[Cites
7
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Suresh Chukkapalli vs Dr.S.Ali Abbas Hussain And Others on 28 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 70
Author:
T.Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T.Amarnath Goud
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD                    

C.C.C.A. NO.94 OF 2002   

28-08-2018 

Suresh Chukkapalli  Appellant  ... Petitioner      

Dr.S.Ali Abbas Hussain and others Respondents   

Counsel for Appellant :Sri Vivek Jain and
                        Sri B.Vijaysen Reddy 
                                                
Counsel for respondent No.1:Sri Sunil B.Ganu
Counsel for respondent No.2: Smt. Manjiri S.Ganu
Counsel for respondent No.3:  Sri V.Manohar Rao 

<Gist:

>Head Note:     
                                                
CASES REFERRED: --     

1. AIR 2003 Delhi 15 (D.B.)
2. (1969) 2 SCC 539 
3. AIR 2002 AP 369 
4. 2002 (4) ALT 448 (D.B.)
5. (1990) 4 SCC 147 
6. (2016) 1 SCC 762 
7. AIR 1946 PC 97 
8. AIR 1968 SC 1028 
9. (2002) 9 SCC 582 
10. AIR 2014 (CAL) 92 (F.B.)
11. ILR (2012) V DELHI 703 
12. (2010) 8 SCC 1 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
 THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD          

C.C.C.A.NO.94 OF 2002   
J U D G M E N T
(Per Honble Sri Justice Sanjay Kumar)
      By judgment and decree dated 28.11.2001, the learned I Senior Civil
Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad, dismissed O.S.No.547 of 1996 on his file.
Aggrieved thereby, Suresh Chukkapalli, the plaintiff therein, is in appeal.
O.S.No.547 of 1996 was instituted seeking specific performance of an
oral development agreement entered into by and between the plaintiff and
Dr.Ali Abbas Hussain, a medical practitioner, the defendant, in relation to the
suit schedule property owned by the defendant and for delivery of vacant
physical possession thereof to the plaintiff for development in accordance
with the stipulations agreed upon between them. He also sought a direction
to the defendant to execute and register a power of attorney in his favour,
inter alia, authorising him to deal with 40% of the built up area after such
development.
The property bearing Municipal No.6-3-883/A&B, admeasuring 2560
square yards, situated at Somajiguda junction, Punjagutta, Hyderabad, is the
suit schedule property.
The plaint averments read as under:
The plaintiff is engaged in the business of acquisition, development
and sale of immovable property, comprising flats, commercial and other
units. He is a Director of Front Line Constructions Limited which is engaged
in the business of civil construction and development by erecting
multi-storeyed buildings and selling them either as a whole or in units. The
modus operandi of the plaintiff and the company is to acquire immovable
properties worthy of development from their owners with the stipulation that
the same would be developed by investing their own funds and in
consideration of the owners entrusting their properties, certain percentage of
the constructed area would be given to them and the balance area would be
retained/owned by the plaintiff or the company, as the case may be.
The case of the plaintiff is that the defendant approached him through
one Mohd. Masiuddin  Farooqui (P.W.5) representing that he owned the suit
schedule property and that he desired the old building standing thereon
should be demolished so that a building with modern taste, in line with the
present market demand, should be constructed. The plaintiff visited the suit
schedule property thereupon and having evaluated its commercial potential,
he proposed that it was best suited for a commercial building and that as the
area fell in a residential zone, he informed the defendant that change of land
use would have to be obtained from the Government. He also pointed out to
the defendant that a considerable part of the land would be affected in
road-widening and relaxation in respect of statutory setbacks would have to
be obtained to avail the total floor space index. The defendant agreed to his
suggestions and thereafter, the parties concluded the contract. The terms
and conditions of the development of the suit schedule property deliberated
upon and concluded between the parties, set out in para 5, read as under:
(i) The Plaintiff shall draw up petitions, plans and other
documents at his own cost and expense , necessary for seeking 
Change of Land use as also for relaxation of Mandatory Open Spaces 
and coverage and shall follow up the matter with various Statutory
Authorities and the Government.
(ii) That upon receipt of the change of land and also the
relaxations of open Spaces, the paties shall apply to the Appropriate
Authority under Chapter XX C of Income tax Act, 1961 and obtain NO
Objection as laid down under the said Act. Simultaneously therewith ,
the Plaintiff shall get the Municipal Plans drawn and submit the same
for approval by paying requisite fees.
(iii) The Defendant shall sign all such petitions and plans as
may be required by the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff shall pay for and bear all
charges, fees payable under any Regulation to the Government or
otherwise without seeking any re imbursement thereof from the
Defendant.
(iv) The Defendant shall within a period of 30 days from the
date of receipt of No Objection from the Appropriate Authority hand
over physical vacant possession of the Suit schedule Property to the
Plaintiff to enable him to develop the property.
(v) That at the time of handing over of Possession of the Suit
Schedule Property the Plaintiff shall pay a sum of Rs.40,000,00/-
[ Rupees Forty Lacs Only ] as Interest free Refundable Deposit to the
Defendant.
(vi) The construction shall be completed with in period of [ 24 ]
months from the date of handing over of Possession of the Suit
Schedule Properlty to the Plaintiff.
(vii) The Plaintiff shall invest his own monies and construct a
commercial building utilising the maximum permissible constructed
area after obtaining necessary permissions from the Corporation.
(viii) That out of total constructed area, the Defendant shall
own and possess 60% [Sixty Percent] of the built up [ including the
circulation areas ] and the balance of 40 % of the constructed areas
shall be the ownership of the Plaintiff. The Defendant shall execute
and register Power of Attorney authorising the Plaintiff to deal with
the undivided share of Land as also the constructed areas falling to
his share and also pertaining to construction of building.
(ix) The Interest Free Security Deposit shall be refunded to the
Plaintiff simultaneously with the areas falling to the share of the
Defendant are ready for occupation.
The plaintiff retained M.N.Rao (P.W.3), a renowned architect, and got
the plans drawn up in consultation with the defendant. He engaged another
expert architect, Upal Ghosh (P.W.8), to give his opinion on the plans drawn
up by M.N.Rao (P.W.3). Having accepted the assignment, Upal Ghosh   
(P.W.8) came to Hyderabad on 06.06.1995, visited the suit schedule
property and scrutinised the plans drawn up by M.N.Rao (P.W.3). The
defendant accompanied the plaintiff to Hotel Golconda, Hyderabad, where
Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) was staying and participated in the discussions. He
appreciated the suggestions made by Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) on the plans  
drawn up by M.N.Rao (P.W.3).  After conclusion of the contract, the plaintiff
drew up a petition for change of land use and got the same signed by the
defendant, after verification. The plaintiff then submitted the petition and
followed up the matter with the Government of Andhra Pradesh. After
considerable effort on his part, the Government was pleased to accede to the
request for change of land use and issued G.O.Ms.No.84 dated 21.02.1995 
(Ex.A4/Ex.B36) approving the change of use of the suit schedule property
from residential to commercial. This change of land use was subject to
payment of a sum of Rs.8,562/- towards development charges and a further
sum of Rs.2,000/- towards processing fee, payable to Hyderabad Urban 
Development Authority (HUDA) so as to obtain the final order, as evidenced
by the Government Memo bearing No.1231/I1/94-2 dated 29.11.1994   
(Ex.A3/Ex.B39). The plaintiff claimed that, as per the agreement, he paid the
development charges and also the processing fees, vide Challan No.4 dated
16.12.1994 (Ex.A1/Ex.B1). The plaintiff was advised to approach the
Government of Andhra Pradesh for getting the maximum floor space index 
by seeking relaxation of setback areas and he drew up applications and plans
apart from corresponding with the Government and also the Municipal
Corporation of Hyderabad. Upon his persuasion, the authorities accepted the
claim for relaxation of the mandatory open areas and issued G.O.Rt.No.1410
dated 12.12.1995 (Ex.B43). The plaintiff spent huge amounts on payment of
professional fees, drawing up of plans and other miscellaneous expenses.
The defendant signed the applications, plans, etc., whenever the plaintiff
required him to do so. The plaintiff stated that issuance of G.O.Rt.No.1410
dated 12.12.1995 (Ex.B43) brought the matter to the stage of drawing up of
an agreement for seeking clearance from the Income-tax authorities under
Chapter XX C of the Income-tax Act, 1961
but the defendant started
avoiding him on one pretext or the other. He initially did not notice the
change of behaviour on the part of the defendant as, in the course of
interaction during this period, he had picked up friendship with the
defendant. When the evasion on the part of the defendant became too
obvious, he had to give a fresh look to the entire scenario and the fact which
emerged was that the defendant was resiling from the agreement. While the
matter stood thus, he went to Guntur to see his parents and while he was
there, he came to know through Minhaj Amjad (P.W.6), a friend, that the
defendant was negotiating for disposal of the suit schedule property with
some other parties. He immediately called the defendant on phone but in
vain. He rushed to Hyderabad and made efforts to meet the defendant but
to no avail. As the defendant was evading performing his part of the contract
and resiling therefrom but he had performed and discharged his obligations
and was willing and ready to perform further acts so as to discharge the
remaining obligations, the plaintiff claimed entitlement to get the agreement
enforced. He accordingly prayed for a decree of specific performance.
The written statement reads as follows:
The defendant denied that there was any agreement entered into
between himself and the plaintiff for development of the suit schedule
property. He asserted that the plaintiff did not approach the Court with clean
hands and had not put forth the true and correct version. He denied
knowledge of the plaintiffs experience in acquisition, development and sale
of immovable properties or that he is a Director of Front Line Constructions
Limited or whether the said company was also engaged in the business of
civil construction. He denied the plaintiffs claim that he had approached the
plaintiff through Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5) or that he had desired
that his old building in the suit schedule property should be demolished and
a building with modern taste, in line with the present market demand, should
be constructed. He denied that he ever offered the suit schedule property for
development to the plaintiff. He further denied that the plaintiff visited the
suit schedule property or evaluated its commercial potential. He denied the
other claims put forth by the plaintiff in this regard including the terms of the
alleged oral agreement set out in para 5 of the plaint. He admitted that the
Government of Andhra Pradesh was pleased to accede to the change of land  
use of the suit schedule property but denied that the plaintiff paid the
necessary charges in this regard. He claimed that he himself paid the
amount under the Challan (Ex.B1). He admitted that G.O.Rt.No.1410 dated 
12.12.1995 (Ex.B43) was issued by the Government with regard to relaxation
of norms but denied that the same was due to the follow-up by the plaintiff
and that he spent huge amounts on professional fees, drawing up of the
plans or other miscellaneous expenses. He stated that he had been planning
to raise a complex on his property and for the said purpose, he filed an
application before HUDA for knowing the zonal use of the land. Having
received a reply to the effect that his property was situated in a residential
zone as per the master plan, but as neighbouring properties had been
converted into non-residential complexes, he knew that he had to apply for
and obtain change of land use from the appropriate authority. He could not
take immediate steps as he had to go abroad and was also tied up with his
professional engagements. After some time, he resumed plans to develop 
the property. At that stage a family friend, Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7),
happened to meet him and when the defendant revealed his plan, Mir Nasir
Ali Khan (P.W.7) stated that he was also trying to get change of land use in
respect of the property belonging to his uncles, which he proposed to
develop, and promised to guide the defendant and help him on the strength
of their friendship. When the application for obtaining change of land use
was prepared, the defendant approved the same after correcting it and
submitted it to the authorities. Much later, Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
introduced the defendant to the plaintiff stating that he is an engineer by
profession having a business in automobiles. The defendant asserted that
there was never any discussion or agreement between the plaintiff and
himself for the development of the suit schedule property. He stated that he
came to know later that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and his brother along
with the plaintiff and his brother formed a company called Front Line
Constructions Limited. The defendant claimed that he actively pursued his
application for obtaining the change of land use and submitted various
documents and plans to the authorities. During his talks with Mir Nasir Ali
Khan (P.W.7), he suggested that the defendant should utilise the services of
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) for preparing the plans for submitting to the authorities in
this regard. The defendant was informed by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) that
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) was engaged for his other projects and it was in these
circumstances that M.N.Rao (P.W.3) prepared the plans. The defendant 
submitted the plans to the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad with an
endorsement that it was for MCH use only. The defendant alleged that the
plaintiff, with the collusion of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), obtained the plans
from the concerned authorities. He stated that after follow-up with the
Government, he was called upon to deposit Rs.10,562/- towards the fee for
change of land use. The said amount was to be deposited and the Challan
was to be produced before HUDA. Again, Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) offered
to have the amount deposited and gave the defendant the Challan.
Accordingly, the defendant gave money to Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) who
sent it to the bank through his office employee. After receiving the Challan,
the defendant submitted the same to HUDA with a covering letter through
an employee of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). Thereafter, G.O.Ms.No.84 dated
21.02.1995 (Ex.A4/Ex.B36) was issued. The original of this G.O. was
received by him through certificate of posting directly from HUDA. He stated
that the plaintiff curiously obtained a duplicate copy of the Challan, which
had to be retained by HUDA, and filed the same in the suit proceedings. He
further stated that he personally submitted the plans, using the services of
M.N.Rao (P.W.3), in terms of the G.O. Thereupon, a report was submitted
recommending relaxation of setbacks and the final G.O. (Ex.B43) was issued.
He stated that he was in possession of the original G.O. He asserted that he
had neither engaged the services of the plaintiff nor was an agreement
entered into with him for the development of the suit schedule property. He
claimed that the plaintiff obtained various documents pertaining to the
property from the authorities for laying a false claim. He stated that after
receipt of the second G.O., he also received a communication from the MCH 
calling upon him to submit the plans for the proposed construction and
asserted that he had not done so till date. He stated that Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7) was aware that the defendant was contemplating to take up
development of the suit schedule property on his own and on an occasion
when his architect from Delhi was in city, the defendant accompanied him as
desired. But for the same, the defendant stated that all the other allegations
made relating to his meeting with Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) were incorrect and
false. He stated that he met Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) for not more than ten
minutes only on the suggestion made by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). He 
claimed that the said casual meeting was being misused by the plaintiff in
collusion with Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) to suit their purpose. He stated that even
prior to 1994, he had been intending to develop the suit schedule property
and engaged the services of reputed architects, namely, A.A. Associates, for
preparing plans. However, by then he had not obtained the permission for
change of land use and it was only subsequently that he corresponded with
HUDA to know the exact position with regard to the nature of the land use.
He was informed in writing that the land was earmarked for residential
purpose and that substantial part of his property would be affected in road-
widening. He stated that he was therefore well aware that he had to apply
for change of land use and also seek relaxation regarding setbacks for
obtaining maximum benefit of the floor space index. He denied that the
plaintiff took necessary steps in this regard. He stated that he engaged the
services of M.N.Rao (P.W.3) through the good offices of Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7) for preparing plans and even at that stage, he had furnished the
plans prepared by A.A. Associates as the basis for preparing fresh plans. He
claimed that he adequately remunerated M.N.Rao (P.W.3) for his services
and asserted that the plaintiff managed to obtain some of the documents to
lay a false claim. He emphatically denied that there was any agreement
between himself and the plaintiff, much less a concluded contract, for
development of the suit schedule property. Even assuming, without
admitting, that the plaintiff had taken steps for obtaining exemptions as
pleaded, the defendant stated that they were without his knowledge or
consent and in any event, not because of any agreement. He pointed out
that the manner in which the said agreement was stated to have been
entered into was inconceivable. He stated that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
and Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5), who were his family acquaintances, 
had joined hands with the plaintiff to knock away his valuable property. He
alleged that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), Mohd. Masiuddin  Farooqui (P.W.5)
and the plaintiff, with the help of M.N.Rao (P.W.3) and Upal Ghosh (P.W.8),
conspired together so as to file the present suit in collusion with each other.
He alleged that the confidence reposed by him in Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
had been misused so as to foist the present proceedings on the basis of
documents which were retained by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and his
employees, while helping him. He pointed out that any development
agreement had to contain basic terms as to the period of construction,
particulars as to the specific areas which would fall to the share of each of
the parties concerned, with floor-wise particulars etc. The nature and
specifications of the construction would also be mentioned, as the rates of
deluxe construction and normal construction would vary. The alleged oral
agreement put forth by the plaintiff therefore could not be treated as a
concluded contract. He pointed out that prior to filing of the suit, the plaintiff
had not even issued any notice to him and that the oral agreement
propounded by the plaintiff lacked bonafides in every respect. He asserted
that the suit was untenable as the terms and conditions, as set out in the
alleged oral contract, were incapable of being enforced. He also alleged that
the suit was undervalued. He accordingly prayed for dismissal of the suit
with exemplary costs.
Upon consideration of the pleadings, the trial Court settled the
following issues for trial:
1.      Whether the oral agreement pleaded by plaintiff is true,
valid and binding on defendant?
2.      Whether plaintiff is entitled to the specific performance as
prayed for?
3.      Whether plaintiff is entitled to the directions prayed for
regarding execution of GPA?
4.      Whether the suit is undervalued?
5.      To what relief?
The plaintiff examined himself as P.W.1 apart from 7 other witnesses.
He marked Exs.A1 to A22 in evidence. The defendant examined himself as  
D.W.1 and another witness. He marked in evidence 44 documents. Six  
documents were marked in the C series.
The trial Court adopted a rather novel approach as the suit agreement
was allegedly an oral one and insisted on the chief examination of the
witnesses being continuous so that they could not be tutored in keeping with
the cross-examination of earlier witnesses. In consequence, P.W.1 was
examined in chief on 17.01.1997 and 21.01.1997. He was cross-examined on  
25.02.1997. P.W.2 was examined in chief on 17.02.1997 and cross-examined   
on 03.03.1997. P.W.3 was examined in chief on 17.02.1997 and cross- 
examined on 04.03.1997. P.W.4 was examined in chief on 17.02.1997 and   
cross-examined on 04.03.1997. P.W.5 was examined in chief on 18.02.1997   
and cross-examined on 03.03.1997. P.W.6 was examined in chief on  
18.02.1997 and cross-examined on 03.03.1997. P.W.7 was examined in chief   
on 18.02.1997 and cross-examined on 25.02.1997 and 27.02.1997. P.W.8   
was examined in chief on 27.02.1997 and cross-examined on the same day.
The plaintiff speaking as P.W.1 stated as follows in his chief
examination: Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5) introduced him to the 
defendant on 02.10.1994. He was not doing construction business 
individually but only on behalf of the company, Front Line Constructions
Limited, which was floated in the year 1994. He met the defendant at his
residence, the suit schedule property, and in the course of the meeting, the
defendant expressed his desire to develop the property. As he liked the
property, he expressed his willingness to take the property for development
and they decided to finalise the terms and conditions in the next meeting.
On 12.10.1994, they met again at the residence of the defendant and
decided the terms for development. Front Line Constructions Limited was to
be the developer and they decided that after obtaining all clearances, the
application for obtaining permission from the Municipal Corporation would be
filed and the permit fee would be paid by the developer. After obtaining the
permission, they would go for permission from the Income-tax authorities
from Bangalore. Within one month of receiving such permission, the
defendant would hand over possession of the property and execute a
General Power of Attorney to develop the same. The plaintiff had to pay
Rs.40,00,000/- towards an interest-free deposit to the defendant, which was
refundable after delivery of possession of the developed property falling to
the share of the defendant. 60% of the developed area was to be handed
over to the defendant and 40% of the developed area was to be retained by
the developer. The building had to be completed within 24 months from the
date of obtaining the sanction and physical possession. He stated that after
the terms and conditions were concluded, he drafted a representation to the
Minister for Municipal Administration on 20.10.1994 seeking permission for
change of land use and relaxation of setbacks. He obtained the signatures of
the defendant after he made some corrections therein and submitted the
same to the Minister on 23.10.1994.  The officials of HUDA inspected the site
in his presence and sent their remarks to the Government. He was also
present when the officials of the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad
inspected the site. After receiving the remarks from both the authorities, the
Government issued a draft variation proposal calling for objections.
Thereafter, the G.O. was issued permitting change of land use on
21.02.1995. As development charges and processing fee had to be paid for
conversion, he scribed the Challan on 16.12.1994 in the name and address
of the defendant in his own hand writing and requested his Office Assistant,
R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2), to go to HUDA office to do the needful. After
paying the amount, R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2) submitted the same to   
HUDA under a covering letter. Thereafter, the Government issued the final
G.O. He arranged meetings between the defendant on the one hand and  
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) and Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) on the other.
In his cross-examination, the plaintiff stated thus: He met the
defendant for the first time on 02.10.1994 and for the second time on
12.10.1994.  In the first meeting, P.W.5, the defendant and he were present
and during the second meeting only the defendant and he were present. By
12.10.1994, Front Line Constructions Limited was not in existence and he
had not made up his mind as to whether he would individually take up the
development or through which company. According to him, Front Line 
Constructions Limited came into existence in January, 1995 and he along
with Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and his brother, Hussain Ali Khan, were the
Directors of the said company. Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) was the Managing
Director of the company. For the first time in January, 1995, he discussed
about the subject project with Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and his brother. He
admitted that as on the date of his deposition, the company was doing two
projects - one on Raj Bhavan Road, in respect of the property belonging to
the uncles of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), and another property opposite the
Secretariat at Saifabad belonging to Basheerunnisa Begum, Bahadur and 
others. Bahadur was also Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s uncle. There were
contracts in writing for construction of these buildings, containing details like
the kind of flooring, kind of electrical installations, sanitary equipment,
plastering, elevation and all particulars as to how the building was to be
made. In relation to the Raj Bhavan Road property, the development
contract also contained particulars as to flooring, electrical installations,
sanitary fittings, plastering, etc.  On 02.10.1994, when he first met with the
defendant, the defendant and he agreed upon the contract but it was only
agreed that he would take up the construction contract and except that,
nothing was decided. On 12.10.1994, the terms as mentioned in para 5 of
the plaint, were agreed upon. By 02.10.1994, he had not seen the title deeds
of the property. In some cases, they obtained legal opinion and in some
cases, they did not do so. If it is an open land, they obtained legal opinion
and he did not obtain any legal opinion in respect of the suit schedule
property as he did not feel it necessary to verify the title. By the date of filing
of the suit, he thought of developing the property through Front Line
Constructions Limited. By 02.10.1994, he knew the number of floors that
could be constructed but did not know the shape of the building. On
12.10.1994, they decided that the constructed area should be split vertically
and the defendant should take 60%. Para 5 of the plaint did not mention the
actual allocation of 60% area. He, personally, had Rs.40,00,000/- with him
on 12.12.1995 and did not withdraw the same from his individual account
but got it from other sources, i.e., by withdrawing it from Front Line
Constructions Limited. This amount was withdrawn from the cash reserve of
Front Line Constructions Limited, which is from sale receipts. He admitted
that he had stated in his affidavit (Ex.C1) filed in support of I.A.No.1855 of
1996 filed in the suit that the amount was essentially meant for the purpose
of his business and that he was losing interest on it. He further admitted that
he had not mentioned that it was from the cash reserve. He drafted the
representation for change of land use on 20.10.1994 and the defendant
signed it on the same day. He alone was present when the defendant signed 
the representation and the defendant corrected the word we in the opening
of each paragraph of the representation as I. As they were both doing the
project, they prepared it by mentioning the word we but the defendant
made the change because he was signing it as the owner.  He admitted that
he did not feel it necessary to obtain a written contract even after the
defendant changed the word we in each paragraph to I.  He also admitted
that he did not protest about the said change. He admitted that all the
correspondence was sent to the defendant at his own address, i.e., the suit
schedule property. He further admitted that he did not take any authority
letter from the defendant during this process. He filled up Ex.A1/Ex.B1
Challan form first and then R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2) filled the remaining
part of the form. He stated that he knew Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5)
since the last five years and never did any business with him or had any
financial transactions. He stated that he knew him as a co-member of Nizam
Club. Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5), the defendant and he met only 
once, i.e., on 02.10.1994. He stated that he met Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
for the first time during 1991. He further stated that Mohd. Masiuddin
Farooqui (P.W.5) and Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) were related but he did not
know the exact relationship. He claimed to have come into possession of
Ex.A1 Challan and had retained the same with him. He admitted that Ex.A1 
Challan was the duplicate and stated that the original Challan was with
HUDA. He admitted that as per Ex.A1, the duplicate Challan, it was meant to
be the copy for estate/planning/development office of the HUDA. He also
admitted that Ex.B1 was the original Challan which was the remitters copy
and that it did not contain his handwriting anywhere. He admitted that it was
in the handwriting of R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2) and bore his signature. He
stated that he introduced the defendant to Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) prior
to relaxation in respect of the land use and that they did not know each
other before that. He admitted that in total, he had invested a sum of
Rs.1,00,000/- towards the project in the suit schedule property but could not
give the details. He denied the suggestion that he was introduced to the
defendant by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and not by Mohd. Masiuddin 
Farooqui (P.W.5). He also denied the suggestion that he came into the
picture as he was already doing follow-up work with the Government for
their other projects and as Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) had also offered to do
the necessary follow-up work for the defendant out of friendship. He stated
that he went to Guntur sometime in January, 1996 but did not remember as
to when he came back. He stated that he met the defendant immediately 
after he came back from Guntur and it must have been in January, 1996.
According to the plaintiff, he knew Minhaj Amjad (P.W.6) for the last 4 or 5
years as he was also a member of Nizam Club. He stated that he had no 
business transactions or financial transactions with him. He was also a
builder and owner of complexes. He stated that he realised that the
defendant was resiling from the contract even before his visit to Guntur. He
stated that by mistake he mentioned in para 11 of the plaint that he had no
meeting with the defendant after his return from Guntur. He claimed to have
issued a legal notice to the defendant between January and April, 1996
before filing the suit. He admitted that the said notice was not filed into
Court. He claimed that he himself posted the notice but did not remember
the date of the posting. He stated that the defendant denied the contract on
telephone on 19.04.1996. He said that the notice was sent by ordinary post
and that he had a copy thereof. He claimed that 40% of the constructed
area as per the oral development agreement would come to Rs.2.5 crores.
He stated that he knew Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) since 1994 and that he was  
doing both their projects. He denied the suggestion that there was no
discussion on 02.10.1994 for development of the suit schedule property and
that no terms were agreed upon on 12.10.1994 as stated by him.
R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2) is an employee of the plaintiff.  He stated
that he worked with him since 1993. He admitted that Ex.A1/Ex.B1 Challan 
bore his signature and that the plaintiff had asked him to make payment to
HUDA thereunder. He further stated that the said Challan was filled half by
the plaintiff and half by himself. After payment, two copies of the Challan
were stated to have been retained by the bank and the other two copies
were given to him. He stated that out of the two Challans given to him, one
was taken away by the office and the other Challan was given to him.
According to him, Ex.A1 was the Challan copy given to him which he handed 
over to the plaintiff. He stated that the property mentioned in Ex.A1 Challan
is the suit schedule property and that he knew that the plaintiff had taken it
for development. In his cross-examination, P.W.1 stated that he did not
attend to the work of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) though he was an employee
of Front Line Constructions Limited and that he attended mainly to the work
of the plaintiff. He admitted that in Ex.B1 Challan, the name of the defendant
was in his handwriting. He also admitted that Ex.B1 Challan was the original
and that Ex.A1 Challan was the copy to be retained by HUDA. He denied that 
Ex.A1 was not the Challan copy that was given to him after the payment was
made. He stated that the plaintiff informed him about the development
agreement with the defendant in 1994 and that is how he came to know of
it. He denied that he was giving false evidence due to his employment with
Front Line Constructions Limited.
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) stated that he was an architect in practice since
1978. He claimed that the plaintiff used to come to him since 1992 for
consultation in relation to project work undertaken at that time. He stated
that in 1995, the plaintiff engaged him to prepare a project work for
conversion of the house property belonging to the defendant into a shopping
complex. He stated that he visited the suit schedule property and inspected
the same and then drew up plans. Ex.A7 was stated to be the plan prepared
by him and it bore his signature. He claimed that he was appointed by the
plaintiff and not by the defendant and that the defendant did not pay any
amount to him. In his cross-examination, P.W.3 stated that he was not
drawing plans for all the projects of Front Line Constructions Limited but only
for some of its projects. He admitted having drawn plans for the Raj Bhavan
Road project and also the project near the Secretariat. He admitted that
since 1992, he must have received approximately more than Rs.2,00,000/-
from Front Line Constructions Limited, the plaintiff and Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7). He also admitted that he drew up plans for P.W.7 at Jubilee hills.
He visited the suit schedule property 3 or 4 times and stated that it was a
plain area with ups and downs but he could not say where there was a
gradient as he visited the property more than two years ago. He further
stated that there were trees in the suit schedule property but he could not
give the number. He could not say whether trees were all around the
property or on front side. He also could not say the names of the trees. He
stated that he inspected the outside periphery of the house and did not go
inside. He further sated that he did not observe any swimming pool in the
suit schedule property. He claimed to have prepared only one plan in original
on a tracing paper and Ex.A7 was the print prepared on the basis of the
original. He admitted that Ex.B9 plan was prepared by him and bore his
signature and seal but claimed that he never gave it to the defendant. He
stated that he visited the suit schedule property for the first time towards the
end of 1994 and again within an interval of 10 to 15 days. He claimed that
he prepared Ex.A7 plan in February, 1995. He claimed to have met the
defendant for the first time in November, 1994. He denied the suggestion
that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) introduced him to the defendant.  He stated
that he could not say whether there was a dividing wall in the suit schedule
property separating the house portion and the back portion. He denied the
suggestion that the defendant paid him Rs.7,000/- for drawing the plan.
N.S.Bose (P.W.4) is an Executive Engineer in the Roads and Buildings
Department of the State. He is also the brother-in-law of the plaintiff. He
was examined in the context of his attestation of certain documents brought
to him by the plaintiff.
Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5) admitted that he knew the
defendant for the past 25 years. He also knew the plaintiff and claimed that
the defendant approached him to introduce him to the plaintiff in September,
1994. He stated that in October 1994, he arranged a meeting between the
plaintiff and the defendant. This meeting was arranged in connection with
development of the defendants property. The meeting was held at the
residence of the defendant, i.e., the suit schedule property. In the meeting,
the defendant agreed to give the property for development to the plaintiff
and the plaintiff accepted. He was present at the time of the talks and came
to know subsequently that the defendant resiled from the agreement. In his
cross-examination, he admitted that the defendant was a close friend of his
cousin and was also his wifes cousin. Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) was his
wifes nephew and he knew him since their marriage in 1968. He admitted
that the defendant used to visit him on all important functions and festivals
previously. Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) also used to meet him on all important
functions and festivals. He said that it may be true that the defendant and
Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) might also be meeting each other. He knew the
plaintiff as they were club-mates. He stated that Akbar Ali Khan was his
mother-in-laws uncle and Faizunnissa Begum was his aunty. He further
stated that he knew Waseema and Isiaq, the children of Faizunnissa Begum. 
Upon being shown Ex.B3 photograph, he stated that the person on the 
extreme left therein was Zaffer Hussain Khan, the brother-in-law of Akbar Ali
Khan, and that the family of the defendant and the family of Akbar Ali Khan
were close as they knew each other since childhood. He stated that he did
not attend the marriage of the defendant but he identified the defendant, his
brother Abid, the defendants wife, Akbar Ali Khan, Faizunnissa and Isaiqs
wife in Ex.B4 photograph. He said that he could not give the specific date
when the defendant met him in September, 1994. He further stated that he
did not talk to Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) but talked to the plaintiff when the
defendant met him. He claimed that though he knew the plaintiff only from 5
or 6 years, he introduced the defendant to the plaintiff as he knew that the
plaintiff worked with Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). The defendant asked him
whether he could introduce him to the plaintiff for developing his property.
The defendant requested him to introduce the plaintiff and Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7). He stated that after September 1994, he might have met Mir Nasir
Ali Khan (P.W.7) but did not raise this subject with him at any time. When
asked the specific question as to whether after he introduced the defendant
to the plaintiff, the plaintiff immediately agreed to take the property for
development, he said that at the instance of the defendant to develop his
property, he arranged the meeting at the defendants place and the plaintiff
and the defendant agreed to develop the property and that the entire
finance would be made by the plaintiff and they agreed to the normal ratio
between the builder and the owner. It was also agreed that the entire liaison
work would be the responsibility of the plaintiff. He admitted that he did not
contact the defendant when he came to know that he was going back from  
his promise. He also admitted that the plaintiff did not request him to
intervene in the matter to talk to the defendant about the contract. He
admitted that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s grandmother was married to his
wifes grandfather and that his wife was instrumental in arranging the
marriage of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). He denied the suggestion that he did
not introduce the defendant to the plaintiff and there was no meeting held
on 02.10.1994 and that he was deposing falsely at the instance of the
plaintiff and Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7).
Minhaj Amjad (P.W.6) stated that he knew the plaintiff but did not
know the defendant personally. He stated that he was a builder doing
construction business. He stated that one broker by name, Irfan Khan,
informed him that the suit schedule property was available for development
and he told him that his friend, the plaintiff, had taken the said property for
development but the broker informed him that it was still available for
negotiations. He stated that he then contacted the plaintiff, who was at
Guntur, on phone as he was not available at Hyderabad. In his
cross-examination, he stated that he knew the plaintiff since 5 or 6 years as
he was a friend of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and also a member of Nizam
Club. He stated that he was never introduced to the defendant. He stated
that it was in March, 1996 that Irfan Khan informed him that the property at
Somajiguda was available for development and he immediately rang up to
the plaintiff who was not in Hyderabad. The plaintiff came back from Guntur
and met him after 2 or 3 days.  He denied that he was deposing falsely at
the instance of the plaintiff and Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7).
Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) stated that he was engaged in the business
of construction and that he knew the plaintiff, as he was one of the Directors
of his company, Front Line Constructions Limited. He admitted that he was
the Managing Director of the said company. According to him, the plaintiff
introduced him to the defendant in 1995. He further claimed that he
accompanied the plaintiff and Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) to the house of the
defendant to discuss about the development contract. He denied the
suggestion that he had introduced the plaintiff to the defendant. He also
denied the suggestion that he had agreed to render help to the defendant to
get the plans approved and in getting permissions. He denied the suggestion
that he conspired with Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) and others to knock away the 
property of the defendant. He denied the suggestion that his family and the
defendants family were friends since a long time. He denied the suggestion
that he had advised the defendant to utilise the services of M.N.Rao (P.W.3).
He stated that he never met the defendant at Nizam Club. He denied the
suggestion that he got the money paid in the Government treasury and
delivered the Challan to the defendant. In his cross-examination, he stated
that he met the defendant in January, 1995 when he came with the plaintiff
to his house. He stated that he came to know about the project for the first
time in January, 1995. He admitted that Badrunissa, also known as
Faizunnissa Begum, was related to him but claimed that he did not know the
exact relationship. He also knew Waseema, daughter of Faizunnissa Begum,  
and stated that he had been meeting them in family gatherings and such
occasions. He said that he did not know whether Waseema was earlier 
staying in the defendants family house.  He identified Mir Akbar Ali Khan, his
relation, in the photograph shown to him (Ex.B3) and admitted that the
bridegroom in the photograph looked like the defendant. He also identified
Faizunnissa Begum in the photograph shown to him (Ex.B4). In Ex.B.5, he 
identified Waseema and admitted that she was his cousin. He admitted that
Ex.B7 cover bore his handwriting and that it was addressed to the
defendant. He claimed that he did not remember what was sent by him in
Ex.B7 cover. When asked as to what were the particulars of the discussion
about the development contract when he accompanied the plaintiff and Upal
Ghosh (P.W.8) to the defendants home, he stated that he did not
remember. He admitted that the properties developed so far through Front
Line Constructions Limited were those of his relations. He further stated that
he never advised the plaintiff at any time in relation to the suit schedule
property. He stated that the Front Line Constructions Limited had given
Rs.40,00,000/- as a loan to the plaintiff but could not say whether it was out
of its reserve fund. He stated that the plaintiff did not consult him before
filing this suit and that he was not present when instructions were given for
drafting of the plaint. He denied the suggestion that the defendant was
known to him through a relation from his mothers side and that he was
closely acquainted with him. He stated that his marriage was performed in
1993 but denied the suggestion that the wife of Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui
(P.W.5) was instrumental in arranging it. He stated that Mohd. Masiuddin
Farooqui (P.W.5) knew the plaintiff for about 5 years. He stated that his
mother was aged about 60 years but stated that he did not remember 
whether his mother had a heart attack and was taken to Apollo hospital
where she was attended upon by Dr. Shailendra. He stated that he stayed
next door to his mother and that his brother stayed with her. He stated that
he did not remember whether his mother had a chest pain and in that
connection, he requested the help of the defendant and Dr. Shailendra
attended upon his mother at Apollo hospital, at the instance of the
defendant. He sated that his mother was not a heart patient but did not
remember whether she had any chest pain at any time.  He stated that he
did not remember whether he along with his wife, his brother, his wife and
the defendant and his wife went to Orchid Restaurant to celebrate his
marriage anniversary. He admitted that his association with Mohd. Masiuddin
Farooqui (P.W.5) was more than the association between the plaintiff and
Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5). He said that he did not remember as to 
whether he met the defendant at the house of Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui 
(P.W.5) at any time. He denied the suggestion that he had offered to help
the defendant when he came to know that the defendant was approaching  
the Government for land use conversion. He denied the suggestion that as
the defendant reposed confidence in him as a family friend, he did not doubt
his bonafides when his employees and associates did some of the follow-up
work. He denied the suggestion that the defendant gave money to him and
he got it deposited through his employee.
Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) stated that he was a private architect with his
head office at New Delhi. He stated that he knew the plaintiff who was a
good friend of his since three years. He stated that he knew the defendant
through the plaintiff. He said that he was developing a few commercial
complexes for the plaintiff and in June 1995, the plaintiff called him for a
new project. He came to Hyderabad on 06.06.1995 and the plaintiff brought
the defendant to his hotel and introduced him for a joint venture project at
Somajiguda. He stated that he, the plaintiff along with Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7) went to the site where the defendant was waiting and they
inspected it. In his cross-examination, he admitted that the plaintiff
consulted him in respect of the project on Raj Bhavan Road and the project
opposite the Secretariat. He admitted that for a project like this, normally a
development agreement will be there in respect of the nature of
construction, flooring, plastering, elevation, etc. between the developer and
the owner. He further admitted that the third party affidavit filed by him
(Ex.C2) was dictated to him by the plaintiff over the phone and he noted
down the same and gave instructions to his office to prepare it. He then
added that he got a call from the plaintiff who told him over phone to submit
an affidavit regarding his involvement in the suit project and he got prepared
the draft in his Delhi office and sent it to the plaintiff. He admitted that in his
affidavit, he stated that he verified the contents of the site plan but did not
mention drawing up any sketch plan. He denied that he was deposing falsely
due to the friendship with the plaintiff and that the defendant was
introduced to him by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), while he was staying in
Golconda Hotel, as a property owner who was interested in developing it.
Speaking as D.W.1, the defendant stated that he was the owner and
possessor of the suit schedule property which was his only immovable
property. He asserted that he never entered into any agreement, either oral
or otherwise, in respect of the said property with the plaintiff. He pointed out
that by Ex.B10 letter dated 16.07.1993, HUDA informed him that his land
was situated in a residential zone and would be affected by the proposed
road-widening. He stated that he knew Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) since a
long time as the uncles and aunts of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), Mr. & Mrs.
Javed Kamal and Mr. & Mrs. Juned Adil, had been his neighbours since his
childhood, i.e., 1960. He further stated that they used to meet each other
quite often. Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s parents used to visit his uncles and
aunts quite frequently and on such occasions they used to come along with
their children. He therefore stated that he knew Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
since that time. He further stated that he knew the mother and grandmother
of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), apart from the brothers of his grandmother.
He said that he knew Akbar Ali Khan since his childhood as a respected
member of the family. In Ex.B3 photograph taken at the time of his
marriage, the defendant stated that Akbar Ali Khan and the brother of Mir
Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s maternal grandfather are both seen. He also gave
details of his acquaintance with various members of Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7)s family. He stated that he knew Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5) 
since his marriage and that P.W.5s wife was instrumental in arranging the
marriage of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). He asserted that he was introduced
to the plaintiff by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) in December, 1994 or January,
1995. He stated that he was called to see P.W.7s mother in an emergency 
at her house as she was complaining of uneasiness in the chest. He stated
that he referred her to Dr.Shailendra at Apollo hospital and Ex.B35 was the
letter addressed by Dr. Shailendra Singh in that regard. He further stated
that he had occasion to see Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s son when he was
admitted in New City Hospital at Secunderabad. He said that he told Mir
Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) about his intention to develop the suit schedule
property and he offered to help him in that regard. He spoke of the various
steps taken by him even earlier and thereafter with the help of those
introduced to him by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). He categorically denied
receipt of any legal notice from the plaintiff and asserted that he never
entered into any agreement with him. In his cross-examination, the
defendant was put several questions in connection with his relations with Mir
Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and his family apart from his medical practice. He
denied the suggestion that on 20.10.1994, the plaintiff prepared the
application for submission to the Minister for change of land use. He added
that he had not even met the plaintiff by then. He claimed that he prepared
the application and then showed it to Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and he
offered to get it typed. He then made corrections in that application. Though
the cross-examination of the defendant continues at great length thereafter,
the thrust thereof is directed at exhibiting his ignorance of construction
activity and is not of much relevance to the suit claim.
Mir Taaqi Ali Khan (D.W.2), a cousin of the defendant, stated that he
knew Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) since his childhood. He stated that he also
knew the father of P.W.7 apart from his grandfather and great-grandfather.
He further stated that his maternal grandmothers sister was married to the
first cousin of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)s great grandfather. He stated that
the defendant and the aunts of P.W.7 had houses opposite each other at
Somajiguda and that the relatives of P.W.7 and the defendant used to visit
each other. He claimed to have seen them meeting and wishing each other 
in various social gatherings. He asserted that P.W.7 used to visit his aunts at
Somajiguda. He said that he is a member of Nizam Club and he had seen Mir  
Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and the defendant wishing and meeting each other in
the Club. According to him, in September 1994, while he and the defendant
were sitting in the house of the defendant and the defendant was telling him
about his proposal to develop the property on his own, Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7) dropped in and during the course of the discussion, P.W.7 offered to
help the defendant, if he required, to obtain conversion of the land use and
to get sanction. There was no discussion about the development of the
property by P.W.7, who knew that the defendant himself wanted to develop
the property. Nothing useful was elicited in his cross-examination.
By the judgment under appeal, the trial Court, having considered the
pleadings and the evidence, oral and documentary, held against the plaintiff
on crucial issues. As regards Issue No.1, the trial Court held that the plaintiff
failed to prove that there was any oral development agreement between him
and the defendant and that it was true and valid. On Issue Nos.2 and 3, the
trial Court held that as Issue No.1 was decided against the plaintiff and he
had failed to prove the oral development agreement, he was not entitled for
the relief of specific performance or for execution of a GPA in his favour. On
Issue No.4, the trial Court found that there was no material to show that the
suit was undervalued and rejected the contention of the defendant in that
regard.  In the result, the trial Court dismissed the suit with costs.
It appears that during the pendency of this appeal, the defendant
orally gifted an extent of 144 square yards out of the suit schedule property
to his daughter, Noor Fatima Hussain, on 05.07.2012. Subsequently, Noor
Fatima Hussain and the defendant, signing as a confirming party, executed
registered sale deed bearing Document No.1125/2013 dated 24.01.2013 in 
favour of Sandhya Hotels Private Limited, Hyderabad, as regards the said
extent of 144 square yards. Thereupon, the plaintiff filed C.C.C.A.M.P.No.493
of 2013 in this appeal seeking to implead the defendants daughter and the
alienee. The implead petition was ordered by this Court on 08.02.2018 and
Noor Fatima Hussain and Sandhya Hotels Private Limited, Hyderabad, are 
shown as respondents 2 and 3 in this appeal.
Heard Sri Vivek Jain, learned counsel representing Sri B.Vijaysen
Reddy, learned counsel for the appellant-plaintiff, and Sri Sunil B.Ganu,
learned counsel for the respondent-defendant. Smt. Manjiri S.Ganu, learned
counsel, entered appearance for Noor Fatima Hussain, respondent 2, and Sri
V.Manohar Rao, learned counsel, entered appearance for Sandhya Hotels  
Private Limited, respondent 3, but they did not choose to contest this appeal.
Contesting parties shall hereinafter be referred to as arrayed in the
suit.
The points for determination that arise in this appeal are:
1.      Whether the plaintiff adequately proved the oral
development agreement dated 12.10.1994?
2.      Whether the discrepancies in the oral evidence of the
plaintiffs witnesses are fatal?
3.      Whether the plaintiff, in any event, disentitled himself from
seeking the equitable relief of specific performance owing to
his own acts?
4.      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any relief?
Sri Vivek Jain, learned counsel, would contend that the plaintiff is
entitled to specific performance notwithstanding the fact that the
development agreement was an oral one in the light of the evidence, both
oral and documentary, adduced by him in proof thereof. He would point out
that the involvement of the plaintiff at each stage is writ large and the
defendant could not claim that the plaintiff merely helped him in that regard.
He would assert that there was consensus ad idem between the parties at
the meeting held on 12.10.1994 and therefore, the oral terms settled at such
meeting would be binding. He would assert that the subsequent events
clearly bore out that the said oral agreement was acted upon. He would
point out that the defendant admitted the assistance rendered by the
employees of the plaintiff and that was sufficient to show that, in furtherance
of the oral agreement, such assistance was extended to him. He would
assert that the oral agreement is adequately proved and that the trial Court
erred in not accepting the same and decreeing specific performance.
Per contra, Sri Sunil B.Ganu, learned counsel, would point out that the
admitted conduct of the plaintiff completely goes against character. Being an
experienced builder and developer, the plaintiff admitted that he had not
even undertaken due diligence by obtaining copies of the title deeds or
seeking legal opinion in relation thereto. He also did not get any public notice
issued through newspapers calling for objections. He would point out that
the agreement was yet to be drawn up and as such, it could not be said that
there was a concluded contract between the parties even if there were any
discussions. He would point out that the nine clauses set out in para 5 of the
plaint did not even mention that such an agreement would be drawn up,
which goes against the plaint averments. He would further point out that the
clauses set out in para 5 of the plaint do not even indicate as to how the
owners share was to be identified or the nature and quality of the
construction that was to be made. No specifications were stipulated, which
would go against the grain of an experienced builder entering into such an
agreement. He would place reliance on
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Specific Relief
Act, 1963 (for brevity, the Act of 1963) and assert that even if believed, the
oral agreement put forth by the plaintiff is not enforceable thereunder.
Learned counsel would also point out the various discrepancies in the
depositions of the plaintiffs witnesses. Having appeared before the trial
Court, the learned counsel would point out that the trial Court insisted on the
chief examination of the witnesses being continuous so that the witnesses
could not thereafter be tutored and in the light of this procedure being
adopted, discrepancies galore in the stories put forth by the plaintiffs
witnesses clearly showed that the entire transaction, as claimed by the
plaintiff, was concocted.  Learned counsel would contend that Mir Nasir Ali
Khan (P.W.7) was well known to the defendant and the extent to which
P.W.7 went to support his partner, the plaintiff, is obvious from the fact that
he stated on the one hand that he was close to his mother but went on to
state that he did not even remember as to whether she had a heart attack.
Learned counsel would therefore assert that P.W.7 was an interested witness
who was bent upon protecting his relations with the plaintiff. He would
further assert that the very fact that the plaintiff did not produce any pre-suit
legal notice lent itself to an adverse inference being drawn against him. He
would point out that Ex.B1 Challan produced by the defendant was
admittedly the original one and that Ex.A1 duplicate Challan was produced
by the plaintiff from the records of the HUDA to support his false claim. He
would also point out that the admitted fact was that Mir Nasir Ali Khan
(P.W.7) was closer to Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5) than the plaintiff
was to P.W.5, but the story put forth was that the defendant approached
P.W.5 to introduce him to the plaintiff and P.W.7 but Mohd. Masiuddin
Farooqui (P.W.5) chose to introduce him to the plaintiff despite knowing
P.W.7 better. Learned counsel would state that this version is patently
improbable, if not unbelievable. Learned counsel would further assert that
there is no proof of any consensus ad idem and that in the light of
Section
16(c)
read with
Section 20
of the Act of 1963, the discretionary relief of
specific performance could not be granted to the plaintiff, given his conduct.
In this regard, reference is again made by the learned counsel to Ex.A1
Challan obtained from the HUDA file apart from the fact that the plaintiff
claimed to have spent Rs.1,00,000/- but had no account in proof thereof.
Learned counsel would also point out that much water has flown under the
bridge and inform this Court that during the suit proceedings, an injunction
was granted at the initial stage subject to deposit of the sum of
Rs.40,00,000/- by the plaintiff but after dismissal of the suit, the plaintiff
chose to withdraw the said amount. Learned counsel would point out that
the property has already changed hands and that no cause is made out to
decree specific performance at this late stage even if this Court is inclined to
believe that there was an oral agreement at that point of time.
In his written synopsis of submissions, Sri Sunil B.Ganu, learned
counsel, pointed out that a development agreement is a totally different
transaction when compared to a sale, as the magnitude of investment would
depend upon the nature of development, flooring, plastering, doors &
windows, electrical fittings, sanitary ware, elevation and other facilities like
swimming pool, club house, office room, which would be decided and looked
into before conclusion of a contract of such nature. He further pointed out
that absolute clarity would be required as to the nature of the construction in
terms of the aforestated parameters and a development agreement would 
not be complete otherwise. Learned counsel asserted that the settled legal
position with respect to oral contracts was that the burden would rest heavily
upon the plaintiff to prove the same and unless the terms of such an oral
agreement are proved in well defined terms, the question of specific
performance thereof would not arise.
In reply Sri Vivek Jain, learned counsel, would only point out that
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963 does not bar a specific performance suit.
There can be no doubt that a suit for specific performance lies to
enforce even an oral agreement. However, in such a situation, it is essential
that the plaintiff should establish the necessary ingredients for seeking the
equitable relief of specific performance. A heavy burden lies on the plaintiff
to firstly prove that there was consensus ad idem between the parties and
that the oral agreement was, in fact, concluded. Secondly, the plaintiff would
also have to prove the vital terms of such an oral contract. As to whether or
not such a concluded oral contract was there would be essentially a question
of fact and the burden of proof in relation thereto would rest heavily upon
the person who intends to get such an oral agreement specifically enforced
through a Court of law. Therefore, even if an oral agreement is legally
permissible and would be enforceable through a Court of law, the plaintiff
would be required to prove such an oral agreement with certainty and unless
and until all the conditions necessary to infer the existence thereof are made
out, the Court would not enforce it.
It is equally well settled that grant of the equitable relief of specific
performance would be wholly within the discretion of the Court and cannot
be claimed as a matter of right. Before granting such a decree, the Court
must be satisfied that (i) the contract is certain and unambiguous in its
terms, (ii) the consideration has passed, (iii) the contract is fair and not
vitiated by fraud etc., (iv) the contract does not offend a third party, (v) the
contract does not impose any hard or unconscionable bargain, and (vi) the
contract is capable of execution. At the same time, it should not be lost sight
of that such discretion must be exercised by the Court based on sound
judicial principles and not arbitrarily. The fundamental condition, which must
be proved beyond all reasonable doubt, is the existence of a valid and
enforceable contract. If a valid and enforceable contract is not made out, the
Court would not make a contract for the parties. (See MERAHUL 
ENTERPRISES V/s. VIJAYA SRIVASTAVA ).  As long back as in the year      
1969, in OUSEPH VARGHESE V/s. JOSEPH ALEY , the Supreme Court          
observed that very rarely would a decree for specific performance be granted
on the basis of an agreement supported solely by oral evidence.
In YELAMATI VEERA VENKATA JAGANADHA GUPTA V/s. VEJJU            
VENKATESWARA RAO , a learned Judge of this Court observed that where     
an oral agreement of sale is pleaded and the very existence of such an oral
agreement is disputed by the other side, a heavy burden would lie upon the
plaintiff to establish its existence as well as the conditions thereof with
clinching and admissible evidence. It was further observed that the nature
and extent of proof in this regard would vary from case to case and would
depend upon the proximity or otherwise of the parties, nature of the
transactions existing between them in the past, their conduct and the steps
undertaken by the parties after the alleged agreement of sale, etc. The said
judgment was confirmed in appeal in YELAMATI VEERA VENKATA       
JAGANADHA GUPTA V/s. VEJJU VENKATESWARA RAO .
In BRIJ MOHAN V/s. SUGRA BEGUM , the Supreme Court pointed     
out that there is no requirement of law that an agreement or contract of sale
of immovable property should only be in writing but in a case where the
plaintiffs come forward to seek a decree for specific performance of a
contract of sale of immovable property on the basis of an oral agreement
alone, a heavy burden would lie on them to prove that there was consensus
ad idem between the parties for a concluded oral agreement for such sale. It
would have to be established by the plaintiffs that vital and fundamental
terms for the sale of the property were concluded between the parties orally
and a written agreement, if any, to be executed subsequently would only be
a formal agreement incorporating such terms which had already been settled
and concluded in the oral agreement.
In K.NANJAPPA (DEAD) BY LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES V/s.
R.A.HAMEED @ AMEERASAB (DEAD) BY LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES ,                 
the Supreme Court observed that a decree for specific performance can be
granted on the basis of an oral contract.  Reference in this regard was made
to the observations of Lord Du Parcq in SHANKARLAL NARAYANDAS       
MUNDADE V/s. NEW MOFUSSIL CO.LTD.  In KOLLIPARA           
SRIRAMULU V/s. T.ASWATHA NARAYANA , the Supreme Court          
however added the rider that when the plaintiff comes forward to seek a
decree for specific performance on the strength of an oral agreement, a
heavy burden lies upon him to prove that there was consensus ad idem
between the parties and whether there was such a concluded contract or not
would be a question of fact to be determined in the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
It is in the light of the aforestated settled legal position, that the
alleged oral development agreement asserted by the plaintiff has to be
tested. In this regard, the first and foremost aspect that must be noted is
that there was no prior relationship between the parties. The plaintiff admits
that he met the defendant for the first time on 02.10.1994 and according to
him, the oral development agreement was concluded at their second 
meeting on 12.10.1994. There are a number of discrepancies as to this
claim. The plaintiffs case is that Mohd. Masiuddin Farooqui (P.W.5)
introduced him to the defendant. However, it is brought out in the evidence
that P.W.5 and Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) are more closely associated with
each other. If that be so, it is hardly believable that P.W.5 would introduce
the defendant to the plaintiff instead of taking him to see P.W.7, had he
desired to enter into a development agreement. Further, the plaintiffs stand
is that P.W.5 only introduced him to the defendant on 02.10.1994. While
confirming this, P.W.5 went a step further in his chief-examination and
asserted that during the first meeting itself, the defendant agreed to give the
property for development to the plaintiff, who accepted it. He further stated
that he was present during these talks. In his cross-examination, P.W.5 was
put a specific question and he answered thus:
Q. After you introduced defendant to the plaintiff, did the plaintiff
          immediately agree to take the property for development?
A. At the instance of Abbas to develop his property, I arranged the
          meeting at Abbass place, Suresh and Abbas agreed to develop the
          property and the entire finance will be made by Suresh. They
          agreed for the normal ratio between the builder and owner.  It
          was agreed that the entire liaison work is the responsibility of the
          plaintiff.
This is not the version of the plaintiff. In his cross-examination, he
said that on 02.10.1994, it was agreed that he would take up the contract
and except that nothing was agreed. He further stated that it was only on
12.10.1994 that the terms, set out in para 5 of the plaint, were agreed upon.
Further, the plaintiff contradicted himself time and again. On the one
hand, he said he was not executing constructions individually and that the
agreement with the defendant was that the construction on the suit schedule
property would be through Front Line Constructions Limited, but on the
other hand, he admitted that Front Line Constructions Limited was not even
in existence on 12.10.1994 and came into being only in January, 1995 but
did not indicate as to which was the other company through which he
wanted to take up the subject construction. He then said that he had not
decided whether he would undertake such construction individually or
through a company. He further stated that by the date of filing of the suit,
he thought of developing the property through Front Line Constructions
Limited and that he arrived at that decision in April, 1996.
He claimed that while he was on a visit to see his parents at Guntur,
Minhaj Amjad (P.W.6), a friend, informed him that the defendant was
negotiating for disposal of the suit schedule property with third parties. In
his cross-examination, he stated that he went to Guntur in January, 1996
and was there for 2 or 3 days. Minhaj Amjad (P.W.6), on the other hand,
stated in his cross-examination that it was in March, 1996 that he was
informed that the suit property was available for development and he
immediately rang up the plaintiff. Further, in his plaint, the plaintiff claimed
that when he rushed to Hyderabad and made efforts to meet the defendant,
he could not do so. However, in his cross-examination, he admitted that he
met the defendant on one occasion after coming back from Guntur but did
not remember the date. He further clarified that he met him immediately
after he came from Guntur and it must have been in January, 1996.
As regards the payment made under Ex.A1/Ex.B1 Challan, the plaintiff
filed Ex.A1 copy of the said Challan claiming that it was the original. On the
other hand, the defendant filed Ex.B1 copy of the said Challan asserting that
it was the original retained by him. Though the original suit record was
transmitted by the trial Court after the institution of this appeal, it is
distressing to note that the said record is not complete. Some of the original
records, and more particularly Ex.A1 and Ex.B1 Challans, are not available in
the original record. However, photocopies of Ex.A1 and Ex.B1 Challans are
part of the appeal record and perusal thereof demonstrates that Ex.A1 is the
duplicate copy for estate/planning/ development office of the HUDA, while
Ex.B1 is the original remitters copy. Ex.A1 copy of the Challan filed by the
plaintiff is therefore from the record of the Hyderabad Urban Development
Authority while the original Challan, which would normally be available with
the remitter, is Ex.B1 produced by the defendant. These photocopies put it
beyond doubt that the original Challan was produced by the defendant and a
duplicate copy from the records of the HUDA was produced by the plaintiff.
Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) admitted straightaway that the contents of his
affidavit (Ex.C2) were dictated by the plaintiff over the phone and he noted
down the same and gave instructions to his office to prepare the affidavit.
He then tried to make up for the slip by saying that the plaintiff told him over
the phone to submit an affidavit regarding his involvement in the suit
project, so he got prepared the affidavit in his Delhi office and sent it. He
further admitted that in his affidavit (Ex.C2), he did not mention about
furnishing any architectural sketch designs, i.e., rough designs for the suit
project and only mentioned that he verified the contours of the site plan.
That apart, it may be noted that the plaintiff did not issue any notice
to the defendant prior to the institution of the suit, as per the plaint. But
during his cross-examination, the plaintiff claimed that he got issued a legal
notice to the defendant between January and April, 1996, before filing the
suit. He further stated that the notice was not filed in the Court.
Conveniently, he did not remember the date of the notice and the date he
posted it. According to him, the defendant denied the contract on phone on
19.04.1996. He claimed that the notice was sent by ordinary post and he
retained a copy thereof, but never produced it.
In PUSHPARANI S.SUNDARAM V/s. PAULINE MANOMANI             
JAMES (DECEASED) , the Supreme Court found fault with the plaintiff in
not even sending any notice to the defendant about his willingness to
perform his part of the contract while suing for specific performance.
It may also be noticed that
Section 16(c)
of the Act of 1963 requires
the plaintiff to aver and prove that he has performed or was always ready
and willing perform the essential terms of the contract. In terms of this
requirement, a suit notice must precede the institution of the suit, wherein
the plaintiff would set forth his averments as to his performance or his
readiness or willingness to perform the essential terms of the contract. In the
present case, there is no evidence of the plaintiff serving upon the defendant
a notice prior to institution of the suit fulfilling the requirements of
Section
16(c)
of the Act of 1963.
It is also relevant to notice that the plaintiff admits to the fact that
written development agreements were executed in relation to the projects
that he thereafter undertook at Raj Bhavan road and opposite the Secretariat
at Saifabad. Interestingly, these projects were in respect of the properties
belonging to the relations of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7), the Managing
Director of Front Line Constructions Limited. Despite the said relationship,
the parties resorted to written development agreements! When the plaintiff
admittedly met the defendant for the first time on 02.10.1994 and orally
settled the terms of the alleged development agreement relating to the suit
schedule property ten days thereafter, it is hardly believable that he would
not have taken some sort of commitment in writing from the defendant. All
the more so, when he claimed that he took several steps pursuant to the
oral agreement resulting in expenditure of Rs.1,00,000/-. The said sum was
not an insubstantial amount in the year 1994. However, the plaintiff
conveniently claimed that he did not keep an account of the said expenditure
and could not give details of the same.
Apart from the aforestated discrepancies in the oral evidence of the
plaintiffs witnesses, it may be noticed that the plaintiffs claim is that the
terms of the oral development agreement, as set out in para 5 of the plaint,
were decided on 12.10.1994. The details of such terms, totalling 9 clauses in
all, which were never reduced to writing, were recalled by the plaintiff with
such clarity so as to be set out at great length nearly one and half years
later. If the parties had really negotiated these terms of the development
agreement with such precision and in such detail, it is hardly believable that
they would not have reduced the same to some sort of informal written
agreement even if they agreed to have a formal agreement drawn up later.
The terms and conditions of the oral development agreement, as set out in
para 5 of the plaint, therefore weaken the case of the plaintiff that such an
oral agreement was concluded between him and the defendant on  
12.10.1994. At the same time, as rightly pointed out by Sri Sunil B.Ganu,
learned counsel, a development agreement would be essentially lacking if it
does not set out the particulars and specifications of the development sought
to be made. The plaintiffs own witness, Upal Ghosh (P.W.8), admitted that
for a project like this, normally, a development agreement would be there in
respect of the nature of construction, flooring, plastering, elevation, etc. In
the absence of the building specifications, the nature of construction, the
quality of the components of such construction, etc., the exact nature of the
development that was proposed to be undertaken pursuant to the so-called
agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant is not certain or
determinable. It may also be noted that though as many as 9 detailed terms
of the development agreement were stated to have been settled orally, there
was no condition imposed as to what would happen in the event of default.
There was also no identification of the 60% of the built up area that would
fall to the share of the defendant. Therefore, the terms and conditions of the
oral agreement, while detailed in relation to some aspects, fall woefully short
in relation to the aforestated aspects.
Further, it is difficult to believe that the plaintiff, being an experienced
builder, would blindly settle the terms of the development agreement orally
without even verifying the title of the defendant and without causing a public
notice to be issued before he ventured to invest his monies in the project.
Admittedly, the plaintiff did neither.
Section 14
of the Act of 1963, as it stood then, spoke of contracts not
specifically enforceable.
Section 14
of the Act of 1963 is relied upon strongly
by Sri Sunil B.Ganu, learned counsel, and it reads as under:
14. Contracts not specifically enforceable. (1) The following
contracts cannot be specifically enforced, namely:
(a) a contract for the non-performance of which compensation in
               money is an adequate relief;
(b) a contract which runs into such minute or numerous details or
      which is so dependent on the personal qualifications or volition of
      the parties, or otherwise from its nature is such, that the court
      cannot enforce specific performance of its material terms;
(c) a contract which is in its nature determinable;
(d) a contract the performance of which involves the performance of a
     continuous duty which the court cannot supervise.
(2) Save as provided by the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(10 of 1940), no
contract to refer present or future differences or arbitration shall be
specifically enforced; but if any person who has made such a contract (other
than an arbitration agreement to which the provisions of the said Act apply)
and has refused to perform it, sues in respect of any subject which he has
contracted to refer, the existence of such contract shall bar the suit.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) or clause (c) or
clause (d) of sub-section (1), the court may enforce specific performance in
the following cases:
(a) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract,
(i) to execute a mortgage or furnish any other security for
           securing the repayment of any loan which the borrower is not
           willing to repay at once:
Provided that where only a part of the loan has been advanced
     the lender is willing to advance the remaining part of the loan in
     terms of the contract; or
(ii) to take up and pay for any debentures of a company;
(b)  where the suit is for,
(i) the execution of a formal deed of partnership, the parties
                    having commenced to carry on the business of the
                    partnership; or
(ii) the purchase of a share of a partner in a firm;
(c) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract for the
               construction of any building or the execution of any other work on
               land:
Provided that the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:
(i) the building or other work is described in the contract in terms
          sufficiently precise to enable the court to determine the exact
          nature of the building or work;
(ii) the plaintiff has a substantial interest in the performance of the
          contract and the interest is of such a nature that compensation
          in money for non-performance of the contract is not an
          adequate relief; and
(iii) the defendant has, in pursuance of the contract, obtained
          possession of the whole or any part of the land on which the
          building is to be constructed or other work is to be executed.
It may be noted that
Sections 14(1)
and (2) of the Act of 1963
effectively bar suits for specific performance in relation to the contracts
mentioned therein.
Section 14(3)
thereof is in the nature of an exception to
Section 14(1)(a)
, (c) and (d) and permits enforcement of contracts falling
within its ambit, notwithstanding the aforestated three clauses.
Sections
14(3)(a)
and (b) are not relevant to the case on hand. Sri Sunil B.Ganu,
learned counsel, would however press into service
Section 14(3)(c)
and
assert that the plaintiffs suit is barred thereunder. Significantly,
Section
14(3)(c)
permits enforcement of a contract for construction of a building or
execution of work on land subject to fulfilment of the conditions prescribed
in the three provisos thereunder. The first proviso reads to the effect that
the building or other work must be described in the contract in terms
sufficiently precise to enable the Court to determine the exact nature of the
building or work. The second proviso stipulates that the plaintiff must have a
substantial interest in the performance of the contract and the interest must
be of such a nature that compensation in money for non-performance of the
contract is not an adequate relief. The third proviso states that the
defendant must have obtained possession of the whole or any part of the
land on which the building is to be constructed or the work is to be
executed, pursuant to such contract. All the three conditions stipulated in the
aforestated three provisos have to be fulfilled before the contract can be
enforced.
In effect, a suit to enforce a development agreement in terms of
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963 necessarily has to be construed to be a
suit at the behest of the land owner and not at the instance of the
developer. The use of the words the defendant in the third proviso, in the
context of his obtaining possession of the whole or any part of the land
pursuant to the contract, puts it beyond the pale of doubt that it is only the
developer who could be arrayed as a defendant in such a suit, as he alone
would come into possession of the land pursuant to the contract and not the
owner of the said land. The possession of the land would ordinarily be with
the owner thereof and would not be obtained by him pursuant to the
development contract, specific performance of which is sought.  It is thus
clear that
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963 visits stringent conditions upon
the land owner when he sues for specific performance of a development
agreement but such conditions are not applicable to a developer when he
files a suit to enforce a development agreement. Therefore, a suit wherein
the developer is the plaintiff, whereby he seeks enforcement of the
development agreement, would not come within the ambit of
Section 
14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963 and the requirements to be fulfilled, under the
three provisos thereunder, would have no application to such a suit. In
consequence, the present suit, being one filed by a purported developer,
would not attract
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963. We are fortified in our
interpretation of this provision by the Full Bench decision of the Calcutta
High Court in ASHOK KUMAR JAISWAL V/s. ASHIM KUMAR KAR .
Therein,
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963 and more particularly,
sub-clause (iii) thereof, fell for consideration. The Full Bench was dealing
with the question as to whether a suit at the instance of a developer was not
maintainable in view of
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963. The conclusion
of the Full Bench was that such a suit, where the developer was not the land
owner, would not be prohibited by
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act of 1963.
Reliance placed by Sri Sunil B.Ganu, learned counsel, on
Section 14(3)(c)
of
the Act of 1963 and the case law relating thereto is therefore misplaced.
That being said, we are of the opinion that Section 14(1)(a), (b) and
(d) of the Act of 1963 would however apply to the case on hand.
In DAVENDER KUMAR SHARMA V/s. MOHINDER SINGH , a          
learned Judge of the Delhi High Court was considering a case similar to the
one on hand. The plaintiff claimed therein that he had an agreement to
construct a four-storied building in the land belonging to the defendant.
However, there was no agreement as regards the specifications of the
proposed construction and as to what would happen if the plan was not
sanctioned or in the event the parties did not agree on the specifications of
the proposed construction. There was no provision with regard to the
supervision of the construction and the agreement was silent as to what
would happen if the plaintiff did not complete the construction. Significantly,
the agreement was not even oral but a written one. Despite the same, the
learned Judge held that the contract was unenforceable in terms of
Section
14(1)(b)
and (d) of the Act of 1963.
Earlier, in VINOD SETH V/s. DEVINDER BAJAJ , the Supreme   
Court was dealing with specific performance of an oral agreement for
commercial collaboration for business benefits. The agreement alleged by
the plaintiff was termed as a commercial collaboration agreement for
development of a residential property belonging to the defendant. The
Supreme Court however found that the alleged oral agreement was vague 
and incomplete, requiring consensus, decisions or further agreement on
several minute details. The Court observed that the alleged oral agreement
involved performance of a continuous duty by the plaintiff, which the Court
would not be able to supervise and ultimately concluded that a collaboration
agreement of the nature alleged by the plaintiff was not one that could be
specifically enforced.
Applying the above principles, it may be noted that the plaintiff claims
to have spent Rs.1,00,000/- but he is not in a position to substantiate the
same. Even if the same is accepted to be true,
Section 14(1)(a)
of the Act of
1963 provides that in the event of non-performance of a contract for which
compensation in money is an adequate relief, the contract cannot be
specifically enforced. Therefore, going by the plaintiffs own claim of having
spent Rs.1,00,000/-, he would, at best, be entitled to be recompensed and
not to specific performance after such a long lapse of time as that would be
an adequate relief given the fact that the plaintiff himself, speaking as
P.W.1, stated to the effect that the suit project would run into crores of
rupees and the claimed expenditure of Rs.1,00,000/-, as per the plaintiffs
own claim, would be a just an iota thereof. However, as already stated, the
plaintiff did not even substantiate the claimed expenditure of Rs.1,00,000/-.
Further, as already pointed out, the alleged oral agreement put forth
by the plaintiff, even if accepted, falls woefully short in relation to several
essential aspects of the proposed development and in the absence of
consensus between the parties on such crucial issues, it is not for this Court
to fill in the blanks and enforce such an agreement.
Section 14(1)(b)
of the
Act of 1963 would therefore be squarely applicable. Lastly, as the alleged
oral agreement is bereft of essential details of the proposed development
and if enforcement thereof is now to be permitted by this Court, the
supervision of such development by the plaintiff over a period of time cannot
be undertaken by this Court, when there is no specific agreement on various
crucial factors of such development.
Section 14(1)(d)
of the Act of 1963
would therefore have application and bar grant of relief to the plaintiff, even
if the alleged oral development agreement is accepted as true.
On the above analysis, even if the plaintiffs version is to be accepted,
he would clearly be disentitled to seek specific performance of the oral
agreement put forth by him. On the other hand, it may be noticed that the
defendant has a cogent and reasonable explanation to offer for the
participation of the plaintiffs employees in assisting him in his transactions
and interactions with the authorities. According to him, it was Mir Nasir Ali
Khan (P.W.7), his family friend, who offered to help him to get the change of
land use in relation to the suit schedule property and put him in contact with
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) and Upal Ghosh (P.W.8). The defendant further claimed  
that it was Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) who introduced him to the plaintiff
much later than 12.10.1994, the date of the alleged oral development
agreement. In this regard, the desperate attempt of P.W.7 to disown
acquaintance with the defendant failed miserably as the defendant clearly
brought out the close family relations that they had.  That apart, they were
also members of Nizam Club and Mir Taaqi Ali Khan (D.W.2) confirmed that 
he saw the defendant and Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) together in the Club.
D.W.2 also claimed to have been present in September, 1994 at the house of
the defendant when the defendant spoke of his proposed plan to develop the
suit schedule property on his own and at that time Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
dropped in and the discussion continued and during the course of such
discussion, P.W.7 offered to help the defendant, if he required, in obtaining
the conversion of land use and getting MCH permissions and sanction. The
details forthcoming from the defendants oral evidence clearly bring out the
falsity of the claim of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) that he had nothing to do
with the defendant or the various transactions which form the sheet-anchor
of the plaintiffs case. It may be noticed that all original documents were
produced by the defendant himself in B series while copies thereof were
produced by the plaintiff in A series. Given the admitted fact that
R.V.Ramana Murthy (P.W.2), an employee of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) and  
the plaintiff, admittedly paid the fees under Ex.A1/Ex.B1 Challan, production
of the duplicate Challan by the plaintiff from the records of HUDA is easily
explained. As rightly pointed out by Sri Sunil B.Ganu, learned counsel,
M.N.Rao (P.W.3) and Upal Ghosh (P.W.8) were both closely associated with  
the plaintiff and his construction company and would not have ventured to
speak against him, even if their involvement with the plaintiff was only due
to Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7). Despite being a close family friend of the
defendant, Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) surprisingly chose to support the
plaintiff, perhaps to safeguard his own professional interests and those of his
relations whose properties were being developed jointly by the plaintiff and
him through Front Line Constructions Limited, their company. Given the
relationship between the defendants family and the family of Mir Nasir Ali
Khan (P.W.7), a presumption can be drawn under
Section 114
of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, that being members of old Hyderabadi Muslim families,
there would have been a close level of contact and friendship between them,
lending credibility to the version put forth by the defendant and confirmed by
Mir Taaqi Ali Khan (D.W.2). The evidence of the defendant to the effect that
he was instrumental in the mother of Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) being
treated at Apollo Hospital, Hyderabad, when she suffered chest pain
remained unshaken. The correspondence (Ex.B35) from Dr.Shailendra Singh,  
who treated her, clearly demonstrates the participation of the defendant in
the said exercise. In that view of the matter, participation of the plaintiffs
employees in assisting the defendant does not come to the aid of the
plaintiff as they were also the employees of P.W.7, who is proved beyond
doubt to have been a close acquaintance, if not a friend, of the defendant.
Significantly, Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) admitted in his
cross-examination that he had not even thought of taking the suit schedule
property for development till the date of his deposition and that there was no
discussion amongst the Directors of Front Line Constructions Limited to do
so. The claim of the defendant was that Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7) helped
him in his transactions with the authorities at that point of time for
development of the suit schedule property on his own and one such help
rendered by him was the payment of fees through his office employee and
that the original Challan was then sent to him by Mir Nasir Ali Khan (P.W.7)
in Ex.B37 cover. Significantly, P.W.7 admitted in his cross-examination that
Ex.B37 cover was in his handwriting but claimed that he did not remember
as to what paper he had sent in the said cover to the defendant.
The version of the defendant therefore has a ring of truth, unlike the
plaintiffs version.
Lastly, it may be noted that
Section 20(1)
of the Act of 1963 confers
discretionary jurisdiction upon the Court to decree specific performance and
the Court is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do
so. Exercise of this discretion by the Court is not arbitrary but guided by
sound judicial principles. In the case on hand, there is no explanation
forthcoming from the plaintiff as to how and why he procured Ex.A1 Challan
from the records of the HUDA. The original of the said Challan (Ex.B1) was
produced by the defendant. Production of Ex.A1 Challan by the plaintiff
therefore weighs heavily against him, as it reflects adversely upon his
bonafides.  Having resorted to such subterfuge to boost his suit claim, the
plaintiff irrevocably disentitled himself from seeking the equitable relief of
specific performance. This Court must also be conscious of the relentless
passage of time since the alleged oral development agreement of October,
1994, and its concomitant vicissitudes. This Court therefore finds no grounds
to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction in favour of the plaintiff, in any event.
On the above analysis, this Court holds that the plaintiff utterly failed
in proving the oral development agreement dated 12.10.1994.  Multitude of
discrepancies in the oral evidence clearly sets at naught his claim as to how
events transpired. Given the absence of irrefutable and consistent evidence
in support of the so-called oral development agreement, this Court has no
hesitation in rejecting the plaintiffs plea as to the very existence of such an
oral development agreement. This Court therefore finds that the judgment
and decree under appeal do not brook interference either on facts or in law.
All the points framed for determination are answered against the
appellant/plaintiff.
The appeal is devoid of merit and is accordingly dismissed with costs.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall also stand dismissed.
_______________   
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
__________________   
T.AMARNATH GOUD, J     
28th AUGUST, 2018