[Cites
5
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Govt. Of A.P., And Three Others vs T.Krishna Murthy on 17 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 22, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 303 (2018) 6 ANDHLD 686, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 686, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 303
Author:
S.V. Bhatt
Bench:
S.V. Bhatt
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT                   

WRIT APPEAL No.955 OF 2017     

17-09-2018 

The Govt. of A.P., and three others ..  Appellants

T.Krishna Murthy...  Respondent

Counsel for the appellants: Government Pleader for Assignment
                                                                                
Counsel for respondent: Sri T.C. Krishnan

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


?CASES REFERRED:      


HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE      
SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN        

AND  

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT     

        
WRIT APPEAL No.955 OF 2017     


JUDGMENT:
(Per the Honble the Chief Justice Sri Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan)

        We have heard the learned Government Pleader for Assignment  
appearing for the appellants and Sri T.C. Krishnan, learned counsel for the
respondent.
2.      The sum and substance of this writ appeal, on the face of it, is
covered by the judgment in Sub-Regisrar, Sri Kalahasti v.
K. Guravaiah .
3.      The property involved in this litigation was put to statutory auction
in terms of the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Co-operative Societies
Act, 1964
, and the Andhra Pradesh Co-operative Societies Rules, 1964;
hereinafter referred to as Rules. In terms of Rule 52 of the Rules, sale
certificate was issued in favour of Ranemma. She alienated that parcel
thereafter to the writ petitioner. The jurisdictional officer refused to issue
pattadar passbook and title deeds in favour of the transferee of
Ranemma.  He, therefore, moved the learned Single Judge for directions.
The writ petition was ordered in favour of the writ petitioner. Hence, this
writ appeal by the official respondents in the writ petition.
4.      The learned Government Pleader very persuasively submitted that
the decision in Sub-Registrar, Sri Kalahasti (supra) requires re-
consideration. He elaborated by saying that the provisions of the
Transfer
of Property Act, 1882
; hereinafter referred to as
T.P. Act
; do not regulate
the transfer of lands in terms of the
Andhra Pradesh Assigned Lands
(Prohibition of Transfers) Act, 1977
; hereinafter referred to as Act, 1977;
and therefore the inhibition contained in that Act should be treated as one
which disentitles a mortgaged property being brought to sale under the
Andhra Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act
and the Rules where the 
property, which is mortgaged, was obtained by the mortgagor in terms of
transfer by the State which was regulated by Act, 1977. He tried to draw
distinction between the applicability of
T.P. Act
and the provisions of Act,
1977, in an attempt to plead that the ratio laid by the Division Bench in
Sub-Registrar, Sri Kalahasti (supra) requires to be revisited.
5.      The decision in Sub-Registrar, Sri Kalahasti (supra) was
rendered holding that the provisions of Act, 1977, would not apply for sale
of assigned lands which are mortgaged to Bank. The auction purchaser in
that case was held to be lawful owner and, therefore, entitled to sell the
property obtained in auction, to a third party.
6.
The Act, 1977
, creates an embargo against alienation of the
assigned lands. However, the assigned land will be heritable, once it is in
the hands of the assignee.  The prohibition against alienation imposed on
the assignee is built with the exclusion that such restriction as to
alienation would not apply to creation of mortgages in favour of those
entities, which are enumerated in the explanation to
Section 2 (1)
of Act,
1977.  The purpose of such exclusion and the legislative wisdom in
making such exclusion are explicit on a reading of the provisions of Act,
1977, in the backdrop of the objects sought to be achieved by that piece
of legislation.  As can be seen from the definition of the term assigned
land under
Section 2 (1)
of Act, 1977, the assigned lands to which those
rules apply are those lands which are assigned to landless poor persons
under the rules for the time being in force.  The condition of non-
alienation and other matters are brought into the basket of the description
of the term assigned land with the explanation that mortgages in favour
of the different institutions enumerated in that sub-section shall not be
regarded as alienation. The purpose is to enable the landless poor persons
who have assigned lands to generate funds, fundamentally for their
agricultural operations and also for other purposes, by putting that lands
to mortgages with institutions which are enumerated under
Section 2 (1)
of Act, 1977.
7.      Once mortgages are created by the assignees of Government lands  
and when those mortgages stand with the support of the exclusionary
provision in the definition of assigned land in Act, 1977, it cannot be
contended that the mortgagees are not eligible to bring the mortgaged
property to sale for the purpose of recovering the amounts paid under the
mortgage.  There is no inhibition in Act, 1977, or is there any principle
referable to the provisions of the
T.P. Act
, which results in any such
embargo.  That being the position, the eligibility of the mortgagee to bring
the property to sale leads to the resultant issuance of the sale certificate
in terms of Sub-Rule 14 (v) of Rule 52 of the
A.P. Co-operative Societies
Act
, which enjoins, among others, that such certificate of sale shall be
conclusive evidence of the fact of purchase, in all courts and tribunals
where it may be necessary to prove it and no proof of the seal or
signature of the Registrar of the district shall be necessary unless the
authority before whom it is produced shall have reason to doubt its
genuineness. The said statutory provision making the sale certificate as
conclusive proof necessarily obliges the statutory authorities under the
different provisions of law to act upon such sale certificates.
8.      In the light of what is aforesaid, a view different from that taken by
the Division Bench in Sub-Regisrar, Sri Kalahasti (supra) is not called
for. We concur with the said judicial precedent.
9.      In the result, this Writ Appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs.
As a sequel thereto, Miscellaneous Applications, if any, pending in
the Writ Appeal stand dismissed.
______________________________________      
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
__________________   
S.V. BHATT, J 
September 17, 2018.