[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1)Gotte Nageshwar Rao. Gotte Anasurya vs State Of A.P.Rep. By Its Public ... on 31 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 125
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.7003 of 2013

31.07.2018 

1)Gotte Nageshwar Rao.  Gotte Anasurya. ... Petitioners/Accused Nos.2 & 3        

State of A.P.Rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P, Hyderabad, and another.  Respondents

Counsel for Petitioners: Sri Ch. Dhanamjaya

Counsel for Respondent No.1: Public Prosecutor (TG) 
Counsel for Respondent No.2: Sri P. Subba Rao 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)AIR 1994 SC 1418  
2)AIR 2001 SC 3837 = (2001) 9 SCC 618   
3)AIR 2004 SC 5097  
4)2005 CriLJ 4322 (Kerala)
5)AIR 2008 SC 2108  
6)AIR 2010 SC 1446  
7)(2010) 8 SCC 628 
8)      (2017) 1 SCC 433 = AIR 2017 SC 74  
9)2017 (2) ALD (Crl.) 231 (SC)
10)AIR 1992 SC 604  


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Criminal Petition No.7003 of 2013
ORDER:
In this petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the petitioners/A2
and A3 seek to quash the proceedings against them in Crime No.489 of 
2013 of Jeedimetla PS.
2)       The prosecution case is that deceasedAshwini aged about 20  
years working in Uninor Call Centre, Panjagutta, Hyderabad fell in love
with A1Kranthi, resident of Huzurnagar, Nalgonda district. So, the
mother of deceased along with one Bukya Pakeera went to A1s house and  
requested his parentsA2 and A3 to perform the marriage of her daughter
with A1. At that time, they demanded Rs.3 lakhs as dowry. The
complainant who was working as maid servant, expressed her inability to
pay the amount and pleaded them to perform the marriage, but they
rejected her plea. While so, on 17.06.2013 at about 10.00 PM, A1 made a
phone call stating that he is not going to marry her and his engagement was
performed with another girl, for which the deceased deeply depressed and
committed suicide by hanging to the ceiling fan rod in their house on
18.06.2013. The mother of the deceased lodged a complaint with the police
of Jeedimetla PS. Basing on the said complaint, the police registered a case
in Cr.No.489/2013 under
Section 174
Cr.P.C. and after investigation filed
the charge sheet.
Hence the petition by A.2 and A.3 to quash the proceedings.
3)      Heard both sides.
4)      Severely denouncing the arraying of petitioners in the charge sheet,
learned counsel for petitioners would argue in vehemence that even if the
contents of the charge sheet are unrebutted, they would not disclose any
offence muchless the offence under
Section 306
IPC against
petitioners/A.2 and A.3.  He would submit that only allegation against
petitioners is that when the mother of the deceased along with some elders
approached petitioners with a proposal of marriage between the deceased
and A.1, they curtly stated that unless the dowry of Rs.3,00,000/- was paid,
they would not agree for the alliance and this allegation by no means can
be termed as an abetment in the legal parlance to drive the deceased to
commit suicide.  He sought to present several decisions to buttress his
argument.  He argued that the petitioners/A.2 and A.3 are innocent and
continuation of criminal proceedings against them would amount to abuse
of process of the Court and quash the charge sheet against them.
5)      Per contra, learned Additional Public Prosecutor would argue that
the deceased and accused are relations and since their childhood, they were
allowed to move closely and thereby the love developed between them and
A.1 promised that he would marry her but all of a sudden, on the previous
night of the incident, he telephoned and informed to deceased that his
marriage was fixed with another girl and therefore, he cannot marry the
deceased.  Thus u-turn was taken by him only due to the ill-advice of his
parents to marry another girl with bulky dowry. He further argued that the
sometime prior to the incident, when the mother of the deceased
approached A.2 and A.3 for marriage negotiations, they demanded 
Rs.3,00,000/- as dowry knowing fully well that she cannot afford to pay
such huge amount only to snap the love knot between the A.1 and deceased  
and thus petitioners/A.2 and A.3 directly incited their son to marry another
person and indirectly instigated the deceased to commit suicide because,
when the A.1, who was her close relation and a childhood lover, refused to
marry her, there was no other go for her except to commit suicide.
Therefore, petitioners are squarely liable for the offence under
Section 306
IPC.  He thus prayed to dismiss the petition.
6)      The point for determination is:
Whether the petitioners deserve quashment of the proceedings?
7)      POINT:
Section 306
IPC defines abetment of suicide, thus:
Section 306
- Abetment of suicide: If any person commits suicide,
whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
The term abetment is not defined in
Section 306
IPC and its live
nerve is related back to
Section 107
IPC, which defines abetment as
follows:
Section 107
- Abetment of a thing: A person abets the doing of a
thing, who 
First.--Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly.Engages with one or more other person or persons in  
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal
omission lakes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to
the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly.--Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing
of that thing.
Explanation 1.A person who by wilful misrepresentation, or by
wilful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose,
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a
thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
A conjunctive study of
Sections 306
and
107
IPC would give an
understanding that the abetment of suicide can be made in any of the three
ways i.e, by instigating deceased to commit suicide; engaging with one or
more persons in a criminal conspiracy which resulted in the suicide; and
intentionally aiding the deceased in the commission of suicide.  In the
instant case, it is not the version of prosecution that the accused either
engaged in a criminal conspiracy to see that the deceased committed
suicide or they intentionally aided her to commit suicide.  Predominantly
the prosecution case is that the petitioners by demanding huge dowry
knowing well that the deceaseds parents cannot afford to pay the amount,
scuttled the marriage negotiations and thereby indirectly instigated the
deceased to commit suicide.  So the crucial question is whether their acts
even if unrefuted, would constitute abetment within the meaning of
Section
107
IPC. The aspect when the instigation would amount to abetment to
constitute an offence under
Section 306
IPC is no more res integra.
i)       In
State of West Bengal v. Orilal Jaiswal and others
, the Apex
Court observed thus:
Para 17: x x x x x Court should be extremely careful in assessing
the facts and circumstances of each case and the evidence adduced in
the trial for the purpose of finding whether the cruelty meted out to the
victim had in fact induced her to end the life by committing suicide. If
it transpires to the Court that a victim committing suicide was
hypersensitive to ordinary petulance, discord and differences in
domestic life quite common to the society to which the victim belonged
and such petulance, discord and differences were not expected to
induce a similarly circumstanced individual in a given society to
commit suicide, the conscience of the Court should not be satisfied for
basing a finding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of
suicide should be found guilty.
ii)     In
Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh
, the Apex Court held
thus:
Para 20: Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
encourage to do an act. To satisfy the requirement of instigation
though it is not necessary that actual words must be used to that effect
or what constitutes instigation must necessarily and specifically be
suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite the
consequence must be capable of being spelt out. The present one is
not a case where the accused had by his acts or omission or by a
continued course of conduct created such circumstances that the
deceased was left with no other option except to commit suicide in
which case instigation may have been inferred. A word uttered in the
fit of anger or emotion without intending the consequences to actually
follow cannot be said to be instigation.(Emphasis supplied)
iii)    In
Randhir Singh and others v. State of Punjab
, it was held thus:
Para 12: Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person
or intentionally aiding that person in doing of a thing. In cases of
conspiracy also it would involve that mental process of entering into
conspiracy for the doing of that thing. More active role which can be
described as instigating or aiding the doing of a thing is required
before a person can be said to be abetting the commission of offence
under
Section 306
IPC.
iv)     In
Cyriac and another v. The S.I of Police and another
, the High
Court of Kerala held thus:
Para 12: In short, in order to prove that the accused abetted
commission of suicide of a person, prosecution has to establish the
following factors: 1) that the accused kept on irrigating or annoying
the deceased by words, deed or wilful omission or conduct which may
even be a wilful silence until the deceased reacted; Or, that the
accused strongly advised or persuaded the deceased to do something; 
or pushed or forced the deceased by deed, words, or wilful omission
or conduct which may even be a wilful silence to make the deceased to
move forward more quickly in a forward direction 2) that the accused
had the intention to provoke, incite, urge or encourage the deceased
to commit suicide, while acting in the manner stated above.
Para 17: An indirect influence or an oblique impact which the acts or
utterances of the accused caused or created in the mind of the
deceased and which drove him to suicide will not be sufficient to
constitute offence or abetment of suicide. A fatal impulse or an ill-
fated thought of the deceased, however unfortunate and touchy it may
be, cannot unfortunately, touch the issue. Those cannot fray the fabric
of the provision contained in
section 306
IPC. In short, it is not what
the deceased 'felt', but what the accused 'intended' by his act which is
more important in this context (Emphasis supplied). Of course, the
deceased's frail psychology which forced him to the suicide also may
become relevant, but it is only after establishing the requisite intention
of accused.
v)      In
Sohan Raj Sharma v. State of Haryana
, the Apex Court held
thus:
Para 11: Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person
or intentionally aiding that person in doing of a thing. In cases of
conspiracy also it would involve that mental process of entering into
conspiracy for the doing of that thing. More active role which can be
described as instigating or aiding the doing of a thing is required
before a person can be said to be abetting the commission of offence
under
Section 306
IPC.
vi)     In Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) , the
Apex Court referring to its earlier decision in Ramesh Kumar2, observed
thus:
Para 19: As observed in Ramesh Kumar [(2001) 9 SCC 618], where   
the accused by his acts or by a continued course of conduct creates
such circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option
except to commit suicide, an instigation may be inferred. In other
words, in order to prove that the accused abetted commission of
suicide by a person, it has to be established that:
(i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by words,
deeds or wilful omission or conduct which may even be a wilful
silence until the deceased reacted or pushed or forced the deceased by
his deeds, words or wilful omission or conduct to make the deceased
move forward more quickly in a forward direction; and
(ii) that the accused had the intention to provoke, urge or encourage
the deceased to commit suicide while acting in the manner noted
above. Undoubtedly, presence of mens rea is the necessary 
concomitant of instigation (Emphasis supplied).
vii)    In
Madan Mohan Singh v. State of Gujarat and others
, the Apex
Court observed thus:
Para 12: In order to bring out an offence under
Section 306
IPC
specific abetment as contemplated by
Section 107
IPC on the part of
the accused with an intention to bring about the suicide of the person
concerned as a result of that abetment is required. The intention of the
accused to aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit
suicide is a must for this particular offence under
Section 306
IPC(Emphasis supplied)
viii)   In
Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab
, it was observed thus:
Para 21: It is thus manifest that the offence punishable is one of
abetment of the commission of suicide by any person, predicating
existence of a live link or nexus between the two, abetment being the
propelling causative factor. The basic ingredients of this provision are
suicidal death and the abetment thereof. To constitute abetment, the
intention and involvement of the accused to aid or instigate the
commission of suicide is imperative. Any severance or absence of any
of these constituents would militate against this indictment.
Remoteness of the culpable acts or omissions rooted in the intention of
the accused to actualise the suicide would fall short as well of the
offence of abetment essential to attract the punitive mandate of
Section 306
IPC. Contiguity, continuity, culpability and complicity of
the indictable acts or omission are the concomitant indices of
abetment.
Section 306
IPC, thus criminalises the sustained incitement
for suicide (Emphasis supplied).
ix)     In
Pawan Kumar v. State of Himachal Pradesh
, it was observed
thus:
Para 41: x x x x.... Be it clearly stated that mere allegation of
harassment without any positive action in proximity to the time of
occurrence on the part of the Accused that led a person to commit
suicide, a conviction in terms of
Section 306
Indian Penal Code is not
sustainable. A casual remark that is likely to cause harassment in
ordinary course of things will not come within the purview of
instigation. A mere reprimand or a word in a fit of anger will not earn
the status of abetment. There has to be positive action that creates a
situation for the victim to put an end to life.
8)      When the above jurisprudential jurimetrics is summed up, in order to
indict a person to have abetted the suicide of another person, the following
cardinal principles should be considered.
(i)     There must be mens rea or the intention of the accused to aid or to
instigate or to abet the deceased to commit suicide.
(ii)    Instigation or goading or urge forward or provoke or incitement or
encouragement on the part of accused must be such that there should 
be a continued course of conduct of accused creating such
circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option except
to commit suicide.
(iii)   A word uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without intending the
consequences to actually follow cannot be regarded to be instigation.
(iv)    There shall be direct nexus between the words uttered, acts or
omissions of the accused and the resultant suicide, for, sometimes the
victim committing suicide might be hypersensitive to ordinary
petulance discord and differences in domestic life quite common to
the society to which the victim belonged and such petulance, discord
and differences were not expected to induce a similarly
circumstanced individual in a given society to commit suicide. The
Court shall keep in mind, it is not what the deceased felt to commit
suicide but what the accused intended by his act, which is more
important in a given context.
9)      With the above law on hand, I perused the charge sheet and the
statements of the witnesses. They would reveal that the deceased and A.1
are close relations and since the time she was studying 7th class, she liked
A.1 and both of them fell in love.  A.1 used to tell the family members of
deceased that he would marry her and he did not like her family members
to search another match for her. While-so, on the night of 17.06.2013 at
about 10:00 hours, all of a sudden he telephoned to her and informed that
his parents arranged his engagement with another girl and therefore, he
would not marry the deceased and asked her to forget him.  On the next day
morning, when her mother and aunt went for work and her younger brother
went to school the deceased committed suicide in their house by hanging to
the fan, obviously, unable to digest the fact that A.1 was not going to marry
her. Be that it may, the allegations against A.2 and A.3 are concerned,
about one year back when the mother and other elders of the deceased went 
to the house of A.1 and brought a proposal for the marriage of A.1 and
deceased, it is alleged, A.2 and A.3 told them that unless dowry of
Rs.3,00,000/- was paid, they would not agree for the alliance.  Since the
mother of deceased was not able to pay that much amount, they arranged 
the marriage of A.1 with another girl.  Now the crucial question is even if
the allegations against A.2 and A.3 are unrebutted, would they constitute
the abetment within the ambit of
Section 306
IPC.
10)     On a conspectus of the facts and record, it does not occur to me any
mens rea on the part of petitioners to intend for the suicide of the deceased,
when they refused the alliance. At best, they may be termed as dowry
mongers but it is too remote a cause for the deceased to commit suicide.  In
the society, the breaking of marriage alliances due to the greediness of
bridegrooms party for high dowry and other paraphernalia is not
uncommon.  It is highly doubtful whether a similarly circumstanced girl
would commit suicide because the parents of the boy refused to perform
marriage, since their dowry thirst was not quenched.  As already stated
supra, it is not what the deceased felt alone should be taken into
consideration but what the accused intended by his act is also important.
Therefore, in my considered view, continuation of the criminal prosecution
against the petitioners/A.2 and A.3 would amount to abuse of process of the
Court.  As
laid down in
State of Haryana and others v. Ch. Bhajan Lal
and others
, when the uncontroverted allegations in the FIR and other
materials do not disclose a prima facie case against the accused, the High
Court while exercising its plenary powers under
Section 482
Cr.P.C can
quash the proceedings.
11)     In the result, this Criminal Petition is allowed and the proceedings
against the petitioners/A.2 and A.3 in Crime No.489 of 2013 of Jeedimetla
PS, are quashed.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 31.07.2018