[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ramakanth Inani vs Madhukar R.Bhangay And Others on 19 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 153, (2018) 2 ANDHLD 164
Author:
J.Uma Devi
Bench:
J.Uma Devi
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J.UMA DEVI                 

WRIT PETITION NO.26383 OF 2013     

19-01-2018 

Ramakanth Inani Petitioner.. Petitioner

Madhukar R.Bhangay and others Respondents     

Counsel for petitioner:  Sri Vedula Venkata
                          Ramana and
                          Sri Poosarla Vikram
                                                
Counsel for respondent No.1: Sri D.V.Seetharama Murty 
                              and Sri K.Mohan

Counsel for respondent Nos.2 to 5  :  --
Counsel for respondent No.6:Sri M.Narender Reddy and  

<Gist:

>Head Note:                Sri M.Srikanth Reddy

? CASES REFERRED:      

1. (2013) 9 SCC 460 
2. AIR 1954 SC 349 
3. (1990) 4 SCC 90 
4. (1996) 5 SCC 705 
5. (2004) 1 SCC 287 




THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
THE HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI       

WRIT PETITION NO.26383 OF 2013     
O R D E R
(per Justice Sanjay Kumar)

      Challenge in this writ petition is to the order dated
22.05.2013 passed by the Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal,
Mumbai, in M.A.No.142 of 2010, holding for the Debts Recovery
Appellate Tribunal, Chennai. A consequential direction is sought to
uphold the auction sale in favour of the petitioner.
By order dated 20.09.2013, this Court directed the parties to
maintain status quo with regard to the property in question. This
direction was continued until further orders on 04.02.2014.
Heard Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned senior counsel
representing Sri Poosarla Vikram, learned counsel for the
petitioner; Sri D.V.Seetharama Murthy, learned senior counsel
appearing for Sri K.Mohan, learned counsel for the first
respondent; and Sri M.Narender Reddy, learned senior counsel 
appearing for Sri M.Srikanth Reddy, learned counsel for the State
Bank of India, the sixth respondent.
The facts, to the extent relevant, are as follows: The second
respondent company obtained a working capital loan to the tune of
Rs.3,79,00,000/- from the State Bank of India. Pursuant to the
guarantee offered by him for this loan, the first respondent
mortgaged Plot No.623/3 admeasuring 1593 square yards in  
Survey No.40/1 of Shaikpet Village, presently Jubilee Hills,
Hyderabad, as security therefor. Default having been committed in
repayment of this loan, recovery proceedings in O.A.No.123 of
1997 were initiated by the bank before the Debts Recovery
Tribunal, Hyderabad, for recovery of Rs.1,78,48,687.80 ps., with
interest thereon, against, amongst others, the third, fourth and
fifth respondents, directors of the second respondent company,
and also the guarantor for the loan, the first respondent herein.
Despite service of notice, respondents 1 to 5 herein failed to
contest the said O.A. By ex parte final order dated 14.05.1999, the
Tribunal allowed the O.A. and Recovery Certificate dated
20.03.2002 was issued pursuant thereto, for a sum of
Rs.4,69,51,295.80 ps. R.P.No.33 of 2002 was then filed by the
bank for realization of these dues and a proclamation of sale,
under Rule 52(2) of the
Second Schedule to the Income Tax Act,
1961
(for brevity, the Act of 1961), was published in the
newspaper on 05.12.2002. In terms of this proclamation, the
auction was conducted on 09.01.2003, wherein the petitioner was
declared the highest bidder at Rs.82,00,000/- for the first
respondents plot of land. On the same day, the petitioner paid
25% of the sale consideration along with 1% poundage, aggregating
to Rs.21,32,000/-, to the Recovery Officer.
The petitioner claims that he and his family members visited
the subject plot on 10.01.2003 and found that a board had been
erected thereon, purportedly by the Hyderabad District Collector,
claiming that title to the land was in dispute in Land Grabbing
Case No.1 of 2003. The petitioner thereupon addressed letter dated
15.01.2003 to the Recovery Officer and requested him to issue
appropriate clarification as to whether there was a cloud on the
title to the said plot. The Recovery Officer failed to give a
clarification and the petitioner issued reminder letter dated
23.05.2003 requesting him again to give a clarification in terms of
the earlier letter dated 15.01.2003. It was only on 05.08.2003 that
the Recovery Officer issued a notice calling upon the petitioner to
pay the balance sale consideration, failing which the sale would be
cancelled. On 18.09.2003, the Recovery Officer suo motu directed
the petitioner to pay the balance sale consideration of
Rs.61,50,000/- on or before 16.10.2003. The petitioner then paid
the said amount, duly acknowledged by the Recovery Officer under
receipt dated 13.10.2003. This amount was accepted by the 
Recovery Officer subject to the outcome of L.G.C.No.1 of 2003
pending before the Special Court constituted under the
Andhra
Pradesh Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Act, 1982
. Further, by order
dated 23.06.2004, the Recovery Officer accepted the request of the
petitioner and permitted him to retain security at the subject plot
at his own cost. He further informed the petitioner that the order of
confirmation of sale would be issued after disposal of L.G.C.No.1 of
2003. Thereafter, the petitioner filed W.P.No.7814 of 2005 before
this Court in relation to L.G.C.No.1 of 2003 and secured interim
order dated 11.04.2005, staying further proceedings therein.
While so, on 19.03.2006, the first respondent filed M.P.No.11
of 2006 before the Recovery Officer, Debts Recovery Tribunal,
Hyderabad, under Rules 57 and 58 of the
Rules in the Second 
Schedule to the Act
of 1961 (for brevity, the IT Rules) to set aside
and/or cancel the auction sale dated 09.01.2003. By order dated
05.06.2009, the Recovery Officer dismissed the said petition as
time barred. Aggrieved thereby, the first respondent filed an appeal
in R.A.No.3 of 2009 before the Debts Recovery Tribunal,
Hyderabad. The Tribunal allowed the said appeal vide order dated
23.12.2009. Perusal of the said order demonstrates that the
following points were framed for consideration by the Tribunal:
1.        Whether the Auction dated 9.1.2003 is liable to be
                set aside?
2.        Whether the Appellant has filed MP.No.11 of 2006
        within the period of limitation?
3.         To what relief?
On the first point, the Tribunal held that the sale held on
09.01.2003 was a complete nullity as the Recovery Officer had no
power to extend time for deposit of the balance sale consideration.
On the second point, the Tribunal opined that the limitation
prescribed under Rule 61 of the IT Rules was not relevant as there
was no sale at all, as the sale proceedings dated 09.01.2003 were
non est in law, and the question of asking for setting aside the sale
did not arise. Consequently, the Tribunal allowed R.A.No.3 of 2009
setting aside the order dated 05.06.2009 passed in M.P.No.11 of
2006 in R.P.No.33 of 2002 in O.A.No.123 of 1997 and also the sale
dated 09.01.2003 held by the Recovery Officer. In its summation,
the Tribunal cited the following reasons for allowing the appeal:
(i)     as the title of the subject property was not clear and
no sale could have been conducted in relation thereto;
(ii)    as the auction purchaser failed to deposit the balance
75% of the sale consideration within fifteen days from
the date of the auction sale;
(iii)   as the auction sale was knocked down in favour of the
individual auction purchaser and not in favour of the
individual auction purchaser and his family; and
(iv)    as the limitation prescribed under Rule 61 of the IT
Rules would not apply as the first respondent was not
asking for setting aside the sale on the ground of any
material irregularity but on the ground that it was
null, void and non est in the eye of law.
Aggrieved by the allowing of R.A.No.3 of 2009, the petitioner
herein filed M.A.No.142 of 2010. This appeal was filed before the
Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Chennai, but it was transferred
to and heard by the Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai.
By order dated 22.05.2013, the Appellate Tribunal rejected the
petitioners appeal primarily on the ground that he had failed to
deposit the 75% balance consideration within the time prescribed.
It is this order which is presently subjected to challenge.
Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned senior counsel, would
advance the following arguments:
(i)     The proper remedy of the first respondent to seek
setting aside of the sale was not a petition under
Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules. A petition to set
aside an auction sale could be filed only under Rule
61 of the IT Rules and the limitation prescribed
therefor is thirty days from the date of the sale.
M.P.No.11 of 2006 was therefore not maintainable.;
(ii)    In any event, Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules
should be treated as directory and not mandatory in
as much as no consequence is provided for violation
thereof and any infraction of the procedure
prescribed thereunder would not vitiate the sale;
(iii)   The first respondent was not entitled to seek
indulgence three years after the sale and all the
more so, when the loan had not even been 
liquidated. Therefore, relief ought not to have been
granted to him by nullifying the sale;
(iv)    The order dated 18.09.2003 passed by the Recovery 
Officer suo motu extending time for making payment
of the balance 75% of the sale consideration was
never subjected to challenge and the amount
payable thereunder was remitted within time. This
aspect was lost sight of by both the Tribunals;
(v)     The order dated 18.09.2003 passed by the Recovery 
Officer was in the nature of a consent order and
therefore, in the absence of a challenge, no
inference could be drawn that it was not legal; and
(vi)    The reasoning of the Debts Recovery Tribunal,
Hyderabad, in R.A.No.3 of 2009 in M.P.No.11 of
2006 in R.P.No.33 of  2002 in O.A.No.123 of 1997 is
fallacious and contrary to the spirit of the rules.
He would further contend that the understanding and
construction of Rule 57(1) and 2 of the IT Rules by both the
Tribunals is incorrect. He would assert that Rule 57(2) is directory
in nature. He would point out that the Tribunals did not even set
aside the order dated 18.09.2003, whereby the Recovery Officer
suo motu extended the time for the petitioner to pay the balance
sale consideration. He would submit that there is no clear finding
as to maintainability of M.P.No.11 of 2006 filed under Rules 57
and 58 of the IT Rules. He would point out that unless the sale is
set aside, be it on the ground of a material irregularity or on the
ground that it is void, it would not come to naught automatically,
and therefore, an application necessarily had to be filed by the
aggrieved party under Rule 61 of the IT Rules to set it aside. As no
such application was ever filed, the learned senior counsel would
contend that it was not open to the Tribunals to assume
jurisdiction for setting aside the sale, when the Recovery Officer
had dismissed the petition on a different ground altogether, viz.,
that extension of time granted to make the balance payment under
order dated 18.09.2003 was within the knowledge of the first
respondent and that the sale was conducted on 09.01.2003, 
despite which the petition was filed only on 27.03.2006, long after
the limitation period prescribed in Rule 61 of the IT Rules.
Further, he would contend that as Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules
are only declaratory and do not provide any remedy for an
aggrieved party to seek setting aside of the sale thereunder, no
jurisdiction is conferred under these provisions to do so, but losing
sight of this aspect, both the Tribunals did so. He would also
contend that as no steps were taken to assail the order dated
18.09.2003, the first respondent is deemed to have acquiesced
with the same and waived his right to object thereto.
Per contra, Sri D.V.Seetharama Murthy, learned senior
counsel, would point out that no warranty is ever offered by a
secured creditor in relation to any auction sale and merely because
a clarification was sought with regard to the pending land grabbing
case, the same was not a valid excuse for the petitioner to fail to
pay the balance sale consideration in terms of the relevant rules.
Learned senior counsel would point out that in the event the
petitioner had any apprehension as to marketability of the subject
property, he could have sought dissolution of the sale under Rule
62 of the IT Rules, on the ground that there was no saleable
interest in the property. Without doing so, a novel mechanism was
adopted by asking for a clarification thereby putting off compliance
with the mandatory temporal stipulation. Learned senior counsel
would further point out that the scheme of a sale under the IT
Rules is in pari materia with the scheme of a sale in execution
proceedings under Order 21 Rules 85 and 86
CPC
, which is also 
mandatory, and in the event of violation of such procedure, there is
no sale at all and no order is required to be passed holding to that
effect. Learned senior counsel would further point out that in so
far as the ex parte final order in O.A.No.123 of 1997 is concerned,
a petition to set aside the same was filed, along with I.A.No.525 of
2004 to condone the delay in filing the same and the said
application was allowed and the set aside petition which was then
numbered as M.A.No.49 of 2006 is posted on 18.01.2018. Learned  
senior counsel would further point out that the plea of
acquiescence and waiver were never raised, either before the
Tribunal, the Appellate Tribunal or even before this Court, in the
pleadings. He would also point out that the order dated 18.09.2003
demonstrates that no notice was given to his client and only the
bank and the petitioner, being the highest bidder, were heard in
the matter. In any event, per the learned senior counsel, the
question of extension of time would arise only if a valid sale had
taken place but once the mandate of the IT Rules was violated,
there was no sale at all in the eye of law. The question of extension
of time therefore did not arise, according to the learned senior
counsel, and he would submit that though it is now asserted that
the Recovery Officer suo motu extended time under the order dated
18.09.2003, the implicit request made by the petitioner in that
regard is evident from the letters dated 15.01.2003 and
23.05.2003. He would further assert that the application in
M.P.No.11 of 2006 was to sensitize the Recovery Officer as to the
mistake committed by him in terms of Rules 57 and 58 of the IT
Rules. He would submit that there is no need to challenge a void
order and therefore, the extension order dated 18.09.2003 was not
required to be independently subjected to challenge. He would
state that the prayer in the said M.P. was to cancel/set aside the
auction sale dated 09.01.2003 but the framing of this prayer would
not bring it within Rule 61 of the IT Rules. He would further assert
that the statutory scheme indicates that finality must attach to the
orders of the Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal and only judicial review
would be permitted of such orders under
Article 226
of the
Constitution, but the petitioner is practically asking this Court to
sit in appeal over the order of the Appellate Tribunal by way of this
writ petition.
Sri M.Narender Reddy, learned senior counsel, would state
that the bank is supporting the petitioner. He would state that the
first respondent did not even cite any prejudice having been
caused to him in M.P.No.11 of 2006 and as he never disputed his
liability in the capacity of a guarantor, he could not seek
nullification of the sale of his property on a technical ground. He
would further point out that the delay on his part in taking steps,
in as much as he filed the subject petition only three years after
the auction sale, should be treated as fatal to even consider his
plea. Learned senior counsel would point out that the provisions
of
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 have no application to
proceedings under the
Recovery of Debts Due to the Banks and 
Financial Institutions Act, 1993
(for brevity, the Act of 1993) in
the light of
Section 22(1)
thereof and therefore, reliance placed by
Sri D.V.Seetharama Murthy, learned senior counsel, on case law 
pertaining to Order 21 Rules 85 and 86
CPC
is misconceived. He
would further point out that the first respondent was aware of
every aspect of the matter throughout but did not choose to take
steps till 2006. He would reiterate that the absence of challenge to
the extension order dated 18.09.2003 passed by the Recovery 
Officer is fatal to the claim put forth by the first respondent.
Sri D.V.Seetharama Murthy, learned senior counsel, would
submit that as the bank is supporting the petitioner, he would be
entitled to rebut the arguments put forth by Sri M.Narender Reddy,
learned senior counsel, and point out that the question of
prejudice would not at all apply in the case on hand as there is a
clear illegality which goes to the root of the matter, viz., the auction
sale held on 09.01.2003.
In his reply, Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned senior
counsel, would assert that the power of the Recovery Officer or the
Tribunal to set aside the sale is traceable only to Rule 61 of the IT
Rules and therefore, Rules 57 and 58 of the said Rules had no role
to play. As only a competent forum can set aside an auction sale
already held, be it on whatever ground, the application filed by the
first respondent could not be entertained and only a petition under
Rule 61 of the IT Rules could have been maintained to set aside
such a sale. Once such an application was not made, neither the
Recovery Officer nor the Tribunals thereafter could have exercised
jurisdiction under a rule which was never invoked. He would
submit that the application in M.P.No.11 of 2006 was therefore not
an application in the eye of law. He would point out that the
powers of the Recovery Officer are set out in
Section 28
of the Act
of 1993 and he necessarily had to act within the four corners of the
statutory provision and if he failed to do so, it would not mean that
an appeal would lie to the Tribunal as the Recovery Officer could
have been asked to resell the property straightaway. Per the
learned senior counsel, the three years delay in seeking such a
remedy was never explained and he would assert that it would be a
travesty of justice to allow a party to come forward at his own
convenience, irrespective of compulsory time stipulations, to seek
setting aside of completed and concluded actions on the ground
that such an action is a nullity in the eye of law.
In the light of the rival contentions urged by the three
learned senior counsel, set out hereinabove, the following points
arise for consideration:
(1)     Whether the recovery officer was entitled to extend
the time for payment of the balance sale
consideration of 75%, under his order dated
18.09.2003, in the scheme of Rules 57 and 58 of
the IT Rules?
(2)     If not, whether the said order required to be
challenged independently?
(3)     If the sale held on 09.01.2003 was a nullity in the
eye of law, whether the same required to be set
aside by way of an appropriate application under
Rule 61 of the IT Rules?
(4)     If so, whether the application filed by the first
respondent under Rules 57 and 58 ought not to
have been entertained?
(5)     Whether the delay on the part of the first
respondent in filing the said application only in the
year 2006 would be fatal to his claim?
In terms of
Section 29
of the Act of 1993, the sale of an asset
under the said enactment has to be in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in Part III of the IT Rules. Rules 52 to 54
therein deal with the proclamation of sale, the contents and mode
of making thereof.  Rule 55 deals with the time of sale while Rule
56 provides that the sale should be by public auction to the
highest bidder, subject to confirmation by the Recovery Officer.
Rules 57 and 58 are crucial for the purpose of this case and read
as under:
57. Deposit by purchaser and resale in default.(1) On
every sale of immovable property, the person declared to be the
purchaser shall pay, immediately after such declaration, a deposit
of twenty-five per cent on the amount of his purchase money, to
the officer conducting the sale; and, in default of such deposit, the
property shall forthwith be resold.
(2) The full amount of purchase money payable shall be paid
by the purchaser to the Tax Recovery Officer on or before the
fifteenth day from the date of the sale of the property.
58. Procedure in default of payment.In default of
payment within the period mentioned in the preceding rule, the
deposit may, if the Tax Recovery Officer thinks fit, after defraying
the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to the Government, and the
property shall be resold, and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit
all claims  to the property or to any part of the sum for which it
may subsequently be sold.
Rule 60 relates to an application to set aside the sale of
immovable property on deposit.  Rule 61 deals with an application
to set aside the sale of immovable property on the ground of non-
service of notice or irregularity and also requires extraction:
61. Application to set aside sale of immovable property
on ground of non-service of notice or irregularity.Where
immovable property has been sold in execution of a certificate,
such Income-tax Officer as may be authorised by the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner in this behalf, the defaulter, or
any person whose interests are affected by the sale, may, at any
time within thirty days from the date of the sale, apply to the Tax
Recovery Officer to set aside the sale of the immovable property on
the ground that notice was not served on the defaulter to pay the
arrears as required by this Schedule or on the ground of a material
irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale:
Provided that
(a)     no sale shall be set aside on any such ground
unless the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied that the
applicant has sustained substantial injury by
reason of the non-service or irregularity; and
(b)     an application made by a defaulter under this rule
shall be disallowed unless the applicant deposits
the amount recoverable from him in the execution
of the certificate.
Rule 62 empowers the purchaser to apply to the Recovery
Officer to set aside the sale within thirty days of the sale on the
ground that the defaulter had no saleable interest in the property
sold. Rule 63 deals with confirmation of the sale and states to the
effect that where no application is made for setting aside the sale
under the foregoing rules or where such an application is made
and disallowed, the Recovery Officer shall, if the full amount of the
purchase money is paid, make an order confirming the sale, and
thereupon, the sale shall become absolute.
Bare perusal of Rule 57(1) demonstrates that the person
declared to be the purchaser is required mandatorily to pay,
immediately after such declaration, 25% of the purchase money
and in default of such payment, the property is to be resold.  Rule
57(2) mandates that the full amount of purchase money shall be
paid by the purchaser to the Recovery Officer on or before the
fifteenth day from the date of the sale of the property.  There is
neither ambiguity nor lack of clarity in the rule that would require
any extraneous interpretation or construction being called for.
Rule 58 makes it clear that in default of payment within the
period mentioned in Rule 57(1) and (2), the deposit may, if the Tax
Recovery Officer thinks fit, be forfeited to the Government and the
property should be resold.  The defaulting purchaser has to forfeit
all claims to the property and to any part of the sum for which it
may subsequently be sold.
The issue raised presently and before the Tribunals below
was whether the Recovery Officer, in exercise of power under the
aforestated rules, could have extended the time for making
payment of the balance 75% of the sale consideration by the
petitioner.
This issue is no longer res integra.
In C.N.PARAMASIVAM V/s. SUNRISE PLAZA , this very    
question fell for consideration before the Supreme Court.  That was
also a case arising under the Act of 1993. As in the case on hand,
an ex parte decree was passed in the OA instituted by the bank
before the jurisdictional Debts Recovery Tribunal. The property
mortgaged with the bank was brought to sale in a public auction.
After protracted litigation, the matter came before the Debts
Recovery Appellate Tribunal on the question as to whether the
rights of bonafide purchasers would get curtailed if the ex parte
decree, on the basis whereof the auction sale was conducted, is
eventually set aside.  The Appellate Tribunal held that the auction
purchasers were not bonafide purchasers as they were aware of
the pending legal proceedings between the bank and the borrower.
Aggrieved thereby, the auction purchasers approached the Madras 
High Court but suffered an adverse order as the High Court, upon
examining the validity of the auction, came to the conclusion that
the same was void because of non-compliance with the provisions
of Rule 57 of the IT Rules.  Aggrieved thereby, they went before the
Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court opined that though
Section  
29
of the Act of 1993 provided that the Second and Third
Schedules to the Act of 1961 shall, as far as possible, apply with
necessary modifications, the use of the words as far as possible
and with necessary modifications would not have the effect of
rendering the provisions of Rule 57 of the IT Rules directory, as the
language therein is couched in a manifestly mandatory form. The
Supreme Court further observed that use of these expressions in
Section 29
was to take care of situations where certain provisions
of the IT Rules may have no application on account of the scheme
under the Act of 1993 being different from that of the Act of 1961
and the rules framed thereunder. The argument that the use of the
words as far as possible in
Section 29
of the Act of 1993 is meant
to give discretion to the Recovery Officer to apply the said rules or
not to apply the same in specific fact situations was accordingly
rejected. The Supreme Court confirmed that upon a plain reading
of Rule 57, it is clear that the provisions thereunder are mandatory
in character as the use of the word shall is both textually and
contextually indicative of the making of deposit of the amount
being a mandatory requirement.  The Supreme Court observed that 
the provisions of Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules have their
equivalent in Order 21 Rules 84, 85 and 86
CPC
which are pari
materia in language, sweep and effect. Reference was made to
MANILAL MOHANLAL SHAH V/s. SARDAR SAYED AHMED              
SAYED MAHMAD , SARDARA SINGH V/s. SARDARA SINGH  and              
BALRAM V/s. ILAM SINGH  which held to the effect that
Order 21  
Rule 85 CPC
being mandatory, its non-compliance renders the sale 
a complete nullity and upon such non-compliance, there is no sale
at all.  It was further observed that when there is no sale within
the contemplation of the rules, there can be no question of any
material irregularity in the conduct of such sale. The argument
that the executing Court has inherent power to extend time by
reason of even its own mistake was expressly rejected. Drawing
inspiration from these judgments and other judgments on the
same lines, the Supreme Court observed that it saw no reason to
hold that Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules were anything but
mandatory in nature, so that breach of the requirements under
these rules would render the auction non est in the eye of law. As
regards the rights of a bonafide purchaser, the Supreme Court
observed that having regard to the view taken as to the validity of
the auction itself, the said issue did not require consideration.
In the light of this authoritative edict of the Supreme Court,
Point No.1 with regard to the Recovery Officer having the power to
extend time, for making payment of the balance sale consideration,
is answered in the negative. As affirmed by the Supreme Court,
even the executing Court under
Order 21 Rule 85 CPC
, a provision
in pari materia  with Rule 57 of the IT Rules, has no inherent
power to extend the time even if it was at fault, having made a
mistake with regard to quantification of the amount to be paid (See
BALRAM4).  Therefore, the recovery officer had no power or
jurisdiction to extend the time under Rule 57(2) of the IT Rules for
making payment of the balance sale consideration. The order dated
18.09.2003 passed by him was therefore non est in the eye of law.
In consequence, the sale held on 09.01.2003 was no sale at
all and was non est in the eye of law. Being a nullity, the sale did
not require to be set aside under Rule 61 of the IT Rules.  The said
rule only deals with a sale which is otherwise valid, but for a
material irregularity which may or may not vitiate the same.
However, when the sale is non est in the eye of law and is no sale
at all, the question of alleging any material irregularity would not
arise, as pointed out in C.N.PARAMASIVAM1, basing on earlier  
precedents. Be it noted that even in C.N.PARAMASIVAM1, no   
application had been filed under Rule 61 of the IT Rules to set
aside the sale but despite the same, the Supreme Court held it to
be non est in the eye of law.  As pointed out in RAFIQUE BIBI V/s.
SAYED WALIUDDIN , a distinction must be made between     
complete lack of jurisdiction and mere irregularity of procedure.
In the case on hand, the judgment of the Supreme Court in
C.N.PARAMASIVAM1  puts it beyond doubt that the order dated   
18.09.2003 extending the time for payment of the balance sale
consideration was without jurisdiction and was therefore a nullity
in the eye of law. In consequence, non-compliance with Rule 57(2)
of the IT Rules stood established and the sale held on 09.01.2003
was no sale at all. The question of asking for it to be set aside
therefore did not arise. The said sale, being a nullity, could be
declared to be such in any collateral proceeding and did not
require a separate application to hold it to be so.  Therefore, the
question of filing an application under Rule 61 of the IT Rules did
not arise at all as the said rule is only for assailing a material
irregularity tainting a sale and not a sale which is void in its
inception. Point Nos.2 and 3 are therefore answered in the
negative, as the null and void order dated 18.09.2003 would not
mature into a valid one by mere passage of time.
The point as to whether the first respondent could have
maintained an application under Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules
therefore pales into insignificance. As the sale itself was a nullity in
terms of the mandate of the rules and the said application was
only filed to sensitise the Recovery Officer on this aspect of the
matter, it was maintainable as the sale itself was non est in the eye
of law and was no sale at all but the Recovery Officer had held it
to be so by exercising jurisdiction which he lacked and extended
the time for making the deposit of the balance sale consideration,
contrary to the rule. Point No.4 is accordingly answered in favour
of the first respondent and against the petitioner.
As regards the delay on the part of the first respondent in
filing M.P.No.11 of 2006, it may be noted that the order dated
18.09.2003 manifests that only the bank and the highest bidder,
the petitioner herein, were heard before extension of time was
granted.  No material is placed before this Court to infer that the
first respondent had notice of such extension of time in violation of
the statutory mandate. The first respondent claimed that he came
to know of the same only at the time of filing the petition under
Rules 57 and 58 of the IT Rules. In the absence of any material to
counter this claim on his part, no delay or laches can be imputed
to him. Further, as already pointed out, a null and void auction
which is no sale at all would not mature like fine wine and attain
validity.
Be it viewed from any angle, this Court finds no reason to
interfere with the order dated 22.05.2013 passed by the Debts
Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, in M.A.No.142 of 2010.
The writ petition is therefore devoid of merit and is
accordingly dismissed. Status quo orders shall stand vacated.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall also stand dismissed.
No order as to costs.
______________________    
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
_____________________    
J. UMA DEVI, J 
19th JANUARY, 2018