[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sri Kondapaka Sridhar @ Sidhu vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 31 March, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 130
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
,
T. Rajani
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM AND THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI                  

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.426 of 2013     

31.03.2018 

Sri Kondapaka Sridhar @ Sidhu    Appellant         


The State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor.Respondent  

Counsel for the Appellant :Sri J. Jaya Reddy

Counsel for the respondent:Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases cited:
        
1.Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer (Civil Appeal No. 4226 of 2012)
  2. AIR 1947 PC 67



THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM            
AND  
THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI      

                     Criminal Appeal No.426 OF 2013

J U D G M E N T :
(per Honble Smt. Justice T. Rajani)
        
      The judgment, which is assailed in this Appeal, is passed by
the III Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, FAC: Judge, Family
Court  cum- Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar in S.C. No.
502 of 2011 on 13.07.2012, convicting the Appellant / Accused
No.1 for the offence punishable under
Sections 302
and
201
of the
Indian Penal Code (
IPC
) read with
Section 34
IPC and sentencing
him to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of
Rs.5,000/-, in default to undergo simple imprisonment for six
months for the offence punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
IPC and rigorous imprisonment for five years and to pay
a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default to suffer simple imprisonment for
three months for the offence punishable under
Section 201
read
with
Section 34
IPC.
The facts of the case, as per the charge-sheet, are briefly, as
follows:
On 09.01.2007, at 18.00 hours, the complainant came to the
police station and gave a report stating that his son (deceased),
who left the house on 05.01.2007 on his Passion motor cycle, did
not turn up.  On the basis of the said report, a case was registered
in Crime No. 6 of 2007, under the head man missing.  During the
course of investigation, look out notices were ordered to all the
police stations and a requisition was sent to the authorities of
cellular network services, to furnish the list of incoming and
outgoing calls to the mobile phone of the deceased.  The identity of
the subscribers, who are in contact with the mobile phone of the
missing person, was collected.  The user was identified as
Kondapaka Sridhar, who is the accused in this case.
On investigation, it came to light that the accused stayed as tenant
at Prashanth Nagar Housing Board Colony and Siripuram Colony  
of Karimnagar, besides staying at Turkapalli and Medchal of Ranga
Reddy District and Gajwel of Medak District.  The antecedents of
Accused No.2, who is a close associate of Accused No.1, were also 
collected, which revealed that Accused 1 and 2 had past criminal
record.
On 18.04.2007, on reliable information about the presence
of Accused No.1 at Mancherial Cross Roads, police rushed to the
said place and apprehended him.  On interrogation, he confessed
about the offence, stating that he, along with Accused No. 2, killed
the deceased, after committing theft of his gold ornaments and
later, they concealed the dead body in a man-hole tank at
Siripuram Colony and reinforced the man-hole with cement.
Based on the confession statement, investigation was conducted 
and ATM cards of the deceased were recovered from the accused  
and after concluding the investigation, charge-sheet was laid
against the accused, for the offences punishable under
Sections
302
,
201
,
379
and
120-B
read with
Section 34
IPC.  The Additional
Judicial Magistrate of I Class, who took cognizance of the case for
the above offences, committed the case to the Sessions Division,
Karimnagar, by virtue of the orders in P.R.C.No. 37 of 2008, as the
offences are exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions.
The  Sessions Court Judge, Karimnagar, in turn, made over the
case to the III Additional Sessions Judge, Karimnagar for trial and
disposal according to law.  The said Court, after conducting trial of
the case, passed the impugned judgment against which, this 
Appeal is preferred on the following grounds:
The Court ought to have seen that the prosecution could not
prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt and ought
to have seen that some of the witnesses did not support the
prosecution case and that there are no witnesses to the incident.
Heard counsel for the appellant and learned Public
Prosecutor.
The counsel for the appellant contends that there is
absolutely no legal evidence pointing to the guilt of the accused
and except the confession of the accused, the prosecution did not
collect any evidence, which would create nexus between the
accused and the death of the deceased.  The Public Prosecutor, on
the other hand, submits that the recovery of ATM cards, made
from the accused, would clinchingly prove that it could be the
accused alone, who could have committed the offence.
Based on the above arguments and the material on record,
we framed the following points for determination:
1)      Whether the circumstances proved by the prosecution 
would suffice to prove the guilt of the accused for the
offences with which he was charged and found 
guilty.
2)      Whether the judgment of the lower Court is
sustainable.
3)      To what result.
POINTS No.1 & 2:   P.W.1 is the father of the deceased,
who reported to the police about the missing of the deceased on
09.01.2007.  The deceased was, in fact, found missing from
05.01.2007.  The reason for lodging the report with a delay of four
days is no where explained by P.W.1 or the prosecution.  P.W.1
only states that before lodging the report, he searched for the
deceased in the neighbouring villages and he could not found him,
but does not state that as a reason for the delay.  The dead body of
the deceased was found in a septic tank, after he lodged the report
i.e. on 18.04.2007.  He stated that the deceased was wearing gold
bracelet, gold rings, gold chain while leaving the house. After about
one month of the deceased leaving the house, he received a
message through mobile phone of his son, informing that his son
was kidnapped and demanding him to deposit Rs.5 lacs in HDFC   
or Andhra Bank, and stating that otherwise his son would be
killed. Then, he deposited Rs.5,000/- in Andhra Bank and again
Rs.2 lacs in the same bank at the Main Branch, Karimnagar into
the account of his son and the said amount was withdrawn by the
culprits on four occasions.  On one occasion, some amounts were 
withdrawn in Karimnagar and on another occasion, some more  
amounts were withdrawn at Siripuram Colony and later, some 
amount was withdrawn at Hyderabad and some at Secunderabad.
He again received another message, directing to deposit another
sum of Rs.25 lacs and that they would send the clothes of his son
for identity. The mobile phone, through which he received the
message, was also handed over to the police.  He could not,
however, give the mobile number of his son, though he could
identify the mobile phone. He also identified the ATM card and the
motor cycle of his son.  Nothing material was elicited in the
cross-examination of P.W.1. But, the evidence of P.W.1, except
speaking about the message that he received, does not speak 
about the complicity of the accused.  P.W.2 is the wife of the
deceased.  She also speaks about what she was informed by P.W.1   
regarding the messages on the mobile of the deceased and his 
depositing amounts.  P.W.3 is the mother of the deceased. She also
lent support to the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2.  P.W.4 is a resident of
Siripuram Colony who knows the accused.  He stated that the 
accused and Geetha, who is Accused No.2, used to reside in a 
house opposite to his house. Accused No.2 used to come to his 
house and have talks with his wife and she was in the habit of
using his land phone often.  From 02.01.2007 onwards, the house
in which the accused and said Geetha used to reside, was found
locked and they were not seen.
P.W.5 is the person, who let-out the house to the accused
and Geetha.  According to him, the house belongs to the daughter
of his co-son-in-law, but since he was residing at Godavarikhani
along with his wife, P.W.5 let-out the house to the accused and the
house was under his care.  The accused and one Geetha, together, 
took the house.  Geetha was introduced as the junior maternal
aunt of the accused.  On one occasion, the land lady of the house
came and went to the house of the accused and told P.W.5, that
candles were being manufactured in the said house.  According to
the evidence of P.W.5, the accused and Geetha lived as tenants for
more than one year.  On 02.04.2007, when he went to the house 
for collecting rent, he found that the doors were curtained.
On that, he made inquiries with the neighbours, who stated that
they were not seen since long time.  Then he broke open the locks
and let-out the house to some other persons.  On 18.04.2007,
police, along with the accused came to the house, which was
let-out to the accused and inquired about the owner.  On that, the
neighbours told the police, that the said house belongs to P.W.5
and later, a constable came to his rice mill and he went to the said
house along with him. There, the accused was present along with
the police and he made a confession.  Though P.W.5 speaks about  
the accused making confession, he does not speak about the 
recovery of the dead body from the septic tank, at the instance of
the accused.
P.W.6 is the Manager (Administration), Legal Department,
IDEA Cellular Company.  He received requisition from the
Inspector of Police, Karimnagar in the month of March 2007,
requesting him to furnish the call data of the mobile phone IMEI,
as such, he furnished the details.  Though he states that he filed
the call details along with a memo, the same is not marked in his
evidence, as they did not contain the date of issue, signature of the
issuing authority or any other competent person or the seal of
office which furnished the call details.  Ex P6 is call details of
mobile number 9912578108, which contains an endorsement of   
the court, that it is marked through PW.6. The same stands to be a
descrepancy. However, the IMEI number, in Ex.P6 is not the same 
as stated by PW.6 and hence it cannot be said to have been issued
by him. Be it so, he does not file the certificate required by
Section
65-B
of the Indian Evidence Act for which reason Ex.P6 cannot be
relied upon.
In
Anvar P.V vs P.K.Basheer,  Civil Appeal
No.4226
of 2012, the Apex Court held An electronic record by
way of secondary evidence shall not be admitted in evidence
unless the requirements under Section 65B are satisfied.
Thus, in the case of CD, VCD, chip, etc., the same shall be
accompanied by the certificate in terms of Section 65B
obtained at the time of taking the document, without which,
the secondary evidence pertaining to that electronic record, is
inadmissible.
The call details pertaining to the IMEI number stated by
P.W.6 were not marked,  

       P.W.7 is a classmate of the deceased.  But his evidence does
not seem to be material as he does not state about any fact which
is helpful to prove the guilt of the accused.
P.W.8 is the land-lord of the house in which, allegedly, the
accused resided along with one Geetha.  He came to know that in 
the month of April, 2006, police raided the house in which the
accused and Geetha stayed as tenants and took them to the police 
station in a brothel case.  Immediately thereafter, they vacated the
house and went away.
P.W.9 is a witness, who purchased the house where Geetha
resided, from one Kalavathi, who was the original owner of the said
house.
P.W.10 is a hostile witness, who went to Siripuram Colony
for cleaning the septic tank, which is situated in front of the house
of the deceased. He again corrects himself stating that the septic
tank is situated in front of the house in which the accused stayed.
He was declared hostile as he did not support the case of the
prosecution that he knows that the accused and Geetha killed the
deceased.
P.W.11 is an X-Ray Technician in Sairam Hospital,
Karimnagar.  He joined as a tenant in the house in Siripuram
Colony on 14-4-2007, in which house the accused was a tenant 
earlier.  On 18.04.2007, police came to the said house and
removed the dead body from the septic tank, in his presence.
According to him, there is a compound wall around his house.  He
was standing outside the compound wall, while the dead body is
being recovered from the septic tank.  He admitted that he does
not know what happened at his house, as he was out of the
compound wall and that he was giving the name of the accused as 
Sridhar as instructed by the police.
P.W.12 is a scavenger, who dug the septic tank and removed
the dead body from the same.  P.W.13 is a photographer, who 
photographed the proceedings of recovery of the dead body from
the septic tank. P.W.14 is a witness for the confession made by the
accused.  He speaks about the recovery of two ATM cards, mobile 
phone and money purse from the possession of Accused No.1.   
P.W.15 is the Civil Assistant Surgeon, District Headquarters
Hospital, Karimnagar, who stated that the body, which was
exhumed, was sent to MGM Hospital for Post-Mortem examination.   
P.W.16 is a photographer, who photographed the dead body of the 
deceased.
P.W.17 is the Assistant Manager in Andhra Bank Main
Branch, Karimnagar.  His evidence is material as the deceased was
holding an account in the said bank and the money deposited by
P.W.9 was in the said account. Hence, he is the witness, who can
lend support to the evidence of P.W.1, with regard to the
withdrawal of amounts.  But, unfortunately, the evidence of
P.W.17 does not lend support to P.W.1s evidence and on the other
hand, it contradicts the said evidence.  According to P.W.1,
initially, he deposited Rs.5,000/- in Andhra Bank and later, Rs.2
lacs in Andhra Bank, Main Branch, Karimnagar where P.W.17 is  
working.  According to P.W.1, there were four withdrawals after he
deposited the amount.  The deposit was made by P.W.1, one month   
after missing of the deceased on  05.01.2007 which would be
around 05.02.2007. But the evidence of P.W.17 shows that as per
the statement of account in respect of Account No. 18381 which is
in the name of the deceased, P. Surender, withdrawal of a sum of
Rs.59,800/-  in total was there.  The first withdrawal was on
06.01.2007 for Rs.300/- i.e. the next day after the deceased left
the house and on 06.02.2007, Rs.5,000/- was withdrawn. The 
same would corroborate the evidence of P.W.1, as he deposited 
Rs.5,000/- around  that time. As to when P.W.1 deposited Rs.2
lacs is not stated by P.W.17, but it is subsequent to the deposit of
Rs.5,000/- which is after one month from 05.01.2007. The next
withdrawal was only on 12.03.2007 which is for Rs.10,000/- and
on the same day, another Rs.10,000/- was also withdrawn and on 
13.03.2007, another Rs.10,000/- was withdrawn. The other
withdrawals stated by P.W.17 are on 16.12.2006 for Rs.5,000/-,
on 18.12.2006 for Rs.10,000/- and on 26.12.2006 for Rs.9,500/-.
The above-said last three withdrawals are prior to the deceased
leaving the house and hence, they cannot be linked up to this case.
The withdrawals that are made after the missing of the deceased
are only to an extent of Rs.35,300/-.  Hence, there is absolutely no
corroboration between the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.17 with 
regard to the amounts withdrawn.  The date of death of the
deceased could not be assessed as the body was putrefied by the 
time it was recovered. Hence, whether the withdrawals on
12.03.2007 were made while the deceased was alive or not cannot 
be known, so as to link up the said withdrawals with the accused.
Next incriminating circumstance is the recovery of ATM
cards. In the light of the above pointed out discrepancies, the
evidence with regard to the recovery of ATM cards from the
accused should be free from any doubt.  But, P.W.14, who is a
witness for the recovery of ATM cards, states that by the time he
was called by the police, the accused was in the custody of the
police and the ATM cards were recovered from the possession of
Accused No.1 on the spot, which appears to be highly improbable.
It cannot be expected that the accused would be moving with the
ATM cards, even after the deceased was murdered.  It cannot also
be assumed that he would be in possession of the ATM cards, 
expecting that further amounts would be deposited in the account
of the deceased for him to withdraw the same with the help of the
ATM cards. On the other hand, the statement of account of the
deceased, Ex.P7, strangely, shows Rs.1,70,528 as the balance, as 
on 23-3-2007.  The said fact, dismantles the entire case, as motive
stands diluted. If it was for gain, that the deceased was kidnapped
and if the accused had the ATM cards and if he is the person who
had withdrawn the earlier amounts, there cannot be expected any
balance, to remain, in the account. In all probability, the accused
would withdraw the entire amount, with the amount of time that
he had at his disposal, before he was arrested. The contention of
the appellants counsel that the ATM cards might have been
planted with the accused, in the light of the above doubtful
circumstances, cannot be brushed aside.
The investigation as regards the call details of the mobile
phone of the deceased is perfunctory and scanty.  Though P.W.21, 
Inspector of Police, Janagaon Rural, who, at the relevant point of
time, worked as the Inspector of Police, Karimnagar, states that on
09.10.2007, he collected the details of SMS sent by the accused to
the wife of the deceased through mobile No. 98853 66605 and that
he also collected the details of SMS sent by the accused to the
father of the deceased, he does not file the same into the Court
which shows the perfunctory nature of the investigation.
The investigation does not seem to have been in the direction in
which it ought to have been.  The important link in the chain of
circumstances i.e. the messages sent to P.W.1, is missing in this
case.
The dead body, no doubt, was recovered from a place not
accessible to everyone and of which only, the person committing
the murder, could, in all probability, have knowledge. But
section
27
of the Indian Evidence Act permits, only that part of the
confession, which leads to the recovery of a fact, to be relied upon.
The Privy Council in
Pulukuri Kottayya V. Emperor
(19th
December, 1946), illuminated the scope and ambit of
section 27
in
the following words,
          It is fallacious to treat the fact discovered within
the section as equivalent to the object produced; the fact
discovered embraces the place from which the object is
produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this, and
information given must relate distinctly to this fact.
Information as to past user, or the past history, of the object
produced is not related to its discovery in the setting in which
it is discovered. Information supplied by a person in custody
that I will produce a knife concealed in the roof of my house
does not lead to the discovery of a knife; knives were
discovered many years ago. It leads to the discovery of the fact
that a knife is concealed in the house of the informant to his
knowledge, and if the knife is proved to have been used in the
commission of the offence, the fact discovered is very relevant.
But if to the statement the words be added with which I
stabbed A these words are inadmissible since they do not
relate to the discovery of the knife in the house of the
informant."
If the recovery of the dead body, in this case, is appreciated
on the above lines, it would rest the proof at the point of the
accused having knowledge of the place where the dead body was  
concealed, but it does not by itself, prove that he committed the
murder of the deceased.  No further links are gathered to such
knowledge of the accused. The only link collected, i.e. the ATM
cards, do not gather our confidence, for the aforementioned
reasons.
The principle that when a case rests on the circumstantial
evidence, the circumstances collected by the prosecution should be
in such a manner that a strong chain should be formed by the
circumstances, without any missing links and all the
circumstances should unerringly point towards the guilt of the
accused, is very well-settled. The circumstances should not leave
any scope for even a hypothesis of the innocence of the accused
and should not leave any loose ends to tie. But, in this case, not
only the important link in the chain of circumstances, but several
other links, which could have lent support to the case of the
prosecution, are found missing.  Hence, in the above
circumstances, we do not feel it safe to uphold the verdict of the
lower Court.  The points are answered accordingly.
POINT No.3:  In the result, the judgment dated 13.07.2012
in S.C. No.502 of 2011 on the file of the Judge, Family
CourtcumAdditional District and Sessions Judge at Karimnagar 
is set aside.  The Appeal is therefore, allowed and the appellant
shall be set at liberty forthwith, if he is not required in any other
case.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending shall
stand closed.
____________________________     
CHALLA KODANDA RAM, J       
_____________  
T. RAJANI, J
Date: 31st March 2018