[Cites
11
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Dommati Prashanthi vs Indian Bank, Warangal And Others on 7 February, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 185, (2018) 188 ALLINDCAS 728 (HYD), (2018) 3 ANDHLD 92, (2018) 2 BANKCAS 567
Author:
P.Keshava Rao
Bench:
P.Keshava Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.KESHAVA RAO                    

WRIT PETITION NO.27552 OF 2014     

07-02-2018 

Dommati Prashanthi  Petitioner.. Petitioner

Indian Bank, Warangal and others  Respondents   

Counsel for petitioner:  Sri Ghanshyamdas Mandhani 
                                                
Counsel for respondents 1 and 2:Sri Ambadipudi Satyanarayana  
Counsel for respondent 4 :  Sri M.Ravinder Babu
Counsel for respondents 3 and 5    :  --

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1. (2004) 2 SCC 601 
2. AIR 1956 SC 593 
3. (2008) 1 SCC 125 
4. (2014) 6 SCC 1
5. 2008 (4) Bom CR 719 : 2008 SCC Online Bom 489   
6. 2015 SCC Online Gujarat 5178 
7. 2016 SCC Online Kerala 35932  
8. 2016 SCC Online Madras 5608  
9. W.P.No.7300 of 2014 dated 05.09.2017  
10. W.P.No.6857 of 2015 dated 11.03.2015  
11. (2014) 1 SCC 479 
12. W.P.No.1770 of 2015 dated 27.01.2015  
13. (2010) 8 SCC 110 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
 THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.KESHAVA RAO         

WRIT PETITION NO.27552 OF 2014     
O R D E R
(Per Honble Sri Justice Sanjay Kumar)

        The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 21.07.2014
passed by the Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Kolkata (hereinafter
'the Appellate Tribunal'), dismissing her Appeal No.287 of 2013 filed
under
Section 18
of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (for
brevity, 'the
SARFAESI Act
').  She seeks a writ of certiorari to quash
the same and to consequently direct the Indian Bank (hereinafter 'the
bank') to drop all further proceedings initiated by it under
Section
13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act.
The aforestated appeal was filed by the petitioner assailing the
order dated 15.07.2013 passed by the Debts Recovery Tribunal,
Hyderabad (hereinafter 'the Tribunal), in S.A.No.129 of 2008. This
securitisation application was filed by the petitioner under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act to set aside the sale of the house property
bearing Municipal No.11-24-256, Desaipet Road, Pochamma Maidan,    
Warangal, by the bank in exercise of powers under the
SARFAESI  
Act
.  The SA was dismissed by the Tribunal.
The petitioners mother, Jannu Mariyamma, the third
respondent herein, had mortgaged the subject house property as
security for the housing loan of Rs.4,00,000/- obtained by her from
the bank in March, 2006.  The loan was repayable in 108 monthly
instalments of Rs.5,500/- each, commencing from June, 2006.  The 
construction of the house was completed in February, 2007. Owing to
the default in repayment of the housing loan, the bank declared the
same a non-performing asset and issued demand notice dated  
12.06.2007 to the third respondent under
Section 13(2)
of the
SARFAESI Act requiring her to pay the sum of Rs.4,33,422/- along
with interest. It was only thereafter that the third respondent
executed registered gift settlement deed dated 03.11.2007, bearing
Document No.366 of 2007, renouncing all her rights and interest in
the subject house property in favour of her daughter, the petitioner
herein, without any monetary consideration. This gift settlement deed
was admittedly executed by the third respondent without obtaining
the prior written consent of the bank.
While so, as the third respondent failed to pay the amount due
in terms of its demand notice dated 12.06.2007, the bank proceeded
under
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act and auctioned the subject 
house property on 10.12.2007.  The fourth respondent herein
emerged as the successful bidder in the said sale. Aggrieved by this
sale, the petitioner filed S.A.No.129 of 2008 before the Tribunal,
under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act.  Her case therein was that 
she was the owner and possessor of the subject house property 
pursuant to the registered gift settlement deed dated 03.11.2007
executed in her favour by her mother and, having stepped into the
shoes of her mother, she was entitled to protect her interest. She
sought to assail the auction sale in favour of the fourth respondent
herein on various grounds.  The bank however contested her locus by
pointing out that she could not claim lawful ownership over the
subject house property pursuant to the registered gift settlement
deed dated 03.11.2007 as it was executed after issuance of the
demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act on  
12.06.2007 and was hit by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act. The 
bank therefore asserted that she had no locus standi to file the
securitisation application.
The Tribunal took note of the fact that the petitioner was
neither a borrower nor a guarantor for the loan secured by the third
respondent from the bank. The pivotal question framed by the
Tribunal was as to whether the petitioner would have the right to
challenge the action taken by the bank under the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
in relation to the subject house property. Taking note
of the provisions of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, the Tribunal
opined that the transfer of title in the subject house property by the
third respondent to her daughter, the petitioner herein, without
securing prior written consent of the bank was not at all valid and,
therefore, she had no locus standi to challenge the action taken by
the bank under the
SARFAESI Act
. The Tribunal accordingly 
dismissed the SA vide its order dated 15.07.2013.
Assailing the said order, the petitioner filed Appeal No.287 of
2013 before the Appellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal opined
that a harmonious reading of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act 
with
Section 35
thereof, which gave overriding effect to the provisions
of the
SARFAESI Act
over anything inconsistent therewith in other
laws, amply made the point clear that
Section 13(13)
of the
SARFAESI Act is mandatory in nature. As it was not in dispute that
the unilateral transfer of title under the registered gift settlement
deed dated 03.11.2007 by the third respondent was after issuance
and receipt of the demand notice dated 12.06.2007 under
Section
13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, the Appellate Tribunal affirmed the view
taken by the Tribunal and held that the petitioner, the donee under
the said gift settlement deed dated 03.11.2007, acquired no right in
the secured house property as the gift deed was non est in the eye of
law and in consequence, she had no locus standi to file the
securitisation application. The Appellate Tribunal accordingly
concluded that no interference was warranted with the judgment of
the Tribunal and dismissed the appeal.
Sri Ghanshyamdas Mandhani, learned counsel for the  
petitioner, would submit that the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal
failed to take note of the fact that any person aggrieved by any of the
measures referred to in
Section 13(4)
taken by a secured creditor is
entitled to apply to the jurisdictional Debts Recovery Tribunal under
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act within 45 days from the date on
which such measures were taken. He would therefore contend that 
the question of examining the locus standi of the petitioner in the
context of the registered gift settlement deed dated 03.11.2007, under
which she claimed title to the subject house property, did not at all
arise as there could be no dispute that she was a 'person aggrieved'
by the sale of the subject house property. He would further state that
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act cannot be construed to mean  
that a transfer of the secured asset by the borrower after issuance of
the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
thereof is straightaway null
and void if it is made without the prior written consent of the secured
creditor.  He would point out that, if the borrower or the transferee
clears the dues of the secured creditor even after the transfer in
violation of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, no cause would arise
to categorise the transfer as null and void or non est in the eye of law
and, therefore, the tribunals below erred in blindly treating it as such
and non-suiting the petitioner on the ground of locus. He would draw
a parallel with
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (for
brevity, 'the Act of 1882'), which incorporates the doctrine of lis
pendens, and assert that the tribunals below committed a patent
error in law in not examining the issues raised by the petitioner in
the securitisation application, by non-suiting her at the threshold.
Sri Ambadipudi Satyanarayana, learned counsel for the bank,
and Sri M.Ravinder Babu, learned counsel for the fourth respondent
auction purchaser, would repel these arguments contending that, as
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act barred the transfer of the
secured asset by the borrower without prior written consent of the
secured creditor after issuance of the demand notice under
Section
13(2)
thereof, the petitioner who is claiming rights in violation of the
said provision could not be permitted to air her grievance with regard
to the measures taken by the bank under
Section 13(4)
of the
SARFAESI Act. They would point out that
Section 35
of the
SARFAESI Act gives overriding effect to its provisions over other laws
and, therefore, the petitioner could not seek to draw an analogy from
Section 52
of the Act of 1882.
The issue arising for consideration before this Court presently
is whether the petitioner, who admittedly traces her title to a
document executed in violation of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI
Act, can claim to be a 'person aggrieved' so as to maintain a
securitisation application under
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act
against the sale of the secured asset by the bank.
It would be appropriate at this stage to take note of pertinent
statutory provisions.
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, at the relevant point of
time, stated as under:
13. Enforcement of security interest.-
(13) No borrower shall, after receipt of notice referred to
in sub-section (2), transfer by way of sale, lease or otherwise
(other than in the ordinary course of his business) any of his
secured assets referred to in the notice, without prior written
consent of the secured creditor.
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act, as it stood prior to its
amendment, read as under:
17. Right to appeal.- (1) Any person (including
borrower), aggrieved by any of the measures referred to in sub-
section (4) of
section 13
taken by the secured creditor or his
authorised officer under this Chapter, may make an
application along with such fee, as may be prescribed, to the
Debts Recovery Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter
within forty-five days from the date on which such measures
had been taken.
Section 35
of the SARFAESI Act is also apposite of extraction
and reads as under:
35. The provisions of this Act to override other
laws. The provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force or any instrument
having effect by virtue of any such law.
Section 52
of the Act of 1882, which is sought to be pressed
into service by Sri Ghanshyamdas Mandhani, learned counsel, is also
worthy of reproduction, to the extent relevant, and it states thus:
52. Transfer of property pending suit relating
thereto: During the pendency in any Court having authority
within the limits of India excluding the State of Jammu and
Kashmir or established beyond such limits by the Central
Government of any suit or proceeding which is not collusive
and in which any right to immovable property is directly and
specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or
otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so
as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any
decree or order which may be made therein except under the 
authority of the Court and on such terms as it may impose.
At the outset, we may note that the parallel and analogy sought
to be drawn by Sri Ghanshyamdas Mandhani, learned counsel, from
Section 52
of the Act of 1882 is without merit. In this regard, he
placed reliance on RAJ KUMAR V/s. SARDARI LAL .  Referring to   
the doctrine of lis pendens incorporated in
Section 52
of the Act of
1882, the Supreme Court observed therein that a defendant cannot,
by alienating the property during the pendency of the litigation, seek
to deprive the successful plaintiff of the fruits of the decree and the
transferee pendente lite is treated in the eye of law as a
representative-in-interest of the judgment-debtor and held bound by
the decree passed against the judgment-debtor though neither the
defendant chose to bring the transferee on record nor did the
transferee choose to come on record. The principle underlying
Section
52
of the Act of 1882, as set out by the Supreme Court, is essentially
different from the bar under
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act,
whereby the borrower is restrained from transferring the secured
asset after issuance of the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
, except
with the prior written consent of the secured creditor.
In NAGUBAI AMMAL V/s. B.SHAMA RAO , the Supreme       
Court observed that the effect of
Section 52
of the Act of 1882 is not
to wipe out a sale pendente lite altogether but to subordinate it to the
rights based on the decree in the suit and as between the parties to
the transaction, it would be perfectly valid and would operate to vest
the title of the transferor in the transferee. It was observed that the
words so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any
decree or order which may be made therein make it clear that the
transfer is good except to the extent that it might conflict with rights
decreed under the decree or order and it is in this view that transfers
pendente lite have been held to be valid and operative as between the
parties thereto.  However, this principle also is alien to the milieu and
objective of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, which operates
solely to protect the interest of the secured creditor.
At the fundamental level, it is to be noted that the doctrine of
lis pendens in
Section 52
of the Act of 1882 is aimed at protecting the
prospective decree holder who is put at risk of being deprived of the
fruits of such decree owing to the transfer pending the litigation. As
between the parties to such transfer, the doctrine however makes it
clear that the transaction would hold good. When
Section 13(13)
of
the SARFAESI Act bars the very transfer of the secured asset to the
detriment of the secured creditor but for the excepted categories, i.e.,
in the ordinary course of business or with the prior written consent of
the secured creditor, the very initiation of the transaction by the
borrower is barred and there is no question of such transfer or
transaction being operative between the parties thereto or vesting any
title in the transferee thereunder, at the cost of the secured creditor.
The analogy sought to be drawn from
Section 52
of the Act of 1882 is
therefore wholly without basis.
The controversy mainly turns upon the effect of the prohibition
envisioned by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act. This provision
postulates that no borrower shall transfer the secured asset, other
than in the ordinary course of his business, be it by way of sale, lease
or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the secured
creditor, after issuance of the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of
the SARFAESI Act referring to the said secured asset.
Considering this provision in TRANSCORE V/s. UNION OF    
INDIA , the Supreme Court opined that a demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act is not merely a show-cause notice 
as
Section 13(13)
thereof indicates that such a notice, in effect,
operates as an attachment/injunction restraining the borrower from
disposing of the secured asset.
In HARSHAD GOVARDHAN SONDAGAR V/s.
INTERNATIONAL ASSETS RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY               
LIMITED , the Supreme Court observed that the provisions of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act were inconsistent with
Section 
65-A
of the Act of 1882, which permits a mortgagor in lawful
possession to create a lease over the property, but by virtue of
Section 35
of the SARFAESI Act, a lease of a mortgaged asset by the 
borrower after he receives the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of
the SARFAESI Act, referring to the said asset, would not be a valid
lease.
A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court (Aurangabad
Bench), in MAHARASHTRA STATE CO-OP. BANK LTD. V/s. STATE           
OF MAHARASHTRA , observed that
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI      
Act would come into play as soon as a notice under
Section 13(2)
thereof is served on the borrower and the borrower shall thereafter
not be in a position to transfer by way of sale, lease or otherwise any
of the secured assets referred to in the said notice.
In OM SHREE NAGRAJ GINING FACTORY V/s. UNION OF         
INDIA , a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court observed that
after issuance of the notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act
by the secured creditor, sale of the property referred to therein was
completely prohibited without the prior consent of the secured
creditor, as per the provisions of
Section 13(13)
. The Division Bench
further observed that no right or title would vest in the vendees
under the so-called sale deed.
In M.K.SIRAJ V/s. THE FEDERAL BANK LTD. , a Division  
Bench of the Kerala High Court observed that
Section 13(13)
of the
SARFAESI Act makes it clear that no borrower shall, after receipt of
the notice referred to in sub-section (2), transfer by way of sale, lease
or otherwise (other than in the ordinary course of his business) any
of his secured assets referred to in the said notice, without the prior
written consent of the secured creditor, and any sale by the borrower
in violation of the provision would be per se illegal.  It was further
observed that if the transfer is opposed to the nature of the interest
affected and is for an unlawful object, the transfer would be illegal
and as such transfer is forbidden by law and would defeat the
provisions of
Section 13(13)
of the Act, the object with which the sale
is made by the borrower can safely be said to be unlawful.
In K.RAJU V/s. THE CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE        
COURT, EGMORE, CHENNAI , a Division Bench of the Madras High      
Court considered the very same provision and opined that when the
petitioner therein admitted that he was inducted into the property
after issuance of the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of the
SARFAESI Act by way of a registered lease deed, he would not be 
entitled to any hearing before any authority as the purported tenancy
was created to hoodwink the judicial process and also the
mechanism prescribed by law.
In A.PALANIKUMAR V/s. THE AUTHORIZED OFFICER,         
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK, CHENNAI , a Division Bench of the      
Madras High Court opined that a lessee under a lease agreement 
executed after issuance of the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of
the SARFAESI Act would not be entitled to seek protection of his
possession as against the secured creditor, as the very lease under
which he was claiming rights was statutorily barred by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act.
The decision of a Division Bench of the Madras High Court in
HAIROONTHAI PUBLIC SCHOOL V/s. THE DISTRICT         
COLLECTOR  to the effect that a tenant could go before the District
Collector-cum-Magistrate, Tiruvallur, under
Section 14
of the
SARFAESI Act, notwithstanding the claim of the secured creditor that
the lease was created after issuance of the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act, is distinguishable on facts as
there was a dispute therein as to the creation of such tenancy being
hit by the bar under
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act.
Sri Ghanshyamdas Mandhani, learned counsel, would cite the
hypothetical example of a transaction hit by
Section 13(13)
of the
SARFAESI Act not being liable to be declared unlawful in the event
the amounts due to the secured creditor are paid, be it by the
borrower or the transferee. In this regard, it may be noted that the
bar to the transfer of the secured asset by the borrower, in terms of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, operates only for the benefit of
the secured creditor and none else. The status of such transfer would
therefore not be put in issue at all if repayment of all dues is then
lawfully made to the secured creditor. The secured creditor, in such a
situation, would have no cause to raise an objection under
Section
13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act. This argument is of no avail to the
petitioner as that situation never arose in the case on hand.
It is therefore manifest from a conspectus of the aforestated
precedential wisdom that the petitioner cannot claim any legal right
or title under the subject gift settlement deed. However, the question
that would then arise is as to whether the petitioner, who admittedly
claims under a document hit by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, 
can be said to be a person aggrieved, competent to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Debts Recovery Tribunal under
Section 17(1)
of the
SARFAESI Act against the sale of the subject house property by the
bank.
In this regard, it may be noted that the Supreme Court, in
JAGDISH SINGH V/s. HEERALAL , while construing the provisions    
of
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act observed that the expression any
person in
Section 17(1)
is of wide import and takes in its fold not
only the borrower or the guarantor but also any other person who
may be affected by the action taken under
Section 13(4)
of the
SARFAESI Act.
In J.MUSTHAQ ALI V/s. INTERNATIONAL ASSET     
RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY PVT. LTD. , the Madras High Court          
also gave the widest possible connotation to any person aggrieved in
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act, relying on JAGDISH SINGH8.   
That was also a case where the person aggrieved claimed rights in
the secured asset under a sale agreement executed after issuance of
the
Section 13(2)
notice under the
SARFAESI Act
.
However, it may also be noted that in UNION BANK OF INDIA 
V/s. SATYAWATI TONDON , the Supreme Court observed that if    
the guarantor whose property was mortgaged to the bank had any 
tangible grievance against the notice issued under
Section 13(4)
or
the action taken under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, she could 
then avail the remedy of filing an application under
Section 17(1)
of
the SARFAESI Act.  It was observed therein that the expression any
person used in
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act was of wide 
import. Reference was also made to this judgment in JAGDISH  
SINGH8. The notable factor is that the grievance sought to be aired
should be a tangible one.
Significantly, the specific question as to whether a person
claiming rights pursuant to a transfer hit by
Section 13(13)
of the
SARFAESI Act could qualify as any person aggrieved so as to
maintain an application under
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act,
against the measures taken by the secured creditor under
Section
13(4)
thereof, neither fell for consideration nor was it addressed in
clear terms in any of the aforestated decisions.
Thus, though the words any person aggrieved in
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act are not qualified or restricted by express
language, the question would arise as to whether a person claiming
under a transfer barred by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act can
be permitted to raise a grievance before the jurisdictional Debts
Recovery Tribunal against the measures taken by the secured 
creditor under
Section 13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act.
Allowing such a person to do so, in our considered opinion,
would be nothing short of dignifying and validating the unlawful
transfer in his favour. When the very transaction under which such
person claims rights is unlawful, giving it even a modicum of sanctity
or legality, so as to permit such person to approach any forum
assailing the measures taken by the secured creditor under
Section
13(4)
of the SARFAESI Act, would amount to making a mockery of
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act. Affording an opportunity of
hearing to an unlawful transferee before the jurisdictional Debts
Recovery Tribunal, by bringing such a transferee within the ambit of
any person aggrieved in
Section 17(1)
would practically make the
bar envisioned by
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act otiose. The
words any person aggrieved in
Section 17(1)
must therefore be
construed to mean any person who, prima facie, has a legally
founded tangible grievance.  A person, such as the petitioner, who at
the very threshold fails to meet this standard, as she admittedly
claims rights under a document hit by
Section 13(13)
of the
SARFAESI Act, cannot be said to be a person aggrieved, as the very
foundation of her grievance is rooted in the illegality of the transfer
under which she is claiming rights.  In K.RAJU8, the Madras High
Court also held to this effect.
On the above analysis, we find that the petitioner cannot be
categorised as any person aggrieved so as to entitle her to maintain
an application under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act in relation to
the sale of the subject house property by the bank. This is so as her
claim over the said property stems from the registered gift settlement
deed dated 03.11.2007 which is clearly hit by the bar under
Section
13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act. As the said deed would not vest any 
right or title in the petitioner against the bank, owing to the statutory
bar under
Section 13(13)
of the SARFAESI Act, the question of
lending sanctity to such a blatantly illegal transfer by the borrower in
favour of the petitioner, even to the limited extent of permitting her to
raise an attack against the subsequent sale of the subject house
property by the bank, would not arise. As pointed out supra, the
words any person aggrieved in
Section 17(1)
of the SARFAESI Act
must necessarily be construed to mean any person who is in a
position to show, prima facie, that he or she has a legally founded
tangible grievance and not a person whose claim is mired in illegality
at the very roots. The petitioner therefore had no locus standi to
maintain an application under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act.  We 
find no error whatsoever in both the tribunals below holding to this
effect and non-suiting her on that ground.
The writ petition is devoid of merit and is accordingly
dismissed. Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall also stand
dismissed.  No order as to costs.
____________________   
SANJAY KUMAR, J    
____________________   
P.KESHAVA RAO, J    
7th FEBRUARY, 2018