[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
N.Sagar vs M.Rajeswara Rao And 2 Others on 3 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 38
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S.Somayajulu
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy and The Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S.Somayajulu 

A.S.No.1368 of 2017 

03.04.2018 

N.Sagar Appellant  


M.Rajeswara Rao and 2 othersRespondents
Counsel for the Appellant:Mr.M.V.Suresh 

Counsel for respondent Nos.1 & 2:   Mr.MAK.Mukheed   


<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
? Cases cited:
AIR 2008 SC 3174  
AIR 1977 SC 2421  

        The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
and 
The Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S.Somayajulu 

AS.No.1368 of 2017 
Dated 03.04.2018 

Between:
N.Sagar 
         Appellant 
and 

M.Rajeswara Rao and 2 others  
        Respondents   


Counsel for the Appellant:                      Mr.M.V.Suresh  

Counsel for respondent Nos.1 & 2:               Mr.MAK.Mukheed 





The Court made the following:
Judgment:  (per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna  Reddy)

        At the interlocutory stage, this Appeal is taken up for
hearing and disposal with the consent of the learned
Counsel for both parties.
This Appeal is filed against Order, dated 21-08-2017, in
IA.No.3501 of 2010 in OS.No.413 of 2010 on the file of the
XIV Additional District Judge, Ranga Reddy District at
L.B.Nagar.
The appellant herein has filed the aforementioned suit
for declaration of his title in respect of the house property
bearing No.2-22-310/244C (Plot No.244/C) admeasuring  
250 square yards in Survey Nos.184 to 189 situated in
Addagutta Co-operative Housing Society Limited, Kukatpalli
Village and Municipality, Balanagar Mandal, Ranga Reddy 
District (for short the subject property).
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 have filed IA.No.3501 of
2010 under
Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure
, 1908 (
CPC
) for rejecting the plaint.  In the
affidavit filed in support of the said Application, it is inter alia
stated that respondent Nos.1 & 2 have filed a suit for
injunction against the appellant and his father in the year
2008 vide OS.No.998 of 2008 on  the file of the I Additional
Senior Civil Judge, Ranga Reddy District, wherein
Temporary Injunction was granted; that on verification of
the record, they came to know that the mother of the
appellant has filed a suit for injunction, claiming that she is
the absolute owner of the subject property as the appellant
has gifted the same to her vide registered gift deed bearing
document No.3936/2008, dated 28-05-2008, by suppressing   
the pendency of OS.No.998 of 2008 wherein the appellant
and his father were parties and have set up the claim that
they are the absolute owners of the subject property; and
that two years thereafter, the appellant has filed the present
suit i.e., OS.No.413 of 2010 for declaration of his title and
injunction in respect of the said property.  Respondent
Nos.1 and 2 have further pleaded that as the appellant has
executed the gift deed in respect of the subject property in
favour of his mother- Smt.M.Pushpa, he ceased to be its
owner and that therefore, the Court cannot declare him as
the owner.  Respondent Nos.1 and 2 have, accordingly,
sought for rejection of the plaint.
The appellant has filed a counter-affidavit wherein he
denied the allegation that he ceased to be the owner of the
subject property, though he is somewhat evasive in meeting
the allegation of his executing the gift deed by stating that
the same is nonest in the eye of law.
Be that as it may, the Court below has accepted the
plea of respondent Nos.1 and 2 that the appellant has
executed the gift deed in favour of his mother and allowed
IA.No.3501 of 2010 on the reasoning that having perused
the contents of the registered gift deed, a copy of which was
evidently produced before it by respondent Nos.1 and 2, it
finds that the appellant has no right and title to file the suit.
Under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
, the Court is
empowered to reject the plaint on various grounds as
envisaged under Clauses (a) to (f), which read as under:
(a)     where it does not disclose a cause of action;
(b)     where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the
        plaintiff, on being required by the court to correct
        the valuation within a time to be fixed by the court,
        fails to do so;
(c)     where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the
        plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped,
        and the plaintiff, on being required by the court to
        supply the requisite stamp paper within a time to
        be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(d)     where the suit appears from the statement in the
        plaint to be barred by any law;
(e)     where it is not filed in duplicate;
(f)     where the plaintiff fails to comply with the
        provisions of rule 9

        Neither respondent Nos.1 and 2 have indicated in the
IA as to under which specific clause, the present case falls
nor the Court below has traced the IA to any particular
clause among (a) to (f) of Rule 11 of
Order VII CPC
.
The salutary principle that has to be applied by the
Court, while exercising power under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
in order to hold whether the plaint is liable to be rejected or
not, is that it shall only look into the plaint averments and
nothing else.  This position in law is evident from various
judgments, one of which is
Kamala and Ors.  Vs.
K.T.Eshwara Sa and Ors
.  The relevant portion of
the
said judgment
is extracted herein below:
Order VII, Rule 11(d) of the Code has limited
application.  It must be shown that the suit is barred under
any law.  Such a conclusion must be drawn from the aver
ments made in the plaint.  Different clauses in Order VII,
Rule 11, in our opinion, should not be mixed up.  Whereas
in a given case, an application for rejection of the plaint
may be filed on more than one ground specified in various
sub-clauses thereof, a clear find ing to that effect must be
arrived at.  What would be relevant for invoking clause (d)
of Order VII, Rule 11 of he Code is the aver ments made
in the plaint.  For that purpose, there cannot be any
addition or sub traction.  Absence of jurisdiction on the
part of a court can be invoked at different stages and under
different provisions of the Code.  Order VII, Rule 11 of
the Code is one, Order XIV, Rule 2 is another. (Emphasis
is ours)

        The order of the lower Court shows that it has not
based its decision on the plaint averments only.  On the
contrary, it has looked into the material produced by
respondent Nos.1 and 2 viz, the gift deed.  Such an approach
on the part of the lower Court runs contrary to the settled
legal position as discussed above.  The question, whether the
appellant was the lawful owner of the subject property when
the suit was filed or not requires to be adjudicated based on
the evidence that may be adduced by both parties in the suit.
The lower Court cannot short circuit the proceedings and
non-suit the plaintiff based on material other than plaint
averments purporting to exercise its jurisdiction under
Order
VII Rule 11 CPC
.
The Judgment in
T.Arivandandam vs.  T.V.Satyapal 
and another
relied upon by Mr.M.A.K.Mukheed, learned 
Counsel for respondent Nos.1 and 2, is of no assistance to
his clients, for
,
the said judgment
was rendered based on the
plaint averments themselves and not on any extraneous 
material outside the plaint.
For the aforementioned reasons, the Order under
Appeal is not sustainable and the same is, accordingly, set
aside. The Appeal is allowed and OS.No.413 of 2010 is
restored to file for adjudication by conducting trial by the
lower Court.
As a sequel, IA.No.3 of 2017, filed by the appellant for
interim relief, is disposed of as infructuous.
_____________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
____________________   
(D.V.S.S.Somayajulu, J) 
Date: 03-04-2018