[Cites
60
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Nuthulapati Naga Basweshwer Rao S/O ... vs 1The State Of Telangana Rep By Its Spl. ... on 10 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 289, (2019) 1 ALD(CRL) 839 (2019) 1 CRIMES 67, (2019) 1 CRIMES 67
Author:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
Bench:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CRIMINAL PETITION No.8432 OF 2016     

10.10.2018 

Nuthulapati Naga Basweshwer Rao s/o late Subba Rao  Nizamabad District  Bheemunigutta Rakasipet Bodhan Nizamabad District       

1The State of Telangana rep by its Spl. Public Prosecutor for ACB Cases High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State
through SHO Police station Banjara Hills Hyderabad.. Respondent  

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri Nandigam Krishna Rao
                                        
Counsel for the respondent     :

                
<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

?Cases referred

1.2005 (5) ALD 682 
2.2013 (2) ALD (Crl.) 469 (AP)
3.(2016) 2 Supreme Court Cases (Cri) 222 
4.(2004) 5 SCC 19 
5.(2002) 7 Supreme Court Cases 631  
6.LAWS (SC) 1981 (5) 12  
7.N.H. 4 Wheat. 518 : 4 L. Ed. 629
8.(1975) ILLJ 399 SC
9.(1975) ILLJ 374 SC
10.LAWS (SC) 2009 (4) 65  
11.LAWS (SC) 2016 (4) 70  
12.LAWS (SC) 2002 (3) 103  
13.JT 2000 (2) SC 546 
14.LAWS (SC) 2005 (10) 72  
15.LAWS (SC) 2015 (11) 14  
16.2013 (3) G.L.H. 490
17.LAWS (SC) 2007 (4) 46  
18.AIR 2000 SC 937  
19.LAWS (APH) 2005 (6) 15  
20.(2016) 4   SCC 417 
21.LAWS (P & H) 1987 (1) 2  
22.LAWS (APH) 2009 (12) 32   
23.AIR 1970 CALCUTTA 557    


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SATYANARAYANA MURTHY              

CRIMINAL PETITION NO.8432 OF 2016     

ORDER:
The sole accused in C.C.No.5 of 2016 on the file of Special
Judge for SPE & ACB Cases, Karimnagar, filed this criminal
petition to quash the proceedings against him, registered for the
offences punishable under Sections 13(2) r/w
Section 13(1)(e)
of
Prevention of Corruption Act (for short
P.C. Act
), 1988 in Crime
No.14/RCA-ACB-NZB/2010.
It is the case that, the petitioner initially worked as a clerk at
Primary Agriculture Co-Operative Society, Kotagiri Village,
Nizamabad District and subsequently worked as Paid Secretary at 
Minarpally Village, Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad District from
04.01.1982 to 20.12.2010. On receiving credible information that
this petitioner acquired assets by corrupt practices, the Joint
Director (Telangana) A.C.B., Hyderabad registered crime and
search warrants were obtained from the II Additional Special Judge
for SPE & ACB cases Hyderabad.  Searches were conducted at    
various residential premises of the petitioner at H.No.1-2-760,
Rakasipet, Bodhan, Nizamabad District, H.No.14-67, Kotagiri
Village & Mandal, Bodhan, Nizamabad District and bank locker 
bearing No.102 in Nizamabad District Co-operative Central Bank
Limited, Bodhan Branch on 20.12.2010.  During the searches, 
incriminating material relating to the disproportionate assets was
found to the tune of Rs.79,45,007/- in his name and in the name
of his family members. Further, during the check period, the total
income derived by the petitioner during check period was
ascertained at Rs.37,61,389/-, whereas, the total expenditure of
the petitioner during the check period as determined at
Rs.37,61,389/-. Further, the petitioner possessed savings of
Rs.8,40,464/- and assets worth Rs.79,45,0007, thereby, he could
not satisfactorily account for Rs.87,85,471/-, which is
disproportionate to his known source of income. Thus, the
petitioner allegedly committed offences punishable under
Sections
3(2)
r/w
Section 3(1)(e)
of P.C. Act.
The material collected by the Investigating Officer during
investigation revealed the assets, income and expenditure of the
petitioner which are placed at Annexures-I, II & III respectively and
based on the statements recorded, the Investigating Officer came to
the conclusion that the petitioner along with his family members
possessed disproportionate assets to the tune of Rs.87,85,471/-.
The present petition is filed by the petitioner mainly on the
ground that, the allegations made in the charge-sheet do not
constitute an offence, even if the allegations made in the charge-
sheet are accepted on its face value and that there was no
allegation that the property was acquired by corrupt practices and
that the petitioner is only an employee in Primary Agriculture Co-
Operative Society, Minarpally Village, Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad. 
The petitioner contended that no proceedings were initiated against
him, inasmuch as, neither there was any allegation with regard to
corrupt practices nor making unlawful gain while working as an
employee in Primary Agriculture Co-Operative Society, Minarpally
Village, Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad, no disciplinary proceedings 
were initiated against this petitioner or no surcharge proceedings
were initiated under
Section 60(1)
of A.P. Cooperative Societies Act
till date, therefore, he cannot be prosecuted for the above offences.
Further, it is contended that, the petitioner is not an independent
authority and that, question of adopting corrupt practices, and
acquiring property does not arise.
In addition to that, the Primary
Agriculture Co-Operative Society is not a society registered under
the Telangana Cooperative Societies Act, 1964, and it is a well
settled law in terms of the judgment rendered by this Court in
A.
Subramanyam Naidu v. Government of Andhra Pradesh
, that,  
the Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies have no
independent power to appoint and retrench Paid Secretaries
without obtaining previous sanction of the Registrar of Cooperative
Societies and therefore, contended that, Paid Secretary is not a
Public Servant within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act and he cannot be prosecuted for the
offences punishable under
Sections 13(2)
r/w
Section 13(1)(e)
of
P.C. Act.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also contended that, the
sanction allegedly obtained by the respondent is not legal, even
assuming that this petitioner is a Public Servant within the
definition of
Section 2(c)
of P.C Act and on this ground alone,
sought to quash the proceedings against this petitioner in C.C.No.5
of 2016 on the file of Special Judge for SPE & ACB Cases,
Karimnagar, for the offences punishable under
Sections 13(2)
r/w
Section 13(1)(e)
of P.C. Act.
During hearing, Sri Nandigam Krishna Rao, learned counsel
for the petitioner would draw attention of this Court to the
judgment rendered in
Ravuri Siva Prasad v. State of Andhra
Pradesh
, to contend that the prosecution against this petitioner is
not maintainable, since the petitioner is not a public servant and
in the absence of any sanction from the competent authority, the
proceedings against this petitioner are liable to be quashed.
In
support of his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner placed
reliance on the judgment rendered by this Court in
A.
Subramanyam Naidu v. Government of Andhra Pradesh
(referred supra) to contend that the petitioner is not a public
servant and when he is not a public servant, obtaining sanction in
terms of G.O.Ms.No.5 Agriculture & Cooperative (VI) Department
dated 24.01.2015, passed by APC & Principal Secretary to 
Government is illegal and thereby, the proceedings against this
petitioner are liable to be quashed.
Per contra, learned Special Standing Counsel for A.C.B,
Sri Nayan Kumar contended that though the petitioner is working
as a Paid Secretary in Primary Agriculture Co-Operative Society, he
falls within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)
of
P.C. Act and that the validity of the sanction obtained from the
competent authority cannot be looked into while deciding an
application under
Section 482
Cr.P.C, since such question can be
decided only during trial.
In support of his contentions, learned
counsel placed reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in
Central Bureau of Investigation, Bank Securities and Fraud
Cell v. Ramesh Gelli and others
and on the strength of the
principles
laid down in
the above judgment, learned counsel
contended that the proceedings against this petitioner cannot be
quashed at this stage by exercising power under
Section 482
Cr.P.C and requested to dismiss the criminal petition.
Considering rival contentions and perusing the material
available on record, the points that arise for consideration are as
follows:
1)      Whether the petitioner who is working as a Paid
Secretary in Primary Agriculture Co-Operative Society,
Minarpally Village, Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad, is a
Public Servant as defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C.
Act?
2)      If, the petitioner is a Public Servant as defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act, whether the sanction obtained
by the respondent to prosecute this petitioner vide
G.O.Ms.No.5 dated 24.01.2015 is valid. If not, whether
the proceedings against this petitioner on this ground
are liable to be quashed?
P O I N T No.1
        Undisputedly, the petitioner is working as a Paid Secretary
in Primary Agriculture Co-Operative Society, Minarpally Village,
Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad and he is governed by the provisions  
of
Telangana Cooperative Societies Act
(for short T.C.S. Act), 1964
and the petitioner would fall within the definition of Officer
defined under Section 2(k) of T.C.S Act, which reads as follows:
officer includes a person elected or appointed by a
society to any office of such society according to its
bye-laws and a president, vice-president, chairman,
vice-chairman, secretary, assistant secretary,
treasurer, manager, member of committee, liquidator
or any other person elected or appointed under this
Act, rules or the bye-laws to give directions in regard
to the business of the society.
When the petitioner being a Paid Secretary is termed as an
officer within the definition of Section 2(k) of T.C.S. Act, the Court
has to examine whether the petitioner falls within the definition of
public servant as defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act, since the
petitioners main endeavour is that, he would not fall within the
definition of public servant, as he is not discharging any public
duty. At this stage, it is relevant to advert to the definitions of
public duty under
Section 2(b)
and public servant under
Section
2(c)
of P.C. Act, and they are as follows:
"public duty" means a duty in the discharge of
which the State, the public or the community at large
has an interest;
Explanation.-In this clause "State" includes a
corporation established by or under a Central,
Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body
owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a
Government company as defined in
Section 617
of 
the Companies Act, 1956.
"public servant" means
(i) any person in the service or pay of the Government or
remunerated by the Government by fees or commission for 
the performance of any public duty;
(ii)  any person in the service or pay of a local authority;
(iii) any person in the service or pay of a corporation
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, or
an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the
Government or a Government company as defined in
Section  
617
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(iv) any Judge, including any person empowered by law to
discharge, whether by himself or as a member of any body of
persons, any adjudicatory functions;
(v) any person authorised by a court of justice to perform any
duty, in connection with the administration of justice,
including a liquidator, receiver or commission appointed by
such court;
(vi)  any arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or
matter has been referred for decision or  report by court of
justice or by a competent public authority;
(vii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is
empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an
electoral roll or to conduct an election or  part of an election;
(viii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is
authorised or required to perform any public duty;
(ix) any person who is the president, secretary or other office-
bearer of a registered co- operative society engaged in
agriculture, industry, trade or banking, receiving or having
received any financial aid from  the Central Government or a
State Government or from any corporation established by or
under a  Central, Provincial or State Act, or any authority or
body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a
Government company as defined in
Section 617
of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(x) any person who is a chairman, member or employee of 
any Service Commission or Board, by whatever name called, 
or a member of any selection committee appointed by such 
Commission or Board for the conduct of any examination or
making any selection on behalf of such Commission or 
Board;
(xi) any person who is a Vice-Chancellor or member of any
governing body, professor, reader, lecturer or any their
teacher or employee, by whatever designation called, of any
University and any person whose services have been availed
of by a University or any other public authority in connection
with holding or conducting examinations;
(xii)  any person who is an office-bearer or an employee of an
educational, scientific, social, cultural or other institution, in
whatever manner established, receiving or having received
any financial assistance from the Central Government or any
State Government, or local or other public authority.
Explanation 1.
Persons falling under any of the above sub-clauses are
public servants, whether appointed by the Government or
not.
Explanation 2.
Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they shall be
understood of every person who is in actual possession of
the situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect
there may be in his right to hold that situation.
1[(d) "undue advantage" means any gratification
whatever, other than legal remuneration.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this clause,--
(a) the word "gratification" is not limited to pecuniary
gratifications or to gratifications estimable in money;
(b) the expression "legal remuneration" is not restricted to
remuneration paid to a public servant, but includes all
remuneration which he is permitted by the Government or
the organisation, which he serves, to receive.]

        According to
Article 12
of the Constitution of India, the
society is a State and the persons discharging duties in society are
discharging public duty.
In
Gayatri De v. Mousumi Cooperative Housing Society 
Limited
, the Supreme Court held in paragraph 11 as follows:
55. We have, in paragraphs supra, considered the
judgments for and against on the question of
maintainability of writ petition. The judgments cited by
the learned Senior Counsel appearing for           the
respondents are distinguishable on facts and on law.
Those cases are not cases covered by the appointment of 
a Special Officer to manage the administration of the
Society and its affairs. In           the instant case, the
Special Officer was appointed by the High Court to
discharge the functions of the Society, therefore, he
should be regarded as a public authority and hence, the
writ petition is maintainable."
In view of the law declared by the Apex Court, Society is
State and its officers are discharging public duty.
Turning to the concept of public servant, the officers of the
society defined under
Section 2(k)
of the Act is a public authority
are deemed to be discharging public duty as defined under
Section
2(b)
of P.C. Act and thereby the officers are public servants as
defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act.
In
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Venku Reddy
, the
Supreme Court held as follows:
8. From the above quoted Sub-clause (ix) of Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act, it is evident that in the
expansive definition of 'public servant', elected office-
bearers with President and Secretary of a registered co-
operative society which is engaged in trade amongst
others in 'banking' and 'receiving or having received any
financial aid' from the Central or State Government, are
included although such elected office-bearers are not
servants in employment of the co-operative societies. But
employees or servants of a co-operative society which is
controlled or aided by the government, are covered by
Sub-clause (iii) of Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act.
Merely because such employees of co-operative societies 
are not covered by Sub-clause (ix) along with holders of
elective offices, High Court ought not to have overlooked
that the respondent, who is admittedly an employee of a
co-operative bank which is controlled and aided by the
government, is covered within the comprehensive
definition of 'public servant' as contained in Sub-clause
(iii) of Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act. It is not
disputed that the respondent/accused is in service of a
co-operative Central Bank which is an 'authority or body'
controlled and aided by the government.
9. It cannot be lost sight of that the 1988 Act, as its
predecessor that is the repealed Act of 1947 on the same
subject, was brought into force with avowed purpose of
effective prevention of bribery and corruption.
The Act
of
1988 which repels and replaces the Act of 1947 contains
a very wide definition of 'public servant' in Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act. The Statement of Objects and
Reasons contained in the Bill by which the Act was
introduced in the Legislature throws light on the
intention of the legislature in providing a very
comprehensive definition of word 'public servant'.
Paragraph 3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
reads:-
"3. The bill, inter-alia, envisages widening the scope of
the definition of the expression 'public servant',
incorporation of offences under
Sections 161
to
165A
of
the Indian Penal Code, enhancement of penalties
provided for these offences and incorporation of a
provision that the order of the trial court upholding the
grant of sanction for prosecution would be final if it has
not already been challenged and the trial has
commenced. In order to expedite the proceedings,
provisions for day-to-day trial of cases and prohibitory
provision with regard to grant to stay and exercise of
powers of revision on interlocutory orders have also been
included.
10. Clause 2 of the Notes on Clause in Gazette of India
Extraordinary, Part-II,
Section 2
, further clarifies the
legislative intent thus:-
"Clause 2. The clause defines the expressions used in the
Bill. Clause 2(c) defines "public servant". In the existing
definitions the emphasis is on the authority employing
and the authority remunerating. In the proposed
definition the emphasis is on public duty. The definition
of "election" is based on the definition of this expression
in the
Indian Penal Code
".
11. Under the repealed Act of 1947 as provided in
Section 2
of the 1988 Act, the definition of 'public
servant' was restricted to 'public servants' as defined in
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code. In order to curb-
effectively bribery and corruption not only in government
establishments and departments but also in other semi-
governmental authorities and bodies and their
departments where the employees are entrusted with 
public duty, a comprehensive definition of 'public
servant' has been given in Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the
1988 Act.
12. In construing definition of 'public servant' Clause (c)
of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act, the court is required to
adopt a purposive approach as would give effect to the
intention of legislature. In that view Statement of Objects
and Reasons contained in the Bill leading to the passing
of the Act can be taken of assistance of. It gives the
background in which the legislation was enacted. The
present Act, with much wider definition of 'public
servant', was brought in force to purify administration.
When the legislature has used such comprehensive  
definition of 'public servant' to achieve the purpose of
punishing and curbing growing corruption in
government and semi-government departments, it would  
be appropriate not to limit the contents of definition
clause by construction which would be against the spirit
of the statute. The definition of 'public servant',
therefore, deserves a wide construction. [see :
State of
Madhya Pradesh v. Shri Ram Singh
2000CriLJ1401 .]  

        In view of the law declared by the Apex Court in the
judgment referred supra, Cooperative Society is a State within
Article 12
of Constitution of India and it is covered by explanation
to
Section 2(b)
of P.C. Act, as the duties being discharged by the
employees as defined under Section 2(k) of T.C.S Act are public
duties. But, the learned counsel for the petitioner at this stage,
contended that the petitioner is not discharging public duties and
he is just rendering services to the society. When the cooperative
society is engaged in providing credit facilities to the agriculturists
with the aid of the government, it shall be treated as discharging
public duties, since the society is being aided by the government or
government corporations established by the centre or the state.
Therefore, the duties being discharged by the employee of the
society would fall within the definition of public duty.
The main grievance is that, the petitioner is not a public
servant as defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C Act.  But, Section 9 of
T.C.S Act defined society to be a body corporate and according to
it, the registration of a society shall render it a body corporate by
the name under which it is registered having perpetual succession
and a common seal. The society is entitled to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, to enter into contracts on its behalf, to
institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings and to do all
other things necessary for the purpose for which it was
constituted.
On a bare look at Section 9 of T.C.S Act, registration of a
society would be deemed to be a corporate body for the purpose of
provisions of this Act, but, that would not acquire the status of a
corporation under the
Companies Act
.
In
S.S. Dhanoa v.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
, the Supreme Court had an
occasion to advert to
Section 21(c)
I.P.C and Section 23 of Bombay
Cooperative Societies Act, 1925, and they read as follows:
Clause (xii) of
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code
protects two classes of public servants, viz., (a) every
person in the service or pay of the Government or
remunerated by fees or commission for the performance
-of any public duty by the Government, and (b) every
person in the service or pay of a local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial
or State Act or a Government company as defined in
Section 617
of the Companies Act, 1956.
Section 23 of the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act,
1925:
The registration of a society shall render it a body
corporate by the name under which it is registered, with
perpetual succession and a common seal, and with  
power to hold property, to enter into contracts, to
institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings
and to do all things necessary for the purposes of its
constitution.
But, the Supreme Court took a different view that,
cooperative society would not fall within the definition of corporate
body under the
Companies Act
, since a corporation is an artificial
body being created by law having a legal entity entirely separate
and distinct from the individuals who compose it with the capacity
of continuous existence and succession, notwithstanding changes 
in its membership. In addition, it possesses the capacity as such
legal entity of taking, holding and conveying property, entering into
contracts, suing and being sued, and exercising such other powers
and privileges as may be conferred on it by the law of its creation
just as a natural person may. The following definition of
corporation was given by Chief Justice Marshall in Dartmouth
College v. Woodward , which is as follows:
A corporation is an artificial being, invisible , intangible,
and existing only in contemplation of law. Being the
mere creature of law, it possesses only these properties
which the charter of its creation confers upon it, either
expressly or as incidental to its very existence. These are
such as are supposed best calculated to effect the object
for which it was created. Among the most important are
immortality, and, if the expression may be allowed,
individuality; properties, by which a perpetual
succession of many persons are considered as the same,  
and may act as a single individuals They enable a
corporation to manage its own affairs, and to hold
property, without the perplexing intricacies, the
hazardous and endless necessity, of perpetual
conveyances for the purpose of transmitting it from hand
to hand. It is chiefly for the purpose of clothing bodies of
men, in succession, with these qualities and capacities,
that corporations were invented, and are in use. By these
means, a perpetual succession of individuals are capable
of acting for the promotion of the particular object, like
one immortal being.
In paragraph 10 of the said judgment, the Apex Court
observed that, there is a distinction between a corporation
established by or under an Act and a body incorporated under an
Act.
The distinction was brought out by the Supreme Court in
Sukhdev Singh and Ors. v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh  
Raghuvanshi and Ors
, wherein, it was observed as follows:
A company incorporated under the
Companies Act
is  
not created by the
Companies Act
but comes into 
existence in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Thus, there is a well-marked distinction between a body
created by a statute and a body which, after coming into existence,
is governed in accordance with the provisions of a statute. Mere
registration under the Act would not render the society as body
corporate, on par with company.
In
Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India and Ors
the question
arose whether the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
which was a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act
,
was a statutory body. It was urged, therein, that because the
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research had government
nominees as the President of the body and derived guidance and
financial aid from the Government, it was a statutory body.
Repelling the contention, the Court observed that, the Society does
not have a statutory character like the Oil and Natural Gas
Commission, or the Life Insurance Corporation or Industrial
Finance Corporation. It is a society incorporated in accordance
with the provisions of the
Societies Registration Act
. The fact that
the Prime Minister is the President or that the Government
appoints nominees to the Governing Body or that the Government 
may terminate the membership will not establish anything more
than the fact that the Government takes special care that the
promotion, guidance and co-operation of scientific and industrial
research, the institution and financing of specific researches,
establishment or development and assistance to special
institutions or departments of the existing institutions for scientific
study of problems affecting ' particular industry in a trade, the
utilisation of the result of the researches conducted under the
auspices of the Council towards the development of industries in
the country are carried out in a responsible manner. As such,
CISR is a society, its employees are public servants.
Yet, the main grievance of this petitioner is that the petitioner is
not a public servant, though discharging public duties, as defined
under
Section 2(b)
of P.C. Act. But, to decide this contention, it is
appropriate to advert to the provisions of T.C.S. Act.
Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act deals with Officers and
employees to be public servant and according to it, the Registrar or
any person authorised by him to recover any amount or to execute
any orders issued or decisions taken under any of the provisions of
this Act and every officer and employee of a society shall be
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of
I.P.C.
The petitioner is not an officer, but an employee of the
society, would fall within the definition of officer under Section 2(k)
of T.C.S Act.  When the petitioner is an employee of the society,
and deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
Section
21
IPC, it embraces the definition of officer within Section 2(k) of
T.C.S. Act and public servant within 2(c)(ix) of
P.C. Act
.
Under the repealed
P.C. Act
of 1947 as provided in
Section 2
of the 1988 Act, the definition of 'public servant' was restricted to
'public servants' as defined in
Section 21
of the Indian Penal Code.
In order to curb-effectively bribery and corruption not only in
government establishments and departments but also in other
semi-governmental authorities and bodies and their departments
where the employees are entrusted with public duty, a
comprehensive definition of 'public servant' has been given in
Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the 1988 Act. It cannot be lost sight of
that the 1988 Act, as its predecessor i.e. the repealed Act of 1947
on the same subject, was brought into force with avowed purpose
of effective prevention of bribery and corruption.
The Act
of 1988
which repels and replaces the Act of 1947 contains a very wide
definition of 'public servant' in Clause (c) of
Section 2
of the P.C
Act, 1988. The Statement of Objects and Reasons contained in the 
Bill by which the Act was introduced in the Legislature throws light
on the intention of the legislature in providing a very
comprehensive definition of word 'public servant' (vide
Govt. of
Andhra Pradesh v. P. Venku Reddy
(referred supra)).
Thus, it is clear that, as per the repealed Act, the employee
of a cooperative society is not a public servant, but, the definition
of
Section 2(c)
of the new
Act, P.C. Act, 1988
, includes the
employee working in the society, registered under the
Cooperative
Societies Act
.
If, the principle
laid down in
the above judgment is applied
to the present facts of the case, certainly the petitioner would fall
within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)
of P.C.
Act. Even, ignoring the law laid down by the Apex Court in various
judgments referred supra, still, in view of the definition of officer
under Section 2(k) and Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act, the petitioner
would fall within the definition of public servant under Section 21
of I.P.C and when the petitioner falls within the definition of public
servant under Section 21 IPC, he would certainly fall within the
definition of public servant under Section 2(c) of P.C. Act, which is
wider than Section 21 of I.P.C.
Similar question came up for consideration before the
Supreme Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Rameshwar
,   
where, the Supreme Court considered the scope of
Section 87
of
M.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 with
Section 21
of I.P.C. The
issue that arose before the Apex Court was, whether the
respondents therein being Directors of the Indore Premier
Cooperative Bank Limited would fall within the definition of a
public servant for the purpose of
P.C. Act
,. Reliance was also
placed on
Section 87
of  M.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1960,
which provided that the Registrar and other officers, as well as
employees of a Co-operative Bank or a Co-operative Society, would
be deemed to be "public servants" within the meaning of
Section 21
of I.P.C and on that basis, the Court held that, the respondent who
was Chairman and the Executive Officer of the Bank would fall
within the definition of a public servant defined under
Section
2(c)(ix)
of P.C. Act.  On perusal of the judgment, the Court opined
that the officer of the cooperative bank as public servant and the
definition of public servant under
P.C. Act
.  As far as
M.P.
Cooperative Societies Act, 1960
is concerned, as the
M.P.
Cooperative Societies Act, 1960
itself declares the authorities as
public servants.
When the Act
itself directly conferred the status of
the officers of the bank or the society, registered under the T.C.S.
Act under Section 129-A, this petitioner cannot escape from his
liability under the provisions of P.C.Act on the ground that he is
not a public servant, as defined under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act.
The
principle
laid down in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Rameshwar
(referred supra) is squarely applicable to the present facts of the
case, since, the Indore Premier Cooperative Bank Limited is State
within
Article 12
of the Constitution of India and the petitioner was
an officer within the definition of
Section 21
I.P.C and conferred
status of public servant by Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act, which is
restricted to certain categories of employees, but
Section 2(C)
of
P.C. Act is wider, which includes the definition of public servant
under
Section 21
of I.P.C.  Therefore, by any stretch of
imagination, the contention of the petitioner cannot be accepted to
quash the proceedings against him.
In
C.B.I v. P.G. Jain
, the Supreme Court by relying on the
judgment in
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Venku Reddy
(referred supra), concluded that an employee of a cooperative
society may not come within ambit of definition of public servant
under
Section 2(c)(ix)
of P.C. Act, 1988, yet such person may be a
public servant within meaning of
Section 2(c)(iii)
of P.C. Act,
provided cooperative society is owned, controlled or aided by
government. Further, the Supreme Court held in the said case that
National Cooperative Consumers Federation of India Limited
(NCCF) is a body aided by Central Government as required under
Section 2(c)(iii)
of P.C. Act and the employees working thereunder
would fall under the definition of public servant. But, the facts of
the above judgment need no detailed consideration.
Similarly, in State of Maharashtra v. Prabhakara Rao ,
the Supreme Court by adverting to principle in
State of
Maharashtra v. Laljit Rajshi Shah and others
, held that, an
employee of a cooperative society would not fall within the
definition of public servant under
Section 21
IPC or
Section 2(c)
of
P.C. Act.
Since, the case was under
P.C. Act, 1947
, the Court did
not agree with the view in
State of Maharashtra v. Laljit Rajshi
Shah and others
(referred supra), as
P.C. Act
was amended in
1988 and finally, concluded that the employee of a cooperative
society would fall within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act.
Similarly, in
N.K. Sharma v. Abhimanyu
, the question
that fell for consideration in the appeal was whether a member of
Indian Administrative Service, whose services are placed at the
disposal of an organization which is neither a local authority, nor a
corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State
Act, nor a Government Company, by the Central Government or  
the Government of a State, can be treated to be a public servant
within the meaning of
Section 21
I.P.C for purposes of
Section 197
Cr.P.C, the Supreme Court held that, when the
employee is discharging his public duties, though he is an IAS
officer, he would fall within the definition of public servant and
such officers are declared as public servants under several special
and local Acts. If the legislature had intended to include officers of
an instrumentality or agency for bringing such officers under the
protective umbrella of
Section 197
Cr.P.C, it would be done so
expressly, thereby concluded that, he is a public servant.
In
N.K. Ganguly v. CBI, New Delhi
, the Supreme Court dealt
with identical question as to whether an officer discharging his
duties in The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), which is
a registered society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
, is a
public servant and when the petitioner was facing charges under
the provisions of
P.C. Act
and offences under
I.P.C
.  But, the Court
concluded that he is a public servant for the purpose of
Section
197(1)
Cr.P.C and set-aside the orders passed by the High court,
while quashing the proceedings, as no sanction was obtained
under
Section 197
Cr.P.C to prosecute the officer of the society
registered under the
Societies Act
.
Similarly, in
Manish Trivedi v. State of Rajasthan
, the
councillors and members of the Board are public servants within
the definition of
Section 2(c)(viii)
of P.C. Act, came up for
consideration, the Court held that, municipal councillor would
come within the definition of public servant and the basis for such
conclusion is
Section 87
of Rajasthan Municipalities Act and in the
present case also, Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act is identical to
Section 87
of Rajasthan Municipalities Act and consequently, the
petitioner would fall within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)(ix) of T.C.S. Act.
In
Naresh Kumar Madan v. State of
Madhya Pradesh
, the Apex Court again considered the scope of
Section 2(c)(i)
of P.C. Act and held that, electricity board
established under Central Act is a corporation within the meaning
of
Section 2(c)(i)
of P.C. Act and all its employees are public servant
within the meaning of said section.
The
Court further held
that,
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
was repealed and enacted
in the year 1988 and the definition of 'public servant', as contained
in
Section 2(c)
thereof, is a broad based one, though reliance was
placed in the judgment of
State of Maharashtra v. Laljit Rajashi
Shah and Others
, observed that the Court therein was dealing
with a case of member of a cooperative society, but not dealing
with the case of an employee of a statutory corporation. Moreover,
the restricted definition of public servant under repealed Act 1944
cannot be applied in view of definition under
section 2(c)
of 1988
Act.
Curiously, in Vanam Anjaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh ,
this Court considered that, Secretary of A.P. Cooperative Society is
a public servant, for the purpose of sanction and with reference of
Section 2(k)
of Cooperative Societies Act. The learned single Judge
of this Court concluded that, the secretary is a public servant.
Undoubtedly, there are several judgments of different High
Courts, including the judgment Apex Court in
State of
Maharashtra v. Laljit Rajshi Shah and others
(referred supra),
which are in favour of this petitioner to conclude that he is not a
public servant.
But, the judgment in
State of Maharashtra v.
Laljit Rajshi Shah and others
(referred supra) was not accepted
by the Apex Court in various judgments referred supra, in view of
Amended Act, 1988
, since the case was under 1944 Act, including 
the judgment in
State of Maharashtra v. Brijlal Sadasukh
Modani
.
Therefore, the judgment in
State of Maharashtra v.
Laljit Rajshi Shah and others
(referred supra) is not applicable.
In
Yash Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab
, the petitioner
therein was an employee of the Punjab Cooperative Land Mortgage 
Bank, Muktsar, which was registered under the
Punjab 
Cooperative Societies Act, 1961
. The Punjab and Haryana Court 
held that the employee of a cooperative society is not a public
servant within the meaning of
Section 5
of P.C. Act or
Section 21
IPC, because a cooperative society is not a corporation established
by a statute,
Punjab Cooperative Societies Act
, conferred no status
of a public servant unlike Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act.
Similarly, this Court in Pinjari Pandalapuram Pedda
Hussain Saheb v. Government of Andhra Pradesh , held that, 
the President and Secretary of a cooperative society are not public
servants within the meaning of Clause 12(b) of
Section 21
IPC and
to them the provisions of
Section 409
IPC are not attracted. But,
this view is contrary to Section 129-A of T.C.S. Act and in the said
case; the Court did not advert to Section 129-A and Section 2(k) of
T.C.S Act.  Therefore, the law declared by the learned single Judge
of this Court is no more good law, in view of the long line of
perspective pronouncements of the Apex Court referred supra.
In
Shanti Ranjan Bhattacharya v. The State
, the
Calcutta High Court took a contrary view, but, that is based on the
State enactment of West Bengal.
The judgments of various High Courts of other states,
including the judgment in
State of Maharashtra v. Laljit Rajshi
Shah and others
(referred supra) have no application, in view of
the law declared by the Apex Court in the judgments referred
supra.
Moreover, in
State of Maharashtra v. Brijlal Sadasukh
Modani
(referred supra) the Apex Court dealt with an identical
question with reference to provisions of
Maharashtra Cooperative
Society Act, 1960
, and held that, employees of cooperative society
falls within the definition of public servant under
Section 2(c)
of
P.C. Act.
Thus, by applying the principles
laid down in
State of
Maharashtra v. Brijlal Sadasukh Modani
(referred supra) and
other judgments of Apex Court referred supra, it is difficult to
uphold the contention of this petitioner that he is not a public
servant.
Though learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance
on the judgment of this Court in
Ravuri Siva Prasad v. State of
Andhra Pradesh
(referred supra), the same cannot be applied to
the present facts of the case, though the learned Single Judge of
this Court referred the judgments of Apex Court, but it was not
properly considered. The Single Judge also did not advert to
definition of officer under
Section 2(k)
and Section 129-A of T.C.S
Act Therefore, the principle
laid down by
the learned single Judge
of this Court cannot be applied in view of the judgments of the
Supreme Court referred supra.
The principle
laid down in
other judgment relied on by the
learned counsel for the petitioner in
A. Subramanyam Naidu v.
Government of Andhra Pradesh
(referred supra), cannot be
applied to the present case, since, the provisions were considered
with reference to the
Industrial Disputes Act
to find out whether
the employees of Cooperative Society would fall within the
definition of workman.
But, whether the society is receiving
financial aid from State, Centre or Corporations established by
state, or Central Government is to be decided only during trial, in
view of the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in
State of
Maharashtra v. Brijlal Sadasukh Modani
(referred supra).
Whereas, learned counsel for the respondent placed reliance
on the judgments in
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Venku Reddy
(
referred supra) and Central Bureau of Investigation, Bank
Securities and Fraud Cell v. Ramesh Gelli and others
(referred
supra), where the Apex Court highlighted the definition of public
servant under
Section 2(c)
of P.C Act and concluded that the
Chairman and the Executive Officer of the Bank would fall within
the definition of a public servant defined under
Section 2(c)(ix)
of
P.C. Act and liable for prosecution.
Even in
State of Maharashtra v. Brijlal Sadasukh Modani
(referred supra), the Apex Court held that, it is left to be dealt with,
in the course of trial whether the society concerned has ever been
granted any kind of aid or not and directed that the issue whether
the respondent is a public servant or not, shall be gone into during
the trial based on such aid from government or its corporation or
public financial institutions. Therefore, at this stage, it is difficult
to accept the contention that the sanction to prosecute this
petitioner is not legal and it is left open to raise this issue during
trial.
The law
laid down by
the Apex Court in the judgments
referred supra is sufficient to conclude that this petitioner is a
public servant within the meaning of
Section 2(c)
of P.C. Act and
also under
Section 21
of IPC, subject to establishing that the
Agricultural Cooperative Society is receiving financial aid as State.
Accordingly, I find this point in favour of the respondent and
against the petitioner.
P O I N T NO.2 
        The other contention raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that, sanction of prosecution against this petitioner is
not accorded by a competent officer, since APC & Principal
Secretary to Government is incompetent to grant any such
sanction as required under
Section 19
of P.C. Act.
It is an undisputed fact that sanction of prosecution was
granted by APC & Principal Secretary to Government. But, whether 
the said APC & Principal Secretary to Government is competent to
grant such a sanction is to be decided at appropriate stage of the
trial, as the petitioner is an employee of cooperative department
and not appointed by registered cooperative societies. The
appointment of petitioner as Paid Secretary by registered
cooperative society will not confer power on the District Registrar
of Cooperative Societies to accord sanction, since, he is an
employee of cooperative department. But, this Court cannot decide
the validity or legality of the sanction, at this stage.
The main contention before this Court is that, the petitioner
is not an employee appointed by the Government and he was  
appointed by the society itself. But, as seen from the allegations
made in the charge-sheet, he was appointed initially as a clerk by
the Government and subsequently worked as Paid Secretary at  
Minarpally Village, Bodhan Mandal, Nizamabad District. If, really,
the petitioner was appointed by the Executive Committee of the
society, he is not liable for the offences punishable under
Sections
13(2)
r/w
Section 13(1)(e)
of P.C. Act. If, for any reason, the
petitioner was appointed by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies,
as contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner, certainly,
the District Registrar Cooperative Societies is the competent
authority. But, no material is placed before this Court to ascertain
whether the petitioner is appointed by the government or by the
District Registrar of Cooperative Societies. When there is a doubt
as to the competent authority as to whether the previous sanction
is required should be given by Central or State Government or any
other authority, such sanction shall be given by the Government or
authority which would have been competent to remove the public
servant from his office at the time when the offence was alleged to
have been committed.
Here, the APC & Principal Secretary to Government issued 
sanction orders under
Section 19(1)
of P.C. Act and when there is
any such doubt to the authority as to who has appointed the
petitioner, it is left open to the petitioner to raise such contention
before the Special Judge for SPE & ACB Cases, Karimnagar and on   
raising such objection, the Special Judge for SPE & ACB Cases, 
Karimnagar is bound to consider the same and decide the same in 
accordance with law.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I do not find any merit in
the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner and the
present criminal petition is liable to be dismissed. However, the
petitioner is at liberty to raise the issue of validity and legality of
the sanction during trial and also about receipt of any financial aid
from State or Central Government or from any corporation,
established by State or Centre and any public financial institutions
or Banks to decide whether the petitioner is a public servant.
One of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that, when the society is not registered under
A.P.
Cooperative Societies Act
, thereby, the provisions of
A.P.
Cooperative Societies Act
has no application to the present facts of
the case. irrespective of registration of the societies either under
A.P. Cooperative Societies Act
or
A.P. Mutually Aided Cooperative
Societies Act
or any other Act, the petitioner is an employee in a
cooperative department, who was initially appointed as clerk and
later promoted as Paid Secretary and now working as such. 
Therefore, the petitioner is under the indirect control of the
sanctioning authority i.e APC & Principal Secretary to Government.
On this ground also, the proceedings against the petitioner in
C.C.No.5 of 2016 on the file of Special Judge for SPE & ACB Cases,
Karimnagar, cannot be quashed.
In the result, the criminal petition is dismissed, while
permitting to raise the issue of validity and legality of the sanction,
and also about receipt of financial aid during trial. On raising on
such contention, the Trial Court shall decide the validity of the
sanction during trial and also about receipt of any financial aid
from State or Central Government or from any corporation,
established by State or Centre and any public financial institutions
or Banks to decide whether the petitioner is a public servant, in
accordance with law.
Consequently, miscellaneous petitions pending if any, shall
stand closed. No costs.
_________________________________________       
JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY          
Date:10.10.2018