[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. 4G Identity Solutions Private ... vs 1.M/S. Bloom Solutions Pvt. Limited, ... on 16 March, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 7, (2019) 3 ARBILR 79 (2018) 3 ANDHLD 334, (2018) 3 ANDHLD 334
Author:
T. Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T. Amarnath Goud
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD                     

C.R.P.No.519 of 2016 

16-03-2018 

m/S. 4g Identity Solutions Private Limited (A company Incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956
) Regd Office at Plot No.330
Rep. by its Vice President & Authorised Signatory. Petitioner/respondent

1.M/s. Bloom Solutions Pvt. Limited, Having its Regd. Office at G1, Chaitanya Place, Street No.8, SBI Colony, Gandhinagar, H
2.Ch. Ramesh Babu (Arbitrator) Chamber 401, 4th Floor, H.No.16-2-677/2, Tirumala Towers, Judges Colony, Malakpet, Hyderabad  

For Petitioner  : Mr. S. Ravi, senior counsel

For Respondents:  Mr. P.V. Ramaraju  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

1.AIR 2006 SC 450  
2.AIR 2004 AP 89 
3.AIR 1999 BOMBAY 219    
4.LAWS (BOM) 2007 (7) 83   
5.LAWS (GAU) 2008 (5) 33  
6.LAWS (CAL) 2015 (2) 95  
7.(2017) 12 SCALE 105  
8.(2010) 8 SCC 329 
9.AIR 1963 SC 874  
10.AIR 1976 SC 425  
11.AIR 2003 SC 3044  
12.AIR 2003 SC 3044  


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD         

Civil Revision Petition No.519 of 2016
ORDER:
(V. Ramasubramanian, J)    

        Challenging an Arbitration Award, the company which suffered
the award, has come up with the above revision under
Article 227
of
the Constitution of India.
2. Heard Mr. S. Ravi, learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Mr. P.V. Ramaraju, learned counsel appearing for the
1st respondent/award holder.
3. At the outset, the very maintainability of the revision under
Article 227
of the Constitution as against an Arbitration Award is
questioned and hence, the same has to be dealt with, before any
other aspect could be gone into.
4. It appears that the petitioner and the 1st respondent entered
into two Memoranda of Understanding and they contained a clause 
for arbitration. A dispute arose after the termination of the
Memoranda of Understanding with effect from 31-12-2001.
Therefore, the 1st respondent herein issued a notice to the petitioner
on 08-08-2014 invoking the arbitration clause and calling upon them
to have discussions with their General Manager for the appointment
of an Arbitrator by consent and also cautioning that if the petitioner
failed to respond, they would proceed to appoint an Arbitrator by
themselves.
5. On the ground that the petitioner did not respond, the 1st
respondent appointed the 2nd respondent as the Arbitrator and he
entered reference.
6. However, the petitioner filed an application in I.A.No.1 of
2015 challenging the appointment of the Arbitrator. But the said
application was dismissed by the Arbitrator on 18-04-2015.
7. It appears that the counsel for the petitioner thereafter
never appeared before the Arbitrator. Therefore, the petitioner was
set ex parte and an Arbitration Award came to be passed on 18-05-
2015.
8. In the meantime, the petitioner seems to have made an
abortive attempt to challenge the order dated 18-04-2015 passed by
the Arbitrator in I.A.No.1 of 2015, by way of an appeal under
Section
37
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  But the same was
not even numbered by the court of the Chief Judge, City Civil Court,
Hyderabad, and the petitioner did not pursue the matter further.
9. It appears that the petitioner attempted to challenge the ex
parte award by way of an application under
Section 34
of the Act,
but the same was rejected as having been filed with a delay beyond
the condonable period. Therefore, the petitioner filed an earlier
revision in C.R.P.No.5786 of 2015, which did not see the light of the
day. However, a petition for execution was filed in E.P.No.54 of 2015
by the 1st respondent/award holder. Therefore, the petitioner came
up with the above revision challenging the award, abandoning
C.R.P.No.5786 of 2015. It appears that a stay of further proceedings
in the execution proceedings was granted in the above C.R.P., after
which the first revision in C.R.P.No.5786 of 2015 was withdrawn.
10. The above sequence of events discloses that there is no
challenge to the Arbitration Award in a manner prescribed by the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
. The time available for
challenging an Arbitration Award under
Section 34
of the Act has
also expired.  According to the petitioner, they were taken for a royal
ride by their counsel at every stage and that they have also filed a
complaint against their previous counsel before the Bar Council and
that in such extraordinary circumstances, they have come up
invoking the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 227
of
the Constitution.
11. Challenging the very maintainability of the revision, it is
contended by Mr. P.V. Rama Raju, learned counsel for the
respondent that the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has
already settled the issue by holding in paragraph No.44 of its
decision in
S.B.P. & Co vs. Patel Engineering Ltd.
, that the
awards passed by arbitral tribunals are not capable of being
corrected by the High Court under
Articles 226
or 227.
The same
view was also echoed by a learned Judge of this Court in
Government of Madhya Pradesh vs. P.V. Vidyasagar
.
12. However, relying upon (1) a judgment of a learned Judge
of the Bomba High Court in M/s. Anuptech Equipments Private 
Ltd vs. M/s. Ganpati Co-op. Housing Society Ltd. ; (2) a decision
of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Dowell Leasing
and Finance Ltd., vs. Radhesyam B. Khandelwal
; (3) the
decision of a learned Judge of the Gauhati High Court in
Raj
International vs. Tripura Jute Mills Ltd.
; (4) the decision of a
learned Judge of Calcutta High Court in
Tuff Drilling Pvt. Ltd. vs.
Srei Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
; (5) the decision of the Supreme
Court arising out of
the said decision
in
Srei Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
vs. Tuff Drilling Pvt. Ltd.
; and (6) the decision of the Supreme
Court in
Shalini Shyam Shetty vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil
, it is
contended by Mr. S. Ravi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners that under extraordinary circumstances, the remedy
under
Articles 226
or 227 is not ousted.
13. We have considered the rival contentions.
14. At the out set it should be pointed out that the
Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996
provides an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism, enabling the parties to have their disputes resolved,
outside the court, as provided by the terms of the contract entered
into by them. Arbitrators and arbitral tribunals are creatures not of
statute but of contract. Therefore, Courts do not have administrative
superintendence over arbitrators and arbitral tribunals.
15. As a matter of fact, arbitration agreements are intended to
keep the interference by the Courts to the minimum. Generally an
agreement in restraint of legal proceedings is void under
Section 28
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. But an agreement to refer a dispute
to arbitration is an exception to the prescription under
Section 28
.
This is why,
Section 5
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
makes it clear that there shall be no judicial intervention in respect of
any proceeding under the Act except as provided in the Act itself. An
award passed in terms of
Section 31 (1)
of the Act is amenable to
challenge only in a manner prescribed by
Section 34
. Once a
challenge made under
Section 34
is rejected or the time limit for
filing a petition under
Section 34
has expired, an award becomes
final and binding on the parties in terms of
Section 35
. Keeping this
fundamental principle in mind, we shall now examine the decisions
relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner.
16. In Anuptech Equipments Pvt. Ltd., the arbitral tribunal
terminated the proceedings under
Section 32(2)
on account of the
failure of the claimant to file his statement of claim, by invoking
Section 25 (a)
. But after the arbitral tribunal decided to terminate the
proceedings, a challenge was made to the appointment of one of the
arbitrators, on the ground that he was not a fellow of the Indian
Institute of Architects, as required by Clause-56 of the agreement.
However, the arbitral tribunal terminated the proceedings. Therefore,
the petitioner before the Bombay High Court filed an Arbitration
Petition, purportedly under
Sections 12(3) (b)
,
13
,
14
,
15
and
24
of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It must be pointed out that
no petition under
Articles 226
or 227 was filed before the Bombay
High Court in Anumptech Equipments.
17. Therefore, an objection was raised
in that case
that the
challenge to the arbitration award was barred by
Section 34(3)
and
that the petition was not maintainable. Instead of confining the
discussion to the question whether a petition under
Sections 12
,
13
,
14
,
15
and
24
was maintainable or not, the Bombay High Court, in
Anumptech Equipments, extended the scope of the enquiry by  
holding that wherever an order affecting the rights of a party attains
finality, the party affected thereby can seek recourse to the
extraordinary remedy available under
Articles 226
or 227.
To come
to the said conclusion, the Bombay High Court drew parallel from
Section 10-A
of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 and the decisions of
the Supreme Court in
Engineering Mazdoor Sabha vs. Hind  
Cycles Ltd.
and
Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs. Rohtas Industries
Staff Union
, wherein it was held that even if the arbitrator
appointed under
Section 10-A
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
was not a Tribunal, a writ may lie against his Award under Article
226. The Bombay High Court went by the logic that irrespective of
whether it was a statutory arbitration or private arbitration, the
arbitrator or arbitral tribunal would at least be a person and hence
would be amenable to the jurisdiction under
Articles 226
or 227.
19. The ratio
laid down by
the learned Single Judge of the
Bombay High Court in Anuptech Equipments was reiterated by a  
Division Bench of the very same High Court in Dowell Leasing and
Finance Limited. Though the decision of the Constitution Bench of
the Supreme Court in S.B.P. & Co was cited before the Division
Bench of the Bombay High Court in Dowell Leasing, the Division
Bench took a view that the Supreme Court did not go in S.B.P. &
Co., to the extent of holding that no writ would lie against an arbitral
tribunal or that an arbitral tribunal is not a person against whom a
writ can be issued.
20. In Tuff Drilling Pvt. Ltd., a single Judge of the Calcutta
High Court was concerned with a case where after having appointed
a sole arbitrator by consent, the petitioner did not submit a statement
of claim, resulting in the termination of the proceedings under
Section 25(a)
. The application to recall the said order was dismissed
on the ground that the arbitrator had become functus officio. When
that order was challenged, the learned Judge of the Calcutta High
Court took the view that an arbitral tribunal is a quasi judicial
authority discharging judicial functions and that therefore, there was
no impediment for entertaining a petition under
Article 227.
21. The above decision of the learned Judge of the Calcutta
High Court in Tuff Drilling Pvt. Ltd., was taken on appeal to the
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court framed three issues as arising 
for consideration, which are as follows:
1.      Whether arbitral tribunal which has terminated the
proceeding Under
Section 25(a)
due to non filing of
claim by claimant has jurisdiction to consider the
application for recall of the order terminating the
proceedings on sufficient cause being shown by the
claimant?
2.      Whether the order passed by the arbitral tribunal Under
Section 25(a)
terminating the proceeding is amenable
to jurisdiction of High Court under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India?
3.      Whether the Order passed under
Section 25(a)
terminating the proceeding is an award under the 1996
Act so as to amenable to the remedy under
Section 34
of the Act?
On issue No.1 the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the 
arbitral tribunal had jurisdiction to consider an application for
recalling the order terminating the proceedings. After holding so, on
issue No.1, the Supreme Court refused to go into issue Nos.2 and 3.
In other words, the question of maintainability of a petition under
Articles 226
or 227 was left open.
22. In Raj International, a learned Single Judge of the Gauhati
High Court equated an arbitral tribunal to a statutory authority and
held in paragraph 21 that when he did not exercise his power vested
on him, a petition under
Article 227
was maintainable. Despite the
decision of the Constitution Bench in S.B.P. & Co., being brought to
its notice, the Gauhati High Court relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in
Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai
to hold 
that the power of superintendence conferred upon the High Court
under
Article 227
was both administrative as well as judicial.
23. But as we have pointed out earlier, the first judgment
relied upon by Mr. S. Ravi, learned Senior Counsel, which was that
of a learned Judge of the Bombay High Court in Anumtech 
Equipments Pvt. Ltd., did not actually arise out of a petition under
Articles 226
or 227. What was before the learned Judge was actually
a petition under
Sections 12
to
15
and
24
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 itself. Therefore, we do not know how the
scope of the enquiry was extended beyond the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
.
24. In any case, two reasons appear to have weighed with the
learned Judge of the Bombay High Court in Anuptech Equipments to  
take the view that he did. They are  (1) that even a private person is
amenable to the writ jurisdiction under
Article 226;
and
(2)
that the
remedy of a writ was held to be available even against an award
passed by an arbitrator appointed under
Section 10-A
of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
25. But with great respect to the learned Judge, what was over
looked by the learned Judge is the fact that in order to maintain a
writ petition as against a private person, who does not come within
the purview of a State or other authority, he must be vested with an
obligation to perform a public duty. The fundamental requirement for
the maintainability of a writ against a private individual is that he
should have been called upon to discharge a public duty.
26. While adjudicating a dispute arising out of a contract
between two commercial entities, an arbitrator or arbitral tribunal
cannot be said to be performing a public Duty. This aspect has been
completely lost sight of by the Bombay High Court in Anuptech
Equipments.
27. The decision of the Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court in Dowell Leasing was authored by the same learned Judge 
who decided Anuptech and the Division Bench read the decision of
the Constitution Bench in S.B.P. & Co narrowly. It would be
appropriate at this stage to extract paragraph-44 of the decision of
the Constitution Bench in S.B.P. & Co., which reads as follows:
It is seen that some High Courts have proceeded on the
basis that any order passed by an arbitral tribunal during
arbitration, would be capable of being challenged under
Article 226
or 227 of the Constitution of India. We see no
warrant for such an approach.
Section 37
makes certain
orders of the arbitral tribunal appealable. Under
Section
34
, the aggrieved party has an avenue for ventilating his
grievances against the award including any in-between
orders that might have been passed by the arbitral
tribunal acting under
Section 16
of the Act. The party
aggrieved by any order of the arbitral tribunal, unless has
a right of appeal under
Section 37
of the Act, has to wait
until the award is passed by the Tribunal. This appears to
be the scheme of the Act. The arbitral tribunal is after all,
the creature of a contract between the parties, the
arbitration agreement, even through if the occasion arises,
the Chief Justice may constitute it based on the contract
between the parties. But that would not alter the status of
the arbitral tribunal. It will still be a forum chosen by the
parties by agreement. We, therefore, disapprove of the
stand adopted by some of the High Courts that any order
passed by the arbitral tribunal is capable of being
corrected by the High Court under
Article 226
or 227 of
the Constitution of India. Such an intervention by the High
Courts is not permissible.
28. There was absolutely no scope for the Division Bench of
the Bombay High Court to come to the conclusion that the Supreme  
Court did not take the view in S.B.P. & Co. that no writ will lie against
an arbitral tribunal, or that an arbitral tribunal is not a person against
whom a writ can be issued.
29. As we have indicated earlier, it is the vesting of a public
duty upon a private individual that would make such an individual
amenable to the writ jurisdiction. The reason as to why the Supreme
Court held an arbitration award under
Section 10-A
of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 to be amenable to the jurisdiction under
Articles
226
or 227, was that such an award was actually binding not only
upon the parties before the arbitrator but also the persons, who were
not  parties to the arbitration. The very object of the
Industrial
Disputes Act
was to maintain peace in industries. That is why
conciliation always precedes adjudication by an Industrial Tribunal or
labour Court or arbitrators. An Arbitrator under
Section 10-A
of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 performs a public duty in the sense that
he attempts to bring harmony and peace in the industry. More over,
sub-section (3) of
Section 10-A
of the Industrial Disputes Act
requires a copy of the arbitration agreement to be forwarded to the
appropriate Government and the appropriate Government is obliged
to publish the agreement in the Government Gazette. Under sub-
section (3-A) of Section 10-A even the employers and workmen, who 
are not parties to the arbitration agreement, but who are concerned
in the dispute, are entitled to an opportunity to present their case
before the arbitrator. Therefore, arbitration under the
Industrial
Disputes Act
is not merely confined to the parties to the agreement,
as in the case of arbitration under the
Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996
. In fact, the arbitration award passed under Section 10-A
is to be submitted to the appropriate Government and the
appropriate Government is entitled to issue a notification prohibiting
the continuance of any strike or lock out in connection with such a
dispute. Therefore, the arbitrator under
Section 10-A
of the Industrial
Disputes Act performs both statutory and public duties. But an
arbitrator appointed by contract between two commercial entities
cannot be elevated to the status of a person performing public
duties.
30. The decision of the learned Judge of the Calcutta High
Court in Tuff Drilling Pvt. Ltd., cannot be pressed into service, on the
basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Srei Infrastructure
Finance Ltd., since the Supreme Court did not answer the second
issue arising for consideration. Similarly, the decision of the learned
Single Judge of the Gauhati High Court, with great respect, does not
reflect the correct position in law. The Gauhati High Court proceeded
on the basis as though an arbitrator is a statutory authority. The
inference drawn by the Gauhati High Court in Raj International on
the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in Surya Dev Rai that
the power of superintendence conferred upon the High Court under
Article 227
is both administrative as well as judicial, does not apply
to arbitral proceedings. The contours of jurisdiction of this Court
under
Articles 226
or 227 over Tribunals, is clearly demarcated by
the Constitution Bench in
L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India
.
In paragraphs 91 and 92 of its decision, the Supreme Court pointed
out that the jurisdiction of this Court under
Articles 226
or 227 is over
the decisions of such tribunals. Therefore, we do not have
administrative superintendence over arbitrators and arbitral tribunals
appointed either by the parties under the contract or by the High
Court in terms of
Section 11(6)
.
31. Coming to the judicial superintendence,
Section 5
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 read with
Sections 34
and
35
provide a complete answer. Once a judicial remedy is provided as
against an arbitral award and such remedy is either extinguished or
exhausted, no party can take recourse to the writ jurisdiction of this
Court.
Articles 226
or 227 are not the panacea for all diseases. If the
argument of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is
accepted on the ground that a party cannot be left without a remedy,
then as against every order which has attained finality, a writ can be
filed.
32. We can examine this issue from another angle also.
Arbitral proceedings are actually a substitute for civil proceedings
before civil Courts. Even in civil proceedings, a writ under
Articles
226
or 227 is not maintainable as against a judgment and decree of
a subordinate Court. Every judgment and decree of a subordinate
Court is open to challenge in a regular appeal under Section 96 and
thereafter by way of a second appeal under
Section 100
of the Code
of Civil Procedure. Let us take for instance, a case where an ex
parte decree is passed and the party could not avail any of the
remedies available under
CPC
. Will it be open to such a party to file
a writ petition under
Article 226
or 227 challenging the decree on the
ground that he lost all other avenues. Even in a case where the
decree is vitiated by fraud, the remedy is not under Article 226 or
227. But a case of fraud, allegedly perpetrated by a partys own
counsel, will not come within the purview of a fraud that would vitiate
the decree of a Civil Court.
33. Therefore, to hold that a writ petition or a revision petition
under
Articles 226
or 227 would lie as against an arbitration award,
would be to recognize a remedy not available even to a litigant
before the civil Court. Hence the objection as to the maintainability of
the revision is liable to be sustained and the revision is liable to be
dismissed.
34. Accordingly, the civil revision petition is dismissed as not
maintainable. As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending
in this revision shall stand closed.
________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
_____________________    
T. AMARNATH GOUD, J     
Date:  16-03-2018