[Cites
32
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sure Ranga Murali Krishna Reddy S/O Late ... vs Sure Yerri Vara Prasada Reddy And Others on 22 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 141
Author:
M.Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M.Seetharama Murti
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Civil Revision Petition No.2186 of 2018

22.06.2018 

Sure Ranga Murali Krishna Reddy S/o late Panduranga Reddy .Petitioner   


Sure Yerri Vara Prasada Reddy and others .Respondents   

Counsel for petitioner:Sri B.S.Reddy

Counsel for the Respondents:Sri V.Venkateswarlu 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Citations:

1.AIR 2001 SC 1158  
2.1961 AIR 1655 
3.2009 (1) ALD 109 (SC) 
4.AIR 1981 AP 175  
5.AIR 1971 SC 1070  
6.(1990) ILR 23 Madras 49 
7.2002 (4) ALD 808 
8.AIR 2003 SC 4548  
9.(2018) 5 Supreme Court Cases 376  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Civil Revision Petition No.2186 of 2018

ORDER:
This Civil Revision petition, under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India, is filed by the petitioner/plaintiff being aggrieved of the order, dated
05.03.2018, passed in I.A.no.1637 of 2017 in O.S.no.61 of 2012 on the file of
Senior Civil Court, Markapur, Prakasam District.
2.      I have heard the submissions of Sri B.S.Reddy, learned counsel appearing
for the petitioner/plaintiff; and of Sri Venkateswarlu Varanasi, learned counsel
appearing for the respondents/defendants.  I have perused the material record.
3.      The introductory facts are as under:
The plaintiff brought the suit against the defendants/respondents herein
for partition, mesne profits and costs.  During the course of evidence of DW1, a
certified copy of unregistered partition deed, dated 17.02.2007, which was
filed along with the affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief of the said witness,
was tendered for being marked and was marked as exhibit B1.  However, cross- 
examination of the said witness by the learned counsel for the plaintiff was
deferred at request.  Later, the plaintiff filed the instant application for
de-exhibiting the said document marked as exhibit B1.  The said petition was
resisted by the 1st defendant/DW1 by filing a counter.  By a docket order,
which is impugned in this revision, the trial Court dismissed the petition of the
plaintiff.  Hence, the plaintiff is before this Court.
4.      The case of the plaintiff and the submissions made on his behalf, in
brief, are as follows:  The 1st defendant filed an application to receive on file
the certified copy of the unregistered partition deed, dated 17.02.2007, (CC of
unregistered partition deed).  Notice on that application is served upon the
counsel for the plaintiff.  He made an endorsement requesting time for filing
counter.  Counsel for the 1st defendant suggested that objection regarding
admissibility of the CC of unregistered partition deed can be raised at the time
of its admission into evidence.  Counsel for the plaintiff, then, endorsed No
objection for allowing the application, but, not to admit the document.
Thinking that the matter will be adjourned to some other day for marking of
the document, counsel for the plaintiff left the Court Hall.
Unfortunately, in
the absence of the counsel for the plaintiff, the matter was taken up and CC of
the unregistered partition deed was marked as exhibit B1; and, the matter was
adjourned for cross-examination of DW1.  Thus, there was no opportunity for
the plaintiff for objecting to the marking of the said document at the time
when it was exhibited.  The marking given does not amount to admission in
evidence.  The plaintiff has a right to question the admissibility of the said
document at any stage of the suit, in view of the decision of this Court in
G.Sudhakara Reddy v. M.Pullaiah
[reported in 2015(3) ALT 575]; and, a
decision of the Supreme Court in RVE Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu  
Visweswara Swamy [2006(3) ALT 66].  Further,
Order 13 Rule 3 of the Code of
Civil Procedure
, 1908, (Code for short), which deals with rejection of
irrelevant or inadmissible documents says that the Court may at any stage of
the suit reject any document, which it considers irrelevant or otherwise
inadmissible, after recording the grounds of such rejection.
In the decision in
Srinivasa Builders, Hyderabad v. A.Janga Reddy
[2016(2) ALT 321], this
Court held that it is the duty of the Court of Law to exclude all irrelevant or
inadmissible evidence even if no objection is taken by the opposite side.
The
same view was also expressed by this Court in the decision in
Syed Yousuf Ali
v. Mohd. Yousuf
[2016 (3) ALD 235]; and, in the decision in
A.P.Laly v.
Gurram Rama Rao
[2017 (6) ALD 300].  In
the above decision
, this Court
reviewed the entire case law on the point and held that the Court has power to
reject a document at any time.  Therefore, inspite of prohibition contained in
Section 36
of the Indian Stamp Act, the trial Court has power to exclude exhibit
B1 from the evidence as the original of it is not properly stamped and is not
registered and is inadmissible in evidence even for collateral purpose.  So, it is
in the interests of justice to exclude the CC of unregistered partition deed from
evidence after de-exhibiting it, as it is not properly stamped and registered.
5.      The case of the 1st defendant as stated in the Counter and as per the
submissions made on his behalf, in brief, are as follows: - The averments in
the affidavit of the plaintiff are all false.  The same are denied.  Before filing
into Court, notice on the application to receive the document was served upon
the counsel for the plaintiff.  Later, plaintiff did not file any counter.  The
right of plaintiff to cross-examine DW1 was forfeited, on 20.10.2017, but, not
on 17.10.2017, as stated by the plaintiff.  The petition is not maintainable.
Hence, the petition may be dismissed.
6.      I have given earnest consideration to the facts & submissions.
7.      The document in question which was marked as exhibit B1 is a certified
copy of an unregistered partition deed.  It is undisputed that on the application
filed by the defendant for receiving the said document, the counsel for the
plaintiff endorsed an objection that it may not be admitted as it is inadmissible
in evidence.  However, that application was allowed.  Afterwards, the affidavit
in lieu of examination-in-chief of DW1 was filed and the said CC of unregistered
partition deed was tendered for marking through DW1.  The Court noted in the
examination-in-chief of DW1 as follows:
DW1 (S.Y.Vara Prasad Reddy) is present and sworn for continuation of chief
examination.
I have filed my affidavit.  I know the contents.  I have filed the following
documents.
Ex.B1 is Certified copy of registered partition deed, dated: 17-02-2017.
Cross Examination by Smt. A.U.S: At request deferred.
Admittedly, the document exhibited is not the original document.  It is a
certified copy.  However, in the deposition, the trial Court noted that exhibit
B1 is certified copy of registered partition deed, though, infact, it is the CC of
the unregistered partition deed.  The said document was marked in the
absence of the counsel for the plaintiff is one of the contentions of the
plaintiff.  As could be seen from the counter of the 1st defendant, except
stating that a counter is not filed in the application filed for receiving the
documents and that the right to cross-examine DW1 was forfeited, no other
averments were made in the counter and the contentions of the plaintiff,
which are stated in the affidavit filed in support of the application are just
baldly denied by stating that the said contentions are far from truth.  Before
this Court, it is not disputed that an objection on the ground of admissibility
was raised for marking the document.  The trial Court obviously did not
examine the twin questions viz., (i) whether the original unregistered partition
deed was engrossed on stamps of required value; and, (ii) whether CC of such
unregistered partition deed can be admitted in evidence.  Further, the trial
Court wrongly noted in the deposition of DW1 that it is CC of registered
partition deed.  When the plaintiff sought for de-exhibiting the CC of
unregistered partition deed on the grounds that the original deed is not
properly stamped and it is unregistered, the trial Court, in the impugned order
noted verbatim as follows:
The plaintiff side evidence completed and now coming for cross-
examination of DW2 at this stage the petitioner/plaintiff come
forward with this petition.   The chief affidavit of DW1 filed on
13.10.2017 and Ex.B1 was marked and posted for cross-examination   
of DW1 call on 20.10.2017.  The petitioner not cross-examined the
DW1.   The document Ex.B1 is unregistered one it was marked in 
O.S.386/
16
on the file of Junior Civil Judge Court, Giddalur.  The
respondent obtained certified copy, i.e., unregistered partition deed
17.02.2007 and the petitioner has not explained in his petition how
the said Ex.B1 cannot be marked.  In a decision in 2015(4) ALT page
No.463 wherein it is held that unregistered partition deed can be
received and marked in evidence in such a case Court must make an 
endorsement there as to having received it only as evidence for
collateral purpose under the proviso to
Section 49
of Act.
Admittedly, in this case also the respondent filed Ex.B1 unregistered
one it is only for collateral purpose and it cannot be De-exhibited
and said decision certainly applies to this case and this point is
answered against the petitioner.
The trial Court did not at all consider as to whether the CC of unregistered
partition deed can be received in evidence and can be permitted to be
exhibited without a foundation being laid for admitting secondary evidence.
Be that as it may.  Though the plaintiff raised an objection that the original
unregistered partition deed is not properly stamped, the trial Court did not
consider the said aspect; viz., whether the original unregistered partition
deed, which was engrossed on stamp papers of a total value of Rs.190/-, was
properly stamped?.  The trial Court before permitting to exhibit the document
in fact did not record a finding that the original deed is duly stamped and that,
therefore, its certified copy can be permitted to be exhibited for collateral
purpose.
8.      Now it is apt to refer to the relevant provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act
:
Section 35
of the Indian Stamp Act reads as under:
35. Instruments not duly stamped inadmissible in evidence, etc.
        No instrument chargeable with duty shall be admitted in
evidence for any purpose by any person having by law or consent of
parties authority to receive evidence, or shall be acted upon,
registered or authenticated by any such person or by any public
officer, unless such instrument is duly stamped:
Provided that:
(a)     any such instrument shall be admitted in evidence on
payment of the duty with which the same is chargeable or, in the
case of an instrument insufficiently stamped, of the amount required
to make up such duty, together with a penalty of fifteen rupees or,
when ten times the amount of the proper duty or deficient portion
thereof exceeds fifteen rupees of a sum equal to ten time such duty
or portion;
(b)     Where any person from whom a stamped receipt could have   
been demanded, has given an unstamped receipt and such receipt, if
stamped, would be admissible in evidence against him then such 
receipt shall be admitted in evidence against him, on payment of a
penalty of three rupees by the person tendering it;
(c)     Where a contract or agreement of any kind is effected by
correspondence consisting of two or more letters and any one of the
letters bears the proper stamp, the contract or agreement shall be
deemed to be duly stamped;
(d)     Nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission of any
instrument in evidence in any proceeding in a Criminal Court, other
than a proceeding under Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI of the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
, 1898; (Now Chapters IX and X D of
Cr.P.C
.1973];
(e)     Nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission of any
instrument in any Court when such instrument has been executed by 
or on behalf of the government or where it bears the certificate of
the Collector as provided by Section 312 or any other provision of
this Act.
As per
Section 36
of the Indian Stamp Act, where an instrument has been
admitted in evidence, such admission shall not, except as provided in
Section
61
, be called in question at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on the
ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped.
Section 61
of the said Act reads as under:
61. Revision of certain decisions of Courts regarding the sufficiency
of stamps  (1) When any Court in the exercise of its civil or
revenue jurisdiction or any Criminal Court in any proceeding,
under Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
, 1898, makes any order admitting any instrument in
evidence as duly stamped or as not requiring a stamp, or upon
payment of duty and a penalty under
Section 35
, the Court to
which appeals lie from, or references are made by, such first-
mentioned Court may, of its own motion, or on the application of
the Collector, take such order into consideration.
(2) If such Court, after such consideration, is of opinion that
such instrument should not have been admitted in evidence
without the payment of duty and penalty under
Section 35
or
without the payment of a higher duty and penalty than those paid,
it may record a declaration to that effect, and determine the
amount of duty with which such instrument is chargeable and may 
require any person in whose possession or power such instrument 
then is, to produce the same, and may impound the same when   
produced.
(3) When any declaration has been recorded under sub-
sec.(2), the Court recording the same shall send a copy thereof to
the Collector, and where the instrument to which it relates has
been impounded or is otherwise in the possession of such Court,
shall also send him such instrument.
(4)     The Collector may thereupon, notwithstanding
anything contained in the order admitting such instrument in
evidence, or in any certificate granted under
Section 42
, or in
Section 43
, prosecute any person for any offence against the Stamp
Law which the Collector considers him to have committed in
respect of such instrument:
Provided that:
(a)     no such prosecution shall be instituted where the amount
(including duty and penalty) which, according to the determination
of such Court, was payable in respect of the instrument under
Section 35
, is paid to the Collector, unless he thinks that the
offence was committed with an intention of evading payment of
the property duty;
(b)     except for the purposes of such prosecution, no declaration
made under this section shall affect the validity of any order
admitting any instrument in evidence, or of any certificate granted
under
Section 42
.
A reading of the provisions of law makes it manifest that no instrument
chargeable with duty shall be admitted in evidence for any purpose by any
person having the authority to receive evidence or shall be acted upon.
Therefore, before admitting in evidence, the CC of unregistered partition
deed, the trial Court is obligated under law to examine whether its original is
properly/duly stamped.  Thus, when an original document is tendered in
evidence for being marked, whether an objection is raised or not, it is the duty
of the Court to examine as to whether such document is chargeable with duty
and find out whether it is properly stamped, if it is chargeable with duty.  The
CC of unregistered partition deed shows that the original of it was engrossed on
stamp papers worth Rs.190/-.  The trial Court before marking the document as
exhibit B1 has not passed an order or has not recorded a finding with regard to
the admissibility of the document after considering the aspect as to whether
the original of it is duly stamped or not.
9.
In this factual background, it is necessary to first refer to the ratio in the
decision in
Ram Rattan (dead) by L.Rs. v. Bajrang Lal and others
, wherein
the Supreme Court held as under:
...The court, and of necessity it would be trial Court before
which the objection is taken about admissibility of document on
the ground that it is not duly stamped, has to judicially
determine the matter as soon as the document is tendered in
evidence and before it is marked as an exhibit in the case ...
9.1     In
Bipin Shantilal Panchal vs. State Of Gujarat And Another
wherein
the Supreme Court, on the aspect of the objections generally raised before the
trial Courts, had laid down the following new procedure:
Whenever an objection is raised during evidence taking stage
regarding the admissibility of any material or item of oral evidence
the trial court can make a note of such objection and mark the
objected document tentatively as an exhibit in the case (or record
the objected part of the oral evidence) subject to such objections to
be decided at the last stage in the final judgment. If the court finds
at the final stage that the objection so raised is sustainable the judge
or magistrate can keep such evidence excluded from consideration.
In our view there is no illegality in adopting such a course. (However,
we make it clear that if the objection relates to deficiency of stamp
duty of a document the court has to decide the objection before
proceeding further. For all other objections the procedure suggested
above can be followed.) The above procedure, if followed, will have
two advantages. First is that the time in the trial court, during
evidence taking stage, would not be wasted on account of raising
such objections and the court can continue to examine the
witnesses. The witnesses need not wait for long hours, if not days.
Second is that the superior court, when the same objection is re-
canvassed and reconsidered in appeal or revision against the final
judgment of the trial court, can determine the correctness of the
view taken by the trial court regarding that objection, without
bothering to remit the case to the trial court again for fresh disposal.
We may also point out that this measure would not cause any 
prejudice to the parties to the litigation and would not add to their
misery or expenses. We, therefore, make the above as a procedure 
to be followed by the trial courts whenever an objection is raised
regarding the admissibility of any material or any item of oral
evidence.
This decision rendered by a Bench of three Honble Judges of the Supreme
Court also makes it clear that if the objection relates to deficiency of stamp
duty of a document the Court has to decide the objection before proceeding
further.  The trial Court failed to do so in the instant case. Further, the
marking of the CC of unregistered partition deed as exhibit B1 by noting in the
deposition of DW1 that it is a registered document also indicates that the trial
Court did not apply its mind before the document is admitted in evidence.
9.2     In the decision in
Javer Chand v. Pukhraj Surana
a Bench of four
Honble Judges of the Supreme Court held as follows:
"That section is categorical in its terms that when a document has
once been admitted in evidence, such admission cannot be called in
question at any stage of the suit or the proceeding on the ground
that the instrument had not been duly stamped. The only exception
recognized by the section is the class of cases contemplated by
S. 61
which is not material to the present controversy.
Section 36
does not
admit of other exceptions. Where a question as to the admissibility
of a document is raised on the ground that it has not been stamped,
or has not been properly stamped it has to be decided then and
there when the document is tendered in evidence. Once the Court
rightly or wrongly, decides to admit the document in evidence so far
as the parties are concerned the matter is closed.
Section 35
is in
the nature of a penal provision and has far-reaching effects. Parties
to a litigation, where such a controversy is raised, have to be
circumspect and the party challenging the admissibility of the
document has to be alert to see that the document is not admitted in
evidence by the Court. The Court has to judicially determine the
matter as soon as the document is tendered in evidence and before
it is marked as an exhibit in the case. The record in this case
discloses the fact that the hundis were marked as Exs. P 1 and P2
and bore the endorsement 'admitted in evidence' under the
signature of the Court. It is not, therefore, one of those cases where
a document has been inadvertently admitted, without the Court
applying its mind to the question of its admissibility. Once a
document has been marked as an exhibit in the case and the trial has
proceeded all along on the footing that the document was an exhibit
in the case and has been used by the parties in examination and
cross-examination of their witnesses,
S. 36
of the Stamp Act comes
into operation. Once a document has been admitted in evidence, as
aforesaid, it is not open either to the Trial Court itself or to a Court
of appeal or revision to go behind that order. Such an order is not
one of those judicial orders which are liable to be reviewed or
revised by the same Court or a Court of superior jurisdiction."
10.     The case on hand is clearly one of those cases where the Court
inadvertently and without application of mind admitted the document in
question in evidence by mistaking the original of it to be a registered partition
deed while in-fact it is an unregistered deed.  Though the trial Court has to
judicially determine the matter as soon as the document is tendered in
evidence and before it is marked as an exhibit in the case, the trial Court failed
to do so in the case on hand.  It is to be next noted that the trial Court in the
impugned order held as under:  In a decision in 2015(4) ALT page No.463
wherein it is held that unregistered partition deed can be received and
marked in evidence in such a case Court must make an endorsement there  
as to having received it only as evidence for collateral purpose under the
proviso to
Section 49
of Act.  Admittedly, in this case also the respondent
filed Ex.B1 unregistered one it is only for collateral purpose and it cannot
be De-exhibited and said decision certainly applies to this case and this
point is answered against the petitioner.  However, the law is well settled
that even an original document, which is chargeable with duty; but, not
properly stamped, also cannot be admitted in evidence even for collateral
purpose.
11.     In this backdrop, it is necessary to refer to
Section 49
of the Indian
Registration Act, which reads as follows:-
49. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be
registered.No document required by
section 17
1
[or by any 
provision of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882)], to be
registered shall
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such
property or conferring such power, unless it has been registered:
[Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable
property and required by this Act or the
Transfer of Property Act,
1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered may be received as evidence of
a contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II of
the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (3 of 1877) or as evidence of any
collateral transaction not required to be effected by registered
instrument.]

As per the said provision, there is no prohibition to receive an unregistered
document in evidence for collateral purpose. But, as rightly contended by the
learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff, even when an original document is
tendered for being marked for collateral purpose, it should be duly stamped or
duty & penalty, if any, payable shall be paid and collected before according
permission for admitting in evidence for collateral purpose. Unless the
document is duly stamped or stamp duty & penalty are paid, an unregistered
document cannot be admitted in evidence even for collateral purpose.
12.
In the decision in the case of
Avinash Kumar Chauhan v. Vijay Krishna
Mishra
, the Supreme Court referred to the following ratio in the decision in
the case of
T. Bhaskar Rao vs. T. Gabriel
and other .
It is now well settled that there is no prohibition under
section 49
of the Registration Act, to receive an unregistered document in
evidence for collateral purpose. But the document so tendered
should be duly stamped or should comply with the requirements of
section 35
of the Stamp Act, if not stamped, as a document cannot
be received in evidence even for collateral purpose unless it is duly
stamped or duty and penalty are paid under
section 35
of the
Stamp Act.
The trial Court, in the case on hand did not examine whether the original
unregistered partition deed is properly stamped, but held that CC of it can be
admitted for collateral purpose.  In the event the trial Court were to find that
the original is not properly stamped the question of admitting the copy of the
same would not arise as the question whether or not stamp duty can be
collected on a copy of a document is no longer res integra.
In
Jupudi Kesava
Rao v. Pulavarthi Venkata Subbarao
, the Supreme Court emphatically held
that stamp duty cannot be collected on a copy of document, if the original was
not subjected to stamp duty at all.   The ratio in this cited decision is as
follows:
"The first limb of
Section 35
clearly shuts out from evidence any
instrument chargeable with duty unless it is duly stamped. The
second limb of it which relates to acting upon the instrument will
obviously shut out any secondary evidence of such instrument, for
allowing such evidence to be let in when the original admittedly
chargeable with duty was not stamped or insufficiently stamped,
would be tantamount to the document being acted upon by the 
person having by law or authority to receive evidence. Proviso (a) is
only applicable when the original instrument is actually before the
Court of law and the deficiency in stamp with penalty is paid by the
party seeking to rely upon the document. Clearly secondary evidence
either by way of oral evidence of the contents of the unstamped
document or the copy of it covered by
Section 63
of the Indian
Evidence Act would not fulfil the requirements of the proviso which
enjoins upon the authority to receive nothing in evidence except the
instrument itself.
Section 35
is not concerned with any copy of an
instrument and a party can only be allowed to rely on a document
which is an instrument for the purpose of
Section 35
. 'Instrument' is
defined in
Section 2(14)
as including every document by which any
right or liability is, or purports to be created, transferred, limited,
extended, extinguished or recorded. There is no scope for inclusion
of a copy of a document as an instrument for the purpose of the
Stamp Act
.
If
Section 35
only deals with original instruments and not copies,
Section 36
cannot be so interpreted as to allow secondary evidence
of an instrument to have its benefit. The words 'an instrument' in
Section 36
must have the same meaning as that in
Section 35
. The 
Legislature only relented from the strict provisions of
Section 35
in
cases where the original instrument was admitted in evidence
without objection at the initial stage of a suit or proceeding."
In
the above decision
, the Supreme Court held thus:
Section 36
only lifted that bar in the case of an original
unstamped or insufficiently stamped document to which no 
exception as to admissibility was taken at the first stage. It
did not create any exemption in the case of secondary
evidence which a copy would undoubtedly be. In the case
before the Judicial Committee the copy was one other than
the final draft of the original document which had been lost
through no fault on the part of the person intending to prove
it and yet it was held that the
Stamp Act
ruled out its
admissibility in evidence.
The Supreme Court also held as follows:
For the same reason we must hold that the dictum in
Satyavati v. Pallayya [AIR 1937 Mad 431 at p. 432] that
Section 36
will also apply when secondary evidence of an
instrument not duly stamped had been wrongly admitted is
not good law.
Be it noted that in the above said decision, the Supreme Court quoted and
approved the judgment of the Privy Council in
Raja of Bobbili v. Inuganti
China Sitaramaswami Garu
.
The same principle was followed by this Court in
Akkam Laxmi v. Thosha Bhoomaiah
.  Thus, the law is well settled that stamp
duty and penalty, if any, payable are collectable only on the original
document, i.e., primary evidence but not on a copy of the document, i.e.,
secondary evidence.  Therefore, the observation of the Court below in the
impugned order that the document can be admitted for collateral purpose is
unsustainable as the trial Court did not advert to and examine the aspect as to
whether the original unregistered partition deed in question is duly stamped or
not.
13.
In
R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder vs. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami and   
V.P. Temple and Anr.
, the Supreme Court having referred to an earlier
decision cited held as follows:
The learned counsel for the defendant-respondent has relied on
The Roman Catholic Mission v. The State of Madras and Another
[AIR 1966 SC 1457] in support of his submission that a document
not admissible in evidence, though-brought on record, has to be
excluded from consideration. We do not have any dispute with
the proposition of law so
laid down in
the above said case.
However, the present one is a case which calls for the correct
position of law being made precise. Ordinarily an objection to the
admissibility of evidence should be taken when it is tendered and
not subsequently. The objections as to admissibility of documents
in evidence may be classified into two classes:- (i) an objection
that the document which is sought to be proved is itself
inadmissible in evidence; and (ii) where the objection does not
dispute the admissibility of the document in evidence but is
directed towards the mode of proof alleging the same to be
irregular or insufficient. In the first case, merely because a
document has been marked as 'an exhibit', an objection as to its
admissibility is not excluded and is available to be raised even at
a later stage or even in appeal or revision. In the latter case, the
objection should be taken before the evidence is tendered and
once the document has been admitted in evidence and marked as  
an exhibit, the objection that it should not have been admitted in
evidence or that the mode adopted for proving the document is
irregular cannot be allowed to be raised at any stage subsequent
to the marking of the document as an exhibit. The later
proposition is a rule of fair play. The crucial test is whether an
objection, if taken at the appropriate point of time, would have
enabled the party tendering the evidence to cure the defect and
resort to such mode of proof as would be regular. The omission to
object becomes fatal because by his failure the party entitled to
object allows the party tendering the evidence to act on an
assumption that the opposite party is not serious about the mode
of proof. On the other hand, a prompt objection does not
prejudice the party tendering the evidence, for two reasons;
firstly, it enables the Court to apply its mind and pronounce its
decision on the question of admissibility then and there; and
secondly, in the event of finding of the Court on the mode of
proof sought to be adopted going against the party tendering the
evidence, the opportunity of seeking indulgence of the Court for
permitting a regular mode or method of proof and thereby
removing the objection raised by the opposite party, is available
to the party leading the evidence. Such practice and procedure is
fair to both the parties. Out of the two types of objections,
referred to hereinabove, in the later case, failure to raise a
prompt and timely objection amounts to waiver of the necessity
for insisting on formal proof of a document, the document itself
which is sought to be proved being admissible in evidence. In the
first case, acquiescence would be no bar to raising the objection
in superior Court.
14.     In the case on hand, the objection is not only with regard to the mere
sufficiency or otherwise of the stamp duty payable on the original partition
deed but, also with regard to non-registration of the original partition deed.
The law is well settled that there is no bar under law to consider at any stage
of the matter, an objection which is raised with regard to the admissibility of
an unregistered document, which is compulsorily registerable, even though
such document is marked as an exhibit, more particularly, when such marking
is given inadvertently and without application of mind.
Indeed, in a recent
decision in
Uma Pandey and Another v. Munna Pandey and others
the  
Supreme Court held that question relating to admissibility of an unregistered
partition deed relied upon by the defendants is a substantial question of law
and can be permitted to be raised even in a second appeal.  Further, as already
noted the law is well settled that
Section 35
only deals with original
instruments and not copies and that
Section 36
cannot be so interpreted as to
allow secondary evidence of an instrument to have its benefit. The words 'an
instrument' in
Section 36
must have the same meaning as that in
Section 35
.
The Legislature only relented from the strict provisions of
Section 35
in cases
where the original instrument was admitted in evidence without objection at
the initial stage of a suit or proceeding.  Therefore, the document in question
now being a certified copy and not an original the benefit cannot be extended
to it in any view of the matter.
15.
In the facts & circumstances and in view of the precedential guidance,
this Court is of the well considered view that the Court below was in error in
marking the document, viz., CC of unregistered partition deed as exhibit B1
without application of mind and without first deciding the objection raised as
ordained in the decision of the Supreme Court in
Bipin Shantilal Panchals
case
(supra) and in further refusing to accede to the request of the plaintiff to de-
exhibit the document or exclude/eschew it from evidence for deciding its
admissibility or otherwise after adverting to the aspects viz., whether its
original was duly stamped/charged with duty and whether it can be admitted in
evidence for collateral purpose in the light of the ratios in the precedents
adverted to supra.  For the foregoing reasons, this Court finds that the order is
unsustainable and is liable to be set aside.
16.     In the result, the Civil Revision Petition is allowed and the order
impugned is set aside. As a sequel, the interlocutory application in I.A.no.1637
of 2017 is allowed and the certified copy of unregistered partition deed marked
as exhibit B1 shall stand eschewed from evidence and the marking given to it
shall stand cancelled.  However, the trial Court shall after affording an
opportunity of hearing to both sides, decide its admissibility after considering
the relevant aspects as to its admissibility as per the settled law and procedure
and then proceed further in the matter in accordance with law. No costs.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
_____________________    
M.SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
22.06.2018