[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1.Dr. S.S.S. Jaya Raju, S/O. Jaya Rao, Ix ... vs 1.The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Law (La & ... on 15 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 181
Author:
T. Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T. Amarnath Goud
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN And HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD                    

W.P.No.24413 of 2017  

15-06-2018 

1.Dr. S.S.S. Jaya Raju, S/o. Jaya Rao, IX Addl. District & Sessions Judge, Machilipatnam, Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh.2
Trial of Cases under SCs & STs (POA) Act-cum-V Additional District Judge, Adilabad, Adilabad District, Telangana State. Peti

1.The State of Andhra Pradesh, Law (LA & JSCF) Department, rep. by its Chief Secretary, Secretariat Buildings, Velagapudi, G
4.The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by its Principal Secretary, Home Department, Secretariat Buildings Velagapudi, Guntur Dis


For the Petitioners: Mr. Y.V. Ravi Prasad (Sr. counsel)

For the Respondent No.1 & 4: G.P. for Home (A.P) 
 For the Respondent No.2 & 5: G.P. for Home (T.G) 
 For the Respondent No.3: Ms. V. Uma Devi. S.C. 


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1.(2002) 5 SCC 1 
2.(2012) 6 SCC 502 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD         

W.P.No.24413 of 2017  

ORDER:
(per VRS,J)  

      The petitioners, who were originally appointed as ad hoc District
Judges to man Fast Track Courts in the State and who were later regularly
appointed to cadre posts, have come up with the above writ petition.
2. Heard Mr. Y.V. Ravi Prasad, learned Senior Counsel appearing
for the petitioners, the learned Government Pleader for Home (A.P), the
learned Government Pleader for Home (Telangana) and Ms. Uma Devi,  
learned Standing Counsel for the Registry.
3. It is a matter of historical fact that pursuant to the allocation of a
sum of Rs.502.90 crores by the 11th Finance Commission under
Article 275
of the constitution, for the purpose of setting up 1734 Courts in various
States for dealing with long pending cases, the State Governments
created Fast Tract Courts. At about the same time, the State of Andhra
Pradesh issued a set of rules known as A.P. State Higher Judicial Service
Special Rules for Ad hoc Appointments 2001.
4. In terms of Rule 2 of these Ad hoc Appointments Rules 2001,
the petitioners herein were selected and appointed as ad hoc District
Judges to preside over Fast Track Courts, under G.O.R.T.No.1798, Law 
dated 06.10.2003. Under Clause-3 of the said Government Order, the
petitioners were to be paid a consolidated pay besides 20% HRA and 
Rs.2000 per month towards conveyance charges. Clause-4 of the said 
Government Order made it clear that the ad hoc appointments may cease  
on 31.03.2005.
5. It must also be pointed out at this Stage that Rule 7 (1) (B) of
the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial Service Special rules for Ad hoc
Appointments, 2001 made it clear that persons appointed under these
Rules were not to be regarded as members of the permanent cadre 
covered by a separate set of special rules. Therefore, the appointments of
the petitioners herein were subject to Rule 7(1) (B) and also subject to
Clauses-3 & 4 of G.O.Rt.No.1798, Law dated 06.10.2003.
6. A challenge was made to the Fast Track Courts Scheme, but the
same was rejected by the Supreme Court in
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of
India
, which came to be known as Brij Mohan Lal-1. The decision of the
Supreme Court contained certain directions to the State Governments,
which included a direction that the members of the Bar directly appointed
to these Courts may be absorbed in regular vacancies, if subsequent
recruitment takes place and their performance was found to be
satisfactory.
7. Within a few months of the appointment of the petitioners, the
High Court issued a notification on 28.05.2004 inviting applications for
direct recruitment. Instead of applying in response to the said notification,
the petitioners herein as well as some of their batch mates filed a writ
petition in W.P.No.11273 of 2004, challenging the direct recruitment
notification and seeking absorption against regular vacancies. But the writ
petition was dismissed by a Bench of this Court and the matter was taken
to the Supreme Court in S.L.P.(Civil).No.17338 of 2004. The Supreme
Court granted leave and passed an interim order on 09.03.2006 to the
effect that the appointments made pursuant to the notification for direct
recruitment, will be subject to the result of the appeal.
8. By the time leave was granted and an interim order was passed
by the Supreme Court in the Special Leave Petition, the FTC scheme itself
had come to an end on 31.03.2005. Therefore, two writ petitions came to
be filed directly before the Supreme Court under
Article 32.
These writ
petitions were taken up along with Civil Appeal filed by the petitioners
herein in Civil Appeal No.1276 of 2005 and they were disposed of by a
common order passed on 19.04.2012. This decision of the Supreme Court  
in
Brij Mohan Lal V. Union of India
came to be known as Brij Mohan
Lal-2.
9. In Brij Mohan Lal-2, the Supreme Court rejected the prayer of
the petitioners herein for quashing the notification for direct recruitment
and for absorption. But the Supreme Court issued a set of directions in
paragraph 146 of the report. Direction No.9 contained in paragraph-146 of
the decision in Brij Mohan Lal-2 enabled persons like the petitioners to be
appointed to the regular cadre of the higher judicial service of the State
subject to certain conditions, which included the conduct of a written
examination followed by interview. Pursuant to the directions issued by
the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Lal-2, the High court issued a notification
on 13.08.2012. A written examination and viva voce followed, on the basis
of the performance in which, the petitioners herein were appointed as
District Judges (Entry Level) on regular basis under G.O.Ms.No.68, Law
dated 02.07.2013. It is relevant to note that under G.O.Ms.No.68, dated
02.07.2013, the petitioners were placed on probation for a period of two
years from the date of joining duty. The petitioners herein accepted the
orders of appointment made in G.O.Ms.No.68. However, one officer viz.,
Kum. C. Yamini, who was appointed along with the writ petitioners herein,
came up with a challenge to condition Nos.5 & 6 contained in
G.O.Ms.No.68 dated 012.07.2013. But the said writ petition W.P.No.13022 
of 2017 filed by the said Kum. C. Yamini was dismissed by a Bench of this
Curt by a judgment dated 17.04.2017.
10. The said officer Kum. C. Yamini also filed another writ petition
in W.P.No.3359 of 2017 seeking fixation of seniority in the cadre of
District Judge, by taking into consideration the length of service rendered
as an ad hoc Judge in the Fast Track Courts. But the said writ petition was
dismissed by this Court by an order dated 27.04.2018.
11. Another officer, by name Ch. Ramesh Babu, who was also
similarly placed like the petitioners herein, also filed a writ petition in
W.P.No.18988 of 2017 praying for counting the service rendered as Fast
Track Court Judge for the purpose of fixation of seniority. The said writ
petition was also dismissed by this Court by an order dated 27.04.2018.
12. In the light of the above, Mr. Y.V. Ravi Prasad, learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioners conceded that the first prayer made by the
petitioners in this writ petition (for counting the service rendered as a FTC
judge for the purpose of seniority) is squarely covered against the
petitioners, by the previous decision of this Court. In other words, the
prayer for counting the services rendered as ad hoc judges in Fast Track
Courts, for the purpose of seniority, cannot be granted, since the batch
mates of the petitioners have earlier come up with writ petitions praying
for the very same relief and lost the battle before this Court. Therefore
unless and until the decision of this Court in the cases of Kum. C. Yamini
and Ch. Ramesh Babu are reversed by the Supreme Court, the first prayer
made by the petitioners for counting the services rendered as Fast Track
Court Judges for the purpose of seniority cannot be granted.
13. However, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners
contended that the service rendered by the petitioners as ad hoc judges in
the Fast Track Courts should at least be counted for the purpose of
fixation of pensionary benefits. It is the contention of the learned Senior
Counsel that this part of the prayer made by the petitioners in this writ
petition, is not covered by any decision of this Court either in favour of or
against the persons similarly placed.
14. We have carefully considered the above submissions. The
second part of the prayer made by the petitioners for counting the service
rendered as Fast Track Court Judges at least for the purpose of fixation of
pensionary benefits appears to be in a virgin territory, not covered by any
earlier decision. Therefore, the same requires a detailed consideration.
15. As we have pointed out earlier, the State of Andhra Pradesh
issued a set of Rules known as the Andhra Pradesh State Higher Judicial
Service Special Rules for Ad hoc Appointments 2001, under G.O.Rt.No. 
286, dated 05.03.2002. But these rules were deemed to have come into 
force with effect from 01.03.2001.
16. In accordance with Rule 2 of the aforesaid 2001 Rules, the
petitioners were appointed as ad hoc Judges to preside over Fast Track
Courts, under G.O.Rt.No.1798, Law dated 06.10.2003.
17. Within 7 months of their appointment, a notification for direct
recruitment was issued on 28.05.2004. The petitioners could have applied
in response to the said notification and participated in the process of
selection. Instead, the petitioners filed a writ petition in W.P.No.11273 of
2004 on the file of this Court challenging the notification dated 28.05.2004
for direct recruitment and also seeking absorption.
18. In the meantime, the Government came up with a new pension
scheme known as Contributory Pension Scheme with effect from  
01.09.2004. Therefore, the A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980 were
amended under G.O.Ms.No.653, Finance, dated 22.09.2004. By this   
amendment, Clause (g) was inserted under Rule 2. This Clause (g) of Rule
2 reads as follows:
2(g) (i) These rules shall not apply to all the Government
Servants appointed on or after 1-9-2004, to services and
posts in connection with the affairs of the State which are
borne on pensionable establishment, whether temporary, 
or permanent.
(ii) These rules shall not apply to all appointments, whether
temporary or permanent, made on or after 01-09-2004 in
all the State Public Sector Undertakings, whose pay and
allowances are drawn from the Consolidated Fund of the
State or not.
(iii) These rules shall not apply to all appointments,
whether temporary or permanent, made on or after 01-09-
2004 of all the tiers of the Rural and Urban Local Bodies
such as the Gram Panchayats, Mandal Parishads, Zilla 
Parishads, Municipalities, Municipal Corporations, Urban
Development Authorities, Co-operative and Urban Local
Bodies, Zilla Grandhalaya
Samsthas, Agriculture Marketing Committees, including all
the Universities in the State, including all the Institutions
functioning under the Universities, whose pay and
allowances are drawn from the Consolidated Fund of the
State or not.
(iv) These Rules shall not apply to appointments, whether
temporary or permanent made on or after 01-09-2004 into
all the Institutions receiving Grant-in-Aid from the
Government.
(v) These rules shall not apply to appointments, whether
temporary or permanent, made on or after 01-09-2004 to
all Co-operative Institutions, Autonomous Corporations,
whose pay and allowances are drawn from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State or not.
19. Therefore, persons appointed after the cut off date even on
regular basis to a post borne on the cadre, became disentitled to pension
under the A.P. Revised Pension Rules 1980, if their appointment had
taken place on or after 01.09.2004. In other words, the distinction
between (1) those appointed on ad hoc basis and later regularized in
service; (2) those appointed on ad hoc basis and later regularly appointed
afresh; and (3) those appointed directly on regular basis, disappeared
with effect from 01.09.2004 insofar as the claim for pension under the
A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980 is concerned. Persons, who are 
appointed on or after 01.09.2004, irrespective of whether they were
appointed on ad hoc or regular basis, do not come within the purview of
the A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980. All persons appointed either on ad
hoc basis or on regular basis on or after 01.09.2004 were to become
members of the Contributory Pension Scheme. The Andhra Pradesh    
Revised Pension Rules, 1980 do not even apply to such persons.
20. Keeping the above fundamental premise in mind, if we go back
to the case of the petitioners herein, it can be seen  (1) that the
petitioners were appointed under the Special Rules for Adhoc
Appointments, 2001, by a Government Order dated 06.10.2003 on ad hoc   
basis to man Fast Track Courts; (2) that within a few months of their
appointment, a regular recruitment was notified on 28.05.2004; (3) that
without applying for direct recruitment under the said notification, the
petitioners challenged the notification unsuccessfully up to the Supreme
Court; and (4) that eventually, by virtue of the directions issued by the
Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Lal-2, the petitioners were allowed to write a
special qualifying examination and appointed on regular basis to the cadre
posts, under G.O.Ms.No.68, dated 02.07.2013.
21. As we have pointed earlier, the appointment of the petitioners
to the State Higher Judicial Service was only under G.O.Ms.No.68 dated
02.07.2013. The expression appointed to a service is defined in
Rule 3(1) of the A.P. State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1962. Rule
3(1) reads as follows:
3(1) Appointed to a service:  A person is said to be
appointed to a service, when in accordance with these
rules or in accordance with the rules applicable at the time,
as the case may be, he discharges for the first time the
duties of a post borne on the cadre of such service or
commences the probation, instruction or training prescribed
for members thereof.
Explanation:-- The appointment of a person holding a post
borne on the cadre of one service to hold additional charge
of a post borne on the cadre of another service or to
discharge the current duties thereof does not amount to
appointment to the latter service.
22. Therefore, two distinctive requirements are to be satisfied for a
person to be deemed to have been appointed to a service. They are (1)
he should have started discharging the duties of a post borne on the
cadre of such service; or (2) he should have commenced the prohibition
prescribed for the members of the service.
23. In the case on hand, the petitioners admittedly got placed on
probation only under G.O.Ms.No.68, dated 02.07.2013. The petitioners
commenced probation only after 02.07.2013. They also started
discharging the duties of the post of District Judge borne on the cadre
of the service for the first time after 02.07.2013. Therefore, the
petitioners were obviously appointed in the year 2013, i.e. after nine years
of the A.P. Revised Pension Rules 1980 getting amended with effect from
01.09.2004, consequent upon the introduction of the Contributory Pension
Scheme.
24. Since the petitioners were appointed to a service in terms of
Rule 3(1) of the A.P. State and Subordinate Services Rules 1962, only in
the year 2013, the provisions of the A.P. Revised Pension Rules will not
apply to them, in view of Rule 2(g) of the Revised Pension Rules, 1980.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot claim the benefit of the A.P. Revised
Pension Rules, 1980. In fact, on account of their appointment to the
service for the first time in the year 2013, the petitioners have already
been enrolled in the Contributory Pension Scheme. Therefore, it is not
possible now to direct the respondents to switch over the petitioners,
especially when the A.P. Revised Pension Rules 1980 do not apply to
these persons.
25. Interestingly, the Supreme Court had an occasion to consider
an identical claim made by judicial officers from the State of Jharkhand, in
Mahesh Chandra Verma v. State of Jharkhand (Civil Appeal No.4782 
of 2018, decided on 11.05.2018). In that case, persons, who were
appointed first as ad hoc Judges to man Fast Track Courts and who later,
became regular District Judges pursuant to the directions issued in Brij
Mohan Lal-2 sought to count the services rendered by them in the Fast
Track Courts for the purpose of pensionary benefits. The High Court
rejected their claim on the ground that with effect from the year 2004, a
new Contributory Pension Scheme has come into force. When the matter   
was taken to the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court allowed their claim
on the ground inter alia (1) that the appellants before the Supreme Court
actually applied in response to a notification for direct recruitment to
cadre posts, but were not accommodated on the ground of want of 
vacancies; (2) that the very Scheme of creation of Fast Track Courts was
to tide over the crisis of non-filling up of posts and non-creation of
adequate Courts; and (3) that therefore, the services rendered as Fast
Track Court Judges cannot go a waste.
26. At first blush, one may be tempted to follow the aforesaid
judgment of the Supreme Court in Mahesh Chandra Verma and allow the   
claim of the petitioners herein. But on a deeper scrutiny, it can be seen
that the said judgment of the Supreme Court cannot be applied to the
case of the petitioners for a variety of reasons.
27. There are lot of differences between the appellants in Mahesh
Chandra Verma and the petitioners herein. They are as follows:
(i) The petitioners in Mahesh Chandra Verma applied for direct
recruitment to cadre posts. Though 27 vacancies were notified, only 17
were appointed. The remaining 10 in the select list and a few who were
next in the order of the merit though not in the select list, were appointed
as fast track court judges. In other words the petitioners in Mahesh
Chandra Verma did not participate in a selection for appointment as ad
hoc judges to Fast Track Courts. They bargained for something else and
settled for something less. But in the case on hand, the petitioners applied
only in response to a Notification for recruitment to Fast Track Courts,
created temporarily under the 11th Finance Commission. Therefore they
knew what they bargained for;
(ii) Despite knowing the nature of their appointment and its fixed
tenure, the petitioners deliberately failed to participate in a process of
direct recruitment to cadre posts, when a notification was issued on
26.05.2004. The petitioners were just 7 months old in service at that time,
having been appointed to Fast Track Courts in October 2003. Their tenure
was to expire on 31.03.2005. Therefore they could have applied for direct
recruitment in response to the notification dated 26.05.2004. Instead of
doing that, the petitioners challenged the direct recruitment and failed
before this court as well as before the Supreme Court. Therefore unlike
the petitioners in Mahesh Chandra Verma, the petitioners herein did not
want to participate in a process of direct recruitment, but chose to take a
chance by pursuing their claim only for absorption or regularisation. To
some extent the petitioners in this case were successful in getting a
reprieve from the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Lal- II for the conduct of a
special selection in the form of a written examination and interview. It
must be remembered that this written examination and interview was not
a competitive examination but a qualifying examination. Hence the
petitioners herein cannot compare themselves with those who participated
in a process of direct recruitment and actually came out successful;
(iii) Apart from the fact that the petitioners were appointed to ex-
cadre posts created under the 11th Finance Commission, their
appointments to the Fast Track Courts were in terms of statutory rules
known as A.P. Ad hoc Appointment Rules, 2001. The appointment of the  
appellants in Mahesh Chandra Verma was not under any such statutory  
rule relating to ad hoc appointments. In other words the petitioners in this
case applied for and appointed to the posts which did not form part of the
cadre strength. But the petitioners in Mahesh Chandra Verma applied for
the posts within the cadre strength, participated in the selection, got
short-listed, but appointed to posts outside the cadre;
(iv) The appointment of the petitioners herein were regulated by
Rule 7(1)(B) of the A.P. Special Rules for Ad-hoc Appointments, 2001. In
addition they were also regulated by Clause 4 of G.O. Ms. No.1798 dated
06.10.2003. But there were no such restrictions on the appointment of the
appellants in Mahesh Chandra Verma;
(v) When the petitioners were subjected to a special qualifying
examination in the year 2013 and were appointed against regular
vacancies, G.O. Ms No. 68 made it clear that the petitioners will be placed
on probation from the date they joined duty. In other words, the
appointment orders issued in 2013 made it clear that the petitioners
became members of the service only from that date. We do not know 
what was the position in the case of Mahesh Chandra Verma.
28. A careful look at the decision of the Supreme Court in Mahesh
Chandra Verma would show that the Supreme Court found fault with the 
establishment for not making a proper estimate of the vacancies and not
providing for adequate number of posts, which led to the appointment of
ad hoc judges. But in this case within seven months of the appointment of
the petitioners as ad hoc judges, a notification for regular recruitment was
issued. Instead of participating in the said direct recruitment, the
petitioners challenged the notification itself. Eventually they lost.
29. Persons, who were appointed to the service on regular basis
pursuant to the notification for direct recruitment dated 28.05.2004,
themselves came into the service only after 01.09.2004. Therefore, even
those directly recruited pursuant to the notification dated 28.05.2004 are
not covered by A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980. Therefore, if we grant
the benefit of the A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980 to the petitioners,
they will be counted as having been appointed even before those directly
recruited on regular basis pursuant to the notification dated 28.05.2004.
This will lead to an anomalous situation where persons who are appointed
on regular basis pursuant to the notification dated 28.05.2004 will not
have the benefit of the Revised Pension Rules, but those who failed to
take part in the process of selection and who unsuccessfully challenged
the notification will get the benefit of the Revised Pension Rules. By our
judgment, we cannot create such an anomaly.
30. It is to be pointed out at this stage that even in Mahesh
Chandra Verma, the Supreme Court denied to the appellants before the
Supreme Court, the benefit of seniority over and above those regularly
appointed to the service. We have also rejected the claim of the
petitioners for the grant of seniority to the petitioners, over and above
those appointed pursuant to the direct recruitment notification dated
28.05.2004. In such circumstances, if we grant relief to the petitioners,
their seniors will not be covered by the Revised Pension Rules, but the
petitioners will get a benefit that even the direct recruits could not get.
31. We must always keep in mind one important aspect. Under the
A.P. Revised Pension Rules, 1980 (or the Pension Rules of any other State
or the Centre for that matter), a period of qualifying service is fixed for a
person to become eligible for the grant of pension. Rule 14 of these Rules
prescribe the conditions subject to which service qualifies. Under this Rule
a leverage is available for the Court to order certain types of services to
be counted along with the qualifying service, for the purpose of
determination of either the eligibility or the quantum of pension. The
Courts, by virtue of the power of interpretation conferred upon them, may
be able to grant relief in individual cases, where some portion of a service
rendered by an individual does not qualify in terms of Rule 14.
32. But the leverage or the elbow space available to a Court to
interpret Rule 14 for the purpose of determining the different types of
services that qualify for pension, is not available to Courts in cases where
the very Pension Rules do not apply. We must always keep in mind, the 
distinction between the interpretation of qualifying service and the
question of the very applicability of the Revised Pension Rules to a person.
33. In cases where the service rendered by a person falls short of
the qualifying service as stipulated by the Rules, the Court may have the
power to find out if there are certain types of services rendered by the
individual that can be counted as qualifying service or not. But in cases
where the Revised Pension Rules 1980 do not at all apply to the case of a
person on account of that person having been appointed after
01.09.2004, the question of the Court having any elbow space in the
interpretation of the Rules, does not arise.
34. To put it differently, we cannot grant the relief of sanction of
pension to the petitioners, unless we hold that the petitioners were
appointed to the service before 01.09.2004. To hold that the petitioners
were appointed to the service before 01.09.2004 exclusively for the
purpose of pensionary benefits, even while holding that they cannot be
taken as having been appointed to the service before 01.09.2004 for all
other purposes including seniority, will be a contradiction in terms.
35. If the new Contributory Pension Scheme had not come into
force on 01.09.2004, making all persons appointed thereafter, ineligible to
pension under the Rules, we would have had no difficulty in directing the
period of service rendered by the petitioners as ad hoc judges to be
counted along with the regular service rendered by them for the purpose
of calculation of pensionary benefits. Today we cannot do that since even
the regular service rendered by them from the year 2013 does not count
for pension. If even the regular service rendered by the petitioners after
2013 does not entitle them to come under the purview of the Revised
Pension Rules, the question of clubbing the service with the ad hoc
service, does not arise. Therefore, the second part of the relief claimed by
the petitioners also cannot be granted. Hence the writ petition is
dismissed.
As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions pending in this writ
petition, if any, shall stand closed. There shall be no order as to costs.
_________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J.
______________________    
T. AMARNATH GOUD, J.
15th June, 2018