[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Vadhiboyana Venkata Krishna Reddy Rep. ... vs C.Venkata Ramama Reddy And Another on 24 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 3
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Civil Revision Petition No.4329 of 2017

24.01.2018 

Vadhiboyana Venkata Krishna Reddy Rep. by GPA Holder Vadhiboyina Yandadhi Reddyand 3 others.... Petitioners/Defendants     

C.Venkata Ramama Reddy and another.  Respondents/Plaintiffs    

Counsel for Petitioners: Sri P.V.L.Bhanu Prakash

Counsel for Respondent  : Sri Karri Murali Krishna

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)AIR 1995 AP 130  

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             

C.R.P. No.4329 of 2017 

ORDER:
Challenge in this CRP at the instance of the petitioners/defendants
is the order dated 27.06.2017 in I.A.No.606 of 2017 in O.S.No.110 of
2011 on the file of IV Additional District Judge, Kadapa, whereby the
learned Judge dismissed the petition filed under Order VII Rule 11 r/w
Sec.151
CPC by the defendants to reject the plaint as the suit was barred
by law.
2)      The respondents/plaintiffs filed O.S.No.110/2011 before the
Principal District Judge, Kadapa, for a decree against defendants to repay
Rs.29,60,600/- along with interest at 18% p.a. received by the defendants
as consideration to marry plaintiff No.2 by defendant No.1 and also to
direct defendants to return 35 Tolas of gold ornaments or their worth of
Rs.9,27,500/- with interest.
3)      The suit was made over to the Court of IV Additional District
Judge-cum-Special Judge for Trial of Cases under SCs/STs (POA) Act, 
Kadapa. Pending the suit, the defendants filed I.A.No.606/2017 under
Order VII Rule 11 r/w
Sec.151
CPC to reject the plaint on the ground
that the money decree sought by the plaintiffs is in respect of the dowry
and gold ornaments allegedly presented by them in consideration of the
marriage and as giving and taking dowry is an offence under
Section 7
of
the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, seeking recovery of the dowry amount
and gold ornaments is not maintainable under
Dowry Prohibition Act
and
also under
Section 23
of Indian Contract Act. The respondents/plaintiffs
opposed the said petition.  The IV Additional District Judge, Kadapa, in
the impugned order dismissed the said petition relying upon the decision
of this Court in
Smt. G.Renuka v. M.Papa Rao
.
Hence the instant CRP.
4)      Heard arguments of Sri P.V.L.Bhanu Prakash, learned counsel for
petitioners and Sri P.Veera Reddy, learned Senior Counsel for Sri Karri
Murali Krishna, learned counsel for respondents.
5)      It should be noted that after passing the impugned order in
I.A.No.606/2017, the IV Additional District Judge, Kadapa, passed
another order on 31.07.2017, whereby the plaint was returned under
Order VII Rule 10 CPC
for presentation before proper Court. It appears,
now the suit is pending on the file of VI Additional District Court-cum-
Family Court, Kadapa.
6)      Apart from arguing that the impugned order is erroneous, learned
counsel for petitioners also sought to argue that the filing of the suit at
the inception before regular Civil Court instead of Family Court was
itself erroneous and thereby the suit itself was not maintainable. He relied
upon some decisions also on this aspect.
7)      Per contra, learned senior counsel for respondents vehemently
argued that what is germane in this CRP is the correctness of the
impugned order in I.A.No.606/2017 but not the issue as to whether the
suit is maintainable before regular Civil Court or before Family Court.
8)      On perusal of the impugned order and hearing both sides, this
Court is of the considered view that the validity of the impugned order in
I.A.No.606/2017 alone is relevant for discussion in this CRP as rightly
argued by learned senior counsel for respondents. The IV Additional
District Court, Kadapa, dismissed the petition in I.A.No.606/2017 relying
on
Smt. G.Renukas
case (1 supra), wherein this Court in view of
Section 6
of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, held that plaint is
maintainable to recover the amount of dowry. It was observed thus:
Para 13: I may also point out that the
Dowry Prohibition Act
contemplates two stages. The first stage is taking or giving or
abetting of giving or taking of dowry. The second stage is, after
taking dowry and pending transfer of the same to the beneficiary,
the person holds it in trust for the benefit of the woman. Though
under the first stage, namely, taking or giving or abetting of giving
or taking of dowry is punishable and therefore such act is a void
transaction; under second stage i.e. after taking the dowry, the
Legislature itself has provided that the person who took the dowry
shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman pending transfer in
her favour. Therefore, during the second stage, it is open to a
woman to file a suit to recover the amount from the person who held
the dowry in trust, if that person has not transferred the trust
property in favour of the woman for her benefit. It follows from the
above, that the suit by the plaintiff, in this case, is maintainable, as
admittedly, the 2nd defendant, who admitted to have received the
amount of dowry from the father of the plaintiff by way of a cheque
on 19-4-1974, had not transferred it for the benefit of the plaintiff.
The observations made by this Court in G. Ramasubbaiah v. G. 
Rajamma (1975 (1) APLJ 168) also categorically say that giving or
receiving of dowry will come within the mischief of
Sec. 3
of the
Act, subject to the provisions of
Sec. 6
. Subject to the provisions of
Section 6
mean that the person taking the dowry holds the property
for the benefit of the woman as a trustee. It does not mean to say
that during the said period, the woman cannot file a suit for
recovery of the same.
Section 6
of the Act enables the wife to file a
suit for recovery of the dowry paid, if the person who received the
dowry has failed to transfer the property for the benefit of the
woman within the prescribed period.
Para 14: It follows from the above, that the plaintiff is entitled to
recover the amount of dowry and the suit is maintainable under
Section 6
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
Needless to emphasize that the ratio in the above decision squarely
applies to the case on hand. The Trial Court rightly rejected the petition.
9)      In the result, I find no merits in the CRP and the same is
accordingly dismissed. No costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
date: 24.01.2018