[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Korra Lachu vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Through ... on 22 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 294, (2019) 1 ALD(CRL) 65
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY  AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                             

Criminal Appeal No.605 of 2011

22-01-2018 

Korra Lachu Appellant  

The State of Andhra Pradesh Through S.H.O., Hayathnagar Police Station  Ranga Reddy District  Rep. by Public Prosecutor  Hig

Counsel for the appellant : Mr. M. Adam

Counsel for the respondent : Public Prosecutor (TS)


<GIST 


>HEAD NOTE:    

? CITATIONS: 1. 2016 (3) ALT (Crl.) 505 (DB)(AP)


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD             
        
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.605 OF 2011      


DATED:22-01-2018   

THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:         
JUDGMENT:
(per the Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)  

        This appeal is filed by the sole accused in Sessions Case
No.318 of 2007 on the file of the Additional Metropolitan
Sessions Judge, Cyberabad, N.T.R.Nagar, Hyderabad, whereby   
he was convicted for the offences punishable under
Sections
302
and
379
of the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
) and sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for life, and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-
(Rupees one thousand only) and in default of payment of fine,
to suffer simple imprisonment for three months for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC; and to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-
(Rupees five hundred only) and in default of payment of fine,
to suffer simple imprisonment for one month for the offence
punishable under
Section 379
IPC.  Both the sentences were 
directed to run concurrently.  The appellant was, however,
acquitted of the charge under
Section 376
IPC.
2.      The case of the prosecution in brief is that on 11.11.2005
at about 18.15 hours P.W.1  K. Jagan Naik came to the Police 
Station, Hayathnagar, and gave a report stating that on
11.11.2005 while he was at his house, he came to know that a
lady was found killed in a room in a open plot.  Immediately at
about 4.30 p.m. he went to the spot and found an unknown 
female dead body, having injuries on neck and abdomen, in a
pool of blood in plot No.142, belonging to one Smt. V. Lalitha,
that it appears some unknown persons killed her on the night
of 10.11.2005.  He accordingly requested for taking necessary
action.  As per the contents of the report, P.W.13  Inspector
of Police, Hayathnagar registered a case in Crime No.522 of
2005 under
Section 302
IPC.  During the course of
investigation, P.W.13 examined P.W.1 and recorded his 
statement in detail, visited the scene of offence, and conducted
the panchanama in the presence of P.W.8 and another   
mediators.  The finger prints expert  L.W.18 visited the scene
of offence and collected chance print on a whisky bottle
available at the scene, where he examined the chance prints and
opined that the chance print is identical with the left
index finger impression of the appellant.  On 12.11.2005 the
identity of the deceased was established as that of Challolla
Manemma, W/o.Balaswamy, R/o.H.No.2-3-720/1/A/55/1/A,     
Ganganagar, Amberpet, Hyderabad, and native of Veerayapalli, 
Peda Mandada Mandal, Mahaboobnagar District, by P.Ws.2    
and 3 and L.W.4.
3.      That inquest was held over the body of the deceased on
12.112005 from 13.00 hrs. to 15.00 hrs. in the presence of
P.Ws.1 to 3, 9 and L.Ws.4 and 13 and thereafter the body was 
sent for post mortem examination wherein, P.W.11  Doctor 
Durdana Begum, Assistant Professor, Department of Forensic  
Medicine, Osmania Medical College, held autopsy.  After the
post-mortem examination, the clothes of the deceased were 
seized and the body was handed over to their blood relatives.
P.W.11 opined that the cause of the death was due to cut
throat wound of neck.  The seized incriminating articles at the
scene of offence and the clothes of the deceased were
forwarded to the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL),
Hyderabad and L.W.16  Assistant Director, FSL, who  
analyzed the articles, opined that human blood is detected on
item Nos.1 to 4 and 6 (item 1  blue colour polyester saree with
white flower design with dark brown stains; 2  red colour
cotton petticoat; 3   violet colour cotton blouse; 4 and 5  soil;
and item 6  green colour cotton towel).  Blood group of
bloodstains on item Nos.1, 2, 3 and 6 was found as AB.  Semen 
and Spermatozoa were detected on item 2.  Based on the facts 
and circumstances, the police apprehended the appellant, who
was residing at Plot No.97, Tarakarama Banjara Colony,
Hayathnagar and a native of Sathyam Thanda, Manchal, on  
18.11.2006, arrested at Sathyam Thanda and brought him to 
Police Station, Hayatnagar, where he voluntarily confessed
about the commission of the offence and the same was 
recorded in the presence of P.W.10 and another.
4.      That in his confession, the appellant stated that he was
granted plot No.97 at Tarakarama Banjara Colony where he is
residing, by doing cooking works, and at the relevant point of
time he was working under one Chand Pasha along with  
Amjhad, Ahmed, Raheem, Habeeb, Ahmed, and P.Ws.4 and 5,      
who were working as permanent coolies, that in the month of
November the aforesaid workers came for work in Khaja
Garden, Namally, where P.Ws.4 and 5 brought another lady  
Manemma (the deceased) and that the appellant introduced 
himself to the deceased, who disclosed to him that she is a
native of Mahaboobnagar, her husband deserted her and she 
has been residing at Amberpet with her brothers.  Again when
he went to work at Methodist Garden Function hall, the
deceased also came there and there he induced her that he
would take care of her, as his wife deserted him, and also
promised to give a plot in her name.  Subsequently, on
8.11.2005 at about 9.00 a.m. the deceased came to Ali Caf
Adda, Amberpet, from there, they went to Dilsukhnagar,
witnessed a movie in Vishnu Theatre, they had lunch there and
later the deceased expressed to leave but the appellant insisted
her to see his house.  That he purchased half bottle whisky and
went to Chintalakunta toddy compound where the deceased   
consumed one bottle of toddy.  That the appellant went to
RTC Colony, along with her, took her to plot No.142 where a
room was situated and there, he consumed the whisky and had  
sexual intercourse with her.  When she insisted to go home, he
again committed sexual assault on her and at this juncture, she
revolted, saying that he is cheating her for sexual acts and
threatened to complain to her brothers and book a case.  Even
thereafter, he committed rape on her and apprehending that
she would complain to Police, he took out a knife which he
carried with him and stabbed on her abdomen and neck.  When  
she died, he took out her silver anklets and he concealed the
knife in the nearby place.  On 9.11.2005 he pledged the silver
anklets for Rs.2,500/-, went to Devarakonda and resided there.
On 17.11.2006 he came to Sathyam Thanda, where he was    
taken into custody by Hayathnagar Police on 18.11.2006, who 
collected the fingerprint impressions of the appellant and
forwarded them to L.W.18  finger print expert.  In pursuance
of the confession of the appellant, offences under
Sections 376
and
379
were also added to the crime.  The appellant led the
Police to the place of offence, where they recovered the knife,
which was used in the commission of the offence.  Thereafter,
they proceeded to the pawn shop of P.W.6, recovered the silver
anklets which were pledged, recorded the statement of the
appellant, and sent him to judicial custody.  Based on the
charge sheet, the Court below framed the following charges.
FIRST CHARGE: That on 08.11.2005 you took the deceased    
Manemma, who is also a coolie and working under one Syed   
Chand Pasha (List Witness No.7) by inducing to keep her 
permanently and brought her to RTC Colony in to open Plot 142
and committed rape on her, and when she threatened to complain 
the matter, you again committed rape on her forcibly and stabbed
her on the neck and abdomen causing her death and that you 
thereby committed an offence punishable U/s302 of
Indian Penal
Code
and within my cognizance.
SECOND CHARGE: That on 08.11.2005, you took the deceased      
Manemma who is a coolie working under one Syed Chand Pasha     
(List Witness No.7) by inducing to keep her permanently and
brought her to RTC Colony to open Plot 142 and committed rape 
on her, and when she threatened to complain the matter, you
again committed rape on her forcibly and stabbed her on neck
and abdomen causing her death and that you thereby committed  
an offence punishable U/s.376 of
Indian Penal Code
and within
my cognizance.
THIRD CHARGE: That on 08.11.2005, you took the deceased    
Manemma who is a coolie working under one Syed Chand Pasha     
(List Witness No.7) by inducing to keep her permanently and
brought her to RTC Colony to open Plot 142 and committed rape 
on her, and when she threatened to complain the matter, you
again committed rape on her forcibly and stabbed her on neck
and abdomen causing her death, and you have also stolen her 
silver (leg) rings and thereby committed an offence punishable
U/s.379 of
Indian Penal Code
and within my cognizance.
6.      As the plea of the appellant was one of denial, he was
subjected to trial.  In support of its case, the prosecution has
examined P.Ws.1 to 14, got marked Exs.P.1 to 28 and  
produced M.Os.1 to 5.  No evidence was let in on behalf of the
defence.  On consideration of the oral and documentary
evidence, the lower Court has disposed of the appeal in the
manner as stated above.
7.      This is a case based on circumstantial evidence as no
eyewitness has witnessed the occurrence.  While the alleged
offence has taken place on 8.11.2005, the appellant was
apprehended on 18.11.2006 and the alleged recovery of silver
anklets was made after the arrest of the appellant.  As could be
seen from the case of the prosecution, the appellant with the
motive of sexually exploiting the deceased and steeling the
sliver anklets, caused the murder of the deceased.  The Court
below, however, disbelieved the case of the prosecution as
regards sexual exploitation/rape.
8.      In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the
prosecution has to establish all the links in the chain of
circumstances.  P.W.1 is the first informant, who had a shop-
cum-residence in the vicinity, where the body of the deceased
was found.  He gave the information to the Police, based on
the information he has received from another person.  He had
absolutely no personal knowledge about the facts of the case.
P.W.2 is the one of the brothers of the deceased.  He only
spoke about the deceased visiting his house at Hyderabad about
five days prior to her death and P.Ws.4 and 5 taking the
deceased with them during that time for cleaning the vessels in
function halls.  P.W.3 is the sister-in-law of the deceased.  Even
she does not have the knowledge about the manner in which 
the offence has taken place.  Her evidence is relevant only to
the extent of the alleged missing of the silver anklets of the
deceased.  The presence of this witness at the time of inquest
was spoken to in Ex.P.4 - inquest report.  It is evident
therefrom that during the preparation of the inquest report she
did not state the fact of the alleged missing of the silver anklets.
9.      P.W.4 is a co-worker with P.W.5 working in a function
hall at Golnaka by cleaning vessels.   She deposed that at the
relevant time, she along with P.W.5 attended the work of
cleaning of the vessels, that the appellant was working as a cook
under P.W.7 and that when she, P.W.5 and the deceased went   
for attending to the labour work, the appellant also came and
she noticed the appellant and the deceased talking to each
other.  She further deposed that for about three days thereafter
there was no work.  Two days thereafter, after she returned
from her work, the brothers of the deceased came to her and
informed that the deceased has not returned to their house and
two days later she came to know that the deceased was 
murdered in Hayatnagar area and the photograph of her
deadbody was published in the newspapers.  P.W.5, who is also 
one of the co-workers, spoke about the deceased attending to
the labour work along with her and others.  She has stated that
she has not observed specifically whether the appellant had any
conversation with the deceased when they were all conversing
with each other.  The evidence of all these witnesses does not
help the prosecution in any manner to establish the
involvement of the appellant in the commission of the alleged
offence.
10.     P.W.6 is a pawnbroker at Hayatnagar.  He has deposed  
that about five years back the appellant came to his shop and
pledged a pair of sliver anklets, that he might have lent a sum of
Rs.2,500/- and that he does not remember the exact amount. 
That about two months thereafter the CCS Police came and 
took way the said anklets.  He further deposed that he can
identify the said anklets if shown to him and accordingly he has
identified those anklets on their production, in the Court.  He
has also deposed that he has passed on a receipt to the
appellant evidencing the pledging of the silver anklets and his
receiving Rs.2,500/- and that he had obtained signatures of the
appellant apart from himself subscribing his signature on the
receipt and the Police have taken away the said receipt.
11.     In addition to the alleged recovery of M.O.1, the Police
allegedly recovered M.O.5  knife.  The prosecution mainly
based its case on the recovery of these two items and the Court
below was also guided by these recoveries in connecting the
appellant to the alleged offence.  As regards the alleged
recovery of M.O.1  silver anklets, no panchanama was
conducted in the presence of any witnesses.  The alleged receipt
spoken to by P.W.6 was not produced by the prosecution  
before the Court.  In the absence of the mediators report and
the failure of the prosecution to produce the receipt, no
credibility can be attached to the claim of the prosecution that
the silver anklets were recovered from the possession of P.W.6.
Significantly, test identification of the appellant as well as silver
anklets was not held for P.W.6.  For the first time, when the
anklets were produced before the Court, P.W.6 purportedly
identified them.  In our opinion, unless proper test
identification as prescribed under Rules 34 and 35 of the
Criminal Rules of Practice and Circular Orders 1990 was held,
no sanctity could be attached to the evidence of P.W.6.
Moreover, P.W.6 has deposed that his turnover per month is
Rs.3 to 4 lakhs, that he will deal with 50 to 60 persons per
month and that per annum he will deal with 600 persons.
P.W.6 has given his evidence five years after the alleged offence
has taken place and M.O.1 was allegedly pledged with him.
Thus, by his own evidence, between the date of the appellant
pledging the article and his giving evidence he must have dealt
with about 3000 persons.  Therefore, it is humanly not possible
for any person to identify the appellant with precision.  In such
circumstances, failure of the prosecution to conduct the test
identification parade is fatal to its case.   We are hence of the
opinion that no credibility whatsoever could be attached to the
evidence of P.W.6, who is obviously planted by the
prosecution.
12.     Coming to the alleged recovery of M.O.5 - knife, based
on the confessional statement of the appellant, it is stated in the
seizure report that M.O.5  knife was seized from a collapsed
room under asbestos sheets in Plot No.142 which is the scene 
of offence.  P.W.10, one of the mediators to the report, has
turned hostile and has not supported the case of the
prosecution.  The alleged seizure has taken place more than one
year after the commission of the alleged offence.  It has come
out from the record that the Police have visited the scene of
offence more than once and it is therefore highly improbable
that if the crime weapon was available at the scene of offence in
the asbestos room, the Police would not have noticed the same
during their visits in the course of investigation.  Further, the
confessional statement leading to the alleged recovery of
M.Os.1 and 5 have also not been marked.  From these facts, it
is reasonable to presume that the prosecution has planted
M.O.5 in order to falsely implicate the appellant.  If we eschew
M.O.1  silver anklets and M.O.5  knife from consideration,
the vital links in the chain of circumstances are totally missing
in this case.  Therefore, we have absolutely no doubt in our
mind that the prosecution has falsely implicated the appellant
and secured false conviction.  The Court below has misdirected
itself in accepting the case of the prosecution without there
being legal evidence.
13.     For the aforementioned reasons, the Criminal Appeal is
allowed.  The conviction and sentences recorded against the
appellant in the impugned judgment are set aside.
Consequently, the appellant shall be set at liberty forthwith, if
he is not required in any other case or crime, and the fine
amount, if any, paid by him shall be refunded to him.
14.     A perusal of the record shows that by order dt.05.12.2016
this Court has granted bail to the appellant as he has served
more than five years of the sentence, following the order of this
Court in Batchu Ranga Rao v. State of A.P.   The bail bonds
stand cancelled and the appellant shall surrender himself before
the Superintendent, Central Jail, Cherlapally, for completion of
legal formalities for his release from Jail.
__________________________    
C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
__________________________    
GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD, J        
22-01-2018