[Cites
11
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
K.Tejaswi Sai Venkatesh vs High Court Of Judicature At Hyderabad ... on 28 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 221
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
,
J. Uma Devi
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI RAMESH RANGANATHAN AND THE HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI                     

WRIT PETITION No.21008 of 2018   

28.06.2018 

K.Tejaswi Sai Venkatesh ..Petitioner    

High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad  For the State of Telangana and the State  Of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, represented
 By its Registrar General and others...Respondents

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri R.Gopala Krishna, Learned Counsel

Counsel for the respondents 1 & 2: Sri Swaroop Oorilla,  Learned
                                    Standing Counsel.
Counsel for the respondent No.3: Learned G.P. for Medical,
                                         Health & FW (AP)
<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?  CITATIONS: 

1 (2012) 7 Supreme Court Cases 389  
2 1996 (3) ALD 56 (FB)
3 1997 (2) ALD (Crl.) 910 (AP)
4 AIR 1957 AP 49 
5 AIR 1951 Nagpur 11 
6. AIR 1952 Patna 341 


THE HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN                
AND  
THE HONBLE MS. JUSTICE  J. UMA DEVI      


W.P.NO.21008 of 2018  

ORDER:
(Per Honble the Acting Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan)   

      This writ petition is filed questioning the office order dated
3.4.2018, directing listing of writ petitions, relating to
counseling/admissions into MBBS/BDS courses which are already   
filed and pending and which are likely to be filed during the
current academic year, before a Division Bench of this Court as
arbitrary, illegal, and contrary to Rule 14 of the Writ Proceedings
Rules of the High Court, and the judgment of the Supreme Court
in
Asha Vs. PT. B.D. Sharma University of Health Sciences
and others
.  A consequential direction is sought to set aside the
same in the interest of justice.
The Supreme Court, in Asha1, observed:-
..We are not oblivious of the fact that the Hon'ble
Judges of the High Court are working under great pressure and
with some limitations. However, we would still make a request
to the Hon'ble Chief Justices of the respective High Courts to
direct listing of all medical admission cases before one Bench
of the Court as far as possible and in accordance with the
Rules of that Court. It would further be highly appreciable if
the said Bench is requested to deal with such cases within a
definite period, particularly during the period from July to
October of a particular year. We express a pious hope that our
request would weigh with the Hon'ble Chief Justices of the
respective High Courts as it would greatly help in serving the
ends of justice as well as the national interest.. (emphasis
supplied).
By its order in Asha1, the Supreme Court requested the
Chief Justices of the respective High Courts to direct listing of all
medical admission cases, as far as possible, before one Bench of
the High Court, and in accordance with the Rules of that Court;
and that the said Bench be requested to deal with such cases
within a definite period, particularly during the period from July to
October of a particular year, as it would greatly help in serving the
ends of justice as well as national interest.
Since cases, relating to medical admissions, are required to
be heard by one bench, that too during the period from July to
October of each year, such matters were directed to be listed before
a Division Bench of this Court. The complaint in this writ petition
is that the Supreme Court, in Asha1, has opined that constitution
of Benches should be in accordance with the rules; Rule 14 (a) of
the Writ Proceedings Rules of the High Court requires these
matters only to be heard by a Single Judge; the office order dated
03.04.2018, whereby all such matters are directed to be listed
before a Division Bench, is therefore illegal; writ petitions, relating
to counselling/admissions into MBBS/BDS courses, should be  
listed only before a Single Judge of this Court, and not before a
Division Bench; the petitioners right of an intra-court appeal
would be lost, if the matter is directly heard by a Division Bench,
instead of a Single Judge; and the officer order, whereby all these
matters were directed to be listed before a Division Bench, should
be quashed.
Rule 14(a) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977, as it stood
prior to its amendment by Roc.No.1967/SO/2015, read thus:-
The following petitions shall be heard by a Bench of two
Judges,
(i)     Petitions for a writ in the nature of Habeas Corpus:
(ii)    Petitions relating to Elections under the
Representation
of the People Act
, 1951
(iii) Petitions relating to Income-tax, Gift-tax, Wealth-tax,
        Estate duty, Sales-tax and Excise Acts and other Allied
        Acts (State and Central Taxation Cases)
(iv) Petitions relating to matters coming within the purview
      of:-
A.P. Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Act,1982
.
Administrative Tribunals Act,1985
,
      A.P Lokayukta & Upa -
Lokayukta Act, 1983
and
The Consumer Protection Act, 1986
.
Rules 14 (b) required all other petitions to be posted before a
Single Judge.
The Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977 were amended by Roc. 
No.1967/SO/2015, and notified in Notification No. 30/SO/2015.
The said notification was published in the Telangana Gazette on
04.08.2015, and the A.P. Gazette on 10.10.2015. By the said
amendment, the words
Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014
were   
inserted, after the words the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
, in Rule
14 (a) (iv) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977.  By the said
amendment sub-clauses (v) and (vi) were also inserted after sub-
clause (iv) of Rule 14 (a) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977.  Sub-
clause (v) relates to matters in which the High Court is impleaded
as a party, and sub-clause (vi) relates to matters where statutory
provisions, sections or rules, regulations or the statute itself is/are
challenged as being ultra vires/unconstitutional.
In terms of the amendment made to the Writ Proceedings
Rules, 1977, in the year 2015, all cases where statutory provisions
and rules, including those relating to medical admissions, are
challenged as being ultra vires or as unconstitutional, are required
to be listed before a Division Bench.  As Rule 14 (b) only requires
all other petitions (other than those referred to in sub-clauses (i) to
(vi) of Rule 14 (a)) to be posted before a Single Judge, writ petitions,
where the vires of statutory provisions are under challenge, cannot
be so posted.
It is true that Rule 14 (a) of the Writ Proceedings Rules of the
High Court do not specifically require Writ Petitions, relating to
medical admissions, to be listed before a Division Bench. The fact
remains that, in the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Asha1, all matters relating to medical admissions are required to
be heard by one Bench. Writ Petitions, relating to medical
admissions and counseling, are filed on various grounds.  In some
case the validity of Statutory provisions or Rules, governing
admissions to medical colleges, are subjected to challenge.  In view
of Rule 14(a)(vi) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977, such cases
are required to be heard only by a Division Bench.  Directing Writ
Petitions where the vires of Statutory provisions and Rules,
relating to medical admissions and counseling are under
challenge, to be listed before a Division Bench, and all other cases,
relating to medical admissions/counseling, to be listed before a
Single Judge, would again fall foul of the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Asha1 whereby the Chief Justices of the High Courts were
requested to direct that all medical admission cases be listed
before one Bench of the High Court.
The Writ Proceedings Rules of the High Court cannot be read
out of context, since a narrow construction of Rule 14 (a)&(b) of the
Writ Proceedings Rules of the High Court would disable all
matters, relating to medical admissions, to be listed before one
Bench.  The right of the litigant to claim that a matter be heard
either by a Single Judge or a Division Bench came up for
consideration before a Full Bench of this Court in
A. Srinath and
others Vs. Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation 
and another
, and the Full Bench observed:-
In
State of Maharashtra v. Narayan
: AIR 1982 SC 
1198 a similar observation has been made in these words:
"The Chief Justice is the master of the roster. He has full power,
authority   and jurisdiction in the matter of allocation of business of the
High Court   which flows not only from the provisions contained in
subsection (3) of
Section 51
of the Act, but inheres in him in the very
nature of things"
To sum up :
(1)
(2)
(3) The Hon'ble the Chief Justice has the inherent power to allocate
the   judicial business of the High Court including who of the Judges
should sit   alone and who should constitute the Bench of two or more
Judges. No litigant   shall, upon such constitution of a Bench or allotment
of a case to a   particular Judge of the Court will have a right to question
the jurisdiction   of the Judges or the Judge hearing the case. No person
can claim as a matter   of right that this petition be heard by a single
Judge or a Division Bench or   a particular single Jude or a particular
Division Bench. No Judge or a Bench   of Judges will assume jurisdiction
unless the case is allotted to him or them   under the orders of the Hon'ble the
Chief Justice. (emphasis supplied) 

      Again in Coromandal Fertilizers Ltd. Vs. P. Venkatarami
Reddy and another   a Full Bench of this Court considered the
question whether hearing of a case by a Division Bench, which as
per the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977, ought to be posted and
heard by a Single Judge, would nullify the hearing.  After
examining Rule 14 (a) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977,  as it
then stood, the Full Bench observed:-
It is not in dispute that most of the cases are posted as per
the Rules. The grievance of the learned Counsel is that when
that is the situation why should there be any exception in
posting these cases before a Division Bench, when such a
posting is not permissible under the Rules, particularly when
the parties are deprived of their right of appeal under Clause
15 of the Letters Patent. This argument is based on the
misapprehension that the rules give a right to the litigants of
hearing of their cases by the High Court by particular number
of Judges. The Rules contemplate apportionment of work 
among the Judges, for hearing and determination of the
cases coming up before the High Court, by way of a single
Judge or Bench of two Judges or a Full Bench. The object of
the Rules appears to be that most of the cases can be
disposed of by single Judges and only some important
matters need to be heard by Division Benches. The language 
of the Rules does not indicate that if the matter is not posted
as per rules, the hearing would be vitiated. The litigant
cannot be heard to say that his case should be heard by a
single Judge than by two Judges, since hearing by two Judges
is not only less expensive but would give him better comfort.
Rule 1 of the Appellate Side Rules only say that the matters may
be heard and determined by one Judge'. It does not follow from
these words that these matters should in no case be heard by a
Division Bench. In the same Rule it is also provided that a single
Judge, before whom the matter is posted for hearing, may refer it
for hearing and determination by a Bench of two Judges. Rule
14(a) of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977, also contemplates
hearing of writ petitions relating to Habeas Corpus, Election
matters, Tax matters and other certain special enactments by a
Bench of two Judges. As per Rule 14(b) "All other petitions shall
be posted before a single Judge who may, if he thinks fit, refer
any of them to a Bench of two Judges". The language is similar to
what we find in Rule 1 of the Appellate Side Rules. It is apparent
from the language of the Rule, that a matter which is to be
heard by a single Judge can also be heard by a Division
Bench.
A Division Bench does not appear to be incompetent 
to hear such matters. The above rules, having been framed
for distribution of work between the Judges and being rules
of procedure, are only administrative in nature and
unenforceable. They do not create any right in the litigant to
claim that his case should be heard by a particular number of
Judges. (emphasis supplied) 

      The Full Bench, in Coromandal Fertilizers Ltd3, referred
with approval to the earlier Full Bench judgment in
K.
Venkateswarulu and others Vs. S. Satyanarayana and  
others
wherein it was held:-
.The Chief Justice of the High Court is the
authority to determine which Judge is to sit alone and which
Judges are to constitute the several division Courts. The
Appellate Side Rules having been made by the High Court 
under statutory authority
referred to above
, if they have a
meaning and effect inconsistent with the Acts authorising
them or if they are in excess of the powers conferred
thereunder or if they contravene the provisions of other
enactments they are pro tanto ultra vires.
Otherwise they have the force of law and are binding on all
the Judges of the Court, as held by a Full Bench of the Madras
High Court in 'District Magistrate of Trivandrum v. M.
Mappillai (ILR (1939) Mad. 708 = AIR 1939 Mad. 120)..
(emphasis supplied)

      The law declared by the Full Bench, in A.Srinath2 and
Coromandal Fertilizers Ltd3, is that the Chief Justice is the
master of the roster; he has full power, authority and jurisdiction
in the matter of allocation of business of the High Court, which
inheres in him in the very nature of things; he has the power to
allocate judicial business of the High Court, including which of the
Judges should sit alone, and who should constitute the Bench of
two or more Judges; no litigant shall, upon such constitution of a
Bench or allotment of a case to a particular Judge of the Court,
have a right to question the jurisdiction of the Judges or the Judge
hearing the case; no person can claim, as a matter of right, that
his petition be heard by a Single Judge or a Division Bench or a
particular single Judge or a particular Division Bench; the Chief
Justice enjoys an inherent and unrestricted administrative power
in the matter of constitution of Benches in the interest of
administration of justice; and a litigant has no right to be heard by
any particular number of Judges.  Consequently no party can
claim that he has a right to be heard by a particular number of
Judges.  The right of appeal, given by the Statute, remains
unaffected unless the party aggrieved can say that he has a vested
right to be heard by a particular number of Judges, which he does
not.
(Zikar Vs. The Government of State of Madhya Pradesh ;
Mahendra Raut and others Vs. Darsan Raut and others
).
As noted hereinabove, listing of all matters relating to
medical admissions before a Division Bench is only to ensure
compliance with the judgment of the Supreme Court in Asha1.  If
medical admission matters, where a statutory provision or Rule is
not under challenge, were to be listed before a single Judge,  and
writ petitions relating to medical admissions, where the vires of
statutory provisions or rules are under challenge, are to be heard
by a Division Bench, that would fall foul of the directions of the
Supreme Court, in Asha1, that all medical admissions should be
heard by one Bench.  It is in such circumstances that it was
considered appropriate that all medical admission cases should be
listed only before a Division Bench.
In the light of the law declared by the Full Bench of this
Court, in the judgments referred to hereinabove, the petitioner
cannot claim, as a matter of right, that his case should be heard
only by a Single Judge, and not by a Division Bench.
The writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Miscellaneous applications, if any pending, shall stand closed. No
costs.
______________________________     
RAMESH  RANGANATHAN, ACJ        
____________  
J. UMA DEVI, J 
Dt.28.6.2018