[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S.Sri Seetharamanjaneya ... vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By The ... on 18 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 815 (HYD.)
Author:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
Bench:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO            

WRIT PETITION No.35879 of 2017   

18-04-2018 

M/s.Sri Seetharamanjaneya Constructions,  Rep. by its Managing Partner P.Satyanarayana Reddy   Petitioner.       

The State of Andhra Pradesh,    Rep.  by the Principal Secretary,  R & B Department,, Secretariat, Velagapudi, Amaravathi, G

Counsel for the petitioners   :       Mr.G. Rama Gopal

Counsel for the respondents :          Government Pleader for Roads and Buildings

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

1. Order dt. 21.12.1999 in Writ Petition No.25424 of 1999
2. Order dt.11.2.2002 in W.P.No.11704 of 2001
3. 1994 (6) SCC 651 
4. Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd .v Wednesbury Corporation (1948) 1 KB 223 (CA)  
5. 2000(2) SCC 617 
6. 2004(4) SCC 19 
7. 2005(4) SCC 435 
8. 2005(1) SCC 679 
9. 2012(8) SCC 216 
10. (2016) 12 SCC 780 
11. (2005) 6 SCC 138 
12. (2015) 2 SCC 796 
13. (2017)  4 SCC 269 


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO            
WRIT PETITION No.35879 of 2017   

ORDER:
The petitioner, in this case, is engaged in civil contract works
and is registered with the departments of the State of Andhra Pradesh
for execution of various civil works. It undertakes execution of works
pertaining to laying of roads, their development and widening.
2.       It is not in dispute that, for laying roads, Bituminous Mixes
which are created in Hot Mix Plants are used.
3.       A Circular Memo No.TA1/514/94-27 dt.12.04.1994 was issued  
by the Chief Engineer, Panchayat Raj (R&MI) Department, 
Hyderabad, stipulating a condition in the tender notice itself that there
ought to be a tie up arrangement between a bidder for a contract for
laying road and a Hot Mix Plant owner, located within a distance of
one hour travel from the farthest point of the work spot.  This is
allegedly because, when Bituminous Mix is used for laying the road,
proper temperature ought to be maintained while transporting it from
the Hot Mix Plant to the work spot.
4.      A Circular Memo No.1/E-in-C(R)Peshi/98 dt.20.03.1998 was  
issued by the Engineer-in-Chief (R&B), State of Andhra Pradesh,
Hyderabad, stating that proper temperatures are not being maintained
for the Bituminous Mixes transported from Hot Mix Plants by the
time they reach the work site, that the maximum distance of a plant
from the work site should be 50 K.Ms. and that conditions must be
included in the tender schedules mandating a bidder (1) to submit
proof of having B.T. Hot Mix Plant with him erected and in working
condition within a distance of 50 K.Ms. from the work site while
applying for the tender schedules; and (2) that the Hot Mix Plant
should have a Quality Control Lab at its premises to conduct the
various quality control tests which should be accessible to the
Department Officers.
5.      Later, Circular Memo No.9999/TA3/AEE.2/99 dt.17.08.1999  
was issued by the Engineer-in-Chief (R&B) Roads, State of Andhra
Pradesh.  In this Memo, he noted that, the earlier instructions require
that a bidder should  submit proof of having Bituminous Hot Mix
Plant with him erected and in a working condition within a distance of
50 K.Ms. from the worksite while applying for the tender schedules;
there were some comments that because of restriction of the distance
to 50 K.Ms. monopolistic tendencies had developed; and, therefore,
the earlier instructions issued restricting the distance to 50 K.Ms. from
70 K.Ms. are cancelled and 70 K.Ms. distance would be the optimum  
distance.
6.      The said Circular Memo No.9999/TA3/AEE.2/99 dt.17.08.1999   
issued by the Engineer-in-Chief, (R&B) Department, State of Andhra
Pradesh, was challenged in Redya Naik V. The Engineer in Chief .
The said Writ Petition was dismissed on 21.12.1999 observing that the
decision to increase the distance from 50 K.Ms. to 70 K.Ms. wherein
the Bituminous Hot Mix Plant should be located is an administrative
decision keeping in view the technical aspects and the Court cannot sit
in judicial review over such matters. The Court rejected the contention
that if the said Circular is followed, it would lead to poor quality of
works resulting in damage of Bituminous roads resulting in wastage
of public money.
7.      Later in the year 2001, both the Circular Memos Memo No.1/ 
E-in-C(R)Peshi/98 dt.20.03.1998 and Circular Memo No.9999/ 
TA3/AEE.2/99 17.08.1999 issued by the Engineer-in-Chief, Roads 
and Buildings Department, State of Andhra Pradesh were challenged 
in
N. Ramachandra Reddy v. Govt. of A.P and others
.
A learned
Single Judge of this Court dismissed the same on 11.02.2002,
following the order in Redya Naik (1 supra).
8.      While so, the State Government issued G.O.Rt. No.46, 
Transport, Roads and Buildings (R.I) Department dt.17.01.2005,
directing changes in the bid document to the effect that the clause
providing for ownership/lease of Hot Mix Plants should be deleted in
the tender condition and a clause permitting the contractor to procure
the Hot Mix materials to the work site, duly maintaining the required
laying temperature, as per the specifications be included.
9.      However, the Builders Association of India gave a
representation to the Department of Roads and Buildings requesting
the Government to include the condition of owning a Hot Mix Plant
within 70 K.Ms. distance of the site of work, and to make it
mandatory in tender schedules.
10.     The State Government, then constituted a Committee and the 
Committee opined that the condition of owning the Hot Mix Plant
within 70 K.Ms. distance from the site of the work should be made
compulsory for all road works involving Bituminous items of work,
irrespective of the cost of the work, provided the completion period
stipulated is up to one year, and the said condition would mitigate the
delay on account of fresh procurement of Hot Mix Plant and help in
quality insistence by the Officers supervising the execution of work.
11.      Thereupon, G.O.Rt. No.179, Transport, Roads and Buildings 
(R-I) Department, dt.06.02.2014, was issued by the State Government
imposing a condition of owning Hot Mix Plant within 70 K.Ms.
distance in contracts involving up to Rs.5.00 Crores Bituminous items
of work and not to impose the said condition for works costing more
than Rs. 5.00 Crores.
12.     There was a rethink on the issue again by the State Government
resulting in the issuance of G.O.Rt. No.180, Transport, Roads and
Buildings, (R.I) Department, dated 19.06.2017 and in that G.O.,
G.O.Rt. No.179, dated 06.02.2014 was superseded and the following 
conditions were imposed for all R&B works involving Dense
Bituminous Mixes like DBM, BC as the qualification criteria:
i) The usage of Hot Mix plant of Batch Type of 100/120 TPH
Capacity shall be made mandatory for all the Works wherever the
works involve the provisions of Dense Bituminous Mixes such as
DBM and BC, with immediate effect.
ii) The Hot Mix plant shall be located within a distance of 100 Km
from the Work site, in order to have control over the temperature
of the Bituminous Mixes. The Contractor shall procure the Hot
Mix material to the work site duly maintaining and ensuring the
required laying temperature, as per the specifications.
iii) For all the works, irrespective of the cost, the bidders may be
permitted to either own or lease the said Batch type Hot Mix Plant
of 100/120 TPH Capacity located within a distance of 100 Km
from site of Work and produce the necessary Documents at the 
time of submission of bid, if the Work involves the component of
DBM/BC. ( emphasis supplied)  

THE CONTENTION OF  WRIT PETITIONER
13.     The petitioner questions clause (iii) in Para 3 of G.O.Rt.No.180,
Transport, Roads and Buildings (R.I), Department, dt.19.06.2017 to
the extent the said clause required prospective bidders to produce
necessary documents at the time of submission of the bid for a work
involving components of DBM/BC that they own or have leased a Hot 
Mix Plant of batch type of 100/120 TPH capacity located within a
distance of 100 K.Ms. from the site of the work.
14.     Petitioner contends that such a condition is arbitrary and
unreasonable and violative of Art 14 and
Art.19(1) (g)
of the
Constitution of India inasmuch as every prospective bidder who
wanted to bid for the R&B work would have to erect a Hot Mix Plant
of his own or obtain a lease deed from any Hot Mix Plant owner
within 100 K.Ms. radius by spending huge amount and then submit 
his bid for the work, without knowing whether or not he  would be
awarded a particular R&B work; and it would be unreasonable to
expect him to first erect a Hot Mix Plant, or to obtain a lease from the
owner of a Hot Mix Plant within 100 K.Ms. radius, incurring large
amount of expenditure, before the submission of the bid.
15.     According to learned counsel for the petitioner, to erect a Hot
Mix Plant, at least Rs.3.00 to 4.00 crores of expenditure has to be
incurred and numerous permissions from various authorities are
required to be obtained, and the State can achieve the object for which
the above condition was imposed, by incorporating specific clauses in
the agreement to be executed by the Department with the successful 
bidder, after he is declared as a successful bidder, but cannot impose
it as a pre-qualification for submitting the tender.
16.     He contends that if this condition is implemented, it would
restrict the competition and virtually facilitate only those contractors
who already own a Hot Mix Plant within a distance of 100 K.Ms.
from the work site under tender and create a cartel of such
individuals, thus defeating public interest. He contends that the said
condition would prevent other persons who do not own a Hot Mix
Plants from getting any road work contracts, though they have rich
experience in laying roads.
17.     He contends that possessing the  expertise to establish, maintain
and manufacture Bituminous mixes, which are used in road laying, is
one thing  and having expertise in road laying is another thing.
According to him, the situation is akin to one where a person who
manufactures cement at a particular location or his nominee is
directed by the State to alone do building construction work within
100 km from place of its manufacture, though expertise for
manufacture of cement is different from expertise in carrying out
building construction work.
18.     He contends that the condition is thus un-reasonable,
discriminatory and has no reasonable nexus with the object sought to
be achieved and was incorporated for extraneous reasons to facilitate
monopoly by contractors who had already erected their Hot Mix
Plants in the territorial area of State of Andhra Pradesh.
19.     He therefore seeks a declaration that clause (iii) in Para 3 of
G.O.Rt. No.180 dt.19.06.2017, to the extent it required production at
the time of submission of the bid of proof of ownership or lease of a
batch type Hot Mix Plant of 100/120 TPH capacity located within a
distance of 100 K.Ms. from the site of the work, be struck down as
arbitrary and violative of
Articles 14
and
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution
of India.
THE STAND OF THE RESPONDENTS 2 AND 3
20.     In the counter-affidavit filed by Superintending Engineer (R &
B) Circle, Eluru, West Godavari District on behalf of himself and the
Engineer-in-Chief (R & B), State of Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada,
Krishna district (respondent No.s 2 and 3 in Writ Petition No.35879 of
2017),  the respondents refute these contentions.
21.     They contend that imposition of the condition for production of
proof of owning or leasing of Hot Mix Plant within 100 K.Ms.
distance from the work site at the time of submission of bid is pursuant
to the advice of the Union of India as well as a Technical Committee
constituted by it.
22.     According to them, the Government of India, Ministry of Road
and Transport & Highways, New Delhi in its Letter No.RW-
24011/02/2014-Mech, dated 11.12.2015 has circulated instructions to
all the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of all States/Uts Public Works
Department dealing with National Highways, other Centrally
Sponsored Schemes and State Schemes and to all the Engineers-in-   
Chief and the Chief Engineers of Public Works Departments of States
with regard to usage of Hot Mix Plant of Bituminous construction
works on National Highways, wherein it is categorically directed that
Batch type Hot Mix Plant should be used fro works involving
bituminous design mixes which require close control over the
proportioning of materials by weight, and where recycling of
Bituminous pavement is not included in the scope of work, however
the use of Batch type Hot Mix Plant is not mandatory for the
following works:-
i)      Works in hilly areas of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttrakhand, West Bengal and the North 
Eastern States except Assam.
ii)     Works in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) Affected 
Areas.
iii)    Works which are in nature of maintenance like
Periodic Renewal (where the sanctioned cost does not
exceed Rupees Twenty Five Crores), Special Repair 
(where the sanctioned cost does not exceed Rupees  
Twenty Five Crores), Flood Damage Repair and 
Ordinary Repair.
In the said instructions, it is categorically stated that Hot Mix
Plant, whether Batch type or continuous type, should have necessary
features/components/devices, should be properly calibrated to enable
control or mix quality within specified tolerance limits and should be
located within the appropriate lead.
23.     They contend that if the contractors like the petitioner are
permitted to participate in tenders without having or obtaining a lease
of Hot Mix Plant within 100 K.Ms. radius and are awarded contracts,
they would take 4 to 6 months time for establishing a Hot Mix Plant
since they would need to acquire the land and take clearance from
Pollution Control Board and other statutory bodies, which would
delay the execution of the project, that in the meantime there would be
change of seasons making it difficult/impracticable to execute the
works. They contend that in view of this, the State decided to impose
such a precondition vide G.O.Rt. No.180, dated 19.06.2017.  They
contend that if this condition is deleted, there is a possibility of
contractors backing out of the tender process by not erecting plants
after they become successful tenderers resulting in tenders to be
re-invited again, increase in the estimates, and leading to loss of
Government revenue. It is denied that this condition  is arbitrary and
was made to favour few contractors.
24.      Reliance is placed on the decisions in Redya Naik (1 supra)
and
N.Ramchandra Reddy
(2 supra
)
referred to above
and it is
contended that in those cases this Court had upheld that at time of
submission of bids itself proof can be directed to be produced of
owning or having lease of hot mix palnts, and it is contended that
inclusion of the said condition is based on technical reasons and this
Court ought not to interfere with the same.
EVENTS PENDING W.P.No.35879 OF 2017
25.     It is pertinent to note that in W.P.M.P. No.44586 of 2017 in
W.P. No.35879 of 2017, initially, this Court granted suspension of the
said condition, but the said order was set-aside on the ground that at
the admission stage, before filing of counter-affidavit, it was passed.
The Bench remanded the matter back to the Single Judge stating that
the award of the contract works would be subject to further orders in
this Writ Petition. It also stated that observations made in the said
order only reflect the prima-facie opinion of the Division Bench and
the Writ Petition should be heard on merits, without being influenced
by the observations made therein.
THE CONSIDERATION BY THE COURT
26.     Learned counsel for the parties reiterated their respective
contentions, post remand.
27.       I have noted the contentions of both sides.
28.      It is important to note firstly that it is not the contention of the
petitioner that the respondents are acting arbitrarily or unreasonably in
insisting for usage of bituminous items of work/mixes prepared by
using hot-mix plants. Secondly, it is also not his contention either that
the insistence of the respondents that such hot mix plants should be
located within a distance of 100 kms from the work site, is arbitrary or
unreasonable.
29.     His contention is the insistence by the respondents that at the
time of submission of bid by a contractor, proof of ownership or lease
of a hot mix plant should be filed where the work involves use of
DBM/BC (bituminous items), is arbitrary and unreasonable.  His
contention is that erection of hot mix plant is itself costing Rs.3 crores
or more (which is admitted by the respondents in para-22 of their
counter) and insistence by respondents that a contractor, at the time of
submission of the bid , should produce evidence that the he owns or
has a lease of such a hot mix plant is unreasonable, since no prudent
businessman, without knowing whether or not he would be the 
successful bidder, would incur such expenditure before filing his
tender, more particularly, when the tender works value itself is far
less.  For the sake of illustration, he points out that in Ex.P-9
e-procurement tender I.D.No.147926, Ex.P-10 e-procurement tender 
I.D.No.147960 and Ex.P-11 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147970 in 
W.P.No.35879 of 2017, the value of the works is Rs.97.33 lakhs,
Rs.1.02 crores and Rs.98.39 lakhs respectively for three different
stretches of roads in West Godavari District, and it would be
unreasonable to expect any contractor, who intends to bid only for one
or two of them, to erect a hot mix plant incurring expenditure of Rs.3
crores or more.  It is his further contention that obtaining lease deeds
from persons having hot mix plants also entails considerable
expenditure and owners of hot mix plants might set up their own
nominees to bid in the contracts, creating a cartel, and decline to
support bids of genuine contractors who have considerable experience
in the road laying works.
30.      He also contends that the technology of laying roads is
different from the technology of manufacturing bituminous mixes
through hot mix plants and the insistence of proof of ownership or
lease at the time of submission of bids, would create a monopoly,
enabling hot mix plant owners to dictate who should be the tenderer
for every road laying contract, thereby compromising on the quality of
the road laying work, since having hot bituminous mix is not the sole
important thing for laying a quality road.
31.     I have considered the decisions in Redya Naik  (1 supra) and
N. Ramachandra Reddy
(2 supra), cited by the learned Government 
Pleader. In my opinion, they have no relevance in this case since this
Court in those cases only considered the question the validity of action
of respondents in restricting, in the tender conditions, the distance to
50 kms from 70 kms from the work site for having a hot mix plant, is
valid or not. In the instant case the distance requirement is not at all an
issue.  This is clear from a close reading of both the decisions.
32.
In Writ Appeal No.1792 of 2017 arising out of the interim order
in W.P.No.35879 of 2017, though the Division Bench in page-5 took
a view that the judgments in Redya Naik (1 supra) and
N. Narasimha Reddy
(2 supra) appear to support the Government  
Pleaders contention that the State can insist at the time of submission
of the bid, ownership or lease of a hot mix plant, with due respect to
the Division Bench, the said issue did not arise for consideration in
those cases.
33.     However, since the Division Bench in the last paragraph of its
order therein stated it is also made clear that the observations in this
order reflect only our prima facie opinion; and the Writ Petition shall
be heard on merits without being influenced by the observations made
therein, I shall decide the matter independently and consider the
submissions of the parties on that issue.
34.     I shall now consider the decisions of the apex Court dealing
with judicial review of tender conditions.
35.
In
Tata Cellular Vs. Union of India
, it was held that judicial
review in matters of award of tenders is limited and this Court does
not sit as a Court of Appeal, but merely reviews the manner in which
the decision was made; that the terms of the invitation to tender
cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is
in the realm of contract; that the Government must have freedom of
contract; but however, the decision must not only be tested by the
application of Wednesbury  principle of reasonableness, but must be
free from arbitrariness, not affected by bias, or actuated by malafides.
36.
In
Air India Limited v. Cochin International Airport Ltd.
,
the Supreme Court held that award of a contract by a State is
essentially a commercial transaction, and in arriving at a commercial
decision, considerations which are paramount are commercial 
considerations;  that it can choose its own method to arrive at a
decision and can fix its own terms of invitation to tender and that is
not open to judicial scrutiny;  and though its decision is not amenable
to judicial review, the Court can examine the decision making process
and interfere if it is found vitiated by malafides, unreasonableness and
arbitrariness.
37.
In
Directorate of Education v. Educomp Datamatics Ltd.
,
the above principles were reiterated and it was held that the Courts
would not interfere with the terms of the tender notice unless they are
shown to be either arbitrary or discriminatory or actuated by malice.
38.
In
Global Energy Ltd., V. Adani Exports Ltd.
,
Association
of Registration Plates v. Union of India and others
and
Michigan
Rubber(India) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka
also these principles was
reiterated.
39.     Thus, the legal position is clear that if there is arbitrariness or
discrimination or malice, judicial review is permissible even of tender
conditions.  In fact, the Division Bench in its order dt.29-11-2017 in
W.A.No.1792 of 2017 at page-4 has also taken the same view.
40.     In State of Orissa and others Vs. Utkal Pharmaceuticals
Manufacturers Association and another , a three Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court considered the question as to whether the decision
of the High Court of Orissa in allowing a Writ Petition striking down
as unconstitutional a tender condition in a tender notice, is correct or
not.  Clause 2.1 of the tender notice in question in that case stipulated
that principal manufacturing units with an annual turnover of Rs.10
crores for the last three financial years alone shall be eligible for
participating in the tender process for supply of drugs to the State of
Orissa.  It was contended by the Writ petitioner therein that the said
condition disqualifies smaller units from empanelment for supply of
drugs and was arbitrary, discriminatory and contrary to the Industrial
Policy Resolution, 2007 as well as Orissa Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprise Development Policy, 2009.  This contention was accepted
by the High Court of Orissa and it struck down clause 2.1.  Before the
Supreme Court, it was urged by the State Government that on the
basis of past experience, the said clause was introduced, that it was a
policy decision and there was no arbitrariness in imposing the said
condition for eligibility.  The Writ petitioner refuted the same and
contended that no material was placed by the State before the High
Court to suggest that Small Scale Industrial Units had defaulted in
making the supplies of drugs as and when required to do so, to justify
their exclusion from empanelment on that ground.  It was contended
by the Writ petitioner that the inference that Small Scale Units, just
because of their size, will fail to perform their contractual obligations
with the State is not correct; and that the material placed by it
indicates that defaults committed by Medium and Large scale units in
the matter of supply of drugs were equal in number, if not more, when
compared with the defaults committed by Small Scale Industrial
Units.  It was also contended that reservation of as many as 269 drugs
in the Medium and Large Scale Sector was much too high a number to  
be fair and reasonable vis--vis Small Scale Units who were reduced
to supplying a mere 20 drugs, threatening their very survival.  The
Supreme Court remanded the matter to the High Court to examine this 
issue as to whether there is any empirical data in support of the State
Governments plea that the condition excluding smaller Units was
introduced on the basis of some study or not.  The Court observed that
the High Court should also examine, whether the reservation of 269
drugs for the larger sector and reduction of number of drugs to 20 in
the case of Small Scale sector, constitutes infringement of any right of
the Small Scale Units.
41.     In para-15 of the counter-affidavit of the respondents in the
present case, a plea is raised that during last 9 years, it observed that
this process of taking lease and buying the equipment has led to a lot
of delay in completing the works and to some extent contractual
obligations on the part of the Department as well as Contractors.
No empirical data in support of the said pleading had been placed on
record by the respondents.
42.     The State cannot therefore say that a Contractor, who did not
produce proof of ownership or having lease at the time of submission
of bid, would invariably fail in executing the contract or delay the
work. There is no such presumption in law. A successful contractor in
the tendering process can always obtain a lease of a hot mix plant,
after he secures the contract, and complete the work; and since he is
the only one who can execute the tendered work, the hot mix plant
owners would have no choice, but to do business with him for their
own survival. So the State can achieve the object for which the above
condition was imposed, by incorporating specific clauses in the
agreement to be executed by the Department with the successful 
bidder, after he is declared as a successful bidder, but cannot impose
it as a pre-qualification for submitting the tender.
43.      I therefore reject the plea of the State that contractors like the
petitioner, if permitted to participate in tenders without having or
obtaining a lease of Hot Mix Plant within 100 K.Ms. radius and
awarded contracts, would invariably take 4 to 6 months time for
establishing a Hot Mix Plant since they would need to acquire the land
and take clearance from Pollution Control Board and other statutory
bodies, which would delay the execution of the project; and that in the
meantime there would be change of seasons making it  
difficult/impracticable to execute the works. Not a single instance of
the petitioner or other person having done so, is placed before this
court.
44.     The State cannot also state that as per advise of Union of India
and that of the Technical Committee it has introduced this condition,
without producing any empirical data justifying the imposition of the
condition.
45.      In my opinion, the plea of Technical Advice raised by the
State, is a red herring and cannot be countenanced,  since the time at
which the proof of ownership of or linkage with a hot mix plant is to
be insisted, cannot be a technical issue, though having such linkage
might be a technical issue.
46.     The Government Pleader for Roads and Buildings also does not 
deny that the technology for preparing bituminous mixes is different
from the technology for laying roads. So, a person having the
expertise to make bituminous mixes may not always have the  
technical expertise to lay roads. Both are different activities and
experience in the former activity does not guarantee that he will be
good at the latter work too.
47.     The stand of the respondents is akin to saying that a
manufacturer of cement alone should be given building construction
works within 100 kms from the place of the manufacture of cement or
persons to whom he is willing to supply cement. Since expertise to
manufacture cement is different from expertise to build
homes/commercial buildings, such a condition would be clearly
arbitrary and unreasonable.
48.     By imposing a condition that at the time of submission of bid,
the contractor should either own or have a lease of a hot mix plant, the
State is practically allowing hot mix plant owners to dictate who shall
participate in the bidding process. Naturally such hot mix plant
owners or their nominees, irrespective of their experience in road
laying works, would get all these contracts. This cartelisation is a
direct consequence of imposition of such a condition in the tenders
and is definitely not in public interest, since the avowed object of
getting the best experienced person to execute the road laying works
at the most competitive price so that quality roads are laid, is defeated.
49.     I also find much force in the contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioner that the corridor/length of the State of Andhra
Pradesh from Srikakulam to Chittoor being about 1000 kms, 
contractors who form syndicates can erect a mere 8 hot mix plants
through out the corridor of the State and manage all the bids for R &
B works either as an owner or as a lease holder, excluding
experienced contractors who dont own any hot mix plant.
50.      In my opinion, the imposition of the condition is solely for the
benefit of wealthy hot mix plant owners and is tailor-made for their
benefit only. Since it restricts the participation in the bid process, the
bidders will quote high amounts to the detriment of the State
exchequer. Thus from the commercial point of view also, imposition
of such condition is  not in interest of the State.
51.      So the action of the State in imposing this condition is clearly
arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
52.     Also, the erection of hot mix plant is itself costing Rs.3 crores
or more (which is admitted by the respondents in para-22 of their
counter). So insisting that a contractor own it at the time of
submission of the bid is unreasonable since no prudent businessman,
without knowing whether or not he would be the successful bidder,
would incur such expenditure before filing his tender, more
particularly, when the tender works value itself is far less.  In this very
case, it may be noted that in Ex.P-9 e-procurement tender
I.D.No.147926, Ex.P-10 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147960 and  
Ex.P-11 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147970 in W.P.No.35879 of  
2017, the value of the works is Rs.97.33 lakhs, Rs.1.02 crores and
Rs.98.39 lakhs each for three different stretches of roads in West
Godavari District. It would be unreasonable to expect any contractor
who intends to bid only for one or two of such works to erect a hot
mix plant incurring expenditure of Rs.3 crores or more.  Therefore,
imposition of the said condition by the State is unreasonable and in
that sense also violates
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
53.     It also violates the fundamental rights guaranteed to the
petitioner and others like him of carrying on business activity of road
laying works guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of
India and it cannot be said to be a reasonable restriction under clause
(6) of the said Article.
54.     The adoption of the said condition cannot also be defended by
the State on the basis that it is a policy decision since even the policy
decision has to be in conformity with Wednesbury reasonableness 
and free from arbitrariness (
Master Marine Services (P) Ltd. Vs.
Mecalfe & Hodgkinson (P) Ltd
, Census Commissioner Vs. R.   
Krishna Murthy  and
Reliance Telecom Limited and another Vs. 
Union of India and another
).
55.     So I hold that imposition of the condition by the respondents
through G.O.Rt.No.180 Transport, Roads and Buildings (R1) 
Department dt.19.06.2017, of producing proof of ownership or lease
of a hot mix plant at time submission of bid, is arbitrary, unreasonable
and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
56.     However since the contracts pursuant to Ex.P-9 e-procurement 
tender I.D.No.147926, Ex.P-10 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147960 
and Ex.P-11 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147970 by the respondents, 
are to be executed within 6 months from 31.10.2017, and since the
successful bidders under the said tender notices might have already
completed most of the work, in my opinion, it would not be proper to
set aside the award of contracts pursuant to the said tender notices, at
this point of time.
57.     In the result,
(i)  the Writ Petition is partly allowed;
(ii) the condition that contractors who intend to bid for R & B works
involving dense bituminous mixes/items should produce evidence at
the time of submission of the bid, that they either own or have lease of
batch type hot mix plant of 100/120 T.P.H. capacity located within a
distance of 100 kms from the site of work, contained in sub-clause
(iii) of clause-3 in G.O.Rt.No.180, Transport, Roads and Buildings
(R1) Department dt.19-06-2017, is declared as illegal and arbitrary
and violative of
Article 14
and
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India;
(iii) sub-clause (iii) of Clause-3 of the said G.O.Rt. shall read:
(iii) for all the works, irrespective of the cost, the bidders
may be permitted to the either own or lease the said Batch
type Hot Mix plant of 100/120 TPH capacity located within
a distance of 100 Km from site of work, if the work involves
the component of DBM/BC   
and to the above extent it shall be valid;
(iv) the relief sought by petitioner to set aside awards of contracts
pursuant to Ex.P-9 e-procurement tender I.D.No.147926, Ex.P-10 e-
procurement tender I.D.No.147960 and Ex.P-11 e-procurement tender  
I.D.No.147970 is rejected; and
(v)  the 1st respondent shall also pay costs of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five
Thousand only) to the petitioner.
58.      As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, shall
stand closed.
___________________________     
M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO, J       
Date: 18.04.2018