[Cites
42
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. C.Hindumathi vs The State Of A.P. Represented By Its ... on 11 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 217
Author:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
HONBLE DR. JUSTICE B. SIVA SANKARA RAO         

CRIMINAL PETITION Nos.12683 of 2017    

11-09-2018 

Smt. C.HindumathiPetitioner    

The State of A.P. represented by its Public Prosecutor and 10 others .Respondents  

#Smt. C.HindumathiPetitioner    

$The State of A.P. represented by its Public Prosecutor and 2 others .Respondents  

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri Kasa Jaganmohan Reddy
                
Counsel for the respondents:Special Assistant Public   Prosecutor Sri T. Pradyumna Kumar Reddy 

? Cases referred
1.AIR 1978 SC 961  
2.1992 4 SCC 272  
3.2008 13 SCC 584  
4.2018 (2) ALT (Crl.) 273 SC
5.2012 12 SCC 180  
6.2016 (1) ALT (Crl.) 210 SC
7.2017 (2) ALT (Crl.) 133
8.1995 1 SCC 349  
9.2002 3 SCC 598  
10.AIR 2001 SC 1444  
11.(2004) 7 SCC 525 
12.2010 14 SCC 496  
13.2017 2 SCC 178  
14.2012 (1) ALT (Crl.) 214 (SC)
15.2018 (3)SCC 22=(2) Scale 285  
16.AIR 2005 SC 3490=2005 8 SCC 143    
17.2004 7 SCC 528=2005(2) SCC 42    
18.AIR 2005 SC 3490  
19.(2003 SCC 409) 
20.2008(13) SCC 584  
21.1978(1) SCC 118  
22.(1995)1 SCC 349  
23.2014 (10) SCC 754) 
24.JT 2014 (14) SC 363 
25.AIR 2001 SC 2023: 2001 Cr LJ 2566: 2001 AIR SCW 1935    
26.AIR 1980 SC 785  
27.1978 1 SCC 118  
28.(2000) 2 SCC 391 
29.AIR 2005 SC 4462  
30.(2008) 5 SCC 66 
31.AIR 2006 SC 3248  
32.(AIR 2011 SC 312=2011(1) SC 694   
33.(1980) 2 SCC 565 
34.(2009) 14 SCC 286 
35.2012(13) SCC 720  
36.AIR 1967 SC 1639  
37.AIR 1958 SC 376  

HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO         

CRIMINAL PETITION Nos.12683, 24692 & 24695 of 2017     

COMMON ORDER:
The respondents to the three bail cancellation petitions
are accused Nos.1, 2 & 4 in Crl.P.No.24695 of 2017, accused 
Nos.6 & 9 in Crl.P.No.24692 of 2017 and accused Nos.3, 7, 8
& 10 to 16 in Crl.P.No.12683 of 2017, of crime No.31 of 2015
of Peddavaduguru Police Station, registered against 16
accused for the offences punishable under Sections 147, 148,
324, 307, 302 r/w 149
IPC
and
Section 120-B
IPC.
2. The defacto complainant is one Smt. C.Indumathi
w/o late C.Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy of Appecherla Village,
Peddavadugur Mandal, Anantapur District.  Almost all
accused are from the same Mandal either from Appecherla or 
Thimmapuram Village particularly of A.1.  The police after
investigation filed charge sheet against the accused except for
A.5.  The learned committal Magistrate taken cognizance and
allotted PRC number from the police final report with 20
witnesses which include the defacto complainant-LW1 w/o of 
the deceased Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy and the circumstantial 
witnesses including on the motive and the injured witnesses
particularly LWs.9, 10 & 11.  In the course of investigation,
the accused were arrested and later enlarged on bail.
Presently SC.No.421 of 2016 is pending against the accused 
persons referred supra.  So far as accused Nos.3, 7, 8 & 10 to
16 concerned they were granted bail by order of this Court
another bench in Crl.P.No.5134 of 2015 dated 17.06.2015
with observations of these accused are in jail for past 75 days
and the main accusation is against A1,2&4, hence to release
on self bond for Rs.10,000/- with two sureties to the
satisfaction of JFCM, Gooty and to stay at Anantapur and not
to enter the village till filing of the charge sheet. So far as
accused Nos.6 & 9 concerned, they were also granted bail on
same day 17.06.2015 in Crl.P.No.5153 of 2015 with same  
observations by same bench of this Court supra. So far as
accused Nos.1, 2 & 4 concerned, they were also released on 
bail in Crl.P.No.6095 of 2015 dated 13.07.2015 with
observation of they are in custody since 07.04.2015 and the
investigation is likely to be completed and on condition of
execution of self bond with two sureties to the satisfaction of
JFCM, Gooty and in directing the petitioners shall before the
SHO on every day between 10.00 am and 05.00 pm until  
further orders.
3. The three present petitions filed in the third week of
December 2017 by the defacto complainant are under
Section  
439(2)
Cr.P.C. in seeking cancellation of the bail orders
granted supra to the accused persons respectively.
4. In the applications for cancellation of the regular
bails granted supra, the averments of the defacto complainant
are that the deceased was elected single window president in
February 2015 and he along with defacto complainant and 
others went to the society office for meeting at 10.00 AM, the
accused who were already present at the office demanded to
appoint co-option members for which the deceased replied of
it was not his business and the accused wanted to settle the
issue otherwise to kill him and they were exchanges where
accused attacked the defacto complainant with sticks already
brought in their vehicles and they killed the deceased on the
spot having attacked the defacto complainant.
5. So far as cancellation of bail concerned what is
averred is that the accused, who were enlarged on bail are
posing threat to life and property of the defacto complainant
and witnesses.  Her husband belongs to YSRCP and he was    
the Chairman of PACS, Kristipadu.  The local TDP MLA and  
other accused of the crime were threatening the deceased to
step down from his office or to join for TDP for which as he
refused he was brutally murdered in the Office and LW.9 was
one of those seriously injured.  Among the accused persons,
A.2 is a life convict in SC.No.280 of 1988 on the file of learned
Sessions Judge, Anantapur and was released on remission by  
Government of AP and he is personal aide of JC Prabhakar 
Reddy, MLA, Tadipathri, and a notorious rowdy with rowdy
sheet No.172 dated 12.07.2016 of Peddavaduguru PS and A.1   
& A.2 are aides of said MLA.  The Inspector of Police, Pamidi
Circle is under the influence of said MLA and calling the
witnesses and threatening to compromise with accused else 
to face wrath of the ruling party. From their refusal to oblige
the so called proposal of compromise from the deceased was 
brutally killed by the accused and also caused injuries to
some of the witnesses.  Unable to bare the torture of the
Inspector, one of the cousins of the deceased committed
suicide in the police station from where he was shifted to
hospital for treatment and on 14.11.2017 the defacto
complainant and other witnesses reported to the learned
Sessions Judge, Gooty for protection from the accused supra
and for cancellation of their bail.  The Tahsildar,
Peddavadugur Mandal under the political influence of the
respondents-accused supra issued show cause notice dated  
13.11.2017 under
Section 7
of the Land Encroachment Act  
through the messenger on 14.11.2017 to evict the defacto
complainant and others from the patta lands within 7 days
alleging the land in S.Nos.276, 286, 618, 619, 537 of
Appecharla revenue village are poramboke lands though said
lands of an extent of 16 acres purchased by defacto
complainants family under registered documents No.748 of
1975.  Further on 17.11.2017, the Tahsildar came with staff
and also the accused of the present crime particularly A.1
and A.2 with earth movers and destroyed the standing cotton,
paddy crops and banana plantations by digging trenches
across the land and by cutting the irrigation systems without
hearing or without caring to see the documents.  The defacto
complainant lodged a complaint to the SHO, Peddavaduguru  
on 17.11.2017 after said destruction of the standing crops
and etc., against Tahsildar and his staff and some of the
accused who were there of the present crime but the police
did not register the crime since the CI was influenced and
aggrieved by inaction of the police, the matter was
represented to the SP, Anantapur and the District Collector,
Anantapur besides the learned Sessions Judge, Gooty for 
protection and for cancellation of the bail of the accused,
however surprisingly after said written complaint the accused
demolished the walls of the semi finished house buildings of
the defacto complainant with aid of earth movers that belongs
to MPP of TDP Rangaiah and petitioners complained about  
said incident and crime No.204 of 2017 dated 19.11.2017
was registered.  The defacto complainant and others
submitted another representation to the District Judge,
Anantapur on 22.11.2017.
6. The police not taken any action nor seized the earth
movers used for destroying the properties as under their
political influence.  The defacto complainant complaint dated
25.11.2017 was registered as FIR.No.209 of 2017 of
Peddavaduguru.  Again on 29.11.2017, Smt. Hari Priya, sister
of deceased was attacked while on the way to her office and
was seriously injured and her right hand at wrist was hacked
taking advantage of her differences with her husband.
Thereby the defacto complainants family and witnesses of the
crime are under threat to life.  Hence to cancel said bail of all
the accused persons.
7. Learned counsel for the defacto complainant
reiterated the same in the course of hearing by referred to
some of the expressions particularly the Apex Court Three
Judge Bench expression in State through
Delhi
Administration Vs. Sanjay Gandhi  and another
three judge
bench expression of the Apex Court in Aslam Babalal Desai 
Vs. State of Maharastra  and another three judge bench
expression of the Apex Court in
Narendra K Amin (DR.) Vs.
State of Gujarat
.
8. The counsel for the accused persons opposed the
applications for cancellation of bail and sought for dismissal
and these applications with false versions introduced only
with vengeance to see that the accused shall not have
personal liberty though there are no worth facts or
circumstances to say accused interfered in any manner with
the witnesses nor coming in the way for disposal of the case
and placed reliance on the recent three judge bench
expression of the Apex Court in
Ms. X Vs. State of
Telangana
and also brought to the notice of the Court that
the Sub Divisional Police Officer, Tadipatri referred by report
dated 28.10.2017, the crime No.165 of 2016 under
Section
506
IPC from the private complaint referred to police, from
investigation as false of the alleged threats to the defacto
complainant for none were directly threatened.  The Public
Prosecutor representing the State has submitted to decide the
applications on merits.
9. Heard the defacto Complainant-Petitioner, the Public
Prosecutor representing the State and the Respondents-
Accused respectively and perused the material on record and
the provisions and propositions.
10. Now the point for consideration is, whether there
are any grounds for cancellation of the bail orders granted
and if so against which of the accused and on what grounds
as to any supervening and subsequent circumstances or 
otherwise for ends of justice to subserve?
11.
Section 439(2)
Cr.P.C. says the High Court or the
Court of Session may direct that any person who has been 
released on bail under this chapter may arrest him and
commit him to custody.  As referred supra the application for
cancellation of bails under
Section 439(2)
Cr.P.C. is with the
prayer of threats and interference with the witnesses by the
accused persons subsequent to the orders of bail and
apprehension to the defacto complainant and witnesses is
thereby from the accused.
12. The latest expression of the Apex Court in its three
Judge Bench in
Ms. X
supra, it is observed that - as per the
expression of the Apex Court in
Kanwar Singh Vs. State of
Rajasthan
the discretion granted to the High Court and
Court of Session under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. to grant or refuse
bail from the considerations of gravity of crime, character of
the evidence, position and status of the accused with
reference to the victim and witnesses, the likelihood of the
accused fleeing from justice and repeating the offence, the
possibility of his tampering with the witnesses and
obstructing the course of justice among other particularly this
peculiar to the case on hand to consider and as per another
expression in
Neeru Yadav Vs. State of UP
it is the duty of
the Court to take into consideration in grant of bail as to the
nature of accusation and the severity of punishment in the
event of conviction with supporting evidence and reasonable
apprehension of tampering with the witnesses and threat to
the complainant and prima facie satisfaction of the Court in
support of the charge and as per
State of Bihar Vs.
Rajballav Prasad
liberty of the subject is an important
consideration, the public interest in the proper administration
of criminal justice is equally important and the Courts have
to adopt a liberal approach; however, if it is found that there
is a possibility of interdicting fair trial by the accused if
released on bail, this public interest of fair trial would
outweigh the personal interest of the accused. Where the
witnesses are not able to depose correctly in the court of law,
it results in low rate of conviction and many times even
hardened criminals escape the conviction. It shakes public
confidence in the criminal justice delivery system. It is this
need for larger public interest to ensure that criminal justice
delivery system works efficiently, smoothly and in a fair
manner that has to be given prime importance in such
situations.  It is pointed out the distinction between rejection
of bail for non-bailable offence at initial stage and cancellation
of bail after its grant.
It also referred to Doltaram Vs. State
of Haryana  where it is said overwhelming circumstances are
necessary for an order directing the cancellation of the bail
already granted, like interference or attempt to interfere with
the due course of administration of justice or evasion or
attempt to evade the due course of justice or abuse of the
concession granted to the accused in any manner from the 
subjective satisfaction of the Court, besides possibility of the
accused absconding in all those to justify the cancellation or
otherwise it cannot be in a mechanical manner without
considering in supervening circumstances rendered in
conducive to fair trial to allow the accused to retain his
freedom during the trial.
13.
In
Neeru Yadav
supra, a reference was made to the
earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in,
Ram Govind
Upadhyay v. Sudarshan Singh
, wherein, it has been clearly
laid down that the grant of bail though involves exercise of
discretionary power of the Court, such exercise of discretion
has to be made in a judicious manner and not as a matter of
course. The heinous nature of crimes warrants more caution
as there is a greater chance of rejection of bail though,
however, dependent on the factual matrix of the matter. In
the said case, reference was made to Prahlad Singh bhati v.
NCT of Delhi , and thereafter the court proceeded to state
the following principles:-
(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind
not only the nature of the accusations, but the severity
of the punishment, if the accusation entails a
conviction and the nature of evidence in support of the
accusations.
(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being
tampered with or the apprehension of there being a
threat for the complainant should also weigh with the
court in the matter of grant of bail.
(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence
establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
doubt but there ought always to be a prima facie
satisfaction of the court in support of the charge.
(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be
considered and it is only the element of genuineness
that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant
of bail, and in the event of there being some doubt as
to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal
course of events, the accused is entitled to an order of
bail.
14.
In
Chaman Lal v. State of U.P.
it is held that it is
a well-settled principle of law that, while dealing with an
application for grant of bail, it is the duty of the Court to take
into consideration certain factors and they basically are:
(i) the nature of accusation and the severity of
punishment in cases of conviction and the nature of
supporting evidence,
(ii) reasonable apprehension of tampering with the
witnesses for apprehension of threat to the
complainant &
(iii) Prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of
the charge.
15.
In
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee
it
was held as to what are the factors to be borne in mind while
considering an application for bail:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed the
offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing
of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by
grant of bail. (Emphasis supplied).
16. Finally, the Supreme Court in
Neeru Yadav
supra
concluded that, this being the position of law, it is clear
as cloudless sky that the High Court has totally ignored
the criminal antecedents of the accused. What has
weighed with the High Court is the doctrine of parity. A
history- sheeter involved in the nature of crimes which
we have reproduced hereinabove, are not minor offences
so that he is not to be retained in custody, but the
crimes are of heinous nature and such crimes, by no
stretch of imagination, can be regarded as jejune. Such
cases do create a thunder and lightening having the
effect potentiality of torrential rain in an analytical
mind. The law expects the judiciary to be alert while
admitting these kind of accused persons to be at large
and, therefore, the emphasis is on exercise of discretion
judiciously and not in a whimsical manner.
17.
In
State of Bihar v. Rajballav Prasad
, the Apex
Court by scanning the law and dealt with the concept of fair
trial not only for the accused but also for victim, observed
that:
We would like to reproduce following discussion from
the judgment in the case of
Kanwar Singh Meena v. 
State of Rajasthan & Anr.
[6]: 10...While cancelling bail
under Section 439(2) of the Code, the primary
considerations which weigh with the court are whether
the accused is likely to tamper with the evidence or
interfere or attempt to interfere with the due course of
justice or evade the due course of justice. But, that is
not all. The High Court or the Sessions Court can
cancel bail even in cases where the order granting bail
suffers from serious infirmities resulting in miscarriage
of justice. If the court granting bail ignores relevant
materials indicating prima facie involvement of the
accused or takes into account irrelevant material,
which has no relevance to the question of grant of bail
to the accused, the High Court or the Sessions Court
would be justified in cancelling the bail. Such orders
are against the well recognized principles underlying
the power to grant bail. Such orders are legally infirm
and vulnerable leading to miscarriage of justice and
absence of supervening circumstances such as the 
propensity of the accused to tamper with the evidence,
to flee from justice, etc. would not deter the court from
cancelling the bail. The High Court or the Sessions
Court is bound to cancel such bail orders particularly
when they are passed releasing accused involved in
heinous crimes because they ultimately result in
weakening the prosecution case and have adverse 
impact on the society. Needless to say that though the
powers of this court are much wider, this court is
equally guided by the above principles in the matter of
grant or cancellation of bail.
xx xx xx
18. Taking an overall view of the matter, we are of the
opinion that in the interest of justice, the impugned
order granting bail to the accused deserves to be
quashed and a direction needs to be given to the police
to take the accused in custody... As indicated by us in
the beginning, prime consideration before us is to
protect the fair trial and ensure that justice is done.
This may happen only if the witnesses are able to
depose without fear, freely and truthfully and this
Court is convinced that in the present case, that can
be ensured only if the respondent is not enlarged on
bail. This importance of fair trial was emphasised
in
Panchanan Mishra v. Digambar Mishra & Ors.
[7] 
while setting aside the order of the High Court granting
bail in the following terms:
13. We have given our careful consideration to the
rival submissions made by the counsel appearing on
either side. The object underlying the cancellation of
bail is to protect the fair trial and secure justice being
done to the society by preventing the accused who is
set at liberty by the bail order from tampering with the
evidence in the heinous crime and if there is delay in
such a case the underlying object of cancellation of
bail practically loses all its purpose and significance to
the greatest prejudice and the interest of the
prosecution. It hardly requires to be stated that once a
person is released on bail in serious criminal cases
where the punishment is quite stringent and deterrent,
the accused in order to get away from the clutches of
the same indulge in various activities like tampering
with the prosecution witnesses, threatening the family
members of the deceased victim and also create 
problems of law and order situation. Such sentiments
were expressed much earlier as well by the Court
in
Talab Haji Hussain v. Madhukar Purshottam 
Mondkar & Ors.
[8] in the following manner:
6...There can be no more important requirement of
the ends of justice than the uninterrupted progress of
a fair trial; and it is for the continuance of such a fair
trial that the inherent powers of the High Courts are
sought to be invoked by the prosecution in cases where
it is alleged that accused persons, either by suborning
or intimidating witnesses, are obstructing the smooth
progress of a fair trial. Similarly, if an accused person
who is released on bail jumps bail and attempts to run
to a foreign country to escape the trial, that again
would be a case where the exercise of the inherent
power would be justified in order to compel the
accused to submit to a fair trial and not to escape its
consequences by taking advantage of the fact that he
has been released on bail and by absconding to
another country. In other words, if the conduct of the
accused person subsequent to his release on bail puts
in jeopardy the progress of a fair trial itself and if there
is no other remedy which can be effectively used
against the accused person, in such a case the
inherent power of the High Court can be legitimately
invoked... We are conscious of the fact that the
respondent is only an under-trial and his liberty is also
a relevant consideration. However, equally important
consideration is the interest of the society and fair trail
of the case. Thus, undoubtedly the courts have to
adopt a liberal approach while considering bail
applications of accused persons. However, in a given
case, if it is found that there is a possibility of
interdicting fair trial by the accused if released on bail,
this public interest of fair trial would outweigh the
personal interest of the accused while undertaking the
task of balancing the liberty of the accused on the one
hand and interest of the society to have a fair trial on
the other hand. When the witnesses are not able to
depose correctly in the court of law, it results in low
rate of conviction and many times even hardened
criminals escape the conviction.
It shakes public
confidence in the criminal justice delivery system. It is
this need for larger public interest to ensure that
criminal justice delivery system works efficiently,
smoothly and in a fair manner that has to be given
prime importance in such situations. After all, if there
is a threat to fair trial because of intimidation of
witnesses etc., that would happen because of
wrongdoing of the accused himself, and the
consequences thereof, he has to suffer. This is so
beautifully captured by this Court in
Masroor v. State
of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
[9] in the following words:
15. There is no denying the fact that the liberty of an
individual is precious and is to be zealously protected
by the courts. Nonetheless, such a protection cannot
be absolute in every situation. The valuable right of
liberty of an individual and the interest of the society
in general has to be balanced. Liberty of a person
accused of an offence would depend upon the 
exigencies of the case. It is possible that in a given
situation, the collective interest of the community may
outweigh the right of personal liberty of the individual
concerned. In this context, the following observations
of this Court in Shahzad Hasan Khan v. Ishtiaq Hasan
Khan [(1987) 2 SCC 684] are quite apposite: (SCC p.
691, para 6) 6 Liberty is to be secured through
process of law, which is administered keeping in mind
the interests of the accused, the near and dear of the
victim who lost his life and who feel helpless and
believe that there is no justice in the world as also the
collective interest of the community so that parties do
not lose faith in the institution and indulge in private
retribution. This very aspect of balancing of two
interests has again been discussed lucidly in
Neeru
Yadav v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
[10] in the
following words:
16. The issue that is presented before us is whether
this Court can annul the order passed by the High
Court and curtail the liberty of the second respondent?
We are not oblivious of the fact that liberty is a
priceless treasure for a human being. It is founded on
the bedrock of the constitutional right and accentuated
further on the human rights principle. It is basically a
natural right. In fact, some regard it as the grammar of
life. No one would like to lose his liberty or barter it for
all the wealth of the world. People from centuries have
fought for liberty, for absence of liberty causes sense of
emptiness. The sanctity of liberty is the fulcrum of any
civilised society. It is a cardinal value on which the
civilisation rests. It cannot be allowed to be paralysed
and immobilised. Deprivation of liberty of a person has
enormous impact on his mind as well as body. A 
democratic body polity which is wedded to the rule of
law, anxiously guards liberty. But, a pregnant and
significant one, the liberty of an individual is not
absolute. Society by its collective wisdom through
process of law can withdraw the liberty that it has
sanctioned to an individual when an individual
becomes a danger to the collective and to the societal
order. Accent on individual liberty cannot be
pyramided to that extent which would bring chaos and
anarchy to a society. A society expects responsibility
and accountability from its members, and it desires
that the citizens should obey the law, respecting it as a
cherished social norm. No individual can make an
attempt to create a concavity in the stem of social
stream. It is impermissible. Therefore, when an
individual behaves in a disharmonious manner
ushering in disorderly things which the society
disapproves, the legal consequences are bound to
follow. At that stage, the court has a duty. It cannot
abandon its sacrosanct obligation and pass an order at
its own whim or caprice. It has to be guided by the
established parameters of law.
17. Coming to the case at hand, it is found that when a
stand was taken that the second respondent was a 
history-sheeter, it was imperative on the part of the
High Court to scrutinise every aspect and not
capriciously record that the second respondent is
entitled to be admitted to bail on the ground of parity.
It can be stated with absolute certitude that it was not
a case of parity and, therefore, the impugned order
[Mitthan Yadav v. State of U.P., Criminal Misc. Bail
Application No. 31078 of 2014, decided on 22-9- 2014
(All)] clearly exposes the non-application of mind. That
apart, as a matter of fact it has been brought on record
that the second respondent has been charge-sheeted 
in respect of number of other heinous offences. The
High Court has failed to take note of the same.
Therefore, the order has to pave the path of extinction,
for its approval by this Court would tantamount to
travesty of justice, and accordingly we set it aside.
In
Ramesh & Ors. v. State of Haryana
[11], which was 
decided only two days ago i.e. on 22.11.2016, this
Court discussed the problem of witnesses turning
hostile, and if that is for wrong reasons, observed that
it affects the very fabric of criminal justice delivery
system. We would like to reproduce following passages 
therefrom:
40. On the analysis of various cases, following reasons
can be discerned which make witnesses retracting 
their statements before the Court and turning hostile:
(i) Threat/intimidation.
(ii) Inducement by various means.
(iii) Use of muscle and money power by the accused.
(iv) Use of Stock Witnesses.
(v) Protracted Trials.
(vi) Hassles faced by the witnesses during investigation
and trial.
(vii) Non-existence of any clear-cut legislation to check
hostility of witness.
41. Threat and intimidation has been one of the major
causes for the hostility of witnesses. Bentham said:
witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice. When the
witnesses are not able to depose correctly in the court
of law, it results in low rate of conviction and many
times even hardened criminals escape the conviction.
It shakes public confidence in the criminal justice
delivery system. It is for this reason there has been a
lot of discussion on witness protection and from
various quarters demand is made for the State to play
a definite role in coming out with witness protection
programme, at least in sensitive cases involving those
in power, who have political patronage and could wield
muscle and money power, to avert trial getting tainted
and derailed and truth becoming a casualty. A stern
and emphatic message to this effect was given in
Zahira Habibullah's case as well.
42. Justifying the measures to be taken for witness
protection to enable the witnesses to depose truthfully
and without fear, Justice Malimath Committee Report
on Reforms of Criminal Justice System, 2003 has 
remarked as under:
11.3 Another major problem is about safety of
witnesses and their family members who face danger 
at different stages. They are often threatened and the
seriousness of the threat depends upon the type of the
case and the background of the accused and his 
family. Many times crucial witnesses are threatened or
injured prior to their testifying in the court. If the
witness is still not amenable he may even be
murdered. In such situations the witness will not come
forward to give evidence unless he is assured of
protection or is guaranteed anonymity of some form of
physical disguiseTime has come for a comprehensive   
law being enacted for protection of the witness and
members of his family.
43. Almost to similar effect are the observations of Law
Commission of India in its 198th Report (Report on
'witness identity protection and witness protection
programmes'), as can be seen from the following
discussion therein:
The reason is not far to seek. In the case of victims of
terrorism and sexual offences against women and 
juveniles, we are dealing with a section of society
consisting of very vulnerable people, be they victims or
witnesses. The victims and witnesses are under fear of
or danger to their lives or lives of their relations or to
their property. It is obvious that in the case of serious
offences under the Indian Penal code, 1860 and other
special enactments, some of which we have referred to
above, there are bound to be absolutely similar
situations for victims and witnesses. While in the case
of certain offences under special statutes such fear or
danger to victims and witnesses may be more common   
and pronounced, in the case of victims and witnesses
involved or concerned with some serious offences, fear
may be no less important. Obviously, if the trial in the
case of special offences is to be fair both to the accused
as well as to the victims/witnesses, then there is no
reason as to why it should not be equally fair in the
case of other general offences of serious nature falling
under the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860. It is the fear or
danger or rather the likelihood thereof that is common
to both cases. That is why several general statutes in
other countries provide for victim and witness
protection. No doubt, the prosecutrix has already
been examined. However, few other material witnesses,
including father and sister of the prosecutrix, have yet
to be examined. As per the records, threats were
extended to the prosecutrix as well as her family
members. Therefore, we feel that the High Court
should not have granted bail to the respondent
ignoring all the material and substantial aspects
pointed out by us, which were the relevant
considerations.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this appeal thereby
setting aside the order of the High Court. In case the
respondent is already released, he shall surrender
and/or taken into custody forthwith. In case he is still
in jail, he will continue to remain in jail as a
consequence of this judgment.
Before we part with, we make it clear that this Court
has not expressed any observations on the merits of
the case. Whether the respondent is guilty or not, of
the charges framed against him, will be decided by the
trial court on its own merits after analysing the
evidence that surfaces on record during the trial.
18.
In
Central Bureau of Investigation, Hyderabad
Vs. Subramani Gopalakrishnan
and more recently in
Dataram Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
it is observed
that overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an order
directing the cancellation of bail already granted like
interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of
administration of justice or evasion or attempt to evade the
due course of justice or abuse of the concessions granted to
the accused in any manner including as to possibility of
absconding of accused if any.
It is from that concluded by
the latest three judge bench in
Ms. X
supra of no grounds to
cancel bail however the quantum of bond as part of the
modification of the conditions of the bail already granted
enhanced.
19. In Aslam Babalal Desai supra it was observed by
the Apex Court three Judge Bench clearly way back that bail
granted under Section 437(1) & (2) and 439(1)
Cr.P.C
. can be
cancelled under Section 437(5) or 439(2) where accused
misused his liberty by indulging in similar criminal activity,
interference with the course of investigation, attempts to
tamper with evidence or witnesses, threatens witnesses or
indulges in similar activities which would hamper smooth
investigation, likelihood of his fleeing to another country,
attempts to make himself scarce by going underground or 
becoming unavailable to the investigating agency, attempts to
place himself beyond the reach of his surety, etc., for rejection
of bail stands on one footing or whereas cancellation of bail is
a harsh order which interferes with the liberty already
granted with concession of bail.
20. No doubt in State through CBI Vs. Amarmani
Tripati  it was observed that so far as cancellation of bail
concerned, it is conduct subsequent to release on bail
relevant for not an appeal against grant of bail to take
consideration of all aspects that are relevant like nature and
seriousness of the offence, likelihood of accused fleeing from
justice, tampering with the prosecution evidence,
circumstances peculiar to the accused under larger interest of
society.
In Amarmani Tripathi supra referring to
Kalyan
Chandra Sarkar Vs. Rajesh Ranjan
it was observed at Para 
8 that the object underlying cancellation of bail is to protect
the fair trial and secure justice being done to the society by
preventing the accused who is staying at abroad at the bail
order from tampering with the evidence or the like.
21.
In State through CBI Vs. Amarmani Tripathy
also referring to
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar
(supra) where the bail
orders granted were cancelled one from order is not
sustainable on merits and seriousness of the crime and the
other from the seriousness of the crime and subsequent
conduct.
At para-8 of Amarmani Tripathy(supra) that the
object underlying cancellation of bail is to protect the fair trial
and secure justice to being done to the society by preventing
the accused who is set at liberty by the bail order from
tampering with evidence or the like----  It hardly requires to
be stated that, once a person is released on bail in serious
criminal cases where the punishment is quite stringent and
deterrent the accused in order to get away from the clutches
of the same, indulged in various activities in tampering with
witnesses, threatened family members or victim and creates
problems of law and order situation.
22. In Kalyan Chandra  Sarkar(supra) it was observed
that, any detention of the accused in the commission of a non
bailable offence during pendency of the trial cannot be
questioned as violation of Article 221 of the Constitution of
India since the same is authorised by statute of law, unless
they are granted bail from any entitlement on coming to
conclusion of prosecution failed to make out prima facie case
or Court be satisfied by recording the reasons in this regard
that in spite of existence of prima facie case, there is need to
release such persons on bail where fact situations require it
to do so.  It was observed that while deciding the cases with
reference to the facts, more so in criminal cases the Court
should bear in mind each case must rest on its own facts and
the similarity of facts in one case cannot be used to bear in
mind the conclusion of fact in another case as a case is only
an authority from what it actually decides and what not
logically fallows from it.
23.
In
Sunil F Shaw Vs. Union of India
the Apex
Court held that release of accused on bail from internment
through Court would still retained constructive control over
him through the sureties through conditions of the bond
given by the accused and the sureties, to intercept the liberty
wherever required.
24. However in the subsequent three judge Bench
expression of the Apex Court in Narendra K.Amin(Dr.) Vs.
State of Gujarat  it was held that the cancellation of bail
parameters are different to the grant of bail, though it is
loosely observed as appeal against a bail order, practically
under Cr.P.C. even there is no appeal remedy against grant of
bail for cancellation but for invoking section 439(2) Cr.P.C.
and observed at para-16 that the Court in entertaining the
application cannot re-appreciate the evidence generally, but
for to consider any perversity of the order in question. It was
also observed that against the order granting bail even a
superior Court can be moved for cancellation.  It was
observed further at para-23 of
Narendra K.Amin
supra that
the Court dealing with an application for cancellation of bail
invariably under
Section 439(2)
of Cr.P.C. can consider by the
re-appreciation of the material to the extent whether
irrelevant material was taken into consideration or relevant
material was not taken into consideration in granting bail.
It
was observed in para-21 in
Narendra K.Amin
supra referring
to
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar
supra that though elaborate
appreciation of the merits of the matter need not be
undertaken, there is a need to indicate for reasons in the
order about prima facie conclusion for grant or refusal or for
cancellation of bail.
It was also observed in para-24 of
Narendra K.Amin
supra referring to Koran Vs. Rama 
Vilas  that concept of setting aside unjustified or
perverse order granting bail is different from
cancellation of bail on the misconduct of accused after
grant of bail concession.  Having regard to the subsequent
conduct of the accused relevant concerned is only if the bail
order seeking cancellation sought for from any interference
with witnesses or possibility of fleeing away from justice or
tampering of prosecution evidence, but not where the very
order granting bail is impugned and found unjust either by
non-consideration of relevant material and the provisions or
by consideration of irrelevant material and provisions that
prone to cancellation.
25.
In
Dolat Ram vs. State of Haryana
, it was
observed that one of the grounds for cancellation of bail
would be where ignoring material and evidence on record a
perverse order granting bail is passed in a heinous crime and
that too without giving any reasons. Such an order would be
against the principles of law and, interest of justice would
require that such a perverse order be set aside and bail be
cancelled.  The court found that inasmuch as the Sessions
Court had ignored vital materials while granting bail, the High
Court had rightly cancelled the bail. It was further observed
that such orders passed in heinous crimes would have
serious impact on the society and an arbitrary and wrong
exercise of discretion by the trial court has to be corrected by
the Superior Courts.
26. The Supreme Court in Abdul Basit alias
Raju vs.
Mohd. Abdul Kadir Chaudhary and another
and in
Jagmohan Bahl vs. State (NCT of Delhi
)  drew the
distinction between review/recall/quashment of bail order for
cancellation and observed that filing of successive bail
applications without any changed circumstances and 
obtaining pre-arrest bail from the in-charge officer would
amount to bench haunting.
The expressions referred the
earlier law including the Constitution Bench of the Apex
Court in Aslam Babalal Desai supra and
Narendra K. Amin
supra, where it was laid down certain parameters for
cancellation of bail. The Apex Court stated that,
Section
439(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure confers jurisdiction
on the High Court or Court of Sessions to direct that any
person who has been released on bail under Chapter XXXIII
be arrested and committed to custody. The power to take
back in custody, an accused that has been enlarged on bail
has to be exercised with care and circumspection. But the
power, though of an extra-ordinary nature, is meant to be
exercised in appropriate cases when, by a preponderance of
probabilities, it is clear that the accused is interfering with
the course of justice by tampering with witnesses. Refusal to
exercise that wholesome power in such cases, few though 
they may be, will reduce it to a dead letter and will suffer the
courts to be silent spectators to the subversion of the judicial
process.
27. Moreover, in
Narendra K. Amin
supra, while
reiterating the judgments of various High Courts
including
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar
supra, the Apex Court
concluded that, once it is found that bail was granted on
untenable grounds, same can be cancelled. The stand that 
there was no supervening circumstance has no relevance 
in such case.
This view is fortified by the judgment in
Puran
v. Rambilas & Anr
, wherein, the Apex Court after reviewing
the entire law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in
Niranjan
Singh vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
,
Dolatram
supra 
and
Gurcharan Singh v. State (Delhi Administration
)  was
of the view that, if, however, a Court of Session had admitted
an accused person to bail, the State has two options.  It may
move the Sessions Judge if certain new circumstances have 
arisen which were not earlier known to the State and
necessarily, therefore, to that Court. The State may as well
approach the High Court being the superior Court under
Section 439(2) to commit the accused to custody. When, 
however, the State is aggrieved by the order of the Sessions
Judge granting bail and there are no new circumstances that
have cropped up except those already existed, it is futile for
the State to move the Sessions Judge again and it is
competent in law to move the High Court for cancellation of
the bail. This position follows from the subordinate position of
the Court of Session vis--vis the High Court.
In
R.
Rathinam v. State by DSP, District Crime Branch,
Madurai District
, the Supreme Court reiterated the same
principles.
28.
In
Puran
supra, the Apex Court succinctly
observed at para 11 as follows:
"11. Further, it is to be kept in mind that the concept of
setting aside the unjustified illegal or perverse order is
totally different from the concept of cancelling the bail on
the ground that the accused has misconducted himself or
because of some new facts requiring such cancellation. This
position is made clear by this Court in Gurcharan Singh v.
State (Delhi Admn.). In that case the Court observed as
under: (SCC p. 124, para 16) "If, however, a Court of
Session had admitted an accused person to bail, the State
has two options. It may move the Sessions Judge if certain
new circumstances have arisen which were not earlier
known to the State and necessarily, therefore, to that court.
The State may as well approach the High Court being the
superior court under Section 439(2) to commit the accused
to custody. When, however, the State is aggrieved by the
order of the Sessions Judge granting bail and there are no
new circumstances that have cropped up except those  
already existing, it is futile for the State to move the
Sessions Judge again and it is competent in law to move
the High Court for cancellation of the bail. This position
follows from the subordinate position of the Court of
Session vis-`-vis the High Court."
29. Thus, if the order suffers from any perversity or on
consideration of any extraneous material, the Higher Court
can set-aside or annul or quash the order of regular bail or
pre-arrest bail as the case may be by exercising the power
under
Section 439(2)
Cr.P.C. subject to facts and
circumstances to justify cancellation.
30. Therefore, it is clear from the long line of
perspective pronouncements that a bail can be
cancelled, set-aside or annulled or quashed by the
Superior Court when the Court found that it is
impregnable or perverse, unjustified and contrary to the
principles of law and the bar under
Section 362
Cr.P.C
has no application to such petition filed before Superior
Courts filed challenging order passed by Subordinate
Court, i.e. Sessions Court in the present case.
31. The grounds for cancellation of bail or setting-aside
the bail are almost on same parameters is well laid down by
the Apex Court in
Usha Devi v. The State of Bihar
as
follows:
17. It is well settled that the grounds for
cancellation of bail under Section 437(5) and 439(2) of
the Code are identical, namely, bail granted
under Section 437(1) or 439(1) of the Code can be
cancelled broadly when one or more of the following
conditions are fulfilled:
(i) The accused misuses his liberty by indulging in
similar activity,
(ii) Interferes with the Course of investigation,
(iii) Attempts to tamper with the evidence,
(iv) Threaten witnesses or indulges in similar activities
which would hamper smooth investigation,
(v) There is likelihood of the accused fleeing away to
another country.
(vi) Attempts to make himself scare by going
underground or becoming unavailable to the
Investigating Agency,
(vii) Attempts to place himself beyond the reach of the
surety,
(viii) Bail has been granted by an inferior Court in a
case involving serious offence shocking to the
conscience of the superior Courts,
(ix) After investigation the facts disclose commission of
graver offence.
32.
In
State of Tamil Nadu v. S.A.Raja
the Apex
Court held in paragraphs 8 & 9 that when a learned Single
Judge of the same Court had denied bail to the respondent
for certain reasons and that order was unsuccessfully
challenged before the appellate forum, without there being
any major change of circumstances, another fresh application
should not have been dealt with within a short span of time
unless there were valid grounds giving rise to a tenable case
for bail. Of course, the principles of res judicata are not
applicable to bail applications, but the repeated filing of the
bail applications without there being any change of
circumstances would lead to bad precedents.
33.
In
Dinesh M.N. (S.P) v. State of Gujarat
, the
three Judge Bench of the Apex Court held that where the
Court admits the Accused to bail by taking into
consideration irrelevant materials and keeping out of
consideration the relevant materials the order becomes
vulnerable and such vulnerability warrants annulment
of the order.
34.
In
Gajanand Agarwal v State of Orissa
, the Apex
Court adverted to the order passed by the High Court and
when no reason has been indicated by the High Court for
granting bail except stating that in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case the bail was being granted because
the accused is in custody for ten months, same is held illegal
in its cancellation with the observations that; even on a
cursory perusal the High Court's order shows complete non-
application of mind. Though detailed examination of the
evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the
case is to be avoided by the Court while passing orders on
bail applications, yet a court dealing with the bail application
should be satisfied as to whether there is a prima facie case,
but exhaustive exploration of the merits of the case is not
necessary. The court dealing with the application for bail is
required to exercise its discretion in a judicious manner and
not as a matter of course. There is a need to indicate in the
order, reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was being
granted particularly where an accused was charged of having
committed a serious offence.
35.
In
Ram Govind Upadhyay
supra, the Apex Court
held that for grant of pre-arrest bail, considerations for
cancellation of such an order of bail are independent and do
not overlap each other, but in the event of non consideration
of considerations relevant for the purpose of grant of bail and
in the event an earlier order of rejection available on the
records, it is a duty incumbent on the High Court to explicitly
state the reasons as to why the sudden departure in the order
of grant as against the rejection just about a month ago.
36. The Apex Court even in
Siddharam Satlingappa
Mhetre Vs. State of Maharashtra
held referring to the
constitutional Bench expression of the Apex Court in
Gurubaksh Singh Sibbia Vs. State
that the Courts are
equally empowered like in granting or refusal of bail also in
cancellation of bail by exercising the judicial discretion vested
statutory. In fact, the grant or refusal or even
cancellation of bail is the judicial discretion to be
exercised with circumspection but for to say blanket
orders should not be passed and orders wont sustain
without reasons. It was also observed the considerations
in this regard from the crime is against society that:-
3. The society has a vital interest in grant of refusal of
bail because every criminal offence is the offence
against the State.  The order granting or refusing bal
must reflect perfect balance between the conflicting
interests, namely, sanctity of individual liberty and the
interest of the society. The law of bails dovetails two
conflicting interests namely, on the one hand, the
requirements of shielding the society from the hazards
of those committing crimes and potentiality of repeating
the same crime wile on bail and on the other hand
absolute adherence of the fundamental principle of
criminal jurisprudence regarding presumption of
innocence of an accused until he is found guilty and the
sanctity of individual liberty. Just as the Liberty is
precious to an individual, so is the societys interest in
maintenance of peace, law and order, Both are equally
important.......
103. It is settled legal position that the Court
which grants the bail also has the power to cancel
it.  The discretion of grant or cancellation of bail
can be exercised either at the instance of the
accused, the public prosecutor or the complainant
on finding new material or circumstances at any
point of time.
37. The Apex Court in Masroor Vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh  observed that the grant of bail without recording
reasons is impermissible equally in failure to consider the
relevant factors for such granting that deserves cancellation
of bail undoubtedly under Section 439(2) of Cr.P.C.
38.
In
Padmakar Tukaram Bhavnagare Vs. State of
Maharashtra
two judge bench expression of the Apex Court 
held that grounds for cancellation of bail are no doubt
interference with due course of justice against the concession
of bail but to cancel such bail order it must be perverse
outcome without application of mind and without
consideration of the relevant material.
39. Thus, from the above propositions of law it is
clear on the permissibility of cancellation of bail from
the impugned order granting bail if the order is found
unjust. Therefrom, application under
Section 439(2)
of
Cr.P.C. for cancellation of the bail can be maintained if
said order is unjust.  Even otherwise, once it comes
within the four corners of
Section 482
of Cr.P.C., same
can be entertained, from the inherent powers inhere in
this Court to meet ends of justice. It is also well
laid down
by
the five judge Bench expression of the Apex Court way
back in
Ratilal Bhanji Mithani Vs. Assistant Collector of
Customs, Bombay
referring to the three judge bench
expression in
Talab Haji Hussain Vs. Madhukar Purshottam  
Mondkar
that the High Court is having the inherent
power under
Section 561-A(old)
482(new)
Cr.P.C. to
cancel bail granted to a person, where such an order is
necessary to secure the end of justice or to prevent abuse
of process of Court as this power is always preserved to
the High Court under the Code.
It was also observed
that the inherent power of the High Court is not
conferred by Cr.P.C. but for to say the power which
inheres in the High Court no way limited or effected for
its exercise by High Court by the provisions of Cr.P.C.
40.
In
Narendra K Amin
supra it is observed by the
three Judge Bench that even the parameters for grant or
refusal are different to those for cancellation of bail under
Section 439(2)
Cr.P.C., court dealing with cancellation
application can find whether irrelevant material of substantial
nature was taken into account or relevant material omitted
for consideration while granting bail and such order of bail
whether perverse justifying its cancellation.
From Narendra
K Amin supra if the bail granted was without consideration
of the material, same can be cancelled by the High Court
under Section 439(2) Cr.P.C.
41.
Said Narendra K Amin
supra and
Talab Haji
Hussain
supra of equal three Judge Bench expressions, 
besides larger Bench expressions earlier of the Apex Court
including of the five Judge Bench expression in
Ratilal
Bhanji Mithani
supra not brought to the notice and not came
for consideration in the recent three Judge Bench expression
in
Ms. X vs. State of Telangana
supra.
42. Therefore, this Court can exercise power
under
Section 482
Cr.P.C or under
Section 439(2)
Cr.P.C to
quash or set-aside or annul the order passed by the Sessions
Judge, subject to availability of grounds to exercise such
power. The sum and substance of the above expressions are 
crystal clear that there is power of cancellation not only where
accused interferes or influences or threatens any of the
witnesses or the like, but also where the order passed either
by the subordinate court or same court is perverse or
otherwise not sustainable from non consideration of relevant
material or consideration of irrelevant material or no reasons
given and parameters for grant of bail not considered by any
cryptic order from the flow of administration of justice, for
interest of the society also, if not equal, one of the important
considerations to balance with the personal liberty not only in
granting but also in cancellation, though it cannot be in a
mechanical or casual manner without positive material, in
showing either granted mechanically or after bail order and
release, accused abused the concession.
43. From this now coming to the facts so far as the
private complaint on the allegation of threat with witnesses
covered by crime No.165 of 2016 under
Section 506
IPC of the
selfsame police station that was referred as false by referred
report dated 28.10.2017 with observation of none were
directly threatened the complainant from the investigation. So
far as complainant of crime No.31 of 2015 concerned, from 5
witnesses including the defacto complainant for the alleged
threat examined.  There is nothing to show any protest
application filed against it from if at all served notice.
44. Then comes to the other aspect on which the
cancellation sought is the proceedings of the Tahsildar at the
instance of local MLA to dispossess and damage the property 
of the defacto complainant and other witnesses which is a
private property however in issuing notice under
Land
Encroachment Act
as if it is a government poramboke under 
encroachment and taking advantage of the notices of the
Tahsildar at the instance of the local MLA, A.1 and A.2
damaged some property by destroying the crop.  Even same is  
relevant and taken therefrom, the main interference is by A.1
and A.2 and not by any other accused of the case on hand in
crime No.31 of 2015 covered by SC.No.421 of 2016, leave
about this court another Bench in granting bail to accused
other than A1,A2 & A4 observed that they are the main
perpetrators of the crime with prima-facie material against
them in the so called brutal and political murder, the regular
bail was granted to them with out considering that aspect
already observed from consideration in the subsequent grant
of bail to the A1,A2 & A4 with simple observation of they are
in judicial custody since 07.04.2015, when same is not at all
the consideration much less to overweigh the propensity of
crime in considering personnel liberty.  No doubt there is no
material or specific allegation of A4s participation or abuse of
the concession among them, equally of other accused other 
than A1&A2, if not both one of them one is a life convict. The
fact that A.1 the life convict in SC.No.72 of 1992 and was
released on parole prior to the grant of bail or later to it is a
consideration for cancellation of the bail when same not
considered with reference to the facts supra.
45. No doubt the paper clippings show it is outcome of
political vendetta and to threaten the witnesses the group of
accused by instigating at the instance of MLA cause damaged 
to the huge property of the defacto complainant and
witnesses and also in cause issued notice under
Section 7
of
the Land Encroachment Act in November 2017. Further the  
defacto complainant addressed the trial court and superior
police officer in this regard of the accused interference and life
threat to witnesses, though that is not the isolated factor so
far as other accused including from a crime registered was
later referred as discussed supra, but for against A1&2 as
additional factor for cancellation of the concession of bail
granted to A1&2 from the cogent material supra.
46. Having regard to the above, the bail order granted to
A.1 & A.2 is only cancelled in directing them to surrender
forth with before the trial Judge otherwise the learned trial
Judge is directed to issue arrest warrant and therefrom
remand them to judicial custody as under trial prisoners by
allowing the Crl.P.No.24695 of 2017 in part to that extent
while disposing of the same in so far as A4 concerned and
also by disposing of the other two petitions viz.,
Crl.P.No.24692 of 2017 and Crl.P.No.12683 of 2017 in so far
as A3 & A6 to A16 concerned for no cogent grounds to cancel 
bail order of other accused including of A.4 for what is
discussed supra and subject to the following additional
conditions of bail: As the investigation was completed long
back and charge sheet filed, case committed, sessions case 
number was allotted and the sessions case is pending since
2016 though applications for cancellation of bail filed are in
December 2017 by considering all these factors, so far as
Accused persons A3, A4, A6 to A 16 concerned,  they are 
directed  not to interfere either directly or indirectly with any
of the witnesses in any manner either by meeting them or by
threatening them either personally and physically or by
having calls or messages or the like or by sending any
persons.  The expressions referred supra shows the Court got
the power to sub serve the ends of justice even to modify the
existing conditions of bail order where not cancelled, thereby
the accused persons are directed to appear before the SHO on
every alternative Sunday for assurance of their availability
and non-interference with the witnesses till end of trial. If at
all there is any cogent material in future, either defacto
complainant or any of the witnesses are entitled to move the
court with such foundation for the court to consider even
against any of them and for that this common order no way
comes in the way.  The learned Sessions Judge shall make 
every endeavour of early disposal of the SC.No.421 of 2016.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
_______________________________     
Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO, J    
Date: 11.09.2018