[Cites
18
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
A.P.State Wakf Board, Represented By ... vs M.Mahender Reddy And Others on 26 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 70, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 114
Author:
T.Amarnath Goud
Bench:
T.Amarnath Goud
THE HONBLE SRI T.AMARNATH GOUD         

C.R.P.No.2501 of 2002 and batch 

26-10-2018 


A.P.State Wakf Board, Represented by its Chief Executive Officer, Nampally, Hyderabad. .. Petitioner

M.Mahender Reddy and others .. Respondents   

Counsel for the petitioner (in CRP):  Sri Mirza Safiulla Baig   

Counsel for the Respondents: Sri Wasim Ahmed Khan    

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:       

(2007) 13 Supreme Court Cases 174  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.AMARNATH GOUD          


C.R.P.No.2501 OF 2002 & W.P.NO.15068 OF 2003      

COMMON ORDER:
There are several directions of this Court in W.P.No.15068 of
2003 to list it along with C.R.P.No.2501 of 2002 by docket
proceedings dated 4.12.2008, 17.06.2010 and 19.07.2010.
The subject matter in both these cases and also the parties
are one and the same.  Hence, with the consent of both parties,
both the matters have been heard together and disposed of by a
common order.
For the purpose of convenience, the parties are herein after
referred to as they are arrayed in the writ petition.
2.      C.R.P.No.2501 OF 2002:-  This Civil Revision Petition is filed
by the A.P. State Wakf Board, against the Judgment and Decree in 
O.S.No.30 of 1999 dated 13.06.2001 on the file of the A.P. Wakf
Tribunal, Hyderabad, wherein the suit filed by the plaintiffs therein
against the Wakf Board for grant of perpetual injunction was
decreed.
C.R.P.M.P.No.8994 of 2017 was filed under
Order I Rule 10 of
Code of Civil Procedure
, seeking to implead the petitioners therein
as respondents 10 to 15 in the main Civil Revision Petition and this
Court by order dated 24.08.2018 allowed the said petition.
3.      W.P.NO.15068 OF 2003:- This writ petition is filed,
challenging the notice issued by the respondent, Wakf Board in File
No.1807/LG/RR/95, dated 18.6.2003, wherein the respondent  
appointed the enquiry officer under
Section 54(3)
of the Wakf Act,
1995 (for short, the Act) to cause enquiry into the matter as to
whether the subject property is the Wakf property.
4.      It is the case of the petitioners that originally the subject
lands admeasuring Ac.2.24 guntas was purchased by one   
Mr.K.Mallanna father of Mr.K.M.Narasimha Rao, who is the 
husband of Smt.K.Padma Bai under 19 different registered sale
deeds during the year 1932 onwards. After the death of K.Mallanna
and K.M.Narasimha Rao, the petitioners purchased plots out of
Ac.2.24 guntas in Sy.No.58, situated at Tirumalgherry Village,
Secunderabad under a registered sale deed dated 21.8.2001 from 
Smt.K.Padma Bai and others.  While so, one Mohsin Ali Khan filed 
a complaint before the Wakf Board against their vendors with
ulterior motive and hence the Wakf Board tried to interfere with the
possession of their vendors.  Their vendors filed O.S.No.30 of 1999
on the file of the Wakf Tribunal, Hyderabad to restrain the Wakf
Board from interfering with their peaceful possession and
enjoyment in respect of their lands and that the Wakf Tribunal
after thorough trial, decreed the said suit on 13.06.2001.
Thereafter, the petitioners purchased the said property from their
vendors, vide registered sale deeds.
5.      It is further stated that the Wakf Board issued a notice under
Section 54(1)
of the Act in File No.1807/LG/RR/95, dated
16.4.2002  to their vendor G.Mahender Reddy stating that the
subject  property is the wakf property and called for his
explanation.  He submitted his explanation dated 17.07.2002,
stating that the said property is not the wakf property and they are
not encroachers and it is private property purchased by them
through registered sale deeds.  There is a temple in portion of lands
and that they are paying taxes to the Cantonment Board and also
informed about the suit filed by them.  After receipt of the above
explanation, the Wakf Board again issued a notice under
Section
54(3)
of the Act in File No.1807/LG/RR/95, dated 14.10.2002,
stating that the Board appointed under
Section 71
of the Act one
Mr.Jalaluddin as an enquiry officer with full powers that of a civil
Court under the pretext that the property is the wakf property and
to cause enquiry.  On that they filed W.P.No.1074 of 2003 on the
file of this Court, and the respondent Board for the reasons best
known to it, withdrew the said notice dated 14.10.2002.  In
pursuance thereof, the writ petition was also withdrawn as there
was no cause of action survives for adjudication.
6.      It is further stated that the respondent Board once again
issued a notice in File No.1807/LG/RR/95, dated 18.06.2003,
which is impugned herein, appointing said Syed Jalaluddin under
Section 54(3)
of the Act to enquire into the subject lands and
submit a report.  Aggrieved thereby, the present writ petition has
been filed, contending that the notice is contrary to the Judgment
and Decree in O.S.No.30 of 1999 and there is no official Gazette
notification issued under
Wakf Act
showing that the subject lands
as wakf property and prayed to allow the writ petition by setting
aside the impugned notice dated 18.06.2003.  The learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners relied on a judgment reported in
Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy V. Syed Jalal
, regarding 
the procedure for appointment of Survey Commissioners for the
purpose of making survey of wakfs in the State and publication of
notification of the wakf properties in the official gazette.
7.      The respondent Wakf Board filed a counter affidavit and
contended that the subject property is the wakf property and relied
upon the entry in Muntakab and prayed to dismiss the writ petition
and to allow the Civil Revision Petition.
8.      Heard.
9.      In the grounds of Civil  Revision Petition filed by Wakf Board
only three grounds which were relied upon i.e., ground No.5 that
the Court below (Wakf Tribunal) failed to appreciate the documents
Exs.B1 to B8; and also ground No.7 that the Court below failed to
see that Ex.B1 Muntakab is nothing but certificate of Wakf.  In
ground No.8, it is submitted that any property registered under the
earlier law is deemed to be registered under
Section 43
of the Act.
10.     The Court below framed issue No.1; whether the plaintiffs are
entitled for perpetual injunction as prayed for.  In this regard, the
Court below has examined PWs.1 and 2 and marked Exs.A1 to    
A90, in all 84 documents on behalf of the plaintiffs. Further, the
Court below examined DW.1 and marked Exs.B1 to B8 on behalf of   
the defendant.
11.     Now, the point for consideration is; whether the plaintiffs are
entitled for perpetual injunction as decreed by the Wakf Tribunal.
Pw.1 in his evidence categorically stated that one Mr.K.Mallanna
and his son K.M.Narasimha Rao were the original owners and 
pattedars of the plaint schedule property admeasuring Ac.2.25
guntas in Sy.No.58 of Tirumalgherry Village and that they acquired
the said property under 19 different sale deeds dating back to 1932
onwards.  The original registered sale deeds are in Urdu and they
filed English translation in the Court below and they are marked as
Exs.A1 to A34. After the death of K.Mallanna and his son
K.M.Narasimha Rao, their legal heirs sold the plaint schedule
property to plaintiffs 1 to 3 and M/s.Modi Construction under an
agreement of sale marked as Ex.A39. Later M/s.Modi Construction  
relinquished their right in the said property by executing an
agreement marked as Ex.A40.  Plaintiffs 1 to 3 entered into a
compromise with the occupants of the 30 tenements and as per the 
compromise, the tenants agreed to give part of their land to
plaintiffs 1 to 3 and that plaintiffs 1 to 3 agreed to construct
houses for them and accordingly, they entered into the agreements
Ex.A41 to A61 and Exs.A62 to A67 are the receipts towards 
payments made to the tenants.  Exs.A68 to A71 are the receipts 
and Exs.A72 to A79 are the assessment forms in the name of  
K.M.Narasimha Rao.  Exs.A80 to A86 are the photographs of the  
suit property.
12.     In the cross examination on behalf of the Wakf Board, PW.1
denied the suggestion that the suit property is an open land and
there are no tenements and he stated that the plaintiffs and the
tenants are in possession and enjoyment of the property and it is
the private property and that the Wakf Board has no right to
interfere with their possession.  The 5th plaintiff, who was the
son-in-law of late K.M.Narasimha Rao was examined as PW.2 and   
he corroborated the evidence of PW.1 on all material aspects of the
case.
13.     On behalf of the Wakf Board, DW.1 who was working as  
Executive Officer has been examined and he stated that old
Sy.No.54, corresponding to new Sy.No.58, admeasuring Ac.2.24  
guntas of Tirmalgherry Village is a wakf property attached to
Dargah Hazrath Koh-e-Imam Zamin. According to revenue records  
and Munthakab, the suit property is Inam land.  The total extent
attached to said Dargah is Ac.82.27 guntas and out of which
Ac.55.10 guntas was acquired by defence authorities by paying
compensation and remaining extent left over is Ac.27.17 guntas
and Sy.No.58 admeasuring Ac.2.24 guntas is part and parcel of the
remaining Ac.27.17 guntas.  According to DW.1, there is a temple
and also a Church in the said land.  The Wakf Board has issued a
notice under
Section 54(1)
of the Act to the occupants and the
tenants have represented before the Wakf Board and the Wakf 
Board fixed the rent and asked them to execute rental agreements
and pay rents to the Wakf Board.
14.     In the cross examination, DW.1 admitted that he has not filed
any rental agreements or receipts in support of his contention to
show that the Wakf Board is in possession of the property and the
occupants are its tenants.  DW.1 also stated that there is no
mention that the property was registered in the Endowments
Register maintained by Ummare Majabi, which means, there is no  
record to show that the said property is wakf property.  DW.1
admitted that in Column No.6 of Sy.No.58 it is shown as Mafi Inam
land, but in Column No.2, it is mentioned as agricultural land
attached to a temple.  There is no evidence to show that old
Sy.No.54 corresponding to new Sy.No.58.  The existence of a 
Temple and Church in the subject land gives a doubt as to whether
the subject land is wakf property.
15.     Admittedly, the plaintiffs are in possession of the suit
property and the defendant was never in possession of the same.
The defendant failed to establish that the Wakf Board is in
possession and the plaintiffs were in unlawful possession of the
suit property.  The defendant failed to establish its right over the
subject land.  The plaintiffs have categorically fulfilled the
requirements to grant an order of injunction on the weightage of
the evidence and exhibits marked in their favour.   The findings
given by the Court below suffers no legal infirmities and the
judgment and decree, granting injunction by the Court below is
confirmed. The Civil Revision Petition filed by the Wakf Board is
liable to be dismissed.
16.     The writ petitioners herein are the respondents in the above
Civil Revision Petition.  They filed the present writ petition,
challenging the impugned notice dated 18.06.2003, issued under
Section 54(3)
of the Act in File No. No.1807/LG/RR/95.  Before
issuing the impugned notice, the respondent on the earlier
occasion issued notice dated 16.04.2002 in File
No.1807/LG/RR/95 and also issued notice dated 14.10.2002.  
Thus, the impugned notice is the third notice issued under
Section
54(3)
of the Act.  Initially on 16.4.2002, notice was issued under
Section 54(1)
of the Act.  The Chief Executive Officer of the Wakf
Board indicated that the Dargah Koh-e-Imam-e-Zamin, situated at
Tiramalgherry is a registered wakf having landed property
comprising in Sy.No.58, admeasuring Ac.2.24 guntas.  Further
with a pre-meditated mind, the respondent has observed that
Mr.M.Mahender Reddy has un-authorisedly encroached a part of  
land to an extent of Ac.2.24 guntas belonging to the Wakf
institution and to explain as to why an order under
Section 54(3)
of
the Act, requiring him to remove the encroachment should not be
issued.  In pursuance thereof, a reply to the said show cause notice
was submitted on 17.07.2002, explaining the antecedents of the
property and also about the Judgment and Decree in O.S.No.30 of 
1999.  They also stated that it is a private property and it is not the
wakf property and they are in lawful possession as owners.  Later,
the respondent has issued the order dated 14.10.2002, appointing
an enquiry officer under
Section 71
of the Act to enquire into the
matter and submit the enquiry report to the Wakf Board by
conducting enquiry under
Section 54(3)
of the Act.  It is also
indicated in the said order that the enquiry officer shall have the
same powers as are vested in a civil Court under
Code of Civil
Procedure
, 1908.
17.     It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners that W.P.No.1074 of 2003 was filed, challenging the
notice dated 14.10.2002 and in pursuance of the withdrawal of the
above notice by the respondent, the writ petition was withdrawn as
no cause of action survives for adjudication.  It is an undisputed
fact and there is no denial.  The respondent once again issued the
order dated 18.06.2003 with a pre-meditated mind, stating that the
persons 1 to 14 in the list appended and to whom impugned orders
have been served are encroachers and a show cause notice under
Section 54(1)
of the Act was issued and on receipt of the reply, the
Wakf Board while denying the contentions of the explanation has
opined that prima facie, it is a fit case to cause an enquiry and
thus, the Chief Executive Officer of the Wakf Board appointed the
enquiry officer.
18.     At the stage of admission, this Court granted interim
suspension of impugned order dated 18.6.2003 vide
W.P.M.P.No.18642 of 2003 dated 23.07.2003.  Undisputedly, the  
petitioners and their vendors are in possession of the subject land
and prima facie, they are entitled for the injunction in the light of
the exhibits marked in O.S.No.30 of 1999.  The petitioners have
also placed before the Court, relevant documents marked as
exhibits in support of their claim to show their title and possession
upon the subject land. The respondent has grossly failed to
establish its possession upon the property.
20.     Now, with regard to the issue of title is concerned to say that
the subject land is wakf property; it is necessary to refer
Section 5
of the Act:
5. Publication of list of wakfs.(1) On receipt of a report
under sub-section (3) of
section 4
, the State Government
shall forward a copy of the same to the Board.
(2) The Board shall examine the report forwarded to it under
sub-section (1) and publish in the Official Gazette a list of
Sunni wakfs or Shia wakfs in the State, whether in existence
at the commencement of this Act or coming into existence 
thereafter, to which the report relates, and containing such
other particulars as may be prescribed.
First of all the respondent has to establish whether the property so
claimed is either Shia Wakf or Sunni Wakf, but the impugned order
is silent.  The definition of Shia wakf, Sunni wakf and Wakif is as
follows:
3. Definitions:- In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires:
(n) Shia wakf means a wakf governed by Shia law;
(o) Sunni wakf means a wakf governed by Sunni law;
(iii)  a wakf-alal-aulad to the extent to which the property is
      dedicated for any purpose recognised by Muslim law
      as pious, religious or      charitable, and wakif means
      any person making such dedication;
There is no publication of official Gazette enclosing the list of wakf
properties placed before the Wakf Tribunal or before this Court.
The matter has been referred under
Section 6
of the Act by raising
the dispute to the Wakf Tribunal, which reads thus:
6. Disputes regarding wakfs.(1) If any question arises
whether a particular property specified as wakf property in
the list of wakfs is wakf property or not or whether a wakf
specified in such list is a Shia wakf or Sunni wakf, the Board
or the mutawalli of the wakf or any person interested therein
may institute a suit in a Tribunal for the decision of the
question and the decision of the Tribunal in respect of such
matter shall be final:
Provided that no such suit shall be entertained by the
Tribunal after the expiry of one year from the date of the
publication of the list of wakfs.
Explanation.For the purposes of this section and
section 7
, the expression any person interested therein,
shall, in relation to any property specified as wakf property
in the list of wakfs published after the commencement of this
Act, shall include also every person who, though not
interested in the wakf concerned, is interested in such
property and to whom a reasonable opportunity had been 
afforded to represent his case by notice served on him in that
behalf during the course of the relevant inquiry under
section 4
.
The decision of the Wakf Tribunal in O.S.No.30 of 1999 is in favour
of the petitioners herein, the plaintiffs before the Tribunal in whose
favour the suit is decreed.
21.     Though the Chief Executive Officer of the Wakf Board is
vested with powers under
Section 25
of the Act for inspecting the
records and also investigating into the nature of the property, he is
authorized to remove the encroachments under
Section 54
of the
Act by following the procedure and after conducting due enquiry,
which reads thus:-
25. Duties and powers of Chief Executive Officer:-(1)
Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made
thereunder and the directions of the Board, functions of the
Chief Executive Officer shall include
(a) investigating the nature and extent of wakfs and wakf
properties and calling whenever necessary, an inventory of
wakf properties and calling, from time to time, for accounts,
returns and information from mutawallis;
(b) inspecting or causing inspection of wakf properties and
account, records, deeds or documents relating thereto;
(c) doing generally of such acts as may be necessary for the
control, maintenance and superintendence of wakfs.
(2) In exercising the powers of giving directions under sub-
section (1) in respect of any wakf, the Board shall act in
conformity with the directions by the wakf in the deed of the
wakf, the purpose of wakf and such usage and customs of 
the wakf as are sanctioned by the school of Muslim law to
which the wakf belongs.
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the
Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties as may be assigned to him or delegated
to him under this Act.
54. Removal of encroachment from wakf property:- (1)
Whenever the Chief Executive Officer considers whether on
receiving any complaint or on his own motion that there has
been an encroachment on any land, building, space or other
property which is wakf property and, which has been
registered as such under this Act, he shall cause to be
served upon the encroacher a notice specifying the
particulars of the encroachment and calling upon him to
show cause before a date to be specified in such notice, as to
why an order requiring him to remove the encroachment
before the date so specified should not be made and shall
also send a copy of such notice to the concerned mutawalli.
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be served in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) If, after considering the objections, received during the
period specified in the notice, and after conducting an
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, the Chief
Executive Officer is satisfied that the property in question is
wakf property and that there has been an encroachment on 
any such wakf property, he may, by an order, require the
encroacher to remove such encroachment and deliver 
possession of the land, building, space or other property
encroached upon to the mutawalli of the wakf.
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall prevent any
person aggrieved by the order made by the Chief Executive
Officer under that sub-section from instituting a suit in a
Tribunal to establish that he has right, title or interest in the
land, building, space or other property: Provided that no
such suit shall be instituted by a person who has been let
into possession of the land, building, space or other property
as a lessee, licensee or mortgagee by the mutawalli of the
wakf or by any other person authorised by him in this
behalf.
In the said process, the Chief Executive Officer in the impugned
order has stated that under
Section 71
of the Act, he appointed the
enquiry officer to enquire into the matter, and
Section 71
reads
thus:-
71. Manner of holding inquiry.(1) The Board may, either
on an application received under
section 73
or on its own
motion:
(b) authorise any person in this behalf to hold an inquiry
    into any matter relating to a wakf and take such action as
    it thinks fit.
(2) For the purposes of an inquiry under this section, the
Board or any person authorised by it in this behalf, shall
have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under
the
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908) for enforcing the
attendance of witnesses and production of documents.
It is relevant to note that
Section 71
enquiry is coupled with
Section 73
of the Act, which is the power of Executive Officer to
direct banks or other persons to make payments, which reads 
thus:-
73. Power of Chief Executive Officer to direct banks or
other person to make payments:(1) Notwithstanding  
anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Chief Executive Officer, if he is satisfied that it is
necessary and expedient so to do, make an order directing
any bank in which, or any person with whom any money  
belonging to a wakf is deposited, to pay the contribution,
leviable under
section 72
, out of such money, as may be
standing to the credit of the wakf in such bank or may be
deposited with such person, or out of the moneys which
may, from time to time, be received by bank or other person
for or on behalf of the wakf by way of deposit, and on receipt
of such orders, the bank or the other person, as the case
may be, shall, when no appeal has been preferred under
sub-section (3), comply with such orders, or where an appeal
has been preferred under sub-section (3), shall comply with
the orders made by the Tribunal on such appeal.
Since
Section 73
of the Act deals with the banks and financial
transactions, it cannot be ignored and under
Section 71(1)(b)
and
(2) of the Act, the enquiry officer is vested with the powers to hold
an enquiry and they shall have the same powers as are vested in a
civil Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908.
21.     To say that the land is wakf property, it is necessary to show
that it should be registered under
Section 36
of the Act by giving
description of the property and sufficient identification of the said
property.
Section 36
of the Act reads thus:-
36. Registration.(1) Every wakf, whether created before or
after the commencement of this Act, shall be registered at
the office of the Board.
(3) An application for registration shall be made in such form
and manner and at such place as the Board may by  
regulation provide and shall contain following particulars:
(a) a description of the wakf properties sufficient for the
    identification thereof;
Under
Section 37(d)
of the Act, the Board shall maintain a Register
of wakfs, containing the particulars of all wakf properties and all
title deeds and documents relating thereto.
Section 37(d)
of the Act
reads thus:
37. Register of wakfs:The Board shall maintain a register
of wakfs which shall contain in respect of each wakf copies
of the wakf deeds, when available and the following
particulars, namely:
(d) particulars of all wakf properties and all title deeds and
    documents relating thereto;
22.     It is not in dispute that the respondent has not registered the
subject land in its registers and there is no registration and no
gazette notification was published by the respondent to show that
the subject lands are wakf property.  In the absence of the
preliminary requirement that the physical possession and title
documents are with the respondent, it is unjust on the part of the
respondent to appoint an enquiry officer vesting with powers of a
civil Court once again to decide the issue, which was already
decided elaborately in O.S.No.30 of 1999 by the Wakf Tribunal.
This order dated 18.06.2003 of the respondent is nothing but
sitting over the judgment and decree of the Wakf Tribunal.  In spite
of the detailed judgment in O.S.No.30 of 1999 and the reply
submitted by the occupants to the respondent, it cannot be
construed that petitioners are encroachers of the wakf property and
they are liable to be evicted.  Prima facie, the respondent has not
proved by cogent evidence that the subject land is the wakf
property and it has miserably failed to establish the same.
23.     The impugned order of the respondent do not speak about the
purpose of withdrawing the earlier order dated 14.10.2002 and
issuing a fresh order dated 18.06.2003.  The impugned order dated
18.06.2003 do not deal with the contentions of the reply and the
said order is passed with pre-meditated mind that the petitioners
are encroachers and are liable to be evicted.  The impugned order
dated 18.06.2003 is nothing else but reviewing its own order dated
14.10.2002.   There is no power vested with the respondent to
review its own order suo motu.   The decision of the respondent
appears to be unilateral and under the garb of issuing notice and
passing an order without giving cogent reasons is the one, which is
bad and arbitrary and is contrary to law and also contrary to the
Judgment and Decree passed in O.S.No.30 of 1999 and therefore, 
the impugned order cannot be sustained and the same is liable to
be quashed.
24.     Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed.  The writ
petition is allowed and the notice issued by the respondent in File
No.1807/LG/RR/95, dated 18.06.2003 is quashed.  No order as to 
costs.  As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions pending if any shall
stand closed.
_______________________    
T.AMARNATH GOUD,J      
Date:26-10-2018