[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Yaragada Govind vs The State Of A.P., Rep. By Public ... on 21 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 148
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
,
Shameem Akther
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO AND THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE SHAMEEM AKTHER                         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.472 of 2013     

21.04.2018 

Yaragada Govind Appellant/accused   

The State of A.P., rep. by Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., Hyd.Respondent

Counsel for the appellant:Smt. Hema Jaiswal, advocate.

Counsel for the Respondents:Public Prosecutor, State of A.P.
                                                
<Gist :

>Head Note: 

?  Cases Referred:

1.AIR 1953 SC 364  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P. NAVEEN RAO         
AND  
THE HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE SHAMEEM AKTHER          

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.472 OF 2013      

JUDGMENT :
(per Honble Dr. Justice Shameem Akther)   

        
        This Criminal Appeal, under
Section 374
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, is filed by the appellant/accused,
challenging the judgment, dated 09.04.2012, passed in S.C.No.4 of
2012 by the Special Judge for Trial of Cases under
The Scheduled
Castes & Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
-
cum-Additional District & Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram, whereby, 
the Court below convicted the accused of the offence punishable
under
Section 302
I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo Rigorous 
Imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- and to
undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for six months, in default.
2.      Heard the submissions of Smt. Hema Jaiswal, learned Legal 
Aid Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant/accused, learned
Additional Public Prosecutor representing the respondent-State and
perused the record.
3.      The learned Legal Aid Counsel appearing on behalf of the
accused would contend that P.Ws.1 to 3 are interested witnesses.
There is no consistency in their evidence.  The accused did not
confess commission of the offence.  M.O.1-knife was not recovered
pursuant to the confession of the accused.  There are omissions
and contradictions in the evidence of prosecution witnesses.  The
Court below erred in finding the accused guilty of the offence
punishable under
Section 302
of I.P.C.  In the alternative, it is
contended that the evidence on record did not make out an offence
under
Section 302
of I.P.C. and at the most, it makes out an
offence under Section 304 Part-II of
I.P.C
. and ultimately prayed to
set aside the conviction and sentence recorded against the accused
by the Court below.
4.      The learned Additional Public Prosecutor representing the
respondent-State would submit that there is direct evidence of
P.Ws.1 to 3 explaining the manner in which, the deceased, who is
the mother-in-law of accused, was hacked to death by the accused 
with M.O.1-Knife.  M.O.1-Knife was recovered pursuant to the
confession made by the accused.  There is also evidence of Panch
witnesses and other witnesses to connect the accused with the
alleged offence.  The prosecution proved the guilt of the accused
for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of I.P.C. beyond
reasonable doubt.  Further, no case is made out for the offence
punishable under Section 304 Part-II of
I.P.C
. and ultimately
prayed to dismiss the appeal by confirming the conviction and
sentence recorded by the Court below.
5.      In view of the above contentions put-forth by both the
learned counsel, the points that arise for determination in this
Criminal Appeal are:
1. Whether the accused caused the death of the 
deceased-Mandala Gowrama?
2. Whether the conviction and sentence recorded
against the accused for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC by the Court below is liable to be set
aside ?
6.      The case of the prosecution is that the deceased- Mandala
Gowramma is the mother-in-law of accused.  P.W.1 is the sister of
deceased.  P.W.2 is the daughter of deceased and wife of accused.
P.W.3 is the neighbour of the deceased.  There are marital disputes
between the accused and P.W.2, his wife.  P.W.2 was staying with 
her mother, i.e., the deceased.  The deceased was not willing to
send P.W.2 to lead marital life with the accused, in view of his
unruly behaviour.  Therefore, accused bore grudge against the
deceased.  On 23.08.2011, around 12:00 noon, the accused went  
to the house of the deceased armed with M.O.1-Knife and 
demanded her to send his wife, P.W.2, to lead marital life with him
and stated that he would not go back unless the deceased sends 
his wife with him.  Unable to bear continuous threats, the deceased
came out of the thatched house and rebuked the accused for his
improper behaviour.  Then, the accused attacked the deceased 
with M.O.1-Knife and inflicted an injury on the left side of the neck
with force, causing her instantaneous death.  While P.W.1 and
L.W.3-Yaragada Kumar & others tried to catch the accused, he fled
away from the scene of offence with M.O.1-Knife.
7.      On a report lodged by P.W.1 (sister of the deceased), the
police registered the crime, completed investigation and filed
Charge-sheet before the Magistrate concerned. The learned
Magistrate, has taken cognizance and committed the case, vide 
P.R.C.No.16 of 2011 to the Court of Session, Vizianagaram, under
Section 209(a)
Cr.P.C., since the offence under
Section 302
I.P.C.
is exclusively triable by the Court of Session.  On committal, the
learned Principal Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram, registered the case
as S.C.No.4 of 2012 for the offences punishable under
Sections
302
and
506(ii)
of I.P.C., and made over the case to the Court
below for trial and disposal in accordance with law.  The Court
below framed charge under
Section 302
of I.P.C. against the
accused, read over to him for which, he pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried.
8.      To prove the case of prosecution, P.Ws.1 to 10 were
examined. Ex.P.1-Report is given by P.W.1 to Andra Police on 
23.08.2011, Ex.P.2-Set of photographs relating to deceased along
with one C.D, Ex.P.3-Scene observation Report Dt.24.08.2011, 
Ex.P.4-Inquest report dated 24.08.2011, Ex.P.5-Mediators report
dated 24.08.2011, Ex.P.6-Scene observation report dt.24.08.2011,
Ex.P.7-Post mortem certificate of deceased issued by Pw.8-Doctor,
Ex.P.8-Final opinion issued by Pw.8, Ex.P.9-Questionnaire by the
Inspector of Police, Gajapathinagaram, and answers given by Pw.8,
Ex.P.10-Original FIR in Crime No.30/2011, Ex.P.11-Rough sketch 
of scene of offence dated 24.08.2011, Ex.P.12-Letter of Advice
dt.14.10.2011 and Ex.P.13-RFSL report dated 14.10.2011 were  
marked.  M.O.1-Knife, M.O.2-Shirt and M.O.3-Lungi were also 
marked.
9.      When the accused was confronted with the incriminating
evidence appearing against him in the prosecution evidence under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C, he denied the same and pleaded innocence.
10.     The evidence of P.W.1  Jalumuri Sarojini reveals that
deceased was her sister.  P.W.2 is the daughter of the deceased.
The marriage between P.W.2 and the accused was performed 13   
years prior to the death of the deceased.  They were blessed with a
son.  Three months prior to the death of the deceased, the
accused, in a fully drunken state, beat his wife-P.W.2 and also the
deceased with a stick and caused bleeding injuries.  On that, the
deceased lodged a report with the police against the accused.  The
accused was arrested in that case and the said dispute ended in
compromise at the intervention of elders.  In a panchayat, the
accused promised to look after his wife/P.W.2 very well.  Even
then, there was no change in the attitude of the accused.  Six
months prior to the date of her deposition, at about 12.00 noon,
the accused, in a fully drunken state, came to the house of the
deceased, demanded the deceased to send her daughter to live 
with him and threatened to kill her, if she did not send her
daughter.  On hearing the cries of the accused, the deceased,
P.W.2 and Kumar (son of the accused) came outside from the  
house of the deceased.  Then, the accused hacked the deceased  
with M.O.1- knife on the left side of her neck. The deceased
suffered bleeding injuries, collapsed on the ground and succumbed
to the injuries.  P.W.1 is the person who lodged the report with the
police, which was marked through her evidence as Ex.P.1.
11.     P.W.2  Yelagada Sanyasamma is the wife of the accused.   
She deposed that she is the daughter of deceased.  Her marriage
with the accused was performed 13 years prior to the incident and
they were blessed with a son.  She also deposed about the
harassment meted out to her by the accused and the Panchayat  
that took place in between the accused and herself.  There is clear
evidence of P.W.2 that the accused hacked on the left side of neck
of the deceased with a knife.  Her evidence corroborates with the
evidence of P.W.1 in all material particulars.
12.     P.W.3  Mallidi Yereribabu, is a neighbour of the deceased.
He deposed that the accused used to go to his house in a drunken
state, used to beat P.W.2.  Six months ago on one day when he 
was at his house, the accused came to the house of deceased and  
asked her to send P.W.2 along with him.  As the deceased was not 
willing to send P.W.2, the accused grew wild and hacked the
deceased with M.O.1-Knife on the left side of the neck and caused
injuries.  He also deposed that P.W.1 gave complaint with regard to
accused committing the alleged offence.
13.     P.W.4 is the Ex-Sarpanch of Maguru village.  He deposed 
about accused visiting the house of deceased in a drunken state,
the deceased giving complaint against the accused and the dispute
ending in compromise. He also deposed that though Panchayat was   
held, the accused did not change his attitude. He also stated that
on receipt of information of the accused committing the alleged
offence, he rushed to the scene of offence and found the dead
body of the deceased lying there. He was also informed by P.W.1
that the accused caused subject death and she filed the report
under Ex.P.1.
14.     P.Ws.1 to 4 were subjected to lengthy cross-examination,
where they have reiterated what they have stated in their
examination-in-chief.  There is no animosity, grudge or reason to
falsely implicate the accused in this case was brought on record in
their cross-examination.
15.     P.W.5 is a Head Constable who deposed about issuance of  
First Information Report and other circumstances of the case.
P.W.6 is a photographer who spoke about taking of photographs 
which were marked as Ex.P.2 along with C.D.  P.W.7 is the Village
Revenue Officer, Avuru village.  He deposed about his finding the
dead body of the deceased in front of the house of deceased and
conducting scene observation and inquest over the dead body of
the deceased. Ex.P3 is the scene observation report.  Ex.P.4 is the
inquest report. Ex.P.5 is mediators report for seizure of M.O.1-
knife.   There is evidence of P.W.7 which reveals confession of
commission of the offence in this case and pursuant to the said
confession, M.Os.2 and 3-lungi and shirt were seized under Ex.P6-
panchanama.
16.     P.W.8 is the doctor, who conducted Post-mortem  
examination over the dead body of the deceased and issued Post- 
mortem Examination report under Ex.P.7 and final opinion under
Ex.P.8.  He clearly stated that the deceased died due to cardio
respiratory arrest and cerebral death, due to cutting of trachea
spinal cord and carotid arteries with a sharp object.
17.     P.W.9 is the Sub-Inspector of Police, who deposed about the
issuance of FIR under Ex.P.10, on receipt of Ex.P.1-report.
18.     P.W.10 is the Circle Inspector of Police who conducted
investigation and filed charge sheet against the accused, who
corroborated with regard to the investigation conducted in this
case.
19.     The contention put-forth on behalf of the accused is that the
accused is innocent and he is no way connected to the subject
death.  There is specific evidence of P.W.1 to P.W.3 that the
accused hacked the deceased on the left side of the neck and
caused her instantaneous death.   There is also evidence of P.W.1
to P.W.3 that the accused gave threats to the deceased to do away
with her life as the deceased was not willing to send her daughter
P.W.2 to live marital life with the accused.  P.W.1 is sister, and
P.W.2 is daughter, of the deceased.  There is no animosity or
reason for them to falsely implicate the accused in the subject
case.  P.W.3 is the neighbour, who is also a direct witness to the
commission of the offence by the accused in this case.   There is
consistency and corroboration in the evidence of P.W.1 to P.W.3.
Their evidence is not shaken in cross-examination.  There is no
reason to discard their testimony.  There are no omissions or
contradictions in their evidence with regard to the accused hacking
the deceased with M.O.1-curved knife.  On this aspect, it is
pertinent to refer to a decision in
Dalip Singh & others v. State of
Punjab
, wherein it has been laid down as under:
"A witness is normally to be considered independent unless he
or she springs from sources which are likely to be tainted and
that usually means unless the witness has cause, such as 
enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely.
Ordinarily a close relation would be the last to screen the real
culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person. It is true,
when feelings run high and there is personal cause for enmity,
that there is a tendency to drag in an innocent person against
whom a witness has a grudge along with the guilty, but
foundation must be laid for such a criticism and the mere fact
of relationship far from being a foundation is often a sure
guarantee of truth. However, we are not attempting any
sweeping generalization. Each case must be judged on its own 
facts. Our observations are only made to combat what is so
often put forward in cases before us as a general rule of
prudence. There is no such general rule. Each case must be
limited to and be governed by its own facts."
The above decision has since been followed in
Guli Chand
and Ors. v. State of Rajasthan
(1974 (3) SCC 698) in which
Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras
(AIR 1957 SC 614) was also
relied upon.
20.     M.O.1 is the knife seized pursuant to the confession made by
the accused.  As per the evidence on record, blood stained shirt
and lungi of the accused, marked as M.Os.2 and 3, were seized 
pursuant to the confession of the accused, and they were subjected
to examination by the Forensic Science Laboratory, and the expert
opined that human origin blood was detected on M.Os. 2 and 3.  It
is also an incriminating circumstance against the accused.   Human
origin blood was also detected on M.O.1-knife, which was
recovered pursuant to the confession made by the accused.  There
is no explanation for the side of the accused how the accused came
into contact with such blood on his apparel.  There is also specific
evidence that the accused left the scene of occurrence with M.O.1
knife.
21.     There is specific evidence of P.W.8-Doctor who conducted
autopsy over the dead body of the deceased that the subject death
was caused due to cutting trachea spinal cord and carotid arteries
with sharp edged object.  Under Ex.P7-post mortem report, there
is specific mention of cause of death of the deceased, as deposed
by P.W.8-Doctor.  There is consistency and corroboration between
the ocular testimony and medical evidence.  Though P.Ws.1 and 2 
are interested witnesses, mere interestedness is not a ground to
discard their evidence, unless they have a strong reason to falsely
depose against the accused and their presence at the time of the
incident is found to be improbable.   P.Ws.1 and 2 are natural
witnesses to be present at the time of occurrence of the incident.
They have no grouse or animosity against the accused.  P.Ws.1 to
3 are truthful witnesses.
22.     Further more, there is no sudden provocation for the accused
to commit the offence.  As per the evidence on record, the accused
proceeded to the scene of occurrence with a knife with pre-
determined mind to do away with the life of the deceased as she
was not sending P.W.2 to his company to lead marital life.   There
are also utterances made by the accused to that effect.    More
over, the subject death was caused in a broad day light in a
residential area.  This is substantiated by the evidence of P.Ws.1 to
3.   There are long pending matrimonial disputes between the
accused, his wife and the deceased.   Inspite of advice given by the
elders, the accused did not change his behaviour.  The accused had
clear intention and motive to eliminate his mother-in-law, as she
was not willing to send P.W.2 to lead marital life with him.  There
were instances to show that on earlier occasions also, the accused
caused bleeding injuries to the deceased and thereafter, the
accused promised in the presence of elders to look after P.W.2
well, but however, he did not change his attitude.  Viewing from
any angle, it cannot be said that the subject death was caused due
to sudden provocation.  Further, there is no evidence provocating
the accused to cause the death.   There are no inconsistencies or
omissions or contradictions in the evidence of material prosecution
witnesses, to extend benefit of doubt in favour of the accused.
There is no dispute with regard to the time and place of death of
the deceased.   Further, there is also no dispute that the subject
death is homicidal in nature.  The prosecution clinchingly proved
the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC.  The Court below had analysed 
the entire evidence on record and recorded the finding against the
accused basing on the oral and documentary evidence.  There is
nothing to take a different view.  All the contentions raised on
behalf of the accused would fail.  The Criminal Appeal is devoid of
merit and is liable to be dismissed.
23.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed, confirming the
conviction and sentence recorded against the appellant/accused by
judgment, dated 09.04.2012, passed in S.C.No.4 of 2012 by the
Special Judge for Trial of Cases under
The Scheduled Castes &
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
-cum-
Additional District & Sessions Judge, Vizianagaram.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in this Criminal
Appeal shall stand closed.
______________  
P. NAVEEN RAO, J    
___________________   
Dr. SHAMEEM AKTHER, J     
21st April, 2018