[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mrs. Ayesha Oman vs M/S.Trend World Rep. By Its Proprietor ... on 26 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 1, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 215 (2019) 1 ANDHLD 193, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 193, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 215
THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN              

ARBITRATION APPLICATION No.98 of 2015      


26.10.2018 

Mrs. Ayesha Oman  Applicant   

M/s.Trend World rep. by its Proprietor S.A.Hyder, And another. Respondents 

!Counsel for the applicant : Mohammed Imran Khan 

Counsel for the respondents : Sri B.Vijaysen Reddy for R.Shashank Reddy 
        

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

(2009) 10 SCC 103 
2018 (2) ALD 728 (DB) 

THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN              

ARBITRATION APPLICATION No.98 OF 2015       
ORDER:
This is an application filed under sub-sections (5) and (6) of
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, hereinafter
referred to as the A&C Act seeking to appoint sole arbitrator to
adjudicate the claims and disputes between the applicant and the
respondents. The affidavit filed in support of the application
delineates the applicants case under
Section 11(5)
and (6) of the A&C
Act.
2.      The respondents filed counter admitting execution of
unregistered lease agreement, dated 06.08.2011 and pleading that
the period of lease was for eleven months and on its expiry, the lease
agreement itself had expired and therefore, there is no surviving
arbitration agreement between the parties. It is their contention that
they cannot be reckoned as holding over tenants and there is no
question of their holding possession on the basis of the terms of the
lease agreement, dated 06.08.2011. They plead that notice under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, was issued to them
and the transaction is governed by the special statute, namely, the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
, and therefore, the dispute in the
nature sought to be raised cannot be adjudicated by way of
arbitration. It is their plea that the arbitration clause is non-existent
and such clause is no longer in force in view of the expiry of the lease
agreement. Thus, they plead that the application is not eligible to be
allowed.
3.      Learned counsel for the applicant made reference to the
Judgment of the Apex Court in
Magma Leasing & Finance Limited  
v. Potluri Madhavilata
and argued for the position that contractual
dispute resolution clause in the form of arbitration clause would
survive and would not perish nor become inoperative even where
there is termination of contract due to breach. The terms of the
arbitration agreement in the case in hand is clause 21 of the lease
agreement, dated 06.08.2011. It provides that in the event of any
dispute with regard to the agreement or the interpretation of any of
the terms and conditions thereof or the implementation thereof,
including the question of determination of any aspects thereof as
applicable, and all of other matters related to or arising out of the
same, the parties agree that the dispute shall be referred to the
arbitration at the hands of the arbitrator, all other aspects as per the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
. The learned counsel for the
applicant argued that this clause is comprehensive enough and is in
the widest possible terms and it covers all disputes, differences,
claims and questions and all such disputes survive for the purpose of
resolution through arbitration.
Magma Leasing & Finance Limited
(supra) and the precedents followed therein were referred to by the
learned counsel for the applicant in support of this argument.
4.      Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the
Division Bench of this Court in Vodafone Essar Infrastructure
Limited v. Prapoorna Properties Private Limited  held that the
issues of the nature in hand are not referable to arbitration. It is
argued that the relationship between the parties to the lease
agreement in question no more survives in view of the termination of
the limited period of eleven months of the lease agreement, dated
06.08.2011 and therefore, the arbitration agreement, which was part
of that lease agreement, itself has become inoperative and does not
have the efficacy to be enforced through any measure under sub-
section (5) or (6) of
Section 11
of the A&C Act.
5.      It needs to be noted, at the outset, that in Vodafone Essar
Infrastructure Limited (supra), the Division Bench of this Court
decided a Revision arising from an Application under
Section 8
of the
A&C Act, which was filed before the VIII Additional Senior civil Judge,
Ranga Reddy District at L.B.Nagar.
The Division Bench made erudite
reference to the decision of the Apex Court in
Booz Allen &
Hamilton Inc., v. SBI Home Finance Limited
and also
Sukanya 
Holdings Private Limited v. Jayesh H.Pandya
to hold that within
the jurisdiction of
Section 8
of the A&C Act, it was impermissible for
the trial Court to refuse to try the suit and make a reference on the
basis of an arbitration agreement, in cases which fell within the
sphere of exclusion on the basis of the law
laid down in
Booz Allen &
Hamilton Inc.
, (supra).
The precedent in Vodafone Essar
Infrastructure Limited (supra) rendered with reference to
Section 8
of the A&C Act has no bearing on the question whether any measure 
is due under sub-sections (5) and (6) of
Section 11
of the A&C Act in
the case in hand. While considering an Application under
Section 11
of the A&C Act, the Chief Justice or his designate; and now, the High
Court; is not to embark upon an examination of the issue of
arbitrability or appropriateness of adjudication by a private forum,
once that authority finds that there was an arbitration agreement
between or among the parties. It would leave the issue of arbitrability
for the decision of the arbitration tribunal.
This principle was
emphasized in
Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc.
, (supra), to state in clear
terms that the nature and scope of issues arising for consideration
under
Section 11
of the A&C Act for appointment of arbitrator are far
narrower than those arising under
Section 8
of the A&C Act seeking
reference of the parties to a suit to arbitration. After requisite
measure by way of appointment of arbitrator is taken under
Section
11
of the A&C Act, the arbitral tribunal would decide on the issue of
arbitrability, if such issue arises. Then, the aggrieved will have to
challenge the award by filing an Application under
Section 34
of the
A&C Act. However, that would not be the case in the context of an
Application under
Section 8
of the A&C Act when made in a pending 
suit. While adjudicating an Application under
Section 8
of the A&C
Act, the arbitrability would arise for decision, since all aspects of
arbitrability will have to be decided by the Court seized of the suit.
That would not be left for the decision of the arbitrator.
This classic
distinction is laid down and well maintained in the judicial precedent
Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc.
, (supra) pointedly in paragraphs 32 and
33 of that Judgment as reported in SCC.
6.      In the aforenoted settled position of law, this Arbitration
Application under sub-sections (5) and (6) of
Section 11
of the A&C
Act is eligible to succeed.
7.      In the result, this Arbitration Application is allowed appointing
an Arbitrator.
8.      Accordingly, Sri K.Sanga Reddy, Retired District Judge, is
appointed as Arbitrator to arbitrate on the disputes between the
applicant and the respondents, including the claims and counter
claims of both sides. The said Arbitrator shall enter on reference and
proceed with, as enjoined by the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
. No
order as to costs.
_________________________________________       
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
26.10.2018