[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Durgam Rayalingu vs The Chairman Mandal Legal Services ... on 14 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 46, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 184
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                         

WRIT PETITION No.28621 of 2016   


14.06.2018 

Durgam Rayalingu ..Petitioner


The Chairman Mandal Legal Services Committee, Mancherial, Adilabad District and others..Respondents  

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr.P.Lakshma Reddy

Counsel for respondent No.1: Mr.J.Anil Kumar, standing counsel
Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3: Government Pleader 
                                    for Revenue
Counsel for respondent No.4: Mr.Joginipally Sai Krishna


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1. AIR 2008 SC 1209 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY           
        AND     
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD             

WRIT PETITION No.28621 of 2016   

14.06.2018 
Between: 

Durgam Rayalingu  
                                ..Petitioner
                                and 

The Chairman Mandal Legal Services Committee,   
Mancherial, Adilabad District and others
                                                                ..Respondents 



Counsel for the petitioner: Mr.P.Lakshma Reddy

Counsel for respondent No.1: Mr.J.Anil Kumar, standing counsel

Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3: Government Pleader 
                                                              for Revenue

Counsel for respondent No.4: Mr.Joginipally Sai Krishna

The Court made the following:











ORDER:
(Per the Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)  

    This writ petition is filed for issue of certiorari to quash award,
dated 16.03.2013, in P.L.No.6 of 2012 on the file of the Chairman,
Mandal Legal Services Committee, Mancherial, Adilabad District 
respondent No.1.
2.      A perusal of the impugned order shows that respondent
No.1 Committee, which falls within the definition of Lok Adalat
under
Section 2(1)(d)
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
(for short the Act) adjudicated P.L.C.No.6 of 2012 on merits and
directed the Tahsildar, Mancherial  respondent No.2 to take steps
to rectify the revenue records with regard to ownership and
possession of Ac.1.20 guntas of land in survey No.7/1 of
Seetharampallly Village, Mancherial Mandal in consideration of the
objection petition, dated 14.11.2011, made by respondent No.4.
3.      Mr.P.Lakshma Reddy, learned counsel for the petitioner, has
submitted that respondent No.1 Committee has no jurisdiction to
adjudicate the dispute on merits in the absence of compromise or
settlement reached between the petitioner and respondent No.4.
4.      (a)  In order to appreciate the above submission, we need to
refer to the relevant provisions of the Act.
(b)  As per
Section 2(1)(d)
of the Act, which defines Lok
Adalat, Lok Adalat means a Lok Adalat organized under Chapter 
VI.
Sections 19
to
22
of the Act fall under the said Chapter.
(c)  Under
Section 19(1)
of the Act, every State Authority or
District Authority or the Supreme Court Legal Services
Committee or every High Court Legal Services Committee or, as 
the case may be, Taluk Legal Services Committee may organize  
Lok Adalats at such intervals and places and for exercising such
jurisdiction and for such areas as it thinks fit.
(d)  Under Sub-Section (5) of
Section 19
of the Act, a Lok
Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a
compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in
respect of (i) any case pending before it; or (ii) any matter which is
falling within its jurisdiction and is not brought before any Court
for which the Lok Adalat is organized.
(e)
Section 20
of the Act deals with cognizance of cases by
Lok Adalats.  Under Sub-Section (1) of
Section 20
of the Act, Lok
Adalats can take cognizance of a case, where both parties agree or
one of the parties makes an application to the Court for referring
the case to the Lok Adalat for settlement and if such Court is,
prima facie, satisfied that there are chances of such settlement or the
Court is satisfied that the matter is an appropriate one to be taken
cognizance of by the Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the case to
the Lok Adalat.
(f)  Under Sub-Section (2) of
Section 20
of the Act,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Authority or Committee organizing the Lok
Adalat under Sub-Section (1) of
Section 19
may, on receipt of an
application from any one of the parties to any matter referred to in
clause (ii) of Sub-Section (5) of
Section 19
that such matter needs
to be determined by a Lok Adalat, refer such matter to the Lok
Adalat, for determination.  Provided that no matter shall be
referred to the Lok Adalat except after giving a reasonable
opportunity of being heard to the other party.
(g)  Under Sub-Section (3) of
Section 20
of the Act, where
any case is referred to a Lok Adalat under Sub-Section (1) of
Section 20
or where a reference has been made to it under Sub-
Section (2) of
Section 20
, the Lok Adalat shall proceed to dispose
of the case or matter and arrive at a compromise or settlement
between the parties.
(h)  Under Sub-Section (5) of
Section 20
of the Act, where
no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no
compromise or settlement could be arrived at between the parties,
the record of the case shall be returned by it to the Court, from
which the reference has been received under Sub-Section (1) of
Section 20
for disposal in accordance with law.
(i)  Under Sub-Section (6) of
Section 20
of the Act, where no
award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no
compromise or settlement could be arrived at between the parties,
in a matter referred to in Sub-Section (2) of
Section 20
, Lok Adalat
shall advice the parties to seek remedy in a Court.
5.      The above discussed provisions would without any cavil of
doubt reveal that both in respect of a pending litigation referred to
Lok Adalat or a pre-litigation case entertained by it in terms of the
aforementioned provisions, the power and jurisdiction of the Lok
Adalat is confined only to passing of an award based on a
compromise or settlement between the parties.  That Lok Adalat
has no power of adjudication on merits in the absence of
compromise or settlement is further amplified by the provisions of
the National Legal Services Authority (Lok Adalats) Regulations,
2009 (for short the Regulations).
Regulation 12
thereof deals with
pre-litigation matters.
Regulation 13
thereof lays down procedure
in Lok Adalats. Clause (6) of the said Regulation, which is relevant
for the present purpose, reads as under.
The Lok Adalat shall not determine a reference, at
its own instance, but shall determine only on the basis of a
compromise or settlement between the parties by making 
an award in terms of the compromise or settlement
arrived at.
Provided that no Lok Adalat has the power to hear
the parties to adjudicate their dispute as a regular Court.
Provided further that the award of the Lok Adalat is
neither a verdict nor an option arrived at by any decision
making process.
6.      The above view that the Lok Adalat has no power of
adjudication on merits is fortified by the judgment of the Apex
Court in
State of Punjab vs. Jalour Singh
, wherein it was held
as under:
8.     It is evident from the said provisions that Lok Adalats
have no adjudicatory or judicial functions. Their functions
relate purely to conciliation. A Lok Adalat determines a
reference on the basis of a compromise or settlement between
the parties at its instance, and put its seal of confirmation by
making an award in terms of the compromise or settlement.
When the Lok Adalat is not able to arrive at a settlement or
compromise, no award is made and the case record is returned 
to the court from which the reference was received, for
disposal in accordance with law. No Lok Adalat has the power
to "hear" parties to adjudicate cases as a court does.
It discusses the subject-matter with the parties and persuades
them to arrive at a just settlement. In their conciliatory role,
the Lok Adalats are guided by principles of justice, equity, fair
play.
When the LSA Act
refers to 'determination' by the Lok
Adalat and 'award' by the Lok Adalat, the said Act does not
contemplate nor require an adjudicatory judicial determination,
but a non-adjudicatory determination based on a compromise 
or settlement, arrived at by the parties, with guidance and
assistance from the Lok Adalat. The 'award' of the Lok Adalat
does not mean any independent verdict or opinion arrived at
by any decision making process. The making of the award is
merely an administrative act of incorporating the terms of
settlement or compromise agreed by parties in the presence of
the Lok Adalat, in the form of an executable order under the
signature and seal of the Lok Adalat.
7.      In the light of the legal position as elucidated above, we are
of the opinion that respondent No.1 Committee has exercised
jurisdiction not vested in it by adjudicating the dispute raised by
respondent No.4 on merits.
8.      On the analysis as above, award, dated 16.03.2013, in
P.L.No.6 of 2012 is quashed, however, leaving respondent No.4
free to avail appropriate remedies available to her in law.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed.
9.      Before concluding, we felt the necessity of observing that
despite the clear and unambiguous legal provisions of the
Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987
, the Regulations made thereunder
and the legal precedents as discussed above, we have been coming 
across many instances where the Lok Adalats at Mandal as well as 
District Levels have been acting as adjudicating bodies, like regular
Courts.  We are indeed surprised that the Chairmen of the Legal
Services Committees who preside over the Lok Adalats, being 
either Senior Civil Judges or District Judges as the case may be, are
acting contrary to the statutory mandate, driving the aggrieved
parties to needless litigation before this Court.  We, therefore,
suggest to the Legal Services Authorities of the States of
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh to consider the desirability of
issuing a Circular apart from sensitizing the Chairmen of the
Mandal and District Legal Services Authorities on the true gamut
of their powers and functions of the Lok Adalats, to avoid
unnecessary litigation.
10.     As a sequel to allowing the Writ Petition, W.P.M.P.
No.35444 of 2016 filed by the petitioner for interim relief stands
disposed of as infructuous.
__________________________    
C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
___________________________     
GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD, J        
14th June, 2018