[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Gaddamidi Bikshapathi vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 17 February, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 31
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY  AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU                          

Criminal Appeal No.1271 of 2012 

17-02-2018 

Gaddamidi Bikshapathi      Appellant

The State of Andhra Pradesh  Rep. by its Public Prosecutor High Court of Andhra Pradesh  Hyderabad    Respondent  

Counsel for the appellant: Mr. C. Narender Reddy,

Counsel for the respondent: Public Prosecutor (TS)

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? CITATIONS:       1. AIR 1973 SC 5
                   2. (1996) 9 SCC 40
                   3. (2003) 12 SCC 616
                   4. (2010) 5 SCC 91
                   5. 1999 SCC (1) Supp. 80
                   6. (2007) 13 SCC 90
                   7. 1989 Supp (1) SCC 91
                   8. (2012) 6 SCC 297
                   9. (2013) 7 SCC 77
                   10. (2012) 4 SCC 37
                   11. (2012) 9 SCC 742



THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY           

AND  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE  D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU         

 Criminal Appeal No.1271 of 2012

Date: 17.02.2018 


The Court made the following:


JUDGMENT:
(Per the Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)   
        This case involves gruesome murder, preceded by rape of
an innocent five year old girl. The sole accused in Sessions Case
No.128 of 2012 on the file of the VI Additional District and
Sessions Judge, at Siddipet, filed this appeal, aggrieved by
judgment dt.28.08.2012, in convicting the sentencing the
accused for the offences under
Sections 302
,
376(2)(f)
and
364
of the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
).
2.      The case of the prosecution as reflected from the charge
sheet is as follows.  On 12.07.2011 at around 06.00 Hours
P.W.14  Sub-Inspector of Police, Toopran Police Station
received telephonic information from P.W.7  Ryakala
Narsingh Rao, Upa Sarpanch of Manoharabad Village, that the 
daughter of P.W.1 - Vadiyaram Dasu, was missing from  
11.07.2011 night and his family members were manhandling the 
appellant in the morning at about 3.00 a.m. suspecting his role
in her disappearance.  P.W.14 deputed P.W.6  Head Constable  
and one Madusudhan Rao (L.W.10)  Police Constable of  
Toopran Police Station, who have produced the appellant
before P.W.14.
3.      On interrogation by P.W.14, the appellant revealed that
he is a resident of Manoharabad village of Toopran Mandal,
and working as mason, that he had three brothers, that the last
one died, that his two elder brothers were living separately, and
that he had been living with his parents.  That in October,
2003, he along with his cousin - Endrelli Ravi, killed one Gandi
Nagaiah as he obstructed them in committing the theft of rice
at Government School, Dandupally, that in that connection the
villagers of Manoharabad boycotted his family from the village,
that the appellant and his cousin were remanded to jail, that to
meet the court expenses his father Bheemaiah sold his Acs.2.00 
assigned land in Sy.No.394 in Dandupally, hamlet of
Manoharabad Village  to Golla Pentaiah and Nagula 
Nagabushanam, one acre each, that thereafter the family
members of the appellant moved to Kallakal village and later to
Dundigal village, that after his release from the jail he worked
as mason in the said village, that later, his parents requested the
elders of Manoharabad village and returned to the said village
and that in the year 2005, the appellant and his cousin were
acquitted from the said murder case.  That in the year 2007, the
appellant married  one Renuka, D/o. Sangaiah, of Rudraram
Village of Chinna Shankarampet Mandal, and they were blessed  
with a female child  Akhila, and that about one year back, due
to family disputes the wife of the appellant left him.  That in
the year 2010, the appellant was arrested and sent to jail by
Toopran Police for practicing black magic in the house of Smt.
Maknoori Shyamala of Manoharabad and after his release from 
the jail, he had been living with his parents at Manoharabad
village.
4.      That subsequently, he cajoled a girl - Kum. Shirisha, D/o.
Vadiyaram Dasu, R/o. Manoharabad, aged five years, 
(hereinafter referred to as the deceased) by giving her
chocolates and biscuits, that as the land rates soared high
recently, the appellant asked one of the land purchasers of their
land - Golla Pentaiah, to give some more amount as the land
was sold to him at a very cheap rate, but the said Pentaiah
refused the said request,  due to which the appellant bore
grudge against Pentaiah and was waiting to harm him.  That
accordingly the appellant made a plan to kill the deceased and
lay her body in the fields of Golla Pentiah so as to involve him
in the murder case.  That in pursuance of the said plan, on
11.07.2011 evening, the appellant purchased a quarter liquor
bottle in Manoharabad wine shop, that after consuming the
same he went to the house of Vadiyaram Swamy, the paternal  
uncle of the deceased, and spent some time, that while
returning to the shop, he has asked the deceased to come along
with him for biscuits and chocolates and she followed him, that
he took her to the Kirana shop of Ryakala Kistaiah and
purchased two small biscuit packets for her by paying Rs.4/-,
that later he purchased a quarter liquor bottle in the
Manoharabad wine shop, consumed the liquor, went to  
Dandupally along with the deceased in a passenger auto, where
again he purchased a quarter liquor bottle in a cool drink shop,
boarded a passenger auto which was going to Konaipally and 
Chetla Gowraram, and got down near the fields of Golla
Pentaiah, with the deceased, that thereafter, he went a little
distance off the road, consumed the liquor, raped the deceased
and killed her by pressing her neck with his hands, that he has
removed her clothes and threw them away and that later, he has
shifted the dead body of the deceased and laid the same in the
wet field (Narumadi) of Golla Pentaiah.  That in the midnight,
he went back to his village by walk and slept in the banana
garden belonging to Panthulu, that at about 3.00 a.m., the
father of the deceased - Vadiyaram Dasu and the appellants
brother came to the appellant and enquired about the deceased,
but he feigned ignorance, that in the meanwhile, some more
villagers gathered and started beating the appellant, that Police
also arrived at around 06.00 Hours and taken him to the Police
Station and that he told the Police that he can show the dead
body if they follow him.
5.      On the basis of the confessional statement of the
appellant, recorded by P.W.14 in the presence of P.Ws.10 and 
11 - mediators, he registered a case in Crime No.163/2011
under
Sections 302
and
374(f)
of IPC, issued express FIRs to
all the concerned. Soon after issuance of the FIR, P.W.15 
Circle Inspector of Police, Toopran Circle, took up the further
investigation of the case from P.W.14.  In pursuance of the
confession, the appellant led the panchas to the scene of
offence in Dandupally Village limits and shown the dead body
of the deceased.  P.W.15 prepared Ex.P.3 - scene of offence
observation-cum-seizure report and seized the clothes of the
deceased as well as the appellant and drafted Ex.P.4 - rough
sketch of the scene of offence.  Later, P.W.15 examined P.Ws.1
to 4, recorded their statements in detail and conducted the
inquest from 11.00 Hours to 13.00 Hours on 12.07.2011 in the
presence of P.Ws.10 and 11 and one Anepu Manemma      
(LW.15).  The dead body was shifted to Gandhi Hospital,
Secunderabad, for autopsy and thereafter it was handed over to
her blood relatives.  P.W.15 later visited Dandupally and
Monoharabad villages, examined the other witnesses - P.Ws.5, 
7, 8 and one Palle Ramesh (L.W.7), recorded their statements in
detail and effected the arrest of the appellant by issuing the
arrest Memo at 15.30 Hours.   P.W.15 also examined P.W.6 and   
L.W.10 and recorded their statements in detail.  The appellant
was produced before the jurisdictional Magistrates Court for
judicial remand.  During the further investigation, Paithari
Swamy  uncle of the deceased (L.W.11) and Durgam Raju    
photographer (L.W.12), were also examined and their
statements were recorded in detail on 14.07.2011.
6.      P.W.12  Assistant Professor, Forensic Medicine, Gandhi 
Medical College, Secunderabad, conducted the autopsy on the  
dead body of the deceased and also preserved the vaginal
smears and swabs.  On filing a letter before the Court, the
appellant was produced before P.W.13  Civil Assistant
Surgeon, District Hospital, Sangareddy, who conducted the
medical examination on the appellant regarding his capability to
perform the act of sex and also collected the blood samples,
semen etc.  The blood and semen stained clothes of the
deceased and the appellant, vaginal swabs of the deceased,
blood samples and semen of the appellant were  forwarded to
the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL), Hyderabad, through a
letter of advice for analysis and report.  After conducting the
required tests, Ms. K. Arun Jyothi  Assistant Director, FSL,
Hyderabad (L.W.18) reported that human semen and human    
blood were identified on the aforesaid items, but their blood
group could not be detected.  P.W.12, who conducted the 
autopsy on the body of the deceased, opined that the cause of
the death of the deceased was Due to throttling associated with
perineal injury.  P.W.13, who conducted the medical
examination on the appellant, opined that there was nothing
suggestive of his impotency.  The Additional Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Siddipet (L.W.19) has recorded the
statements of P.Ws.1 to 5, 7 and 8 and Palle Ramesh (L.W.7) 
under
Section 164
CrPC.  The Police thus concluded that the
appellant has committed the offences punishable under
Sections 364
,
376(f)
,
302
and
201
of IPC and filed the charge
sheet.
7.      Based on the charge sheet, the Court below has framed 
the following charges against the appellant.
Firstly: That you on or before 11.07.2011 at about 9 p.m. at Dandupally
village you kidnapped Kum.Shirisha, aged five years for committing murder
and thereby committed an offence punishable U/s. 364
IPC
and within my 
cognizance.
Secondly: That on the above said date, time and place mentioned supra
committed raped on Kum.Shirisha, aged five years and thereby committed an 
offence punishable under
section 376(2)(F)
IPC and within my cognizance.
Thirdly: That you on the above said date, time and place mentioned supra
committed murder intentionally causing the death of Kum.Shirisha, aged five
years by throttling with hands and thereby committed an offence punishable
u/s. 302
IPC and within my cognizance.
Fourthly: That on the above said date, time and place mentioned supra
knowing to believe that the offences, namely you committed offences
u/s. 302
and
376(2)(F)
IPC i.e. committed rape and murder of deceased Kum.Shirisha 
aged five years by throttling with hand, caused certain evidence committed
with the said offences 376 (2) (F) and 302
IPC
to disappear knowingly i.e. you
dumped the dead body in the wet fields of Golla Pentaiah after removing her
clothes, with intention to screen the offender from legal punishment and
thereby committed an offence punishable
u/s. 201
IPC and within my
cognizance.
8.      As the plea of the appellant being one of denial, he was
made to stand trial. In order to prove its case, the prosecution
has examined PWs.1 to 15 and marked exhibits P1 to P11. On   
behalf of the accused, no evidence was adduced. On 
appreciation of oral and documentary evidence, the Court
below has convicted the appellant
u/s. 235(2)
Cr.P.C. for the
offences under
Section 302
,
376(2)(f)
and
365
IPC and
sentenced him to imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of
Rs.1000/- and in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for
three months for the offence under
Section 302
IPC. The
appellant was also sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for ten years  and also to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- and in default,
to suffer three months simple imprisonment for the offence
under
Section 376 (2) (f)
IPC. The appellant was also sentenced
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and also to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- and in default, to undergo simple
imprisonment for one month for the offence under
Section 364
IPC. All the sentences were directed to run concurrently and
the period of detention undergone by the appellant was
directed to be given set off as per Section 428 Cr.P.C.
8.      Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the
learned Public Prosecutor (TS).
9.      PW-1 is the father of the victim/deceased. He deposed
that he has two children and the deceased was aged 5 years at
the time of her murder. That, he knows the accused whose 
house is situated at a distance of 200 yards from his house; that
the appellant was residing with his brother and parents and he
used to come to PW-1s house often. PW-1 further deposed  
that about one year back, on Tholi Ekadasi day, the appellant
came to his house in the morning and again in the evening and
that, after some time, the appellant went to the house of PW-
1s brother. His deceased daughter was also at her uncles house
and that after some time, the appellant went out along with his
daughter. PW-1 further deposed that PW-4 his brother, asked
the appellant as to where he was taking the deceased and that
the appellant had replied that he was going to purchase biscuits
for the deceased. That, as his daughter did not return home,
they searched for her and the appellant was found in the
banana fields in the early morning and when he was brought
home and enquired, the appellant did not reveal anything, even
though PW-1 had offered  Rs.500/- to the appellant, in the
hope that on receiving money, he will give the information
about the whereabouts of the deceased. That when they were in
the process of enquiring about the whereabouts of the
deceased,  the police of Toopran came and took away the 
appellant and later they came to know that the appellant has
committed rape on the deceased and killed her in the wet fields
of PW-3. Thereupon, they went to the said place and found the
dead body of the deceased.
10.     That the appellant was frequently visiting his house and
on the date of the incident also, the appellant came in the
morning, afternoon and also in the evening. That, in the
evening, the appellant came to PW-1s house and went to the
house of his brother i.e. PW-4, that about two or three times,
they searched for the appellant in the field and at last, they
found him in the banana fields. PW-1 has further admitted that
Kirana shop is run by one Raju i.e. PW-9 and earlier to the
incident also, the appellant used to take the  deceased and get
her biscuits and that, as the appellant has not disclosed the
whereabouts of his deceased daughter, the police came at about
5 or 6 a.m. and took away the appellant.
11.     Except, eliciting information that the appellant was in
cordial terms with the family of PW-1, visiting their home often
and giving money to the deceased and that there is no enmity
between him and the appellant, nothing else could be elicited
from PW-1, to falsify his testimony. The suggestion to PW-1
that the appellant has not committed rape on the deceased and
has not killed her and that he is deposing falsehood at the
instance of PW-3, was denied.
12.     PW-2, wife of PW-1 also deposed on the same lines as 
PW-1 has deposed.
13.     PW-3 is the owner of the agricultural land at which the
body of the deceased was found.  He has deposed that he 
knows the appellant and PWs-1 and 2.  That, in the year 2003,
he purchased one acre of land in Survey No.394 for
Rs.1,40,000/- situated at Manoharabad from Gaddameedi  
Bheemaiah S/o.Pochaiah (father of the appellant) and that, one
Nagula Nagabushanam, also purchased one acre of land from  
the said vendor along with the witness; that, he purchased the
land to provide water facility to his existing three acres of land
situated abutting the said land and since then, he has been
cultivating the same. That, at the time of purchase of the land,
the appellant was in jail and that about 3 years ago, the
appellant came to him (PW-3)  and demanded money stating   
that he purchased the land from his father at a cheap price, for
which he did not agree. That, the appellant also tried to
threaten his wife and thereupon, the witness has gone to the
police station, Toopran, and made a complaint to the police,
who called the appellant and questioned him and since then, he
was not coming to PW-3. That on 12.07.2011 at about 6 a.m., 
the police came to PW-3 and asked him to come to the police 
station and that on being asked, the police informed PW-3 that
the appellant was apprehended for killing a girl and that he was
referring the name of PW-3; that his son saw the dead body of
the girl and informed the Sarpanch of the village and later he
came to know that the appellant committed the murder of the
girl. The suggestions put to  PW-3 in his cross-examination,
reveal that the defence has admitted the fact that the witness
has purchased one acre of land from the father of the appellant
and that he allegedly owed Rs.40,000/- representing the alleged
part consideration under the transaction between him and the
appellants father. It was elicited from PW-3 that police told
him that the appellant has informed them that he has killed the
daughter of PW-1. Significantly, the suggestion put to PWs-1
and 2 that it is PW-3 who killed the daughter of PWs-1 and 2,
was not put to PW-3 himself. It was only suggested to PW-3
that a false case is filed against the appellant as there was enmity
between PW-3 and the appellant.
14.     PWs-4, 5 and 8 are the last seen witnesses. PW-4 is none 
other than the brother of PW-1. He has deposed that he knows
the appellant who is residing at a distance of 200 yards from his
house in the village, that the appellant used to visit this
witnesss house often and that about one year back, the
appellant came to his house at 7 p.m. and secured toddy and
both of them consumed the same at his  house and after one 
hour, the appellant took away PW-1s daughter along with him,
informing the witness that he is taking her in order to get her
biscuits and, thereafter,  the appellant did not return. That they
have searched for the appellant in the night till 3 a.m. and the
appellant was found in banana field and was brought to the
village  for enquiry. He repeated the same version as that of
PWs-1 and 2 in this regard about police arresting the appellant
at around 6 a.m. and dead body being seen in the agricultural
land of PW-3. Except the suggestion that the appellant did not
commit rape and kill the deceased and that the witness was
deposing false, the defence could not elicit anything, so as to
expose the falsity of claim of PW-4 regarding the appellant
meeting and spending time with him, consuming toddy on the 
previous night and also his taking the deceased girl along with
him on the pretext of buying her biscuits.
15.     PW-5 is a Kirana shop owner in the village located near
Hanuman temple. He deposed that on 11.07.2011 at about 7.30  
to 8 p.m., the appellant came to his shop along with the
deceased and purchased biscuits and went away and that on the  
next day, he came to know that the appellant committed rape
and killed the deceased girl and that he went to the place where
the dead body of the girl was lying and could identify that it is
the same girl who came to his shop along with the appellant.
Even from this witness, the defence could not extract anything
which would discredit his version.
16.     PW-8, a worker in a liquor shop located in the village
concerned, deposed that about 5 p.m., the appellant came to
the liquor shop along with a girl of 5 years and purchased a
quarter of liquor bottle of Officers choice make, crossed the
road along with the girl and boarded an auto and that on the
next day at about 7.30 a.m., he went to the field situated at
about 4 kms. from the village and saw the dead body of the
deceased and he then came to know that the appellant has 
killed the girl. A suggestion was put to PW-8 that the appellant
along with the girl did not come to his shop and did not
purchase a quarter bottle and that he was deposing false.
17.     PW-10, the Revenue Inspector of Toopran mandal, who  
was examined, spoke about the confession made by the  
appellant about his committing rape and killing the deceased
and also about the seizure of blue colour white lines full shirt
(MO1), coffee colour pant (MO2), white colour baniyan
(MO3), one Meroon colour underwear (MO4), Baby skirt  
(MO5) and top (MO6). Ex-P-2  - confessional statement of the
appellant (admissible portion), Ex.P-3  scene of offence
panchanama, Ex.P-4  rough sketch and Ex.P-5  Inquest  
panchanama, were marked through this witness. In the cross-
examination, the witness deposed that all the panchanamas 
were prepared in the police station and himself and other
panchayathdar signed in the police station.  He denied the
suggestion that he did not accompany the police and did not
visit the scene of offence, that no panchanama was prepared
and that the accused has not confessed anything about the
commission of offence. It was not suggested to this witness
that either the MOs 1 to 4 were not seized or that they  did not
belong to the appellant.
18.     PW-11  another Revenue Inspector of Toopran mandal,  
deposed on the same lines as PW-10 has deposed and similar   
questions were put to this witness also, as were put to PW-10.
19.     PW-12, Assistant Professor, Forensic Medicine Gandhi  
Medical College, Secunderabad, who has conducted autopsy on   
the dead body of the deceased, deposed that he has found 
following injuries in the body of the deceased:
1. Perineal laceration extending upto anal regiona with
tearing of vaginal layers muscle and hymen is seen. Blood
clots seen in vagina.
2. Two Crasentric abrasion each about 0.25 x .25 cms. seen
over right side of front of neck.
3. Multiple pressure abration each about 3 x 2 cm. seen over
front of neck. On cut section multiple bruises seen over neck
structure. Inward fracture of grater horn of hyoid bone with
body of hyoid bone on both sides. Fracture throid and
cricoid cartilages seen.
Based on the injuries, he has opined that the deceased has died
due to throttling assault with perineal injury. He has further
deposed that the approximate death of the deceased was 
between 12 to 24 hours prior to his examination. Ex.P-6 - post
mortem examination report, was marked through him. PW-12   
further deposed that Ex.P-4 - FSL report shows that human
semen and spermatozoa are detected on items 1, 2 and 6 i.e. 
(MOs - 5, 6 and 4) and item No.7 (whitish turbid    liquid) and
that blood group could not be detected. He has further stated
that human blood was detected on item No.1 (MO5) and item  
No. 8 (reddish turbid liquid) but their blood group could not be
determined and that semen and spermatozoa were not detected   
on items 3, 4 and 5 i.e. MOs.1, 2 and 3 and 9 (vaginal swab) and
blood was not detected on items No. 2 to 7. The witness
further deposed that he cannot say whether the girl was
subjected to rape, for the reason that item No.9 in FSL report,
does not reveal the presence of semen. He further stated that
injury No.1 caused on the vagina may be caused in case of rape
and forcible penetration. In the cross-examination, the doctor
has deposed that he has not noticed injury on legs and back
side of the body and that it is not necessary that when a girl
aged 5 years resists rape, she would sustain abrasions  on legs
and back. He has denied the suggestion that he has not given
proper opinion.
20.     PW-13, the doctor who conducted potency test on the 
appellant referred to Ex.P-8 - potency report, wherein he has
opined that the clinical and physical examination of the
appellant did not suggest anything to his impotency. The
witness has admitted in the cross examination  that he did not
notice any external injury on the genital organs of the appellant
and that he was not sure whether there are chances of such
injuries being sustained in case of forcible penetration against
the child of 5 years old.
21.     PW-14, the then Sub-Inspector of Police, Toopran,
deposed about his receiving information at about 5 a.m. on
12.07.2011 about the missing of a girl, apprehension of the
appellant and his production before  him at about 6 a.m. on the
same day, confession made by the appellant and recorded in the
presence of PWs-10 and 11, his registering Crime No.163 of
2011 for offence
u/s 302
,
376 (f)
of IPC and issuing express
FIRs. The admissible portion of the confession was marked as
Ex.P-2 and FIR was marked as Ex.P-9 through this witness. 
The suggestions put to this witness that the appellant has not
confessed the commission of offence and that a false case was
registered at the instance of PW-3, were denied by the witness.
22.     PW-15, the Investigating Officer, referred to recording of
statement of the prosecution witnesses, the recovery of the
body of the deceased, examination of the prosecution witnesses
during investigation, autopsy on the dead body of the deceased,
sending of MOs 1 to 6 to Forensic Science Laboratory and
Ex.P-7 - FSL report. He has also deposed that on 20.07.2011,
he has filed a requisition before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Sanga Reddy, Medak, to nominate JMFC to record
Section 164
Cr.P.C. statements of PWs 1 to 5, 7 and 8 and LW-7 and, 
accordingly, Ex.P-11  statements, were  recorded by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate. In his cross-examination, the witness
admitted that PW-8 - potency report, did not contain anything
to show that semen and blood samples of the appellant were
collected. He denied suggestion that there was any enmity
between the appellant and PW-3 and a false case was foisted
against the appellant at the instance of PW-3.
23.     In his statement given during his examination under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., the appellant did not come out with any
specific stand, except giving a mono syllable answer of false or
nothing to every question and incriminating circumstances put
to him.
24.     This is a case based on circumstantial evidence. As has
been well settled, in a case of circumstantial evidence, the
prosecution has  to establish every link in the chain of
circumstances. The links such as motive and all other
circumstances, which connect the accused with the offence,
must be established beyond all reasonable doubts. As regards
the motive, it has come out on record that the wife of the
appellant  has abandoned him and he was staying alone with his
parents. He developed acquaintance with the deceased girl and
he used to frequently visit the house of her father and take her
and buy eatables such as biscuits for her.  The evidence of PWs
- 4, 5 and 8 to the effect that on the fateful night, the appellant
was in the company of the deceased, has not even been 
disputed by making appropriate suggestions to these witnesses.
In every case, it is not possible for the prosecution to prove the
motive by adducing direct evidence, as motive reflects the mind
set of a person and his thought process.
25.
In
Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra
, the
Supreme  Court held that evidence as to motive would, no
doubt, go a long way in cases wholly dependent on
circumstantial evidence, that such evidence would form one of
the links in the chain of circumstantial evidence in such a case,
but, that would not be so in cases where there are eye-witnesses
of credibility, though even in such case if motive is properly
proved such proof would strengthen the prosecution case and
fortify the court in its ultimate conclusion, but that does not
mean that if motive is not established the evidence of an eye-
witness is rendered untrustworthy.
26.     In a catena of decisions, the Supreme Court held that
even if the absence of motive as alleged is accepted, that is of
no consequence and it pales into insignificance when direct
evidence establishes the crime. Therefore, in case there is direct
trustworthy evidence of witnesses as to the commission of an
offence, the motive part loses its significance and if the genesis
of the motive of the occurrence is not proved, the ocular
testimony of the witnesses as to the occurrence could not be
discarded only by the reason of the absence of motive, if
otherwise the evidence is worthy of reliance (
Hari Shanker v.
State of U.P.
,
Bikau Pandey and others v. State of Bihar
,
and Abu Thakir and others v. State of Tamil Nadu ).
27.
In
Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar
the
Supreme Court held that a motive is something which prompts 
a person to form an opinion or intention to do certain illegal
act or even a legal act but with illegal means with a view to
achieve that intention, that in a case where there is clear proof
of motive for the commission of the crime, it affords added
support to the finding of the court that the accused was guilty
of the offence charged with, but it has to be remembered that
the absence of proof of motive does not render the evidence
bearing on the guilt of the accused nonetheless becomes
untrustworthy and unreliable because most often it is only the
perpetrator of the crime alone who knows as to what
circumstances prompted him to adopt a certain course of
action leading to the commission of the crime.
In
Ujagar
Singh v. State of Punjab
the Supreme Court reiterated its
view that motive is in the mind of the accused and can seldom
be fathomed with any degree of accuracy.
28.
In
Subedar Tewari v. State of Uttar Pradesh
the
Supreme Court observed that the evidence regarding existence
of motive which operates in the mind of an assassin is more
often than not within the reach of others and that the motive
may not even be known to the victim of the crime.
29.     In the light of the settled legal position as above, if the
prosecution has let in the evidence of eyewitnesses which is
found trustworthy, the accused is liable to be convicted even if
motive is not fully established.
30.     The prosecution was able to bring out the circumstances
which would clinchingly establish that the appellant has
developed evil desires against the  deceased girl and obviously,
he befriended her with a view to sexually exploit her. Therefore,
this Court with reasonable certainty, could conclude that the
appellant had ill motive against the deceased girl and with a
view to satiate his sexual desire, he has taken her to the fields of
PW-3. Though the defence made an attempt to suggest that  
PW-3 is the real culprit, it miserably failed to substantiate the
same. Indeed, except a plea that there is enmity between the
appellant and PW-3, no suggestion was put to the latter that he
was the culprit. Therefore, it is not possible to believe the faint
version of the defence that PW-3 might have committed the
offence. It is also not possible to accept the plea of the defence
that because of the enmity of the appellant with PW-3, on
whose fields the body of the deceased was found, has falsely
implicated the appellant. Such a plea on the facts of the case, is
far-fetched.
31.     In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the evidence
of last seen witnesses assumes much significance, more so, 
when the time gap between the accused being seen with the 
deceased and time of death was not long. It has clearly come
out on record from the evidence of PWs 4 and 5 - even if we
ignore the evidence of PW-8 because of variation in time
spoken to, by him -  the deceased was last seen in the company 
of the appellant at around 7.30 or 8 p.m. In Ex.P-6  post-
mortem report, PW-12 opined that death might have occurred 
12 to 24 hours before post-mortem. Post-mortem was  
conducted at 12 noon on 12.07.2011. Therefore, it was quite
possible that the appellant might have killed the deceased any
time at 8.30 p.m. on 11.07.2011 and the body was found at
around 06.00 a.m. on 12.11.2011 in the fields of PW-3. It is
thus proved beyond doubt, that the appellant had exclusive
knowledge of the whereabouts of the deceased and the burden 
lies on him under
Section 106
of the Indian Evidence Act,  to
explain as to how the deceased might have been killed.  The
appellant failed to discharge this burden. Added to this, the
recoveries, amply proved by the evidence of PWs 11 and 14
and PW-15, the investigating officer, also connected the
appellant with the offence. Ex.P-7 - FSL report, clearly referred
to existence of  human semen and spermatozoa on MOs 5, 6   
and 4, which are maroon colour underwear of the appellant and
baby skirt and top of the deceased. This evidence which
remained uncontroverted, would clearly show that the appellant
has sexually assaulted the deceased.
32.     The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in
the light of the admission of PW-12 that he cannot say whether
the girl was subjected to rape, as item No.9 (vaginal snab) did
not reveal the presence of semen, the prosecution failed to
prove rape. We do not find any merit in this submission. In
every case of rape, semen need not be found on the genital
organ of the victim. Mere penetration even without discharge
of semen on the female genitals, would constitute rape. PW-12
has clearly stated that injury No.1 on the vagina suggests
forcible penetration.  Mere penetration without ejaculation in
the genital organ of the deceased, may have been possible.
Presence of semen on MO-4, underwear of the appellant, 
coupled with the nature of injury No.1, as opined by PW-12 -
doctor, would clinchingly establish commission of rape.
33.     The above discussed evidence, without any iota of doubt,
establishes the vital links in the chain of circumstances, proving
the guilt of the appellant beyond all reasonable doubts.
Therefore, the trial Court has rightly convicted and imposed
appropriate sentence.
34.     Hence, we do not find any reason to interfere with the
judgment of the Court below. Appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.
35.     Before closing the case, we would be failing in our duty if
we do not articulate our concern at the prevailing situation.
During the hearing of this case, we honestly felt that the lower
Court ought to have imposed capital punishment on the
appellant for the barbaric manner in which he committed the
offence against an innocent child who could not sense the beast
in disguise and fell prey to the faade of affection displayed by
the appellant.  We refrained from issuing notice for
enhancement of the sentence due to the long lapse of time after
the incident and the conviction of the appellant.  We are
extremely concerned for and our conscience disturbed at the
brazen manner in which crimes are being perpetrated on
helpless women and innocent children.  It is unthinkable that a
man would develop sexual desire towards a tender aged child,
considered as a Gift of the Almighty.  The sexual assaults even
on infants, leave us to wonder as to how the moral standards of
men are falling to the depths of degradation.  One thought and
hoped that at least the Nirbhaya Act, 2013 would have a
punitive effect on the male monsters in the human form.  To
our disappointment, we noticed that there is a marked rise in
sexual assaults against women and even infants in recent times.
We are conscious of the fact that the courts have in the past
expressed anguish and deep concern for the crimes against the
women and children and imposed capital punishment in 
appropriate cases.
36.
In
Jugendra Singh v. State of U.P.
the Supreme Court
held that rape or an attempt to rape is a crime not against an
individual but a crime which destroys the basic equilibrium of
the social atmosphere and that the consequential death is more
horrendous.  That it should be kept in mind that an offence
against the body of a woman lowers her dignity and mars her
reputation.  That it is said that ones physical frame is his or her
temple and no one has any right of encroachment.  That an
attempt for the momentary pleasure of the accused causing the
death of a child will have a devastating effect on her family and,
in the ultimate eventuate, on the collective at large and when a
family suffers in such a manner, the society as a whole is
compelled to suffer as it creates an incurable dent in the fabric
of the social milieu.
37.     Dealing with the case relating to rape of an eight year old
girl, the Supreme Court in
Shyam Narain v. State (NCT of
Delhi
)  observed as under:
27. Respect for reputation of women in the society
shows the basic civility of a civilised society. No member of
society can afford to conceive the idea that he can create a
hollow in the honour of a woman. Such thinking is not only
lamentable but also deplorable. It would not be an
exaggeration to say that the thought of sullying the physical
frame of a woman is the demolition of the accepted civilised
norm i.e. physical morality. In such a sphere, impetuosity
has no room. The youthful excitement has no place. It should
be paramount in everyone's mind that, on the one hand,
society as a whole cannot preach from the pulpit about social,
economic and political equality of the sexes and, on the other,
some perverted members of the same society dehumanise the   
woman by attacking her body and ruining her chastity. It is an
assault on the individuality and inherent dignity of a woman
with the mindset that she should be elegantly servile to men.
Rape is a monstrous burial of her dignity in the darkness. It is
a crime against the holy body of a woman and the soul of the
society and such a crime is aggravated by the manner in which
it has been committed. We have emphasised on the manner   
because, in the present case, the victim is an eight year old girl
who possibly would be deprived of the dreams of Spring of
Life and might be psychologically compelled to remain in the
Torment of Winter. When she suffers, the collective at large
also suffers. Such a singular crime creates an atmosphere of
fear which is historically abhorred by the society. It demands
just punishment from the court and to such a demand, the
courts of law are bound to respond within legal parameters. It
is a demand for justice and the award of punishment has to be
in consonance with the legislative command and the
discretion vested in the court.
38.
In
Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of
Maharashtra
the Supreme Court has confirmed the death 
penalty imposed by the Sessions Court and confirmed by the 
High Court, on the accused, aged thirty-one years old, for
committing heinous crimes of rape and murder of a three year
old girl child.  The pain and suffering the innocent child must
have undergone was visualised by the Court as under:
35. It can hardly be even imagined that what torture
and brutality the minor child must have faced during the
course of commission of this crime. All her private parts were
swollen and bleeding. She was bleeding through her nose and
mouth. The injuries, as described in Ext. P-17 (the post-
mortem report) shows the extent of brutal sexual urge of the
accused, which targeted a minor child, who still had to see the
world. He went to the extent of giving bites on her chest. The
pain and agony that he must have caused to the deceased 
minor girl is beyond imagination and is the limit of
viciousness.
39.
In
State of U.P. v. Munesh
the Supreme Court left a
note of caution to the Courts dealing with the crimes against
women and children, which is apt to be reproduced hereunder:
25. The primary concern both at national and
international level is about the devastating increase in rape
cases and cases relating to crime against women in the world.
India is no exception to it. Although the statutory provisions
provide strict penal action against such offenders, it is for the
courts to ultimately decide whether such incident has
occurred or not. The courts should be more cautious in
appreciating the evidence and the accused should not be left
scot-free merely on flimsy grounds. In the instant case, the
accused had committed rape, which repels against the moral 
conscience as he chose a girl of 11 years to satisfy his lust and
subsequently murdered her.
40.     Cases of this nature must be an eye-opener to the
investigating and prosecuting agencies.  Unless stringent
measures are taken to prevent recurrence of the offences
against the women and children; efficient investigating and
prosecuting agencies are established for securing convictions
and appropriate sentences by the Courts, which would act as a
deterrence on the rogues in the society are imposed, no woman
or child would be safe and secure in this country.  The
executive Governments of the States must introspect and take
all such measures which would effectively curb the menace
against the weak and the meek in the society.
______________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
                                                                
_____________________    
(D.V.S.S.Somayajulu, J) 
Date: 17th February, 2018