[Cites
11
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Lingala Potha Raju (Died) Per Lrs. And ... vs Chagantipati Annapurnamma And 3 Others on 2 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 65
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

S.A.No.1061 of 1999 

02-01-2018 

Lingala Potha Raju (died) per LRs. and others... Appellants

Chagantipati Annapurnamma and 3 others.. Respondents    

Counsel for Appellants: Sri K.V.Subrahmanya Narsu 

Counsel for Respondents: Sri O.Manohar Reddy  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)AIR 1969 SC 1147  
2)AIR 1955 SC 346  
3)(2001) 7 SCC 503 
4)MANU/SC/0285/2010    

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             
SECOND APPEAL No.1061 of 1999      
JUDGMENT:
This Second Appeal is preferred by defendants aggrieved by the
judgment and decree in A.S.No.91 of 1991 dated 17.08.1999 passed by the  
learned II Additional Senior Civil Judge, Vijayawada whereby and
whereunder the learned Judge allowed the appeal preferred by the plaintiff
against the judgment and decree in O.S.No.474 of 1988 dated 12.07.1991, 
filed for partition.
2)      The parties in this Second Appeal are referred as they were arrayed
before the Trial Court.
3)      The facts in nutshell are thus:
a)      Parties are related to each other. Defendants 1 to 3 are brothers and
defendant No.4 is the sister of plaintiff and all are residents of Penamaluru
village; their motherSaraswathamma died intestate on 02.09.1984 and 
their fatherVeeraswamy also died intestate on 19.07.1987;
Saraswathamma had Ac.0.66 cts. in R.S.No.87/1 of Chodavaram village  
and therefore, plaintiff is entitled to 1/5th share in the said property; as the
defendants are evading to partition the suit property, she issued legal notice
and filed the suit.
b)      Defendant No.1 filed written statement admitting the relationship
between the parties and also admitting that the suit property belonged to
their late motherSaraswathamma. Their case is that their father
Veeraswamy executed a Will dated 10.07.1987 bequeathing properties  
including the share which he got from his wife to defendants 1 to 3 and
hence plaintiff is entitled to only 1/6th share. They also pleaded the suit
property is only Ac.0.52 cts. in R.S.No.86/3 but not Ac.0.66 cts as alleged.
Thus, they prayed to dismiss the suit.
c)      Defendants 2 and 3 filed a memo adopting the written statement of
1st defendant. Defendant No.4 was set ex parte.
d)      Basing on the above pleadings, the trial Court framed the following
issues.
1)      Whether the Will dated 10.07.1987 is true, valid and binding?
2)      Whether the plaint schedule property is correct?
3)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to share as prayed for?
4)      Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action?
5)      To what relief?
e)       During trial, PWs.1 to 3 were examined and Exs.A1 to A14 were
marked. DWs.1 to 3 were examined and Exs.B1 and B2 were marked on     
behalf of defendants.
f)      The Trial Court accepting the genuinety of the Will propounded by
the defendants held the plaintiff is entitled to 1/6th share in Ac.0.52 cts. in
RS No.86/3.
g)      Aggrieved in so far as granting 1/6th share to her, plaintiff filed
A.S.No.91 of 1991 before the II Additional Senior Civil Judge,
Vijayawada and the said appeal was allowed granting 1/5th share to the
plaintiff. The lower Appellate Court held the due execution of the Will
was not established by the defendants inasmuch as they failed to examine
the attestors but only examined the scribe. It may be noted that during
pendency of first appeal, 1st respondentdied and respondents to 5 to 10
were brought on record as his LRs. vide Court order dated 16.06.1997 in
I.A.No.8093 of 1996.
Hence, the instant Second Appeal by defendant Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
and 10.
4)      The following substantial questions of law were framed by this
Court out of the grounds of appeal filed by the appellants:
1)      Whether the learned II Additional Senior Civil Judge is
right in holding that Ex.B2 was not proved by not
examining any of the attestors?
2)      Whether the evidence of the scribe DW2 is not sufficient
to prove the execution of the will, he having put his
signature ANIMO ATTESTANDI as required under
Section 68
of the Indian Evidence Act?
5)      Heard arguments of Sri K.V.Subrahmanya Narsu, learned  
counsel for appellants and Sri O.Manohar Reddy, learned counsel for
respondents.
6)      Appeal against R3 and R4 was dismissed for default vide
Court order dated 25.06.2014
7)     Substantial Question Nos.1 and 2:   Since both the above questions
are interconnected, they are taken up together. The main plank of
argument of learned counsel for appellants is that though under law
attestors have to be examined in proof of Will, still Will can be proved by
examination of scribe only if he could speak of all the facts concerned to
the execution of the Will. In the instant case, the scribe had vividly stated
about the due execution of the Will by late Veeraswamy. The witness
stated that Ex.B2 was scribed by him on the instructions given by
executant. He also stated that executant was in a sound and disposing state
of mind. He further stated that attestors attested the Will and Veeraswamy
affixed his thumb impression in his presence. In that view, learned counsel
would submit, the due execution of the Will can be approved in spite of
non-examination of the attestors. The trial Court rightly held the execution
of the Will to have been proved but the lower appellate Court on a wrong
appreciation of facts and evidence held execution of the Will was not duly
proved.
8)      Per contra, learned counsel for respondents, while supporting the
judgment of the appellate Court argued that the execution of a Will can be
established only by way of examining atleast one of the attestors to the
Will and by no other mode. In the instant case, he argued, the attestors of
the Will are very much alive, but the defendants for the reasons best
known to them did not examine the attestors. However, they examined 
only the scribe. The job of the scribe is altogether different from that of
the attestors. He cannot fit into the slot of attestors. Therefore, the
defendants cannot claim to have proved the due execution of the Will by
mere examination of the scribe. The appellate Court rightly rejected
Ex.B2Will. He thus prayed to dismiss the appeal.
9)      Law on proof of execution of Wills is fairly settled and no more res
integra. Wills under
Section 63
of Indian Succession Act, Gifts under
Section 123
and Mortgages under
Section 59
of Transfer of Property Act
are compulsorily attestable documents. What is attestation and how the
due execution of a compulsorily attestable document has to be proved are
dealt with by law.
10)
Section 3
of Transfer of Property Act defined the term attested
thus:
Attested, in relation to an instrument, means and shall be deemed
to have meant attested by two or more witnesses each of whom has  
seen the executant sign or affix his mark to the instrument, or has
seen some other person sign the instrument in the presence and by
the direction of the executant, or has received from the executant a
personal acknowledgment of his-signature or mark, or of the
signature of such other person, and each of whom has signed the
instrument in the presence of the executant; but it shall not be
necessary that more than one of such witnesses shall have been
present it the same time and no particular form of attestation shall be
necessary."
Then,
Section 68
of Indian Evidence Act prescribes the manner in
which compulsorily attestable documents have to be proved.
Section 68
reads thus:
Section 68
. Proof of execution of document required by law to be
attested:- If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not
be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been
called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and
capable of giving evidence;
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call at attesting witness in
proof of the execution of any, document, not being a Will, which has
been registered in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian
Registration Act
, XVI of 1908 unless its execution by the person by
whom it purports to have been executed is specifically denied.
a)      The Apex Court in
M. L. Abdul Jabbar Sahib vs. M. V. Venkata
Sastri and Sons and others
happened to discuss whether scribe and 
identifying witnesses before the Sub-Registrar, can be treated as attesting
witnesses.  It was held thus:
Para 6:  xx xx xx   It is to be noticed that the word "attested", the
thing to be defined, occurs as part of the definition itself. To attest is
to bear witness to a fact. Briefly put, the essential conditions of a
valid attestation Under
Section 3
are: (1) two or more witnesses have
seen the executant sign the instrument or have received from him a
personal acknowledgment of his signature; (2) with a view to attest
or to bear witness to this fact each of them has signed the instrument
in the presence of the executant. It is essential that the witness should
have put his signature animo attestandi, that is, for the purpose of
attesting that he has seen the executant sign or has received from
him a personal acknowledgment of his signature. If a person puts
his signature on the document for some other purpose, e.g., to
certify that he is a scribe or an identifier or a registering officer, he
is not an attesting witness.
In its further discussion, the Apex Court referred its earlier
judgment in
Girja Datt vs. Gangotri
, wherein it was held that two
persons who had identified the testator at the time of the registration of the
will and had appended their signatures at the foot of the endorsement by
the Sub-Registrar, were not attesting witnesses as their signatures were not
put animo attestandi.
Thus in the above two judgments the Apex Court held that the
scribe or the identifying witnesses cannot be regarded as the attesting
witnesses since they have not put their signatures as animo attestandi,  i.e.
not for the purpose to attest but with a different purpose.
b)      In
N.Kamalam v. Ayyasamy
the facts were that one Masaney   
Gowder executed the Will which was attested by two attestors viz.
D.Subbayya and P.Govindarajulu. The Will was scribed by one 
Arunachalam. In proof of the Will, the attestors were not examined but
scribe was examined. The Apex Court, in that context, held that the due
execution of the Will was not proved as scribe cannot prove due execution
of the Will.
c)      In similar circumstances as that of
N.Kamalams
case (3 supra), the
Apex Court in
S.R.Srinivasa v. S.Padmamma
has observed thus:
Para28:   The aforesaid observations are fully applicable in
this case. Admittedly, none of the attesting witnesses have been
examined. Here signature of the scribe cannot be taken as proof
of attestation. Therefore, it becomes evident that the execution of
a Will can be held to have been proved when the statutory
requirements for proving the Will are satisfied. The High Court
has however held that proof of the Will was not necessary as the
execution of the Will has been admitted in the pleadings in O.S.
No. 233 of 1998, and in the evidence of P.W.1.
Para37:    The First Appellate Court pointed out that the
execution of the Will has not been proved as none of the attesting
witnesses have been examined. The scribe who was examined as   
DW.2 nowhere stated that he had attested the Will. The animus to
attest was not evident from the document. In the Will, D.W.2 had
described himself as the scribe of the Will and signed as such.
Therefore, in view of the ratio of law
laid down in
N. Kamalam
(supra) the statutory requirement of attestation was clearly not
satisfied.
d)      Thus, on a close scrutiny of
Section 3
of Transfer of Property Act,
Section 68
of Evidence Act and the above precedential jurisprudence
thereof, it is clear that when law ordains that a particular fact is to be
proved in a specific mode that has to be followed. Compulsory attestable
documents are concerned,
Section 68
of Evidence Act ordains that the due
execution of such documents can be established only by way of examining 
atleast one of the attestors. The precedents referred to supra would explain
us that the scribe or identifying witnesses of an attestable document
including Wills, cannot be regarded as attesting witnesses because there
was no animo attestandi  i.e. they have not signed on the document for the
purpose of attestation but they have signed for a different purpose. In such
an instance, examining them in stead of attestors will not amount to proof
of due execution of the document.
e)      It may be noted that under the proviso to
Section 68
of Evidence
Act, the necessity of calling an attesting witness is done away with in the
case of a registered document, other than a will, unless its execution by
the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically
denied.  Thus, if a registered document, required by law to be attested, not
being a will, is produced before a Court of law and if its execution is not
specifically denied, it may be proved by any other witness without calling
the attesting witness. However, the Will stands on a different footing.
Mere registration of the Will does not obviate the propounder of the Will
to prove its due execution by examining the attestors.
11a)    Will is concerned, different persons play different roles to assist the
executant to execute the Will. For instance, the scribe, on receiving the
instructions from the executant, write down the last testament of the
executant in black and white portraying the contents of his instructions in
a legal and understandable form. His role is confined to that extent only.
Sometimes, after scribing the contents to the satisfaction of the executant
and reading over them to him, the scribe may leave some space for the
signature/thumb impression of the executant and attestors and beneath, he
will subscribe his signature mentioning as scribe and hand over the drafted
Will to the executant and may depart. He need not necessarily see the
executant and the attestors signing or putting their thumb impressions on
the Will, which is not his duty. Later, the executant and attestors may affix
their signatures at the respective slots. Still the Will can be held valid
because it is not mandatory for the scribe to witness the due execution of
the Will.  The proof of due execution has to come from horses mouth i.e.
attestors but none others.
b)      Going by the definition attested, it is evident that attestors take
upon the responsibility of witnessing the executant affixing his signature
or thumb mark to the instrument or they have seen some other person
signing the instrument in the presence and by the direction of executant or
has received from the executant a personal acknowledgement of his
signature or mark or of the signature of such other person. Further, each of
the attestors has signed the instrument in the presence of the executant.
c)      Similarly, the role of identifying witness is also a different one. He
only identifies the executant before the Sub-Registrar. His physical
presence was not mandatory when executant was signing/putting his 
thumb mark on the Will.
d)      Perhaps, in view of clear segregation of their roles, the law did not
accept the scribe or identifying witnesses speaking for attestors. It was
held, it was only the attestors who could speak for due execution of the
Will. In a given case, may be the scribe and identifying witnesses have
also witnessed the execution of the Will by the executant. However, law
did not allow them to don the cloak of attestors to speak about execution
as there was no animo attestandi. It is because, unlike other compulsory
attestable documents, Will comes into life only after the death of the
executant who cannot appear before the Court to speak of its truth or
falsity.  Hence, strict proof rule was imposed by law.
12)     Having regard to the above law on the subject, it can only be held
that the defendants failed to prove the due execution of Ex.B2Will. The
lower appellate Court thus rightly allowed the appeal. There is no
perversity in it.
13)     In the result, this Second Appeal is dismissed by confirming the
judgment in A.S.No.91 of 1991 passed by the learned II Additional Senior
Civil Judge, Vijayawada.  No costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
__________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 02.01.2018