[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The State Of Telangana, Represented By ... vs Sangaraboina Shiva And Another on 24 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 310
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1011 of 2011     

24.07.2018 

The State of Telangana, represented by its Public Prosecutor, Hyderabad ..Appellant

Sangaraboina Shiva and another ..Respondents  

Counsel for the appellant: Public Prosecutor (T.S.)

Counsel for the respondents: Mr.A.Prabhakar Rao 


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1.      AIR 1963 SC 200  
2.      AIR 2007 SC (Supp) 997  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY           
        AND     
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD             

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1011 of 2011     

24.07.2018 

The Court made the following:

JUDGMENT:
(Per the Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)   
     This appeal by the State is against judgment, dated
09.02.2010, in Sessions Case No.898 of 2007 on the file of
learned IV Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court),
Warangal.  By the aforementioned judgment, the two accused, 
who were charged for the offence punishable under
Section
302
I.P.C., were acquitted, inter alia, of the charge.
2.      As the case of the prosecution has been narrated in detail
by the Court below, it is unnecessary for us to restate the same
once over.  It would suffice to note that the Court below has
believed the evidence of P.Ws.9 and 10  the alleged
eyewitnesses, but acquitted the accused on two grounds 
viz., (i) even before the F.I.R. was registered, the Police started
investigation and that (ii) recovery of the crime weapons is not
proved by the prosecution.
3.      While the learned Public Prosecutor (T.S.) appearing for
the appellant has urged that once the testimony of the
eyewitnesses is believed, the Court has no option other than
convicting the accused even if the investigation suffered from
defects as pointed out by the Court below.
4.      Mr.A.Prabhakar Rao, learned counsel for the
respondents/accused, has opposed the above submission and   
stated that the findings of the Court below regarding the
evidence of P.Ws.9 and 10 are perverse and that though those
findings were rendered against the accused, still this Court has
the power to re-appreciate the evidence and reverse the
findings of the Court below so as to support the conclusion
arrived at by it and confirm the judgment.
5.      This is a peculiar case, where we are faced with a situation
where the State is relying upon the findings of the Court below
and questioning the result as being contrary to the said findings,
while the defence is questioning the findings and supporting
the conclusion.  This necessitated us to refer to the scope of the
powers of this Court envisaged under
Section 386
Cr.P.C.  For
proper appreciation, this provision, to the extent it is relevant,
is reproduced hereunder.
386. Power of the Appellate Court. After perusing
such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he
appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in
case of an appeal under
section 377
or
section 378
, the
accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it
considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering,
dismiss the appeal, or may-
(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse
such order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that
the accused be re- tried or committed for trial, as the case
may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him
according to law;
(b) in an appeal from a conviction-
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or
discharge the accused, or order him to be re- tried by a
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such
Appellate Court or committed for trial, or
(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the
nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the
sentence, but not so as to enhance the Same;
From the express language of
Section 386
Cr.P.C. as 
reproduced above, it is evident that no specific power is
conferred on the appellate Court to sustain the conclusion by
reversing the findings unlike in a civil appeal as envisaged under
Order XLI Rule 22 C.P.C
.  However, it needs to be borne in
mind that having succeeded before the trial Court, the accused
had no opportunity of filing an appeal only for the purpose of
questioning the findings of the trial Court.  Indeed, such an
appeal is barred under
Section 372
Cr.P.C., which prohibited
filing of any appeal except as provided for by the Code or by
any other law for the time being in force.  The accused are,
therefore, entitled to canvass the correctness or otherwise of
the findings of the Sessions Court in order to support the
conclusion arrived at by it.
6.      A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
M.K.Kulkarni vs. State of Maharashtra
discussed the scope
of powers of the appellate Court in an appeal against conviction
or acquittal with reference to
Section 423(1)
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.  The relevant portion of
the said
judgment
reads as follows.
16.
Section 423(1)
prescribes the powers of the appellate
Court in disposing of appeals preferred before it and
clauses (a) and (b) deal with appeals against acquittals and
appeals against convictions respectively. There is no doubt
that the power conferred by clause (a) which deals with an
appeal against an order of acquittal is as wide as the power
conferred by clause (b) which deals with an appeal against
an order of conviction, and so, it is obvious that the High
Court's powers in dealing with criminal appeals are equally
wide whether the appeal in question is one against acquittal
or against conviction. That is one aspect of the question.
The other aspect of the question centres round the
approach which the High Court adopts in dealing with
appeals against orders of acquittal. In dealing with such
appeals, the High Court naturally bears in mind the
presumption of innocence in favour of an accused person
and cannot lose sight of the fact that the said presumption
is strengthened by the order of acquittal passed in his
favour by the trial Court and so, the fact that the accused
person is entitled to the benefit of a reasonable doubt will
always be present in the mind of the High Court when it
deals with the merits of the case. As an appellate Court the
High Court is generally slow in disturbing the finding of
fact recorded by the trial Court, particularly when the said
finding is based on an appreciation of oral evidence
because the trial Court has the advantage of watching the
demeanour of the witnesses who have given evidence.
Thus, though the powers of the High Court in dealing with
an appeal against acquittal are as wide as those which it has
in dealing with an appeal against conviction, in-dealing with
the former class of appeals, its approach is governed by the
overriding consideration flowing from the presumption of
innocence. Sometimes, the width of the power is
emphasized, while on other occasions, the necessity to
adopt a cautious approach in dealing with appeals against
acquittals is emphasised, and the emphasis is expressed in
different words or phrases used from time to time. But the
true legal position is that however circumspect and cautious
the approach of the High Court may be in dealing with
appeals against acquittals, it is undoubtedly entitled to reach
its own conclusions upon the evidence adduced by the 
prosecution in respect of the guilt or innocence of the
accused. This position has been clarified by the Privy
Council in
Sheo Swarup v. Emperor
, 61 Ind App 398: (AIR
1934 PC 227(2).
(emphasis added)

     In
Jagdish vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
, the Supreme
Court had this to say.
12.  The High Court while dealing with an appeal from a
judgment of acquittal was, thus, required to meet the
aforementioned reasonings of the learned Trial Judge.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that irrespective of
the fact that the High Court was dealing with a judgment of
acquittal, it was open to it to re-appreciate the materials
brought on records by the parties, but it is a well-settled
principle of law that where two view are possible, the High
Court would not ordinarily interfere with the judgment of
acquittal. (See
Rattan Lal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir
[2007 (5) Scale 472].                               (emphasis added)
7.      Following the reasons assigned hereinbefore and the case
law discussed above, we have no hesitation to hold that even in
an appeal against acquittal filed by the State, it is open to the
accused to assail the correctness or otherwise of any finding of
the Sessions Court with a view to support his acquittal.
8.      We shall now consider whether the finding of the Court
below that the evidence of P.Ws.9 and 10 is worthy of
acceptance and that through their evidence, the prosecution
proved the guilt of the accused.  In Ex.P-1 report given by
P.W.1, the names of P.Ws.9 and 10 were not referred to.  They
did not figure as eyewitnesses to Ex.P-6 - inquest panchanama.
For the first time, they were examined by the Police two days
after the occurrence.  Further more, each of these two
witnesses did not speak to the presence of the other witness.
The following omissions were elicited by the defence from
P.W.9 in his cross-examination.
I did not state to the Police that the A2 beat
the deceased with a stick as in Ex.D4..I did not state
to the Police that the A1 chased the said Bhaskar at a
distance and hacked with an axe as in Ex.D5. I did not
go to the Police Station at any time.
The defence was also able to elicit the following omissions
from the cross-examination of P.W.15  the investigation
officer.
.The P.W.10 stated to me as in Ex.D6. P.W.10   
stated to me that he is a coolie and he did not state to
me that he is working in Gram Panchayat. P.W.10 did 
not state to me at the time of alleged incident that he
was bringing water on bicycle. P.W.10 did not state to
me that while A1 was beating the deceased the A2 
stand by his side. The P.Ws.9 and 10 are not shown as 
eyewitnesses in Ex.P6..
9.      The aforementioned lacunae in the case of the
prosecution qua P.Ws.9 and 10 render their testimony unworthy 
of acceptance.  Therefore, as rightly submitted by the learned
counsel for the respondents/accused, the Court below has
rendered an erroneous finding that through the evidence of
P.Ws.9 and 10, the prosecution was able to prove the guilt of
the accused.  Accordingly, while reversing the finding of the
Court below to the above extent, we confirm all other findings
rendered by it including the conclusion and the result of the
case.
10.     In the result, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed.
__________________________    
C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
_________________________    
GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD, J        
24th July, 2018