[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Pathlavath Devamma,W/O Pathlavath ... vs The State Of Telangana, Reptd., By The ... on 4 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 239, (2019) 1 ALD(CRL) 445
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                       

Crl.A.No.891  of 2011

04.6.2018 


Pathlavath Devamma,W/o Pathlavath Chinna Balaya..... Appellant 

The State of Telangana, reptd., by the Public Prosecutor, Hyderabad. .....Respondent


<Gist:

>Head Note: 

Counsel for the appellant: Mrs. A.Gayatri Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent: Mr. C.Pratap Reddy 
                             Public Prosecutor for the State of Telangana
                                                                        
?Cases Referred: 


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY          
        AND     
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD            

 Crl.A.No.891 of 2011

Date:04.06.2018 


The Court made the following:


JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)   

     The sole accused in Sessions Case No.811 of 2007 on the
file of the learned I Additional Sessions Judge, Mahabubnagar
filed this Criminal Appeal feeling aggrieved by her conviction
for the offence under
Section-302
IPC and sentencing her to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for life apart from imposition of
fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default, to suffer simple imprisonment
for one month, vide judgment, dated 27.07.2011.
The case of the prosecution in brief is as follows:
P.W-1 is the first wife and the appellant is the second wife
of the deceased. That on 21.4.2007 at 8 am, P.W-1 lodged a
complaint at Mahabubnagar Rural Police Station stating that her
marriage with the deceased was performed about 25 years back; 
that she begot two daughters from the wedlock; that as she had
no male issues, a second marriage between the deceased and the  
appellant was performed about 14 years back, but the appellant
remained issueless; that the appellants father and the elder
brother used to quarrel with the deceased demanding him to
give half of 6 acres of land to her; that finally, they hatched a
plan to do away the life of the deceased; that accordingly, on
20.4.2007 at about 7 pm, the appellant brought one liquor
bottle and forcibly made the deceased to consume it; that on the
same night, at about 8.30 pm, the deceased and the appellant
went to the thrashing yard in order to guard paddy; that on next
day morning, as her son-in-law has prepared to go to his
village, her younger daughter went to the fields to call the
deceased, who returned crying; that on enquiry, she disclosed
that the neck of the deceased was chopped and he was in a pool 
of blood; and that they rushed to the spot and found cut injury
on the throat and injuries of an axe on the head and neck of the
deceased. On receipt of the said complaint, a case in Crime
No.103 of 2007 was registered for the offence under
Section
302
IPC and express F.I.Rs were sent to all the officers
concerned.
PW-16-Circle Inspector of Police, Mahabubnagar Rural
Police Station took up the investigation of the case, visited the
scene of offence situated at the agricultural fields of the
deceased at Kodur sivar, conducted panchanama in the presence  
of the mediators-PWs.8 and 9, prepared a rough sketch of the
scene of offence, seized the blood stained earth, control earth
and one axe used in the commission of offence by the appellant
under the cover of panchanama, got the dead body of the
deceased photographed by L.W-10-Kiran Goud, examined and    
recorded the statements of P.Ws.4 and 5 and held inquest over
the dead body of the deceased in the presence of P.Ws.10 and 17 
and sent the body of the deceased for post-mortem examination.
Subsequently, P.W-15-Sub-Inspector of Police, Mahabubnagar  
Rural Police Station examined and recorded the statements of
PWs.6 and 7 and L.W-9-Sabavath Chandramma and L.W-10-      
Kiran Goud. That the appellant visited the house of P.W-6 and
made extra-judicial confession that she killed the deceased in
the agricultural fields for harassing her and not giving half of
six acres of land to her. PW-14-dcotor, who conducted autopsy
over the dead body of the deceased opined that the cause of
death was due to injuries to vital organs like brain and both
carotid alkies leading to haemorrhage and shock and death.
That on 04.5.2007, at 6.30 pm., PW-15 arrested the appellant
and on interrogation, in the presence of PW-11 and LW-16-
Chimanti Ramchandraiah, she confessed to have murdered the  
deceased by inflicting injuries with an axe.
Based on the charge sheet and the material collected by
the Investigation Officer, the Court framed the following charge:
That on 20.4.2007 at about 10 pm., at your
agricultural field in Kodur thanda, you did commit
murder intentionally or knowingly causing the
death of your husband Pathlavath Chinna Balya 
Naik by chopping his neck with an axe and
inflicting injuries on the head and that you thereby,
committed the offence punishable under
Section-
302
IPC and within my cognizance.
As the plea of the appellant was one of denial, she was
subjected to trial, during which, the prosecution has examined
P.Ws.1 to 18, got Exs.P-1 to P-16 marked and produced M.Os.1   
to 9. On behalf of the defence, no oral evidence was let in, but
Ex.D-1-Copy of proceedings of the Tahsildar and Ex.D-2-Copy 
of settlement document, dated 26.3.2008, executed by P.W-2  
were got marked.
On appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence,
the Court below has disposed of the case in the manner as
indicated above.
We have heard Mrs. A.Gayatri Reddy, learned counsel for
the appellant, and Mr. C.Pratap Reddy, learned Public Prosecutor
for the State of Telangana.
This is a case based on circumstantial evidence. Therefore,
motive plays a crucial role in this case. The only reason
attributed to the appellant to develop grudge against the
deceased, her own husband, was that her apprehension that the 
deceased may not settle any property in her favour as, she did
not bear children. In our opinion, this alleged motive sounds
very unnatural for, even if the deceased is done to death, the
appellant may not automatically succeed to his estate as, there is
every possibility and risk of her being convicted and sentenced
to imprisonment, more so, when the deceased had a living first
wife along with two children. We are, therefore, of the opinion
that the motive set up by the prosecution is too weak to be given
any credibility.
As regards the evidence produced by the prosecution, the
Court below has mainly relied upon the last seen theory spoken
to by P.W-1. Indeed, through the suggestions given to P.W-1
and the explanation offered by the appellant in her
Section-313
Cr.P.C. examination, she has set up the plea that the appellant
was not living with the deceased for some time prior to the
murder of the deceased and that she was living with her brother
in a different place i.e., at Mahabubnagar. This plea derives its
support from the evidence of P.W-4, who testified that as per his
information, about six months prior to the murder of the
deceased, the appellant had left the latters house and started
living at her brothers house at Mahabubnagar. The Court below
does not appear to have given much attention to this plea of the
defence.
As regards the probability of the appellant killing the
deceased on her own, it is the case of the prosecution that the
appellant had purchased a liquor bottle and forcibly made the
deceased to drink it before accompanying him to the thrashing
floor, where they slept together during the night when the
murder has taken place. Ex.P-10-Post-mortem examination  
report does not reveal that the viscera of the deceased was
examined so as to know whether alcohol contents were present. 
The Post-mortem report only shows the presence of digested 
food in the stomach contents, without there being any reference
to alcohol contents. Column No.6 of Ex.P-10-Post-mortem 
examination report described the physique of the deceased as
well-built. Even as per the evidence of P.W-1, the first wife of
the deceased, the latter was physically strong. It is, therefore, not
possible to believe that the appellant being a woman would have
been able to overpower the deceased, who, apparently, was not
in a drunken condition, and cause his death. Ex.P-10-Post-
mortem examination report reveals as many as nine injuries,
most of which were caused on the head and neck part of the
deceased with a sharp weapon. In our considered opinion, it is
not possible for the appellant alone to cause such extensive
injuries to a well-built and able bodied person like the deceased,
who, as stated above, appeared to be in normal condition
without consuming alcohol.
The further improbability of the appellant alone causing
injuries to the deceased is evident from the nature of injuries
described by P.W-14-the doctor, who conducted autopsy over 
the dead body of the deceased. In his cross-examination,
P.W-14 stated that injury No.4 is possible with a stick. Even as
per the prosecution version, MOs.1 and 2-an axe and a stick
respectively were recovered from the scene of offence. Assuming
that the appellant has participated in the attack, it is not possible
to believe that she used both axe and stick for causing injuries to
the deceased. It is, therefore, reasonable to presume that more
than one person has participated in the attack of the deceased
and it logically follows that the prosecution has not come out
with true version as to the persons who participated in the
attack of the deceased and the manner in which such attack has
taken place.
As regards the alleged recovery, admittedly, except
MO-3-saree, which allegedly contained blood stains, nothing
was recovered from the possession of the appellant. As per
Ex.P-13-Forensic Science Laboratory Report, MO-3-Saree did  
not contain any blood stains. Therefore, recovery of MO-3-saree
from the possession of the appellant has no legal consequences
at all and the Court below has also rightly declined to place any
reliance on such recovery.
As for the last seen theory, as discussed above, it comes
under the cloud of doubt in the face of the defence of the
appellant that for about six months prior to the murder of the
deceased, she was living with her brother at Mahabubnagar,
which was supported by the statement of P.W.4.  Even 
otherwise, the law is well settled that the Court cannot base its
conviction only based on the last seen theory in the absence of
any other independent evidence corroborating the version of the
prosecution in order to find the accused guilty of the offence.
In
Arjun Marik v. State of Bihar
the Supreme Court held
as under:
31. it is settled law that the only circumstance of
last seen will not complete the chain of circumstances
to record [a] finding that it is consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and, therefore, no
conviction, on that basis alone, can be founded.
In
State of Karnataka v. M.V. Mahesh
, the Supreme Court
held:
3.  Merely being seen last together is not enough.
What has to be established in a case of this nature is
definite evidence to indicate that [the deceased] had
been done to death of which the respondent is or must
be aware as also proximate to the time of being last
seen together. No such clinching evidence is put forth.
It is no doubt true that even in the absence of the
corpus delicti it is possible to establish in an
appropriate case commission of murder on appropriate
material being made available to the court.
In
State of U.P. v. Satish
, the Supreme Court held:
Where the time gap between the point of time when
the accused and the deceased were last seen alive and
when the deceased is found dead is so small that
possibility of any person other than the accused being
the author of the crime becomes impossible.
Upon review of the case law, the Supreme Court in
Sahadevan v. State of Tamil Nadu
held:
32. Undoubtedly, the last seen theory is an important
event in the chain of circumstances that would
completely establish and/or could point to the guilt of
the accused with some certainty. But this theory should
be applied while taking into consideration the case of
the prosecution in its entirety and keeping in mind the
circumstances that precede and follow the point of
being so last seen.
On the analysis of the evidence undertaken hereinbefore,
undoubtedly the prosecution has failed to adduce any other
corroborative evidence to support the last seen theory.  Hence,
we are of the opinion that the prosecution failed to prove the
guilt of the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt and the Court
below has wrongly convicted the appellant for the offence
punishable under
Section-302
IPC.
Accordingly, the judgment, dated 27.07.2011, in Sessions
Case No.811 of 2007 on the file of the I Additional Sessions
Judge, Mahabubnagar is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of
the charge under
Section-302
IPC and her bail bonds shall
stand cancelled. Since the appellant is on bail, she must
immediately surrender herself before the Superintendent,
Cherlopalle Central Jail for completion of formalities for her
release. The fine amount paid by the appellant shall be refunded
to her.
____________________________     
JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY        
_____________________________     
JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD          
04th June, 2018