[Cites
2
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Meer Mubhashir Ali S/O. Meer Maqsood ... vs The State Of Telangana, Rep.By Its ... on 18 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 179, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 471
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO         

WRIT PETITION No.19217 OF 2018    

18.06.2018 

Meer Mubhashir Ali s/o. Meer Maqsood Ali, Aged about 37 years,Occu: Forest Section Officer, Nasrullabad Section, O/o the For
District (earlier Nizamabad district), Telangana state. Petitioner

The State of Telangana, rep.by its Prl.Secretary to Government,Environment, Forests, Science & Technology Department,Telanga 

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri G.Raman Goud

Counsel for the Respondents:  Govt.Pleader for Services-I(TG) for
                               respondents
<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
 (1993)3 SCC 196 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P NAVEEN RAO        

WRIT PETITION NO.19217 OF 2018     

ORAL ORDER:
Petitioner is presently working as Forest Section Officer/ Forester
and aspiring for promotion as Deputy Range Officer. Petitioner was
served with charge memo dated 13.2.2017.  It is alleged that petitioner
allowed the sawmill owners to use additional saw bands in their sawmills
violating the orders of the Honble Supreme Court in W.P.No.202 of 1995
and failed to implement A.P. Sawmill (Regulation) Rules, 1969.  Petitioner
filed his written statement of defense on 23.10.2017 denying the
allegations.  He was served with notice dated 18.5.2018 informing him
that enquiry is fixed on 1.6.2018.  On 1.6.2018 petitioner appeared
before the Enquiry Officer and submitted his written statement of
defense.  According to petitioner, 8 persons were promoted as Deputy
Range Officers on 24.10.2017, out of them 4 were juniors to him and two
more were promoted on 2.4.2018.  Alleging that he is illegally ignored for
promotion by promoting his juniors and that for no fault on him,
disciplinary proceedings are not concluded, this writ petition is filed.
2.      Learned counsel for petitioner would submit that promotion
to the post of Deputy Range Officer is based on seniority; that it is non-
selection post.  Promotion to non selection posts are covered by Rule 5(b)
of A.P. State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1996.  For promotion to non
selection post, pending departmental proceedings is not a bar, therefore,
petitioner could not have been ignored for promotion while promoting his
juniors.  He would submit that G.O.Ms.No.257 G.A. (Ser.C) Department, 
dated 10.6.1999 is applicable only to selection posts.  He would further
submit that as per policy of the Government, enquiry has to be
completed in case of minor allegations within three months and in case
of major allegations within six months, whereas in the case on hand,
though charge memo was drawn on 13.2.2017, for more than one year,  
there is no progress in the enquiry.  He would therefore submit that
petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion without reference to
pending disciplinary proceedings.
3.      The issue for consideration is whether petitioner is entitled
for promotion pending disciplinary proceedings.
4.      One of the important parameters of public service is if an
employee is facing disciplinary action/trial on his/her misdemeanor or
misconduct-criminal/civil, he/she should not be granted promotion. It
is not in public interest to grant promotion to an employee when on
allegation, enquiry/trial/investigation is pending against him. Thus,
though employee is entitled to be considered for promotion, on such
consideration even if he is found fit, his promotion can be differed on
the ground that disciplinary proceedings/criminal proceedings are
pending.  On this proposition, no distinction can be made between
selection posts and non-selection posts. An employee has right for
consideration for promotion, but has no right to ask promotion as a
matter of course [
K Samantaray Vs National Insurance Company   
Limited
- (2004) 9 SCC 286].
In
Delhi Development Authority v.
H.C.Khurana
, Supreme Court set out scope of consideration of
competing claims.  Supreme Court observed as under:
8. ..Where a decision has been taken to initiate the disciplinary
proceedings against a government servant, his promotion, even if
he is found otherwise suitable, would be incongruous, because a
government servant under such a cloud should not be
promoted till he is cleared of the allegations against him,
into which an inquiry has to be made according to the decision
taken. In such a situation, the correctness of the allegation being
dependent on the final outcome of the disciplinary proceedings, it
would not be fair to exclude him from consideration for promotion
till conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings, even though it
would be improper to promote him, if found otherwise suitable,
unless exonerated. To reconcile these conflicting interests, of the
government servant and public administration, the only fair and
just course is, to consider his case for promotion and to
determine if he is otherwise suitable for promotion, and keep
the result in abeyance in sealed cover to be implemented on
conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings; and in case he is
exonerated therein, to promote him with all consequential
benefits, if found otherwise suitable by the Selection Committee.
On the other hand, giving him promotion after taking the decision
to initiate disciplinary proceedings, would be incongruous and
against public policy and principles of good administration.
(emphasis supplied)
        5.1.    Telangana State and Subordinate Service Rules 1996 (for
convenience referred to as General Rules) deal with general conditions of
service of all Government employees.  Rule 5 deals with procedure for
promotion to selection posts and non-selection posts.   Rule 6 deals with
preparation of panels.  Rules 5 and 6 to the extent necessary read as
under:
5.      Selection Posts:-
(a)     All first appointments as a State Service and all promotions/
appointments by transfer in that service shall be made on grounds of
merit and ability, seniority being considered only where merit and ability
are approximately equal, by the appointing authority as specified in sub-
rule (a) of Rule 6 from the panel of candidates.  Such panel shall be
prepared as
laid down in
Rule 6 by the appointing authority or any other
authority empowered in this behalf.
(b)     Non-selection posts:- No non-gazetted post should be treated as
selection post. Promotion and appointment by transfer to higher posts
other than those mentioned in sub-rule (a) shall be made in accordance
with seniority-cum-fitness, unless:
(i) such promotion or appointment by transfer of a member has been
withheld as a penalty; or
(ii) a member is given special promotion for conspicuous merit and
        ability.
6.  Method of preparation of panels:
(a) to (h) xxxxxxx
(i)  Non-selection posts:-
For non-selection posts referred to in sub-rule (b) of Rule 5 the
appointing authority shall prepare a list of eligible employees every year
i.e., from 1st September of the year to 31st August of the succeeding year
after considering the record sheet and the qualifications prescribed for
the said post in the relevant Special Rules for promotion to next higher
category of non-section post.
5.2.    According to sub-rule (a) of Rule 5, all first appointments to
a State service and all promotions/appointments by transfer in that
service should be made on grounds of merit and ability, seniority being
considered only where merit and ability are approximately equal from the
panel of candidates provided. According to Rule 5(b), non-gazetted posts
are not treated as selection posts.    In case of non-section post, sub-rule
(b) contemplates that it should be made in accordance with the seniority
cum fitness.
5.3.       Rule 6 deals with method of preparation of panels.  The
salient features of this provision are: panel of approved candidates as
envisaged in Rule 5 (a) should be prepared by appointing authority/
authority empowered, in consultation with, the Departmental Promotion
Committee / the Screening Committee, in respect of the posts within the
purview of Telangana State Public Service Commission; the appointment 
should be made from the panels so drawn; the 1st September of the year
shall be reckoned as qualifying date to determine the eligibility and such
panel would lapse on 31st December of the succeeding year or when the 
next panel is prepared, whichever is earlier; for computation of
vacancies, 1st September of the year to the 31st August of the succeeding
year should be reckoned as the period; the zone of consideration is
confined to 1:3.
5.4.       According to Rule 6(i)  for non selection posts, competent
authority should prepare list of eligible employees every year i.e., from 1st
September of the year to  the 31st August of the succeeding year, after
considering the record sheet and qualifications prescribed.
5.5.       It is appropriate to notice that Rules 5 and 6 of the
Telangana State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1996 do not deal with
the issue of consideration for promotion when disciplinary proceedings or
criminal proceedings are pending, whether promotion is to selection post
or non-selection post.  The administrative instructions/ orders notified
vide G.O.Ms.Nos.424 General Administration (Ser.C) Department, dated 
25.05.1976 and G.O.Ms.No.257 General Administration (Ser.C)  
Department, dated 10.06.1999 reflect the policy of the Government on
consideration for promotion when disciplinary proceedings / criminal
proceedings are pending.
6.      At this stage it is expedient to consider the policy of the State
Government. In the combined State, prior to bifurcation, the Government
formulated promotion policy on consideration of employees/officers
facing the disciplinary proceedings and the same is in force in both
States. The two states are not adopting sealed cover procedure. After
consideration of the case by the DPC or by the appointing authority, if
the employee is found suitable/fit for promotion, the result of
consideration is declared but his actual promotion is differed till the
proceedings pending against him are concluded.
7.        Government notified its policy vide G.O.Ms.No.424, dated
25.05.1976. For the purpose of such consideration, Government
classified the Officers, who are facing enquiry, trial or investigation, into
three categories.  The three categories are as under:
i) an officer with a clean record, the nature of
charges/ allegations against whom relate to minor lapses
having no bearing on his integrity or efficiency, which,
even if held proved, would not stand in the way of his
being promoted;
ii) an officer whose record is such that he would not
be promoted, irrespective of the allegations/charges under
enquiry, trial or investigation; and
iii) an officer whose record is such that he would
have been promoted had he not been facing enquiry, trial
or investigation, in respect of charges which, if held
proved, would be sufficient to supersede him.
7.1.     According to G.O.Ms.No.424, dated 25.5.1976, Officers
falling into third category should be deferred for promotion pending
departmental enquiry/trial/investigation. Most of the litigation is
generated in cases falling into third category.
7.2.      On further review of this policy and subsequent orders of the
Government, Government notified its fresh policy vide G.O.Ms.No.257
dated 10.06.1999.
7.3.    The relevant portions of G.O.Ms.No.257 read as under:
(5)   Government also order that with immediate effect the following
procedure and guidelines, be followed to consider the employees against
whom disciplinary cases or criminal prosecution are pending or whose
conduct is under investigation, for appointment by promotion or transfer, to
next higher categories.
(A) The details of employees in the zone of consideration for promotion
falling under the following categories should be specifically brought to the
notice of the Departmental Promotion Committees or Screening Committees:-
(i)   Officers under suspension;
(ii)  Officers in respect of whom a charge sheet has been issued and the
disciplinary proceedings are pending;
(iii) Officers in respect of whom prosecution for a criminal charge is
pending.
(B)   Officers who are facing enquiry, trial or investigation; can be
categorized into the following groups based on the nature of the allegations or
charges pending against them or about to be instituted namely:-
(i) an officer with a clean record, the nature of charges or allegations
against whom related to minor lapses having no bearing on his integrity or
efficiency, which even  if  held proved, would not stand in the way of his being
promoted.
(ii) an officer whose record is such that he would not be promoted,
irrespective of the allegations or charges under enquiry, trial or investigation;
and
(iii) an Officer whose record is such that he would have been promoted
had he not been facing enquiry, trial or investigation, in-respect of charges
which, if held proved,  would be sufficient to supersede him.
(C) The suitability of the Officers for inclusion in the panel should be
considered on an overall assessment based on the record which should 
include namely:-
(i)    Adverse remarks recorded in the Annual Confidential Reports, the
penalties awarded and the bad reputation of the Officer as vouchsafed by the
Head of the Department and the Secretary to Government of the Department 
concerned;
The above cases should be considered as falling under category (ii) of
item (B) above.
(ii)  The Officers who do not have any adverse entry in the Annual
Confidential Report, and who have no penalties awarded against them in the
entire duration of the post and not merely in the past five years and whose
reputation is vouchsafed by the Head of the Department and the Secretary to
Government of the Department concerned should be considered as falling
under category (iii) of item (B) above.
The Officers categorized as under item (iii) of G.O.Ms.No.424, G.A.(Ser.C)
Dept, dt: 25-5-1976 as mentioned above only should be considered for adhoc
promotion after completion of two years from the date of the Departmental
Promotion Committee or Screening Committee Meeting in which their cases  
were considered for the first time.
(6)  The Appointment Authority should consider and decide that it would not
be against public interest to allow adhoc promotion to the Officer concerned
and this shall be decided with reference to the charge under enquiry.  If the
charge is one of moral turpitude, misappropriation, embezzlement and grave
dereliction of duty then the Appointing Authority should consider as not in
the public interest to consider adhoc promotion to such charged Officer.  But,
however, if the charge is not a grave one but is a minor one, not involving
moral turpitude, embezzlement and grave dereliction of duty then only in
such cases the Appointing Authority should consider that it would not be
against public interest to allow adhoc promotion because till then his record
is clean with reference to ACRs, past punishment and reputation in the
Department as vouchsafed by the Head of the Department and Secretary to 
Government.  The Appointing Authorities should strive to finalise the
disciplinary cases pursuing them vigorously so that within two years the
proceedings are concluded and final orders issued.
7.4.     This G.O. mandates that the concerned authority should
bring to the notice of the Departmental Promotion Committee, the details
of the employees in the zone of consideration for promotion falling under
the three categories mentioned there under i.e., i) officers under
suspension; ii) officers in respect of whom a charge sheet has been
issued and the disciplinary proceedings are pending; and iii) officers in
respect of whom prosecution on criminal charges are pending.  Similar
categorization of officers as was notified in G.O.Ms.No.424 is also
incorporated in paragraph-5(B) of this G.O.  The G.O. enables
consideration of claims of officers also falling under the third category, if,
even after completion of two years from the date of the Departmental
Promotion Committee or Screening Committee meeting, there was no   
progress in the enquiry/trial/investigation.  However, even this
consideration is confined to officers against whom charge leveled is not
grave, but is a minor one, not involving moral turpitude, embezzlement
and grave dereliction of duty.
8.      It is significant to note that even to non-selection post,
promotion based on seniority position of an employee is not automatic.
It is subject to assessment of fitness, on consideration of record sheet
and on assessing whether employee is possessing requisite 
qualifications. Assessment of fitness/consideration of record sheet,
necessarily mean consideration of conduct of employee.  The only issue
for consideration is whether consideration for promotion to non-selection
posts pending disciplinary proceedings/criminal proceedings attract
similar scrutiny as applicable to selection post.  However, it is
appropriate to note at this stage that in assessing the suitability even to
selection posts, the pendency of disciplinary proceedings/criminal
proceedings is not the basis. Employees suitability is assessed
independently, but when employee is found suitable DPC/Screening 
Committee would recommend to defer promotion pending disciplinary 
proceedings/criminal proceedings.  Senior can be ignored for promotion
for variety of reasons.  If senior is under currency of punishment, he can
be superseded.  Further, Rule 5(b) also carves out two exceptions. First
one deals with a situation when employee is facing punishment of
withholding of his promotion; if so, he cannot even be considered.
Second deals with grant of accelerated promotion.  If employee has
conspicuous merit, he can be promoted ignoring his seniors.  When
disciplinary proceedings/criminal proceedings are pending, as per
seniority, employees suitability has to be assessed and if found fit and
qualified, he may not get his promotion as per his turn, but he would
earn promotion retrospectively once he is cleared in disciplinary
proceedings/criminal proceedings. As against this, in the three
contingencies mentioned above, he would not earn his promotion
retrospectively / on par with his juniors.
9.      On an interactive analysis of provisions in Rules 5 and 6 of
General Rules, Government Policy as reflected in G.O.Ms.No.424 and 
G.O.Ms.No.257 and law on the subject, I am of the view that pending
disciplinary proceedings/criminal proceedings acts as a bar for granting
promotion even to non-selection posts.
10.     Further, even according to petitioner, G.O.Ms.No.257 is
attracted to his case.  As per G.O.Ms.No.257, as noticed above,
petitioner is not entitled for promotion even on adhoc basis unless
panels were drawn in two panel years after he was considered for the
first time.
11.     I am fortified in my view by the decision of Division Bench in
W.P.No.25598 of 2007, dated 24.01.2008.  In
the above case
, respondent 
was denied promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade.II in
Registration Department on the ground that disciplinary proceedings are
pending.  He approached the A.P. Administrative Tribunal.  By way of
interim order, the Tribunal directed consideration of his case for
promotion without reference to disciplinary proceedings pending against
him.  Respondent claimed that promotion as Sub-Registrar Grade.II is
based on seniority and, therefore,   pending disciplinary proceedings is
not a bar for consideration of promotion.  This Court vacated the interim
order granted by A.P. Administrative Tribunal.
11.1.  On construing scope of Rule 5 (b) and 6(i), Division Bench
observed as under:
11. A conjoint reading of the above two Rules would
abundantly makes it clear that, when the disciplinary
proceedings are pending, it is not the seniority alone, that
should be taken into consideration, but also the record
sheet, for effecting promotions.  In other words, the conduct
of the incumbent has also to be looked into.  While
considering the aspect of conduct, it is essential that record
sheet, which contains the details as to whether any
disciplinary proceedings are pending as on the date of
consideration for effecting promotions of the individuals, has
to be looked into.
11.2.   On considering the scope of G.O.Ms.No.424, the Division
Bench observed:
15.  From the above, it is clear that it is not only the
Departmental Promotion Committee (for short the DPC), but
also the other authority, which may or may not recommend 
the employees for promotion.  It is further clear that the
individuals would not be recommended for promotion, if
their conduct is under enquiry, trial or investigation.
11.3. Explaining the scope of fitness, the Division Bench
observed:
19. . Fitness, in other words, means the conduct of
an individual, which is in surveillance of the charges by way
of departmental enquiry. It would rather keep such an
individual away from the zone of consideration for sometime
and such an individual would be restored to his original
status due, in case he is exonerated of the charges as
contemplated in G.O.Ms.No.66, dated 30.01.1991.
12.     In the case on hand, as petitioner is facing disciplinary
proceedings, the prayer to direct the respondents to grant promotion
without reference to pending disciplinary proceedings cannot be granted.
However, it is noticed from the narration of facts in the affidavit filed in
support of writ petition that the charges were drawn on 13.02.2017 and
petitioner claimed to have submitted his written statement of defence on
23.10.2017 and notice of enquiry scheduled on 01.06.2018 was issued 
on 18.05.2018.  In view of the same, the disciplinary authority is directed
to ensure that disciplinary proceedings are concluded as expeditiously as
possible, at any rate within a period of four months from the date of
receipt of copy of this order.
13.     Subject to above directions, writ petition is dismissed.
Pending miscellaneous petitions shall stand closed.  There shall be no
order as to costs.
__________________________    
JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO      
Date: 18.06.2018