[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kunamneni Nageswara Rao vs Kunamneni Dasaradharamaiah, And ... on 27 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 32
Author:
M.Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M.Seetharama Murti
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.3592 of 2018    

27.06.2018 

Kunamneni Nageswara Rao .Petitioner   


Kunamneni Dasaradharamaiah, And another. .Respondents     

Counsel for petitioner:         Sri K.Ananda Rao

Counsel for the Respondents :   ---
                              (C.R.P. is disposed of at the stage of admission)

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Citations:

1.2017 (3) HLT 594
2.2017 (1) HLT 715
3.2016 (2) ALT 248 (FB)
4.2008 (3) ALT 409 (DB)

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.3592 of 2018    

ORDER:
This Civil Revision Petition, under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India, is filed by the petitioner-unsuccessful first
defendant, assailing the order, dated 07.05.2018, of the learned
Junior Civil Judge, Parchur, passed in I.A.No.157 of 2018 in
O.S.No.62 of 2011, whereby the learned Junior Civil Judge
allowed the aforestated Interlocutory Application filed by the
first respondent herein/plaintiff for sending the document with
the disputed signatures, namely, suit contract of sale, dated
28.08.2003, along with the vakalat & written statement of the
first defendant and also the registered sale deed, dated
16.09.2011, containing his signatures to a handwriting expert
of A.P.Forensic Science Laboratory, Amaravathi, for comparing
the disputed signatures on the said contract of sale with the
signatures said to be admitted on the aforestated documents
and for furnishing an opinion along with a report to the Court.
2.      I have heard the submissions of the learned counsel
appearing for the revision petitioner/first defendant (first
defendant for short).  I have perused the material record.
3.      The introductory facts, in brief, are as follows:
The plaintiff brought the suit for specific performance of
the aforestated contract of sale, dated 28.08.2003.  The first
defendant, having entered appearance, filed his written
statement disputing his signature/s on the said contract of sale.
After trial, the plaintiff filed the aforestated Interlocutory
Application and the same was resisted by the first defendant.
However, the trial Court, by the impugned order, allowed the
said application and directed to send the disputed contract of
sale, dated 28.08.2003, to the handwriting expert, F.S.L.,
Amaravathi, for comparison of the admitted and disputed
signatures of the first defendant and called for his report along
with his opinion.  Aggrieved thereof, the first defendant is before
this Court.
4.      The first defendant, in the grounds, and the learned
Counsel, during his submissions, raised two contentions.
Firstly, it is urged that the approach of the plaintiff is a laidback
approach, as his present request made at the conclusion of the
trial to send the documents to the handwriting expert for his
opinion is highly belated, and therefore, the trial Court was in
error in granting the said request.  Secondly, it is sought to be
contended that the contract of sale is of the year 2003 and that,
the suit was instituted in the year 2011; that the signatures of
the first defendant on the vakalat & the written statement and
also on the deed of sale are of the year  2011, and therefore, the
said signatures of the first defendant, which the plaintiff wants
the expert to consider as standard signatures for comparison
with the disputed signature/s, are not of contemporaneous
period;  therefore, the trial Court ought not to have considered
the request of the plaintiff.
5.      Dealing with the contentions, it is to be noted that the
learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the
following decisions of this Court. The decision in
Dhatla
Lakshmipathi Raju v. P.Venkata Ramana
, is relied upon in
support of the proposition that a belated application filed for
sending the documents to an expert for an opinion is not
entertainable.
The decision of this Court in
P.Padmanabhaiah
v. G.Srinivasa Rao
is relied upon  in support of the
proposition that, when the signatures, which are to be
compared with the disputed signatures, are not of a
contemporaneous period, the request for obtaining an opinion
from the expert based on such signatures shall not be
considered.
6.      I have gone through the decisions cited.  I have given
earnest consideration to the submissions.
7.
In the considered view of this Court, the two contentions
and the issue raised in the revision do no merit consideration,
as the issue involved is no longer res integra, in view of the
decision of the Full Bench of this Court in
Bande Siva
Shankara Srinivasa Prasad v. Ravi Surya Prakash Babu
(died) per LRs .
8.      It is to be noted at the outset that this is not a case where
the first defendant having filed his vakalat and written
statement is making a request to send the said documents to an
expert for comparing the signatures thereon with the signatures
said to be of him on the suit document which he is disputing.
In this case, the plaintiff is making a request to send the vakalat
and written statement containing the signatures of the first
defendant and also the contract of sale said to be containing the
signature/s of the first defendant to an expert for inter se
comparison and furnishing a report to the Court.  If the first
defendant files his vakalat and written statement and makes a
request to send the said documents to an expert for comparison
of the signatures thereon with the disputed signatures of his on
the suit documents, the plaintiff may have reason to object for
considering such signatures on the vakalat and written
statement of the first defendant as admitted and/or standard
signatures,  if the plaintiff has any apprehension that the first
defendant might have signed vakalat and written statement
after designedly disguising or altering his signatures with an
intention to defeat the claim of the plaintiff.  In such a case, the
Court may be slow in accepting the request of the first
defendant and may call the first defendant to produce
documents of authentic nature, if any, containing his
signatures, or may even refuse to exercise the discretion in
favour of the first defendant, who makes the request for seeking
an opinion of the expert, keeping in view the apprehension of
the plaintiff which may sound reasonable and appear well
founded in the facts & circumstances of the case.  But, if the
plaintiff himself makes a request in this regard by stating that
the signatures of the first defendant on the written statement
and vakalat and other documents can be considered as 
standard signatures for comparison with the disputed
signatures, then the first defendant cannot be heard to say that
such a request of the plaintiff cannot be considered; and, in
such a case, it is for the Court dealing with the matter to
exercise its discretion judiciously either way having regard to
the facts & circumstances of the case.
9.      Dealing further with the first contention, be it noted that
in a decision in
Janachaitanya Housing Limited v. Divya
Financiers
rendered by a Division Bench of this Court upon a
reference made by a learned Single Judge of this Court on the
question as to whether an application under
Section 45
of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, for expert opinion on disputed
signatures could be entertained at a later stage of the suit,
including at a stage when the suit was coming up for
arguments after the entire trial, the Division Bench, upon due
consideration of the case law on the point and the judicious
discretion which vests with the Court, answered the reference
as under:
For the reasons aforementioned, we answer the
reference thus: No time could be fixed for filing
applications under
Section 45
of the Indian Evidence
Act for sending the disputed signatures or writings to
the handwriting expert for comparison and opinion and
same shall be left open to the discretion of the court;
for exercising such discretion when exigencies so
demand, depending upon the facts and circumstances  
of the each case.
In the case on hand, the trial Court, having exercised its
discretion, considered the request of the plaintiff, though it was
made at a late stage in the matter.  This Court, on facts, finds
no grounds calling for interference with such discretion which
was judiciously exercised by the trial Court.
10.     The second set of contentions of the first defendant is that
he is disputing the signatures said to be of his on the suit
contract of sale and hence, the said signatures, which he is
disputing, on one hand, and that his signatures on his vakalat
and written statement on the other, are not of comparable
standard being not of a contemporaneous period.  Nonetheless,
the Full Bench of this Court in
Bande Siva Shankara Srinivasa
Prasads
case (3rd supra) answered the said aspect as follows:
It is essentially within the judicious
discretion of the Court, depending on the
individual facts and circumstances of the case
before it, to seek or not to seek expert opinion as
to the comparison of the disputed
handwriting/signature with the admitted
handwriting/signature under
Section 45
of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  The Court is however
not barred from sending the disputed
handwriting/signature for comparison to an
expert merely because the time gap between the 
admitted handwriting/signature and the disputed
handwriting/signature is long.  The Court must
however endeavour to impress upon the 
petitioning party that comparison of disputed
handwritings/signatures with admitted
handwritings/signatures, separated by a time lag
of 2 to 3 years, would be desirable so as to
facilitate expert comparison in accordance with
satisfactory standards.  That being said, there can
be no hard and fast rule about this aspect and it
would ultimately be for the expert concerned to
voice his conclusion as to whether the disputed
handwriting/signature and the admitted
handwriting/signature are capable of comparison
for a viable expert opinion

Thus, the Full Bench of this Court held that there can be no
hard and fast norms as to when comparison can or cannot be 
undertaken owing to the time lag between the two sets of
handwritings/signatures and that it would ultimately be for the
expert concerned to voice his conclusion as to whether the
disputed handwritings/signatures and the admitted
handwritings/signatures are capable of comparison for a viable
expert opinion.  In that view of the matter, it is not for the first
defendant to say that the signatures on his vakalat and written
statement as well as the registered sale deed are of comparable
standard or not, and it is for the expert to voice an opinion on
the said aspect at an appropriate stage of the matter.  Therefore,
this Court finds that the above stated contentions of the first
defendant do not merit consideration being devoid of merit.
11.     In the considered view of this Court, if the two sets of
signatures are sent to an expert and his opinion is obtained,
though it may be in the nature of opinion evidence, yet, it will
be one more additional piece of evidence, which may be of
considerable assistance to the trial Court not only in assessing
the entire evidence including the other evidence, which the parties
may let in during the course of trial, but also in arriving at a just
decision in the matter.
12.     On the above analysis, this Court holds that the Civil
Revision Petition is liable to be dismissed. And, the same is,
accordingly, dismissed.
Miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, in this Civil
Revision Petition, shall stand closed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
_____________________________     
M.SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
27.06.2018