[Cites
16
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Vijay Goutam Dabbiru, S/O. Late C.P. ... vs 1.The Honble High Court Of Judicature At ... on 24 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 216, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 132
Author:
J. Uma Devi
Bench:
J. Uma Devi
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN And HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI                 

W.P.No.26305 of 2018  

24-10-2018 

Vijay Goutam Dabbiru, S/o. Late C.P. Suresh, R/o. Flat No.A-3,  R.R. Enclave, H.No.6-22-RR/3A, Sai Nagar Colony,  Rai Durgam 

1.The Honble High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh rep. by its R


For the Petitioner: Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, Sr. Counsel for
                        Mr. M.V. Subba Reddy

For the Respondents 1 & 2: Mr. S. Sri Ram, Standing Counsel 
For Respondents 3 to 6:         : ---      
For the respondent No.7         : Mr. P. Kiran       

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1. 2005 LawSuit (Guj) 450
2. 2014 LawSuit (Raj) 1083
3.  (2010) 3 SCC 119
4.  (2014) 14 SCC 745 
5.  (2015) 16 SCC 778 
6.  (2017) 12 SCC 680 
7.  (2018) 11 SCC 352.
8.  (2010) 3 SCC 119
9.  (2014) 14 SCC 745 
10. (2015) 16 SCC 778 
11. (2017) 12 SCC 680 
12. (2018) 11 SCC 352 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI      

W.P.No.26305 of 2018  

ORDER:
(per VRS,J)  

      The petitioner, who appeared for selection to the post of District
Judge (Entry Level) under the quota reserved for direct recruitment, has
come up with the above writ petition, challenging the action of the High
Court in inviting the 7th respondent to appear for viva voce and also the
action of the Registry in selecting the 7th respondent to the post of District
Judge (Entry Level), as against an unreserved vacancy.
2. Heard Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel appearing
for the petitioner, Mr. S. Sri Ram, learned Standing Counsel appearing for
the respondents 1 and 2 and Mr. P. Kiran, learned counsel appearing for
the 7th respondent.
3. By a notification dated 15.04.2017, applications were invited for
appointment to four posts of District Judges (Entry Level) by way of direct
recruitment. Out of those four posts, one was reserved for Scheduled
Tribes; one was reserved for the candidates belonging to BC (B) category
and the remaining two were unreserved. However, out of the remaining
two unreserved posts, one was intended to be filled by woman.
4. It was indicated in the notification for direct recruitment that as
per Rule 6(4) of the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service Rules 2007, the
candidates appearing for the selection will be subject to a written
examination, carrying maximum marks of 80 and viva voce carrying
maximum marks of 20. The minimum qualifying marks in the written 
examination were prescribed to be 40% for open category candidates,
35% for the candidates belonging to Backward Classes and 30% for the 
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. No 
minimum marks were prescribed for viva voce.
5. The written examination was held on 10.09.2017 and the results
of the written examination were declared on 30.11.2017. The candidates,
who were declared qualified in the written examination, were invited to
attend the viva voce on 11.12.2017. The petitioner was one among the
candidates, who were so invited to attend the viva voce.
6. At this stage it may be relevant to point out that the petitioner
was permitted to appear for the written examination, by virtue of an
interim order passed by the Honble Supreme Court in I.A.No.40050 of
2017 in W.P.(C).No.354 of 2017. The fixation of qualifications was the
subject matter of dispute in the said writ petition and the question was as
to whether the services rendered by a judicial officer is to be counted as
experience at the bar.
7. We have brought on record the above fact, only for the purpose
of completion of narration. The issue that arises for consideration in this
writ petition has nothing to do with the issue pending before the Supreme
Court or the interim order passed by the Supreme Court pursuant to
which the petitioner was permitted to appear for the written examination.
8. As stated earlier, viva voce was held on 11.12.2017 in which six
candidates participated. Thereafter, by a notification dated 07.07.2018,
three candidates were declared as provisionally selected for appointment.
These candidates are arrayed as respondents 7, 9 & 10 in the present writ
petition. But the writ petition was not pressed as against respondents 8 to
10, and hence the same was dismissed on 27.07.2018 against  
respondents 8 to 10.
9. Therefore, the challenge in this writ petition is confined only to
the selection of the 7th respondent and the challenge to his selection is on
a very limited ground.
10. The petitioner herein as well as the 7th respondent belong to BC
(D) category. No post was reserved for BC (D) in the selection in question.
Therefore, both the petitioner as well as the 7th respondent were entitled
to compete only for the single post kept unreserved for the general
category. The marks secured by the petitioner and the 7th respondent are
as follows:-
Candidate 
Marks in written
examination 
(out of Max of 80)
Marks in viva voce
(out of a Max of
20)
Total marks
(out of Max. of
100)
Writ Petitioner
33
7.33
40.33
Respondent No.7
28
14
42
11. The selection of the 7th respondent is assailed primarily on the
ground that though he belonged to BC (D) category, he applied for
selection only as an open category candidate and also got selected only as
against an unreserved vacancy, and hence, he ought to have secured
40% marks, viz., 32 out of 80 in the written examination. But he secured
only 28 out of 80 in the written examination and hence, according to the
writ petitioner, the 7th respondent could not have been short listed for
viva voce, in the teeth of Rule 6(4) of the Andhra Pradesh Judicial Service
Rules 2007. It is relevant to point out at this stage that out of four
vacancies notified for direct recruitment, one was reserved for Scheduled
Tribes, one was reserved for the candidates belonging to BC (B) category
and the remaining two were unreserved (but one out of those 2 was
intended for woman). Therefore, it is contended by Mr. C.V. Mohan
Reddy, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the 7th respondent
(as well as the writ petitioner) could have applied and had actually applied
only as against the unreserved vacancy available for men. No vacancy was
earmarked for BC (D). A candidate belonging to BC (D) is not entitled to
apply for the vacancy earmarked for BC (B) category. Therefore, both the
writ petitioner as well as the 7th respondent applied only as general
category candidates eligible to be considered as against an unreserved
vacancy. In such circumstances, the petitioner as well as the 7th
respondent, according to the petitioner, could be declared to have passed
the written examination, only if they had secured 40% marks in the
written examination and not otherwise. While the petitioner secured 40%
marks in the written examination and thus qualified for viva voce, the 7th
respondent secured less than 40% marks in the written examination. But
he was invited for interview and was also selected. Therefore, it is
contended by the petitioner that the selection of the 7th respondent was
illegal.
12. The main thrust of the argument of Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy,
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is that when a reserved category
candidate participates in a process of selection, as a general category
candidate, he must acquire the minimum qualifying marks prescribed for
general category candidates and that the threshold bar cannot be
lowered. In support of his contention, the learned Senior Counsel relied
upon certain decisions of other High Courts as well as of the Supreme
Court. They are as follows:
1) Kailashben Ninama v. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad
;
2) Rajesh Singh v. State of Rajasthan
;
3) Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
;
4) Samta Aandolan Samitti v. Union of India
;
5) Ajithkumar P. v. Remin K.R.
;
6) Deepa E.V. v. Union of India ; and
7) Gaurav Pradhan v. State of Rajasthan
.
13. In response to the contentions of the learned Senior Counsel
for the petitioner, it was argued by Mr. S. Sri Ram, learned Standing
Counsel for the Registry that the proviso to sub-rule (4) of Rule 6 did not
distinguish between candidates applying under the quota reserved for the
reserved categories and those actually belonging to the reserved
categories and that therefore the relaxed bench mark stipulated in the
proviso to Rule 6(4) has to be given an interpretation that will subserve
the object of such a prescription. He contented further that the 7th
respondent has not been selected on the basis of a relaxed criteria, but
has been selected for appointment on the basis of his own merit. Drawing
our attention to the marks secured by all the six candidates short listed for
viva voce it was contended by Mr. S. Sri Ram, learned Standing Counsel
that the 7th respondent was the topper in the total tally of marks.
Therefore, he argued that merit was not compromised. It was also his
submission that the distinction between the eligibility criteria and the
standard of selection has to be kept in mind before testing the correctness
of the selection of the 7th respondent.
14. Mr. P. Kiran, learned counsel appearing for the 7th respondent,
adopted the arguments of the learned Standing Counsel for the Registry
and
placed reliance upon
the judgment of the High Court of Jammu &
Kashmir in
Naveen Kumar v. High
Court of Jammu and Kashmir,   
rendered on 01.02.2010 in SWP.No.2886 of 2010.
He also relied upon 
some passages in the decision of the Supreme Court in Deepa E.V.
15. We have carefully considered the rival submissions. The entire
controversy, in our opinion, revolves around the question as to whether a
reserved category candidate, to be eligible for selection as against an
unreserved vacancy, should have secured the minimum qualifying marks 
prescribed for open category candidates, or whether he is entitled to claim
the benefit of relaxed eligibility criteria. Before searching for an answer to
this question from judicial precedents, let us first take a look at the rule
position.
15. Rule 6 of the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service Rules, 2007
prescribes a detailed methodology for the conduct of the written
examination for selection to the post of District Judges. Sub-rule (4)
together with its proviso reads as follows:
(4) The written examination shall invariably carry 80
marks limiting the viva voce to the remaining 20 marks.
Provided that the candidate shall secure a minimum
qualifying mark of 40% for O.C. category, 35% for B.C.
category, and 30% for S.C, and S.T. category in the written
examination
16. It appears from the language employed in the proviso that the
object of the proviso is to provide a relaxed eligibility criteria for
candidates belonging to the reserved categories. The object does
not seem to be to provide a relaxed eligibility criteria only to
those considered under the exclusive streams. In other words,
the relaxed eligibility criteria is not restricted in its application
only to those opting to take the reserved category route.
17. The law is well settled that the reserved category candidates
are entitled to ride two horses by competing with others in the open
category on their own merit and also by choosing to enforce the right of
reservation. The proviso to Rule 6(4) is not framed in such a manner as to
make the benefit of relaxed criteria available only to those who opt to take
the reservation route. Keeping this in mind, we shall now take a look at
the decisions relied upon by Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioner.
18. In the first decision relied upon by Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy,
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner in Kailashben Ninama,
a learned Judge of the Gujarat High Court was concerned with a case of
admission to Post Graduate Courses in Preventive and Social Medicine.
The candidate before the Gujarat High Court belonged to the Scheduled
Tribes and the pass mark prescribed for the reserved category candidates
in the written examination was 40%. The petitioner before the Gujarat
High Court had secured 40% marks in the written examination. But she 
could not secure admission to a particular college, in which no seat was
reserved for Scheduled Tribes, in the particular course of her choice.
But there were seats available in another college under the General
category.
However, the University refused to consider her case as against
the vacancy in General category, on the ground that she had not secured
50% marks in the written examination. This decision of the University was
challenged by the candidate, but the challenge was rejected by a learned
Judge of the Gujarat High Court. This was on the ground that a candidate
who seeks admission as against a seat kept unreserved, should fulfill the
criteria prescribed for General category candidates. The learned Judge of
the Gujarat High Court relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh
[(2005) 1 SCC 394],
to come to the conclusion that he did.
19. But we do not know how the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah was
made applicable to the case in Kailashben Ninama. What was in question 
before the Supreme Court in E.V. Chinnaiah was the categorization of
Scheduled Castes in the State of Andhra Pradesh into four groups, under
a separate enactment known as
Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes    
(Rationalisation of Reservations) Act, 2000
. Three questions arose for
consideration before the Supreme Court in E.V. Chinnaiah. They were
(i) whether the impugned Act was violative of
Article 341(2)
, (ii) whether
the impugned enactment was constitutionally valid and (iii) whether the
enactment created sub-classification of Scheduled Castes violating
Article 14.
The decision in E.V. Chinnaiah had nothing to do with the issue
that fell for consideration in Kailashben Ninama. Therefore, we are unable
to agree with the decision of the learned Judge of the Gujarat High Court
in Kailashben Ninama.
20. The second decision relied upon by Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy,
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, is that of the Division Bench of
the Rajasthan High Court in Rajesh Singh. The question that fell for
consideration in Rajesh Singh was whether a reserved category candidate,
upon having availed of relaxation in age, besides special
relaxations/concessions, can be considered for being selected against
unreserved vacancies, in the event of his securing high marks in the
selection. The Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court made a
distinction between two types of reserved category candidates viz., (i)
those who participated in the process of selection after availing the
relaxation in age and (ii) those reserved category candidates who
participated in the process of selection after availing special relaxations/
concessions. Insofar as the first category of persons is concerned, the
Rajasthan High Court held that those candidates, though belonging to the
reserved categories, are entitled to migrate to General/Open category
vacancies. The Court held that the second category of persons viz., those
reserved category candidates who availed special relaxations/concessions
are not entitled to so migrate to the vacancies under the Open/General
category. The Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court sought to draw
a distinction between these two categories of persons on the ground that
a mere relaxation in age did not tantamount to a relaxed standard of
merit, affecting the maintenance of efficiency in administration. As a
matter of fact, by the time the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court
considered the issue in Rajesh Singh, the Supreme Court has already
clinched the issue with regard to relaxation in age, in its decision in
Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
.
21. In Jitendra Kumar Singh, the reserved category candidates
were granted waiver of examination fee and also relaxation in upper age
limit. But
Section 3(6)
of the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation
for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act,  
1994, stipulated that if a reserved category candidate got selected on the
basis of merit in open competition with General category candidates, he
shall not be adjusted against the vacancies reserved for reserved
categories. It was contended before the Supreme Court that those who
participated in the process of selection after availing the benefit of waiver
of examination fee or relaxation in upper age limit cannot take advantage
of
Section 3(6)
of the Act. While rejecting the said contention, the
Supreme Court pointed out that the concession in fee and age relaxation
merely enable the reserved category candidates to fall within the zone of
consideration and that the same did not tilt the balance in favour of the
reserved category candidates in the preparation of the merit list. The
concession granted in the matter of upper age limit and examination fee
were held by the Supreme Court, not to be relaxations in the standards
prescribed for qualifying in the written examination. The benefits so
granted to the reserved category candidates in the matter of fee and
upper age limit, were held by the Supreme Court not to have upset the
level playing field.
22. Placing heavy reliance upon
the said decision
, it was contended
by Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, that
the real test is to find out whether the concession availed by a reserved
category candidate actually tilted the balance and resulted in a relaxation
of the standard. If the benefit availed by a reserved category candidate in
the process selection, resulted in the lowering of standards, then such a
reserved category candidate cannot stake a claim for an unreserved
vacancy. According to the learned Senior Counsel, the observations of the
Supreme Court in paragraphs-46, 48 and 49 of the report in Jitendra
Kumar Singh clinch the issue and that if the concession availed of by the
reserved category candidate had any relevance to the determination of
inter se merit on the basis of the final written test and interview, then
such a candidate cannot be considered as against a vacancy kept 
unreserved.
23. We have no difficulty in accepting the contention of the learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the real test in such cases is to find
out whether the concessions/benefits availed by a reserved category
candidate had a bearing upon the standard of merit. If it did, then such
a candidate cannot be considered as against a vacancy kept unreserved.
But before we apply this test to the facts of the case on hand, we shall
also take a look at the other decisions relied upon by the learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioner.
24.
In
Samta Aandolan Samiti v. Union of India
, the Supreme
Court was concerned with admissions to MBBS Course in the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences. The actual issue before the Supreme Court
in Samta Aandolan Samiti was whether the meritorious reserved category 
candidates, admitted to seats available in the open competition, are to be
counted within the quota reserved for SCs/STs/OBCs etc.
The origin of the
controversy in Samta Aandolan Samiti could be traced to the judgment of
the Supreme Court in
Ritesh R. Sah v. Y.L. Yamul
[(1996) 3 SCC 253].
In the said case, the Supreme Court held  (i) that a student, who is
entitled to be admitted on the basis of merit, though belonging to a
reserved category, cannot be considered to have been admitted as
against the seats reserved for such a category and (ii) that provisions
should be so made that it will not work out to the disadvantage of such
candidates and he may not be placed in a more disadvantageous position 
than the other less meritorious reserved category candidates.
25. The principles
laid down in
Ritesh R. Sah were given a relook
by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
Union of India v.
Ramesh Ram
[(2010) 7 SCC 234]. In Ramesh Ram, the Supreme Court      
framed three questions for its consideration, the first of which was
whether the reserved category candidates who were selected on the basis
of their own merit and placed in the list of General category candidates,
could be considered as reserved category candidates at the time of
service allocation. After considering the ratio in both Ritesh R. Sah and
Ramesh Ram, the Supreme Court held in Samta Aandolan Samiti that so    
long as the upper limit of 50% reservation is not breached, the
consideration of the claim of a meritorious reserved category candidate as
against a General category seat was not violative of the Constitutional
scheme.
26. But none of these decisions (Ritesh R. Sah, Ramesh Ram or
Samta Aandolan Samiti) have any relevance to the issue arising for
consideration in the present writ petition. As we have pointed out earlier,
the only question that we are obliged to consider in this case is as to
whether the concession availed by the 7th respondent amounted to
a relaxed standard of merit, so as to deprive him of the eligibility to stake
a claim against an unreserved vacancy or not.
27. The next decision relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for
the petitioner is the one in
Ajithkumar P. v. Remin K.R.
. The case
before the Supreme Court in Ajithkumar related to the appointment to the
post of Sub Inspectors in the Kerala Police Subordinate Service. Though
the Kerala Public Service Commission Rules of Procedure prescribed 
a written test followed by practical test, physical efficiency test and oral
test for selection, the number of persons who applied was so huge that
the Public Service Commission thought fit to conduct a screening test first,
for the purpose of shortlisting candidates who could be invited for the
written examinations to be conducted as per the Rules. Relaxed eligibility
criteria was fixed for various reserved categories, in the screening test.
The candidates shortlisted in the screening test, were allowed to
participate in a written examination followed by physical efficiency test
and oral interview and a final list of candidates was published. The final
list came to be challenged on the ground that those candidates who failed
to secure the minimum marks fixed for General category candidates in the
screening test, but who were declared successful on the basis of the
relaxed cut-off marks available for reserved category candidates should
not have been accommodated against the General category vacancies.  
The challenge was rejected by the Supreme Court on the ground that the
screening test/preliminary examination conducted by the Public Service
Commission for shortlisting the candidates for the main written
examination, had no statutory basis and that a relaxation or concession
given at the preliminary stage cannot have any relevance in determining
the merit of the candidate.
28. The decision of the Supreme Court in Ajithkumar was pressed
into service by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner to drive home
the point that whenever a selection is held as per the statutory scheme,
the relaxation given in the written examination, if availed, would enable
the reserved category candidate only to stake a claim as against
a vacancy reserved for such category.
29. But what follows from Ajithkumar is that a person who gets
qualified in a screening test/preliminary examination, even though on the
basis of relaxed criteria, is entitled to improve his performance and prove
his merit, when he is subjected to a further process of selection. Once he
does, he cannot be branded as a reserved category candidate merely 
because of the benefit that he availed in the screening test. The real
competition in cases of the nature covered by Ajithkumar starts after the
shortlisting of candidates in the preliminary examination. The decision in
Ajithkumar stops at this stage and it cannot be stretched to cover
a situation like the one on hand. It is well settled that a judgment is
a binding precedent for what it holds and not for what follows.
30.
In
Deepa E.V. v. Union of India
, a candidate belonging to
the Other Backward Classes, who participated in the process of selection
for appointment to the post of Laboratory Assistant after obtaining
relaxation of the upper age limit, staked a claim for appointment as
against a General category vacancy on the ground that she had secured
more than the minimum cut-off marks prescribed for General category
candidates. No candidate belonging to the General category had secured
more than the minimum cut-off marks prescribed for General category
candidates. But her claim was rejected on a combined reading of Rule 9 of
the Recruitment Rules and the proceedings issued by the Department of 
Personnel and Training. Though the candidate before the Supreme Court
placed heavy reliance upon the decision in Jitendra Kumar Singh
,
the said
decision
was distinguished on the ground that the decision in Jitendra
Kumar Singh was based upon a statutory interpretation to U.P. Act, 1994.
In Deepa, the Supreme Court found that there was an express bar for the
candidates belonging to SCs/STs/OBCs who have availed relaxation, for
being considered for the vacancies kept unreserved for the General
category candidates. But the decision in Deepa will be of no avail to the
petitioner in this case, since there is no express bar for reserved category
candidates who have availed the relaxed eligibility criteria from being
considered for vacancies kept unreserved.
31. The decision in Deepa was cited with approval in
Gaurav
Pradhan v. State of Rajasthan
. In fact, the State of Rajasthan issued
a Circular after the judgment of the Supreme Court in Deepa E.V. and
reiterated the position that candidates belonging to SCs/STs/OBCs who
have availed the concession of age are not eligible to be migrated to the
unreserved vacancies. Therefore, the Supreme Court held in Gaurav
Pradhan that the law
laid down in
Deepa would hold the field.
While
holding so, the Supreme Court also took note of another decision in
Vikas
Sankhala v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal
[(2017) 1 SCC 350]. But all the
three decisions viz., Deepa E.V., Vikas Sankhala and Gaurav Pradhan were 
decided on the basis of Circulars, while Jitendra Kumar Singh was decided
on the basis of a statutory scheme.
32. In other words, all the four decisions of the Supreme Court that
dealt with the relaxation in upper age limit or waiver of examination fee,
revolved around statutory schemes. While Jitendra Kumar Singh was 
decided on the basis of U.P. Act, 1994, the decisions in Deepa E.V., Vikas
Sankhala and Gauran Pradhan were decided on the basis of Rules and  
Circulars issued by the State, the validity of which were not challenged.
Therefore, it boils down to the question as to whether the statutory
scheme provides for a migration or not.
33. We have already extracted sub-rule (4) of Rule 6 and the
proviso thereunder of the Andhra Pradesh State Judicial Service Rules.
The relaxation in the minimum qualifying marks in the written
examination, granted under the proviso to Rule 6(4) is actually
to the candidate and not to the post earmarked for reserved
categories. The proviso is not framed in such a manner as to apply the
relaxed criteria only to the category of post sought to be filled up. This
hypothesis can be explained by taking two illustrations:
(i) let us take for instance a case where a Notifications is issued for
direct recruitment to a few posts of District Judges, none of which is
reserved for any category. If all the posts notified are unreserved
vacancies, all candidates irrespective of the category to which they
belong, are entitled to apply. If the argument of the writ petitioner is
accepted, then the minimum qualifying mark to be secured by all
candidates in the written examination should only be 40%. In such a
case, the proviso to Rule 6(4) will have no application to the said
Notification for recruitment. There cannot be two different types of
Notifications for recruitment, one to which the proviso Rule 6(4) would
apply and another, to which the proviso would not apply. So long as the
language employed in the proviso to Rule 6(4) does not permit the same
to be eclipsed by the type of the Notification, it is not possible for us to
hold that the proviso to Rule 6(4) would be redundant in cases where all
the posts notified for recruitment fall under the General category.
(ii) The second illustration can be of a Notification where two posts
are kept unreserved and one post is reserved for candidates belonging to
BC-D (The petitioner as well as the 7th respondent belong to BC-D
category and in the Notification out of which the present controversy
arises, no vacancy was reserved for BC-D). Let us take a hypothetical case
where one vacancy was reserved for BC-D. If it was so reserved, the
7th respondent herein would have been declared successful in the written
examination, on the basis of the relaxed criteria stipulated in the proviso
to Rule 6(4). Thereafter, he would have been invited for interview. Since
the final selection is based upon the combined performance of candidates
in the written examination and oral interview, the Registry would have
been obliged to draw a merit list of candidates (to begin with) after the
interviews are over. If in the ultimate tally, the 7th respondent was found
to have secured the highest tally of marks (written exam and interview
put together), he cannot be overlooked for a claim as against the
unreserved vacancy. The law is well settled that while filling up the posts
after completion of the process of selection, the unreserved vacancies are
to be filled up first by allotting the meritorious candidates in the order of
merit, without looking into the category to which they belong. It is only
after first filling up the vacancies kept unreserved, that the process of
filling up the posts reserved for other categories has to be taken up.
Unless this well established rule is violated, the 7th respondent could not
have been overlooked, for allotment as against a vacancy kept
unreserved. Law does not permit a less meritorious General category
candidate to be allotted a seat kept unreserved, by overlooking the claim
of a more meritorious candidate, solely on the ground that such more
meritorious candidate belonged to the reserved category and availed the
benefit of relaxed criteria.
34. The tug of war between merit and reservation poses several
challenges and in a variety of ways. Ultimately, the test to be applied is to
see where a person stands in the order of merit at the time of final
selection. A less meritorious candidate, after availing the benefit of
a concession, cannot suddenly become a topper at the end of the process 
of selection. The concession granted, does not suddenly become a spring
board that catapults him to rank No.1 in the order of merit. This can be
seen even in the case on hand.
35. We have provided elsewhere a tabulation indicating the marks
secured in the written examination, the marks secured in the interview
and the total tally of marks of the petitioner as well as the 7th respondent.
Though the 7th respondent secured lesser marks than the petitioner in the
written examination, the 7th respondent emerged as the most meritorious
among all the six candidates who came up to the final stage of selection.
Therefore, to overlook the 7th respondent on the basis of his performance
in the written examination and to appoint the petitioner herein, would
only result in overlooking merit. The underlying theme in all the decisions
of the Supreme Court right from Ritesh R. Sah is that merit cannot be
sacrificed. If the same theme is applied, the selection of the
7th respondent cannot be found fault with.
36. As a matter of fact, it should be pointed out that the Rules of
Procedure adopted by this Court on the administrative side are such that
the Interview Committee is not made aware of the marks secured by the
candidates invited for interview. In other words, the Members of the
Interviewing Board will not be aware of the marks secured by the
candidates whom they will be interviewing. This procedure is evolved with
a view to ensure that the marks secured by a candidate in the written
examination do not influence the mind of the Members of the Interviewing
Board.
37. Therefore, if in the ultimate tally, a person is found to be the
topper in the entire process of selection, the selection of such a candidate
does not result in merit being compromised. On the contrary, his
non-selection would result in merit being compromised.
38. In view of the above, we are unable to sustain the challenge to
the selection of the 7th respondent for appointment by way of direct
recruitment to the post of District Judge. Hence, the writ petition is
dismissed. Pending applications, if any, shall stand closed. No costs.
_________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J.
_______________   
J. UMA DEVI, J.
24th October, 2018