[Cites
21
, Cited by
18
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mr. Namineni Audi Seshaiah vs Mr. Numburu Mohan Rao on 25 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 57, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 751 2019 (194) AIC (SOC) 18 (HYD), 2019 (194) AIC (SOC) 18 (HYD), 2019 (194) AIC (SOC) 18 (HYD) (2018) 6 ANDHLD 751, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 751, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 243
Author:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
HONBLE DR. JUSTICE B. SIVA SANKARA RAO         

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4656 of 2018    

25-09-2018 

Mr. Namineni Audi SeshaiahPetitioner    

Mr. Numburu Mohan Rao .Respondent      

Counsel for the petitioner :Sri Kuriti Bhaskara Rao

Counsel for the respondent:Sri Uma Shankar Nemikanti 

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1.      2014 (1) ALD 521 
2.      2017 Law suit (Hyd) 23 dated 19.01.2017 
3.      2016 (3) ALT (Crl.) 397
4.      AIR 2008 SC 2010  
5.      AIR 2006 SC 3366  
6.      2008 (4) SCC 54 
7.      2010 (11) SCC 441 
8.      AIR 2003 P&H 344  
9.      2015 Lawsuit Mad 807  
10.     2011 3 CTC 616  
11.     2008(1) Mad. LJ (Cri) 769
12.     2010(2) Mad LJ (Cri) 762
13.     2011 (2) Mad LJ (Cri) 595 at para-32
14.     2011(3) Mad LJ(Cri) 440
15.     2010 (1) CTC 424 
16.     2012(5) CTC 596 
17.     AIR 1964 SC 529 at 537 
18.     2010 CrLJ 1510 
19.     2016 3 ALT (Crl) 307 at paras 27 to 30
20.     2007 1 SCC (Crl) 577 
21.     2016 2 ALT 248 
22.     2008 3 ALT 409 


HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE B. SIVA SANKARA RAO        

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4656 of 2018    

ORDER:
The revision petitioner is the defendant in OS.No.228 of
2014 on the file of learned V Additional District Judge,
Nellore.  It is a suit based on 4 pro-notes said to have been
executed by the defendant in favour of the plaintiff viz., 2 pro-
notes dated 04.02.2012 for Rs.10,00,000/- each and another
pro-note of Rs.10,00,000/- on 09.03.2012 and another pro-
note of Rs.5,00,000/- on 13.08.2012 and that despite
demands having failed to pay having issued cheque bearing
No.374451 dated 17.06.2014 of Rs.50,00,000/- towards so 
called part payment out of it and the cheque later returned
dishonoured and thereby entitled to the suit amount claimed
of total Rs.58,00,332/- with interest on Rs.35,00,000/- from
date of suit and for costs etc., is the sum and substance with
supporting averments.
2. The defendant contested by filing written statement
by denying the said averments with the say that the
defendant never had any such necessity to borrow such huge 
amounts on the alleged dates.  It was in relation to the
venture of his son at Bangalore, the plaintiffs son had some
disputes and the plaintiff, his son and one Aluru Srinivas
Reddy colluded together and created and fabricated the
documents referred and relied in the plaint of the present suit
and in another suit filed against the defendants son.  The
defendant is an agriculturalist and lives by its income and
entitled to the benefit of Act No.4/38 otherwise and there is
no cause of action for the suit hence to dismiss.  Leave about
other contentions, the main contention of defendant is those
are fabricated documents to say he never admitted execution
of pro-notes and signed or received of amounts thereunder
and also giving of cheque in question.
3. In the factual scenario I.A.No.122 of 2018 filed by the
defendant before the trial Court under
Section 94(e)
,
151
CPC
and
Section 45
of the Evidence Act to send the disputed pro-
note to an expert to ascertain the age of the ink in the
signatures of the petitioner and the recitals in the pro-notes
by saying suit claim based on the so called pro-notes are
fabricated documents and by misusing the transactions
between the plaintiffs son Venkateswara Rao in fabricating
the suit pro-notes and thereby those are to be sent to expert
to determine the age of the ink found in the signatures of him
and of the alleged attestors and the recitals in the body of the
pro-notes.
4. The counter filed by the plaintiff in opposing the
petition before the trial Court is with contest of the
petitioner/defendant borrowed amounts and executed the 
pro-notes.  In the written statement he admitted the
signatures but for contentions of plaintiff misused the
transactions between the plaintiff and the son of the
defendant, the suit pro-notes were executed in the year 2012
and after lapse of 6 years the age of the ink cannot be
determined and even if such facility available, it cannot be
sent for determination, in the cross examination of the
defendant he admitted as DW.1 the signatures on the pro-
notes and that he is not in the habit of signing on blank pro-
notes and hence there is no need to sent suit pro-note to
determine the age of the ink and placed reliance on the
expression of this Court in Kambala Nageswara Rao Vs. 
Kesana Bala Krishna .  The impugned order of the learned
trial Judge is in dismissing the application with the
observation that the contention of the defendants counsel of
plaintiff fabricated the suit pro-notes by making use of blank
signed pro-notes containing the signatures of the defendant
in respect of transaction between the plaintiff and son of
defendant Venkateswara Rao.  It is observed of the contest of
other side is there is no procedure to be determined the age of
the ink and even if there is such facility it leads to several
complications, that the ink might have been manufactured or
pen might have been manufactured long back and it was 
used after long time that is before using the same.  Due to
lapse of 6 years it is not possible to determine the age of ink
as observed in the above expression of Kambala supra.
5. It is impugning the same the present revision is filed
with the contentions in the grounds of revision the impugned
dismissal order of the trial Judge is unsustainable and the
proposition laid down in the expression of Kambala supra no
way applicable to the facts on the case of hand as it is the
contention of the petitioner/defendant of never borrowed any
amount from plaintiff and plaintiff has no capacity to arrange
such huge amounts and the so called documents inserted  
with words on the printed pro-note, the defendant given the
pro-note as surety during the business of plaintiff and son of
defendant who were doing real estate business at Bangalore.
The trial Judge should have been thereby considered the
request instead of dismissal more particularly from the
written statement contest also for the fact plaintiff admitted
in his cross examination as PW.1 of the date of issuance of
pro-note and filling of pro-note are not co-relating in seeking
thereby to send to expert as necessitated.
6. The respondent even served and proof filed failed to
attend.  Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and taken as
heard to revision respondent/plaintiff.
7. The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance
on the expression of the Apex Court in T.Rajalingam @
Sambam v. State of Telangana  where it is in a cheque
bouncing case from the defence of cheques given in the year
2007 and those were time barred and those were tampered by  
showing as if given in 2012 more than 5 years and thereby
documents are to be send to expert for comparison and
determination of the age of ink.
It is observed that when the
dispute as to the tampering with antedate and determination
of age of ink that is valuable right of accused to establish by
defence evidence and once wants to do so as held by this
Court in M/s. S.K. Health Care Formulations Pvt. Ltd v.
M/s.Globe Glass Containers  relying upon the expression of
the Apex Court in
T.Nagappa v. Y.R.Muralidar
; apart from
the other settled expression in
M.S.Narayana Menon v. State
of Kerala
relied upon in
Krishna Janardhan Bhat v.
Dattatraya G.Hegde
that was referred and explained by the
three Judge Bench in
Rangappa v. Sri Mohan
in relation to
the reverse onus burden on the accused the Court has to
afford an opportunity by preponderance of probabilities to
rebut the presumptions available against him.
It also referred
the expression of Kambala supra where observed mere  
determination of age of ink, even there exists any facility for
that purpose; cannot, by itself, determine the age of the
signature and thereby no purpose be served by sending the
disputed cheques which contain the admitted signatures of
the accused and also referred the expression of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in
Yash Pal v. Kartar Singh
held
that age of the ink cannot be determined by expert and the
expression of the Madras High Court in
A.Inayathulla v.
A.Ramesh
, of age of ink is not determinable to consider the
application of accused to send the disputed cheque to
determine the age of ink.
It referred earlier expression in
Elumalai v. Subramani  of it is possible to discover age of
the ink from the reputed authors who are experts in the field,
however the procedure is to be evolved for experiment with
latest technology for achieving improvement on the subject.
The Government has to provide necessary latest
infrastructures in the Document Division of the Forensic
Sciences Laboratory and also allot necessary funds for the
constitution of sophisticated laboratory to elect non-
destructive technique.
8. In fact in 1964 the Supreme Court rendered decision
in Shashi Kumar Banerjees Case saying the expert had 
stated that the determination of the age of writings and ink
could be ascertained definitely by a chemical test and once
even prior to 1964, chemical test were in application to find
out age of ink. Now, the science in this branch has prospered
to considerable dimensions and it cannot hereafter be
contended that it is not possible to ascertain the age of the
ink by scientific method.
In
A.Inayathulla
supra while
referring to Elumalai supra, referred further
Yash Pal
supra
of Punjab High Court that was followed in another Single
Judge expression of Madras High Court in
S.Gopal v.
D.Balachandran
, in saying age of the ink cannot be
determined by the expert with scientific accuracy even does
not mean not at all possible.
9.
In
A.Inayathulla
supra, it also referred another
expression of the Madras High Court in
V.Makesan v.
T.Dhanalakshmi
, where in a cheque bouncing case  
regarding dispute on the age of the ink of no expert in that
field to give opinion by adopting any scientific method and
also referred other expressions of the Madras High Court
in
A.Sivagnana Pandian v. M.Ravichandran
and
A.Devaraj v. Rajammal
, where the Madras High Court took 
the leaf of the disputed documents to be send to determine
the age of the ink to the Central Forensic Department,
Hyderabad, by referring to  the earlier expression
in
R.Jagadeesan v. N.Ayyasamy
, which referred earlier
expression in
S.Gopal
supra and it is observed in
A.Inayathulla
supra and
A.Devaraj
supra.
10. It is observed in
A.Inayathulla
supra, another
expression of the Madras High Court in
K.Vairavan v.
Selvaraj
, and that though there is scientific method
available, there is no expert available who can scientifically
examine particularly at the Forensic Science Department of
the Government of Tamilnadu. The Central Forensic Sciences 
Laboratory, Hyderabad, expert attended the Tamilnadu
Judicial Academy to address the officials also stated that no
expert is available there had and the fax message received
from Assistant Director of Central Forensic Sciences
Laboratory, Hyderabad, of there is no validated method in
their laboratory to undertake examination to determine the
relative or absolute age of the ink of the writings or
signatures.
It is observed in
A.Inayathulla
supra, by referring
to the expression in
R.Jagadeesan
supra that there is one
institution known as Nutron Activation Analysis, BABC,
Mumbai, where there is facility to find out the approximate
range of the time, during which the writings would have been
made and it is a Central Government Organization.
It was
concluded in
A.Inayathulla
supra therefrom of no purpose
that could be served in sending the cheque in question to
Government handwriting expert Tamilnadu.
11. In Rajalingam supra referring to the above it is
observed at Para 10 as follows:
10. In fact this Court relied upon the Apex
Courts expression in Shashi Kumar Banerjee v.
Subodh Kumar Banerjee  observed as follows:
Finally we may point out that the expert
admitted in his evidence that it was only by a chemical
test that it could be definitely stated whether a
particular writing was of a particular year or period.
He also admitted that he applied no. chemical tests in
this case. So his opinion cannot on his own showing
have that value which it might have had if he had
applied a chemical test. Besides we may add that
Osborn on "Questioned Documents" at p. 464 says   
even with respect to chemical tests that "the chemical
tests to determine age also, as a rule, are a mere
excuse to make a guess and furnish no. reliable data
upon which a definite opinion can be based.
It further observed that the time and place of
execution of promissory note in dispute including as to
difference in ink, opinion of handwriting expert can be
sought for under
Section 45
of the Act and such
opinion is not totally irrelevant for adjudication of the
dispute from the opinion sought for determining the
age of the disputed handwriting, it is crystal clear of
the handwriting as to the year of writing can be given
by expert opinion is the conclusion before the Supreme
Court in its approving to consider way back in 1964
and referring to it way back in 1994 this Court held
opinion as to age of writing or signature can be sought
from the expert. It is no doubt in relation to a civil
dispute.
12. From this coming to Kambala Nageswara Rao 
supra, what it is observed even facility available on facts no
purpose served by referring to the expression of the
Karnataka High Court in
Ishwar v. Suresh
.
13. It is observed at Para 12 even therefrom once the
Apex Court expression is very clear that an expert opinion as
to determine the age of writing of ink can be possible and to
admit is relevant, it is premature to determine its evidentiary
value as whether it can be basis or not and whether to serve
as a piece of corroboration and if so to what extent is
ultimately to be determined from the reasons assigned in the
opinion of the expert as even opinion on handwriting is a
developing science and not conclusive as reiterated by the
Apex Court in the recent expression of the settled law in
SPS
Rathore v. CBI
.
14. Further in view of the above expression in
A.Inayathulla
supra of no useful purpose can be served or no
opinion can be possible are untenable and it is observed at
Para 14 that the Apex Court in
Kalyani Baskar v.
M.S.Sampoornam
having set aside the order of the 
Magistrate upheld in revision of dismissing the application of
the accused in a cheque bouncing case and allowed the 
request of the accused to send the disputed signatures to
handwriting expert saying that is valuable right of defence,
unless the Court thinks that the object of the application
itself is vexatious or with a delay tactics such request cannot
be negated.
Further the Full Bench expression of this Court
in
Bande Siva Shankara Srinivasa Prasad Vs. Ravi Surya 
Prakash Babu
(died) per L.Rs. and Others  by referring to
earlier Division Bench expression in
Janachaitanya Housing
Limited Vs. Divya Financiers
, observed that non-
availability of contemporary relevancy and even from long gap
between the admitted and disputed signatures not a ground
to refuse nor as to any said Rules as to at which stage the
application to be filed for each case to be determined on own
facts it is thereby ultimately concluded in allowing the
revision to entertain the application of accused by the learned
Magistrate to send to determine the age of the ink.
15. No doubt there is another earlier single judge
expression of this Court in
Takkella Radhakrishnaiah vs.
Ganipaineni Nagaraju
in CRP.No.1698 of 2016 dated 
23.12.2016 where Kambala supra referred besides Madras  
High Court
R.Jagadeesan
supra among others and stated  
that in the absence of scientific expert even if the arguments
of the petitioner was to be considered on age can be
determined for the impracticability involved it cannot be a
futile exercise.  Same is quoted by the learned selfsame Judge
in another CRP.No.1079 of 2017 dated 03.03.2017 and from 
the said expression the technology is available and in the
absence of facility it is a futile exercise.
16. As referred in Rajalingam supra it is crystal clear of
Para 4 of Inayathulla
supra speaks referring in
Jagadeesan
supra of there is one institution known as Nutron Activation
Analysis, BABC, Mumbai where the facility to find out the
approximate range of the time during which the writings
would have been made and that is also a Central Government 
Organization.
17. Once such is the case, the facility available and the
expert is also available.  Thus there is no meaning in arguing
of no practical use or purpose or sending to determine age of
the ink is a futile exercise.
18. Having regard to the above, this Civil Revision
Petition is allowed by setting aside the order of the lower
Court by restoring and allowing the application with a
direction to the lower Court to direct the defendant to deposit
Rs.20,000/- and send the document to the Nutron Activation
Analysis, BABC, Mumbai which is a Central Government   
Organization where the facility of determination of age of the
ink available for its determination, on petitioners ascertain
the full and correct address and availability of the facility and
from deposit of the amount.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
_______________________________     
Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO, J    
Date: 25.09.2018