[Cites
5
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ankam Govindamma vs Syed Shafeeullah on 27 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 96
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

C.R.P No.1500 of 2018 

27.06.2018 

Ankam Govindamma..... Petitioner 


Syed Shafeeullah.. Respondent 

Counsel for Petitioner: Sri Y. Ashok Raj

Counsel for Respondent  : Sri T. Sreedhar

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)      2018(1) ALT 420 =2018 (2) ALD 315  
2)      (2002)7 SCC 559  
3)      AIR 2005 SC 3353  
4)      (2017)13 SCC 705  
5)      2015(6) ALD 713 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Civil Revision Petition No.1500 of 2018

ORDER:
This CRP is filed by the petitioner/defendant aggrieved by the
order dated 22.02.2018 in I.A.No.86 of 2018 in O.S.No.8 of 2012
passed by the Principal Junior Civil Judge, Deverakonda, dismissing the
application filed by the defendant under
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
seeking
to amend the written statement by adding the plea of adverse possession.
2)      Heard.
3)      At the outset I find no illegality or perversity in the order
impugned. The Trial Court dismissed the application on two main
observations, firstly, that the petition is a belated one in the sense, the
suit was filed on 04.01.2012, written statement was filed on 09.04.2012
and the I.A.No.86 of 2018 seeking amendment of written statement was 
filed on 17.02.2018 at the stage when the suit was posted for cross-
examination of PW.1 and the petitioner has not shown any bonafides as
she has not submitted satisfactory explanation for the delay of nearly
six(6) years in filing the petition.  Secondly, it was observed that
originally in the written statement the defendant took the plea that she is
the owner of the suit schedule property and now she wants to introduce
an inconsistent plea of adverse possession which is impermissible.
4)      I have gone through the impugned order which is a reasoned one.
As rightly observed by the Trial Court, proviso to
Order VI Rule 17
CPC
emphatically lays down that no application for amendment shall be
allowed after the trial has commenced, unless the Court comes to
conclusion that inspite of due diligence, the party could not have raised
the matter before the commencement of the trial.  In the instant case, the
reason submitted by the petitioner/defendant for the delay is that at the
time of drafting written statement, she in fact instructed her counsel to
take the plea of adverse possession also but by oversight such plea was
not taken in the written statement and the said mistake could be detected
only when they were preparing for the trial.  It is a far-fetching and
fallacious explanation. Every party and counsel are required to
meticulously go through the pleadings prepared by them and then the
party has to sign on the pleadings and submit to the Court.  The plea of
adverse possession being an important one, it is difficult to believe that
the defendant and her counsel by oversight could not take that plea and
further, they did not detect such omission before filing the written
statement into Court.  At any rate, the defendant has not shown a
plausible cause to overcome the mandate of proviso to
Order VI Rule 17
CPC
.
5)      In this regard, the decision of this High Court in Dhulipalla
Srinivasa Rao v. Kandula Govardhan Rao and others , relied upon by
the petitioner can be distinguished.  In that case, the plaintiff filed the
suit initially for cancellation of the sale deed executed by 1st defendant
in favour of 2nd defendant.  During pendency of suit, plaintiff sought for
amendment of the plaint to add relief of declaration of title and recovery
of possession.  The Trial Court allowed the said petition.  The defendant
preferred CRP No.433 of 2016, wherein a learned Judge of this Court
dealt with the aspect as to whether amendment of plaint cannot be
permitted on the ground of delay.
Relying upon the judgment of Apex
Court in
Sampath Kumar v. Ayyakannu
, the learned Judge held that on 
the ground of mere delay, however long it may be, an application for
amendment cannot be rejected provided the facts of the case warrant
allowing of the amendment. In Sampath Kumar2, the Apex Court  
allowed the amendment sought for about 11 years after the institution of
the suit on the ground that the plaintiff
in that case
was not debarred
from instituting a new suit seeking relief of declaration of title and
recovery of possession on the same basic facts as were pleaded in the
plaint seeking relief of issuance of permanent prohibitory injunction
which was pending. Thus it would appear, the Apex Court tested the
amendment petition on the touchstone of whether or not a separate suit
for the same relief and on the same facts as mentioned in the amendment
petition is barred by limitation. If answer is negative, the Apex Court
opined, the amendment could be allowed to avoid multiplicity of
proceedings.
There is no demur about the aforesaid ratio.  However, it must be
noted, Sampath Kumar2, appeared to have been decided without  
reference to the amended provision of
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
.  It is to be
noted that with a view to shorten litigation and speed up the trial of
cases,
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
was omitted by Amendment Act, 46 of   
1999. The prominence of the said rule was such that there was hardly a
suit or proceeding where this provision had not been used. Its omission
therefore created commotion leading to protest in the legal community.
In that view, this rule was restored in its original form by Amendment
Act 22 of 2002 with a rider in the shape of proviso limiting the power of
amendment to some extent.
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
now reads thus:
Rule 17. Amendment of pleadings:
The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party
to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms
as may be just, and all such amendments shall be made as may be   
necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in
controversy between the parties:
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed after
the trial has commenced, unless the Court comes to the conclusion
that is spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised the
matter before the commencement of trial.
The new proviso lays down that no application for amendment
shall be allowed after commencement of the trial unless the Court comes
to the conclusion that inspite of due diligence, the party could not have
raised the matter before commencement of the trial. Whether a party has
acted with due diligence or not would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. The Apex Court in
Salem Advocate Bar  
Association, Tamil Nadu v. Union of India
, observed thus:
Para 26: Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code deals with amendment of
pleadings. By Amendment Act 46 of 1999, this provision was 
deleted. It has again been restored by Amendment Act 22 of 2002
but with an added proviso to prevent application for amendment
being allowed after the trial has commenced, unless the court
comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party
could not have raised the matter before the commencement of trial.
The proviso, to some extent, curtails absolute discretion to allow
amendment at any stage. Now, if application is filed after
commencement of trial, it has to be shown that in spite of due
diligence, such amendment could not have been sought earlier.
The object is to prevent frivolous applications which are filed to
delay the trial. There is no illegality in the provision.
So with the amendment of
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
and  
introduction of proviso, the petitioner seeking amendment after
commencement of trial shall, convince the Court that inspite of due
diligence, he could not have raised the matter before commencement of
trial. So in my considered opinion, the yardstick for considering the
amendment petition filed after commencement of trial is not only
whether a separate suit on same facts and for same relief is not time
barred as
laid down in
Sampath Kumar2, but also whether the petitioner
could show plausible cause that inspite of due diligence, he could not
raise the matter before commencement of the trial. So to sum up, the
amendment petition filed after commencement of trial no doubt can be
considered, provided, the petitioner could establish that inspite of
exercising due diligence he could not file the petition before
commencement of the trial and a separate suit on same cause of action
for the same relief could be maintainable.  In the instant case, as already
observed, the petitioner could not show any plausible cause for the
inordinate delay.  Hence the petition merits no consideration.
6)      The next lacunae in petitioners case is that the plea of adverse
possession, which was sought to be taken through the amendment is  
mutually inconsistent with the original plea of title setup by the
petitioner/defendant in her written statement by way of purchase of the
suit property.
In
Dagadabai (dead) by LRs v. Abbas
, the Apex Court
observed thus:
Para 18: In this case, we find that the defendant did not admit the
plaintiff's ownership over the suit land and, therefore, the issue of
adverse possession, in our opinion, could not have been tried
successfully at the instance of the defendant as against the
plaintiff. That apart, the defendant having claimed the ownership
over the suit land by inheritance as an adopted son of Rustum and
having failed to prove this ground, he was not entitled to claim the
title by adverse possession against the plaintiff.
A learned Judge of this Court in
Kasa Muthanna and others v. Sunke
Rajanna and others
, has opined that having pleaded title, it is not
permissible for the defendant to plead adverse possession as both pleas
are mutually inconsistent. In view of the aforesaid case laws also, the
petition cannot be allowed.
7)      Accordingly, this C.R.P is dismissed.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U.DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 27.06.2018