[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
D. Sitharamaiah vs State Of Andhra Pradesh,Rep. By The ... on 8 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 13, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 721
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Appeal Suit No.1217 of 1998 

08.06.2018 

D. Sitharamaiah... Appellant/Plaintiff


State of Andhra Pradesh,Rep. by the District Collector, Guntur and another.  Respondents/Defendants

Counsel for Appellant   : Sri N.Subba Rao 

Counsel for Respondents: Government Pleader for Appeals (AP)  

<Gist:

> Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)      AIR 1954 SC 44  
2)      MANU/TN/0864/2018   
3)      AIR 1928 Sindh 21 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO                
Appeal Suit No.1217 of 1998 

JUDGMENT:
The challenge in this appeal, at the instance of plaintiff, is the
judgment dated 08.09.1997 in O.S.No.66 of 1993 on the file of Subordinate
Judge, Bapatla partly decreeing the suit for Rs.10,000/- with interest at 12%
p.a. against the claim of Rs.3,50,000/-.
2)      The parties in the appeal are referred as they were arrayed before the
trial Court.
3)      The factual matrix of the case is thus:
a)      The plaintiff is the contractor of Government works.  During 1989-90
the 2nd defendant called tenders for strengthening and black topping of
BapatlaParchoor road from K.M.10.40 to 15.00 at an estimate of 
Rs.10,00,000/- vide CR.No.21/89-90. The plaintiff being the highest bidder
the work was entrusted to him and plaintiff executed an agreement in favour
of 2nd defendant vide CR.No.11/90-91 on 20.04.1990 and site was entrusted
to plaintiff on the same date. Plaintiff with a view to commence the work
paid advance to a tune of Rs.76,500/- for supply of metal from quarries and
for transportation.
b)      While so, there was devastating cyclone on 07.05.1990 thereby, the
proposed site of suit contract was badly damaged forming breaches and pits
at several points. There were rains continuously for sum more days after
cyclone. Hence, the plaintiff and officials of the 2nd defendant jointly visited
the site and found the condition of the site not conducive to carry out black
topping work proposed in the contract. The officials of 2nd defendant orally
instructed the plaintiff not to proceed with the work and submit report about
the condition of the site so that they may submit additional estimate and get it
sanctioned for doing the work perfectly. Hence plaintiff sent a representation
dated 21.06.1990 about the condition of the road and sought instructions for
commencing the work.  However, the plaintiff never expressed his inability
or unwillingness to proceed with the work as per the agreement dated
20.04.1990. On the other hand, he was always ready and willing to carry out
his part of the work.  Basing on his representation, the 2nd defendant
addressed a letter dated 30.08.1990 to the Engineer-in-Chief (R&B) A.P.,
Hyderabad appraising the bad condition of the road due to cyclone and the
need for carrying additional work before commending the actual work as per
the agreement dated 20.04.1990. The 2nd defendant requested the Engineer- 
in-Chief to include the additional work in the special repair programme for
the year 1990-91 and pending instructions he asked the plaintiff not to
commence the work till the necessary orders for additional work were
received from the Engineer-in-Chief.  As there were no instructions from the
2nd defendant for a long time, the plaintiff addressed a letter dated 04.10.1990
to Executive Engineer (R&B) requesting to inform him about the decision
taken by the 2nd defendant.  However, to the surprise of plaintiff, he received
a letter LR.No.WF/CR/11/90-91 AG dated 11.12.1990 from the Executive  
Engineer terminating the contract and ordering refund of the deposited
amount. The said order is contrary to the terms of contract dated 20.04.1990.
The allegation in the said letter that the contract was terminated because of
the difficulty expressed by the plaintiff to maintain uniform thickness of the
road in question is false. On the other hand, the work could not be
commenced because of the instructions of the 2nd defendant and his
subordinate officials. Thus, the termination of the contract for no fault of the
plaintiff was illegal. The plaintiff addressed several letters to 2nd defendant
but no reply was given. The defendants thus committed breach of the contract
due to which plaintiff suffered mental agony besides monetary loss. He
deposited Rs.10,000/- by way of demand draft on 16.01.1990; he paid
advances to a tune of Rs.76,500/- for transportation of metal which he could
not recover; further, he suffered a loss of estimated profit of Rs.1,80,800/-.
He claimed interest at 24% on the aforesaid three items and claimed total
sum of Rs.3,50,000/- and filed the suit after issuing notice under
Section 80
CPC.
c)      Second defendant filed written statement denying plaint averments
contending that the plaintiff executed agreement on 20.04.1990 and site was
entrusted immediately to him. Due to cyclone in May, 1990 the way was 
completely sunken and sand has come out.  The plaintiff failed to commence
the work for about 8 months even after completing agreement and taking the
site. But he has not started the work even to the date of determination of the
contract in December, 1990 even though he has taken over the site on
20.04.1990. He stated in his letter dated 21.06.1990 that the road was
completely damaged unravelling black top earth and hence metal layer
cannot lay uniform thickness. He should have started work of packing the
road surface, spreading metal after bringing the levels of camber. Instead of
that he started unnecessary correspondence only to avoid execution by
lapsing 8 months time out of agreed period of 9 months for completion of the
work. The plaintiff in his letter dated 19.12.1990 requested the Department to
reconsider and issue orders for execution of the work within reasonable rates
etc. The plaintiffs work was determined in the divisional proceedings dated
17.12.1990 considering the difficulties expressed by him in starting the work
by duly refunding the deposits made by him. As such, the plaintiffs loss said
to have been sustained by him is not acceptable to the Department.
d)      It is further contended that the work originally entrusted to the plaintiff
was to black top the road with two layers metalling. However, as per the
present condition of the road, it is felt necessary to provide 200 mm thickness
of gravel and one layer metalling with 65 mm HBG metal before the work is
started. The cost of extra work was estimated at Rs.7,00,000/- which is to be
taken separately under special repairs programme. In those circumstances,
the position of the road was submitted to 2nd defendant by Executive
Engineer (R&B) in his letter dated 18.08.1990 for taking up SR programme
as a special case. The 2nd defendant in turn reported to Chief Engineer (R&B)
through his report SE Lr.No.4263/J2/76 dated 30.08.1990. The Chief
Engineer (R&B) in his Memo No.99163/TA2/W1(1)/76 dated 12.10.1990    
had directed the 2nd defendant to close the contract and submit the estimate
for scrutiny of CBR files. Accordingly, the 2nd defendant instructed vide
Memo No.4263/J2/76 dated 25.10.1990 to close the contract of the above 
work and submit the detailed estimate with CBR values. In view of said
instructions, the contract was closed duly intimating the plaintiff. The 2nd
defendant contended that as per Clause 59 of P.S. to APDSS, no claims for
compensation can be entertained due to hindrance of work for whatsoever
reasons.  The defendant thus prayed to dismiss the suit.
e)      The following issues were framed by trial Court.
1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the suit amount?
2. To what relief?
f)      During trial, PWs.1 to 8 were examined and Exs.A1 to A10 were 
marked on behalf of plaintiff.  DW1 was examined and Ex.B1 and B2 were 
marked on behalf of defendants.
g)      As can be seen from the impugned judgment, the trial Court having
considered the evidence on record opined that after the work was entrusted to
plaintiff on 20.04.1990 there was heavy cyclone on 07.05.1990 which
damaged the road and therefore, the work could not be executed by the
plaintiff as per the agreement dated 20.04.1990 and the damage to the road
was caused due to act of God and therefore, defendants were not liable to pay
any damages and hence the question of ascertaining the quantum of damages  
as deposed by PWs.2 to 8 does not arise. Ultimately the trial Court held the
deposit amount of Rs.10,000/- made by the plaintiff alone can be ordered to
be refunded and accordingly decreed the suit for the said amount of
Rs.10,000/- with interest @ 12% p.a. while dismissing the other claims.
Hence, the appeal.
4)      Heard arguments of Sri N.Subba Rao, learned counsel for appellant
and learned Government Pleader for Appeals (AP).
5)      Severely castigating the judgment of the trial Court, learned counsel
for appellant would argue that the work was entrusted to plaintiff on
20.04.1990 and the cyclone that lashed out Andhra Pradesh has damaged the  
contract road on 07.05.1990 and therefore, the plaintiff, though made
arrangements to transport bitumen could not commence the work but, 
however, the plaintiff was always ready and willing to perform his part of
contract and there were no laches on his part. He did not commence the work
after cyclone only on the oral instructions of 2nd defendant and his
subordinate officials and, therefore, no fault can be attributed to him.
Learned counsel further argued, in the absence of pleadings and proof on the
part of defendants that plaintiff committed breach of contract or that contract
was impossible for performance by act of God, termination of the contract by
unilateral decision of the 2nd defendant is quite illegal and therefore, trial
Court ought to have considered efforts already put in by plaintiff and mental
agony and monetary loss sustained by him, decreed the suit as prayed for.
Learned counsel further argued that if, as per defendants, the damaged road
required full-fledged repairs and relaying at an additional cost of
Rs.7,00,000/-, they should have entrusted that work also to the plaintiff or
defendants ought to have completed the additional work by themselves and
ought to have entrusted the contract work to the plaintiff to enable him to
perform the contract. Therefore, the defendants are liable to pay
compensation to the plaintiff.  He thus prayed to allow the appeal.
6)      Per contra, learned Government Pleader argued that though the work
of black topping of BapatlaParachoor was entrusted to plaintiff on
20.04.1990 and site was also entrusted to him on the same day with an
understanding that the work should be completed within 9 months, plaintiff
did not commence the work till 07.05.1990 and thereafter the cyclone
intervened and damaged the road and made it impossible to execute the
original contract but plaintiff thereafter also did not make any efforts except
whiling away time by making some correspondence.  The 2nd defendant sent  
a letter to Engineer-in-Chief (R&B) informing that the road needs special
repairs at an estimated cost of Rs.7,00,000/- before proceeding with original
work. However, the Engineer-in-Chief instructed the 2nd defendant to
terminate the contract and submit revised estimates for full-fledged repairs
and in those circumstances the contract was terminated in December, 1990 
ordering return of deposit made by plaintiff. Learned Government Pleader
vehemently argued that in the entire process there was no fault of defendants
in cancellation of contract and it was only due to Vis Major. Therefore, the
plaintiff cannot claim compensation. The trial Court rightly dismissed the
suit.  He thus prayed to dismiss the appeal.
7)      In the light of above rival arguments, the points for determination in
this appeal are:
1)      Whether the contract dated 20.04.1990 between the parties was 
frustrated due to Vis Major?
2)      If point No.1 is held in affirmative, whether defendants are liable to
pay compensation to plaintiff for cancelling the contract though
because of Vis Major?
8a)  POINT No.1: In the pleadings, the plaintiff narrated that he executed an
agreement on 20.04.1990 and site was also entrusted to him on the same day.
Thereafter, on 07.05.1990 there was a devastating cyclone due to which the
proposed site was badly damaged by forming breaches and pits at several
points. There were rains continuously for some more days and therefore, the
plaintiff and officials of 2nd defendant jointly visited the proposed site and
found the condition of the road was not conducive to carry out the contract
work as per the terms of the contract by the plaintiff. On their instructions he
also submitted Ex.A6letter to that effect. In his evidence also PW1 stated
that just before transporting the material there was cyclone on 07.05.1990
and due to it the subject road was damaged to a large extent and base for
laying road was damaged heavily. He took Deputy Executive Engineer, 
Bapatla to the work spot and shown the damage caused by the cyclone. The  
DEE asked him to stop the road work as no road can be laid as the base was 
damaged. The 2nd defendant addressed a letter to Engineer-in-Chief to
include the said work in the repair programme for the year 1990-91. The 2nd
defendant and his subordinates asked him not to commence the work till the
instructions are received from the Engineer-in-Chief. Ultimately the Chief
Engineer wrote a letter to 2nd defendant on 16.10.1990 to close the contract
vide Ex.B2. Thus, according to plaintiff, the contract work could not be
commenced due to devastating cyclone occurred on 07.05.1990.
b)      Coming to defendants, in para-4 of the written statement it is pleaded
that Deputy Executive Engineer (R&B) has submitted a detailed report that
150 mm thick sand cushion and 150 mm thick compacted gravel base was    
provided in that reach during 1980-81; first layer of metal was laid during
1982-83; since 1983-87 no renewals were provided and during usage road
was sunken and base was completely damaged and due to recent cyclone in   
May, 1990 the carriage way was completely sunken and sand has come out.   
In Ex.B1, the 2nd defendant informed the Engineer-in-Chief that due to recent
cyclone and subsequent continuous rains, the carriage way was completely 
sunken and sand has come out and traffic was experiencing much difficulty
to pass on the way due to bad condition. He further stated that black topping
with two layers of metalling entrusted to the plaintiff was yet to be
commenced and as can be seen from the present condition of the road, it is
better to provide 200 mm thick compacted gravel base and one layer of
metalling with 65 mm HBG metal before the work is started as otherwise
black toping may not stand. The approximate cost of gravel base and one
layer of metalling comes to Rs.1,50,000/- per one KM and total cost comes to
Rs.7,00,000/-.
c)      In his deposition DW1 stated that there was a cyclone on 07.05.1990,
due to which the surface of the road was damaged to some extent. The
departmental people have opined that further layer of crust at an estimate of
Rs.7,00,000/- was required as per the technical standards. He of course stated
that the plaintiff could procure metal and proceed with the work and at the
time of spreading material the department could consider whether the road
condition was suitable or not for executing the work.
9)      Thus, as can be seen, as per the plaintiff, the work could not be
executed because of the untimely devastating cyclone due to which subject
road was badly damaged. On the other hand, the defendants in the written
statement though not mentioned in same fashion with strong words, still they
admitted that the cyclone dated 07.05.1990 damaged the road. Of course,
defendants pleaded as if plaintiff could have made efforts to proceed with the
work after cyclone. However, such a plea cannot be accepted in view of
Ex.B1letter in which the 2nd defendant himself stated that due to cyclone
and subsequent rains carriage way was completely sunken and sand has come    
out and traffic was experiencing much difficulty to pass on the road due to its
bad condition.  In view of such bad condition, probably the Superintending
Engineer (2nd defendant) stated in Ex.B1 that before the work entrusted to
plaintiff was taken up, it was better to provide 200 mm thick compacted
gravel base and one layer of metal work with 65 mm HBG at an estimate cost 
of Rs.7,00,000/- and requested for permission to undertake the additional
work as special repairs programme. In Ex.B2 the Engineer-in-Chief while
criticizing the 2nd defendant and his subordinate officers for entrusting the
work without proper inspection, directed the 2nd defendant to close the
contract and submit the estimate for scrutiny with the CBR values. So, at the
outset, it can be stated that 2nd defendant also ultimately came to the
conclusion that the contract work entrusted to the plaintiff could not be
executed because of the devastating cyclone occurred on 07.05.1990.
10)     It is to be noted that as per the correspondence among defendants, the
original work cannot be commenced as planned without first undertaking
special repairs to the road because the base of the road was totally damaged
and therefore, the work entrusted to the plaintiff cannot be undertaken
without first completing special repairs. Having regard to this factual position
emanated from the pleadings and evidence, there is no demur that the
contract was frustrated due to Vis Major.
11)
Section 56
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 deals with the Doctrine of
Frustration. It reads thus:
56. Agreement to do impossible actAn agreement to do an act  
impossible in itself is void.
Contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or
unlawfulA contract to do an act which, after the contract is made,
becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor 
could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes
impossible or unlawful.
Compensation for loss through non-performance of act
known to be impossible or unlawful.Where one person has  
promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable
diligence, might have known, and which the promisee did not know,
to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must make compensation 
to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains through
the non-performance of the promise.
The first paragraph of
Section 56
provides that an agreement to do an
act impossible in itself is void.  The 2nd paragraph provides a contract to do
an act become unenforceable (a) if the contract is impossible or (b) for
reasons of some events which the promisor could not prevent. It also
provides it becomes unenforceable when the act becomes impossible or 
unlawful. The third paragraph places a liability on the promisor to
compensate the promisee where the promisor knew, or with reasonable  
diligence might have known, and the promisee did not know that act of
promise was impossible or unlawful.
12)     The Apex Court in
Satyabrata Ghose vs. Mugneeram Bangur and    
Company
observed as follows:
Para-9. The first paragraph of the section lays down the law in the
same way as in England. It speaks of something which is impossible
inherently or by its very nature, and no one can obviously be directed
to perform such an act. The second paragraph enunciates the law
relating to discharge of contract by reason of supervening
impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be done. The wording
of this paragraph is quite general, and though the illustrations
attached to it are not at all happy, they cannot derogate from the
general words used in the enactment. This much is clear that the
word "impossible" has not been used here in the sense of physical or
literal impossibility. The performance of an act may not be literally
impossible but it may be impracticable and unless from the point of
view of the object and purpose which the parties had in view; and if
an untoward event or change of circumstances totally upsets the very
foundation upon which the parties rested their bargain, it can very
well be said that the promisor finds it impossible to do the act which
he promised to do.
13)     The Doctrine of Frustration was well delineated in a recent decision of
High Court of Madras in
Puravankara Projects Limited vs. Galaxy
Properties Private Limited
as under:
Para-60: The doctrine of frustration is really an aspect or law of
discharge of contract by reason of supervening impossibility or
illegality of the act agreed to be done and comes within the purview
of
Section 56
of Indian Contract Act. It would be incorrect to say that
Section 56
applies only to cases of physical impossibility.
Section 56
lays down a rule of positive law and does not leave the matter to be
determined according to the intention of the parties. The doctrine of
frustration of the contract is applied on the subsequent impossibility
of the agreement when it is found that the whole purpose or basis of a
contract was frustrated by the intrusion or occurrence of an
unexpected event or change of circumstances which was beyond what   
was contemplated by the parties at the time when they entered into
the agreement. When such an event or change of circumstances  
occurs which is so fundamental as to be regarded by law as striking
at the root of the contract as a whole, court can pronounce the
contract to be frustrated. For that purpose Court has to examine the
contract and the circumstances under which it was made. The belief,
knowledge and intention of the parties are only evidences. On the
evidence Court has to conclude whether the changed circumstances  
destroyed altogether the basis of the object. When there is frustration,
the dissolution of the contract occurs automatically. It does not
depend on the ground of repudiation or breach or on the choice or
election of either of the parties. It depends on the effect of what has
actually happened on the possibility of performing the contract.
Para-61: The doctrine of frustration comes into play when a contract
becomes impossible of performance after it is made on account of
circumstances beyond the control of the parties. It is a special case of
discharge of the contract. In the event of frustration of contract, the
contract comes to an end and future performance is excused on both
sides. To attract
Section 56
of the Indian Contract Act, the following
conditions must be fulfilled. (1) There should be a valid and
subsisting contract between the promisor and promisee. (2) there
must be some part of the contract yet to be performed (3) the contract
after it is entered, becomes impossible to be performed. (4) the
impossibility is by reason of some event which the promisor could not
prevent (5) the impossibility is not induced by the promisor or due to
his negligence.
14)     Applying the above precedential jurisprudence, it is clear in the instant
case neither party had foreseen the impending devastating cyclone when they
entered into contract. Further, the aftermath of cyclone was such that the
original contract could not be fulfilled in its original form without
undertaking the special repairs. Thus, as already discussed supra, the contract
can be said to be frustrated within the meaning of
Section 56
of Indian
Contract Act.
This point is answered accordingly.
15)  POINT No.2: What remains for determination is whether the defendants
are liable to pay compensation to plaintiff for rescinding the contract vide
Ex.B2. The vehement contention of the plaintiff is that he advanced monies
for procuring material which he cannot get back and further, he suffered loss
of estimated profit on execution of contract and therefore, he deserves
compensation. It is to be noted that he will deserve if either the agreement
takes care of the present situation or his case falls within the ambit of
paragraph-3 of
Section 56
. Coming to Ex.A1, in spite of intensive study, I
find no clause in the agreement speaking about the payment of compensation 
when either party fails to perform the contract on account of Vis Major or
due to other reason. The contract is silent and therefore, we have to rest upon
Section 56
of Contract Act. The third paragraph of
Section 56
ordains, a
promisor to pay the compensation to the promisee only in the circumstances
when the promisor knows and promisee did not know that the performance of 
contract is impossible or unlawful. In such an instance the promisor must pay
compensation to promisee for any loss sustained by him due to non-
performance.
16)     In Firm of Hussainbhoy Karimji vs. Haridas and others  it was held
thus:
Para-23:. The question whether compensation is payable or not 
depends not merely on (i) whether it can in an abstract manner be
said that the act agreed to be done is impossible (in itself) or
unlawful, but upon (ii) the knowledge as to the act being impossible
or unlawful, as well as the promisor using reasonable diligence in
obtaining that knowledge; but this knowledge or absence of diligence
must be coupled with (iii), the want of knowledge on the part of the
promisee; and finally it depends also upon (iv), whether the promisor
could have prevented that event which renders the act unlawful; in
particular if the promisor knew, or with reasonable diligence might
have known and the promisee did not know, that the act promised to
be done was (or semble would become) impossible or unlawful, 
compensation must be made.
The real question that must be considered, when it has to be
determined whether
S.56
is applicable or not in any suit, except
where the contract is sought to be specifically enforced, is not
whether the contract was or became void, but whether the promisor
has to make compensation for non-performance.
Anticipating the result of what I am about to say, I might add a
fourth conclusion: that the substance of
S. 56
(viz., the payment of
compensation being excused) can only apply when there is no 
contract to the contrary, and that this is but stating in other words
that
S. 56
must be read (when possible) as an implied term in
contracts.
17)     In the instant case, since the contract was frustrated because of cyclone
i.e. Vis Major and neither party can be attributed with the pre-knowledge of
the said event, the defendants cannot be mulcted with compensation on the
ground that the plaintiff incurred some expenditure and suffered damage. The
law does not permit awarding compensation in such instance. So, on a
conspectus of facts and evidence, I find no illegality or perversity in the
judgment of the trial Court.
18)     In the result, the appeal is dismissed by confirming the judgment of the
trial Court in O.S.No.66 of 1993. No costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_______________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 08.06.2018