[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
S.Nandi Reddy vs State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 27 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 127, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 312
Author:
A.Rajasheker Reddy
Bench:
A.Rajasheker Reddy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY           

Rev.W.P.M.P No.1 of 2018  

27.07.2018 

S.Nandi Reddy.  ... Petitioner      

State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Principal Secretary, Irrigation & CAD Department, Secretariat Building, Velagapudi, Gunt

Counsel for the Petitioner:  Party-in-Person

Counsel for the Respondent: Learned Government Pleader  
                             for Irrigation.

>HEAD NOTE:    


?Cases referred

1 AIR 1997 AP 179  
2 WA No.881 of 2006  





HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY          


Rev.W.P.M.P No.1 of 2018  
in
WRIT PETITON No.5977 OF 2016     

ORDER:
This Review Petition is filed seeking review of order
passed by this Court in W.P.No.5977 of 2016 dated 14.12.2017, 
wherein this Court disposed of the Writ Petition filed by the
review petitioner, with the following direction;
The respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to
complete the subject works as expeditiously as possible,
preferably within a period of two months.  On petitioner
failing to complete the works within the time stipulated, it is
open for the respondents to take appropriate action in
accordance with law.
This review petition is filed stating that he was entrusted
with two civil works by the 2nd respondent-Chief Engineer
(Projects) and he has commenced the said work in the 1st week 
of March, 2014 and incurred an amount of Rs.4,00,000/-
approximately and that about 40% of the work has been 
completed.  He submits that vide proceedings dated 14.10.2014,
the 4th respondent-Executive Engineer extended the time for
completion of subject works up to 31.12.2014. The respondents
in their letters also agreed that the petitioner has completed
25% of the work, no payment is made for the work done by the
petitioner. The petitioner is a small farmer and he sold one acre
land out of his total land admeasuring Ac.5.00 on 01.04.2017
and made payments to the his creditors and also that he had
loan to a tune of Rs.1,90,000/- from the State Bank on
13.02.2014 against jewellery of his wife and paying interest on
the same.  That there is a lot of difference in sanctioned notes
SS rates for the year 2014-15 when compared with SSR rates in 
2017-18 so also the labour charges for the year 2014 and at
present and prayed to award Rs.4,00,000/- towards
expenditure which was already incurred by him in completing
25% of the work i.e., towards improvement to Narvabandadari
Ayakat Road of Sekriyal, katwa Canal  under Cumbum Tank   
System and also to improvement to Modalladari, Ayakat Road of 
Sekriyal, Katwa Canal under Cumbum Tank System.
2.      Counter affidavit is filed by the 3rd respondent denying the
averments in the affidavit filed in support of the review petition
stating that this petition is not maintainable under law.   That
to review an order passed by this Court, the review petitioner
has to satisfy that the order passed is a mistake or an error
apparent on the face of the record or new evidence has been
discovered and the same was not within his knowledge even 
after exercising due diligence, as such, he could not produce the
same before this Court at the time of passing of order or he has
shown some other sufficient reason to allow for review.  Since
the petitioner has not shown any one of the aforesaid grounds,
this petition is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. That
the review petition is filed after 30 days of receipt of the order
dated 14.12.2017, as such, the same is barred by limitation and
that on this ground also, the same is liable to be dismissed.
That on the complaint filed by the petitioner, the Honble
Lokayukta for the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 
disposed of the same by order dated 22.01.2016 to approach 
competent civil court to redress his grievance.  Without
approaching the competent civil court, petitioner filed
W.P.No.5977 of 2016.  It is stated that except dumping the
material, he has not done any work and that it is the
responsibility of the petitioner to take care of the material
dumped and the respondents are not responsible for the loss of
material.  That as he has not done any work at the site, no
payments can be made to him and that the petitioner has not
filed any document to show that he has executed a particular
work.     That the APSS Rules does not permit a contractor to
execute a particular work according to the current SSR
deviating the original Standard Specific Rates.  It is stated that
only at the fault of the petitioner, the alleged work has not been
completed even after extension of time.  It is stated that
bifurcation of State has nothing to do with the present case.  It
is stated that this Court has no jurisdiction to grant the prayer
for modification of order dated 14.12.2017 in WP No.5977 of
2016 by awarding Rs.4,00,000/- as compensation to the work 
done.  That if the petitioner aggrieved by the order of this Court
dated 14.12.2017, he may challenge the same by preferring
appeal before the Honble Division Bench or approach a
competent civil court for redressal of his grievance and sought
for dismissal of the petition.
3.     Reply affidavit is filed by the petitioner reiterating the
averments in the affidavit filed in support of the Review Petition
and denied the averments in the counter affidavit filed by the 3rd
respondent stating that Clause 60 of A.P.Standard
Specifications is not applicable to the present case, inasmuch
as the costs of two works awarded to the petitioner is only Rs.5
lakhs each.  It is stated that the respondents have failed to give
administrative sanction enabling the petitioner to complete the
work, as such, he could not complete the work within the time
stipulated by this Court.
4.     Heard Party-in-Person and learned Government Pleader for
Irrigation appearing for respondents and they advanced their
arguments basing on the averments in the affidavits filed in
support of their respective claims.
5.       In this case, it is to be seen that this Court disposed of
W.P.No.5977 of 2016 on 14.12.2017 directing the respondents 
to permit the petitioner to complete the subject works as
expeditiously as possible, preferably within a period of two
months and on failure of the petitioner to complete the works
within the time stipulated, it is open for the respondents to take
appropriate action in accordance with law.
6.    Admittedly, after receipt of copy of order in the writ
petition, petitioner made representation to the respondents on
06.01.2018 seeking to grant all the administrative sanctions for
the works entrusted to the petitioner so as to enable him to
complete the works within the stipulated period.   On
09.01.2018, the 5th respondent informed to the 4th respondent
to give necessary permission to continue the subject works.  On
11.01.2018, the 4th respondent has addressed letter to the
petitioner to submit proposals for extension of time through the
5th respondent to take further action and the petitioner
submitted proposals for extension of time to complete the work
to the 5th respondent. Subsequently, the 4th respondent has
forwarded the communication dated 25.01.2018 to the 3rd
respondent to give necessary permissions to carryout the works
so also the 5th respondent forwarded the extension proposals to
the 4th respondent on 21.02.2018 and the 4th respondent in
turn informed to the 3rd respondent to grant extension of time to
complete the work by the petitioner by communication dated
01.03.2018.  But so far, time was not extended to the petitioner
for completion of work.
7.      Learned Government Pleader for Irrigation contends that
the present petition is barred by limitation as the same is filed
after lapse of 30 days of the order in the writ petition.
In
Secretary and Correspondent, Badruka College of Commerce and Arts   
(Day), Hyderabad v. State of A.P
, the Honble Full Bench of this
Court held as follows:
7. Notwithstanding the law of Limitation or the Act not being
made applicable to the proceedings under Arts.226 or 227 of
the Constitution as per the settled law the doctrine of laches to
deal with the delay in bringing such proceedings and the
condonation has been operating the field of law in such
situations.  In State of Haryana v. Bhajanlal, 1992 Supp (1)
SCC 335: (AIR 1992 SC 604) and Babu v. Union of India, AIR 
1979 SC 1713, Ashok v. Collector, AIR 1980 SC 112, Ramesh   
v. T.I.D, AIR 1980 SC 1200 (sic) and State of M.P. v. Nandlal,
AIR 1987 SC 251, the Supreme Court has authoritatively held
that though there is no specific period of limitation, the High
Court may refuse to exercise the extraordinary power where
the petitioner is guilty of laches on undue delay for which
there is no satisfactory explanation.  What constitutes laches
and what circumstances are sufficient to condone the same
depends upon the facts and circumstances each case.  The  
real test to determine delay is that the petitioner should come
to the court before a parallel right is created and that the lapse
of time is not attributable to any laches or negligence of the
petitioner. The test is not the physical running of time.  Where
the circumstances justify the conduct exists, the illegality
which is manliest cannot be sustained on the sole ground of
laches.
(
Dehri Rohtas Light Railway v. District Board
, 1992 92)
SCC 598: (AIR 1993 SC 802).  No hard and fast rule can be
laid down in
the matter and each case should be determined
according to its circumstances.
The law now settled is not
restricted or expected to particular type of relief under
Art.226
but the whole thing is left to the discretion of the Court as has
been held by the Supreme Court in several precedents
including Puran Singhs case (AIR 1996 SC 1092). Therefore,
we unhesitatingly conclude that the provisions of
Limitation
Act
1963 or the Rule of Limitation are not applicable to the
proceedings under
Art.226
and
227
of the Constitution in
dealing with the delay proceedings thereunder expect to
borrow any such law or the provisions in addition to applying
the doctrine of laches to exercise the discretion therein and
further subject to the restrictions enumerated above.
In M.Jagadeeswara Rao and others v. the Divisional
Forest Officer, Vizianagaram District , the Honble Division
Bench of this Court, by considering aforesaid judgments,
held as follows:
In view of the above legal position, it deserves to be
reiterated that the provisions of the
Limitation Act
are not
applicable to a petition filed for review of an order passed by
the High Court in exercise of power under
Article 226
of the
Constitution.  We are not suggesting that in each and every
case, the High Court is bound to entertain the application for
review ignoring unexplained delay of any length, but are of the
considered view that the application filed for review of order
passed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India cannot
be decided by invoking the provisions of
Section 5
of the Act.
As a sequel to the above, we hold that the application
filed by the appellants under
Section 5
of the Act, which was
registered as WPMP No.1899 of 2006 was wholly unnecessary.   
We further hold that the learned Single Judge committed an
error by refusing to entertain the application for review on the
premise that the appellants have failed to show sufficient
cause or explain 214 days delay in filing the review petition.
In view of principle laid down in the aforesaid judgments,
the
Limitation Act
is not applicable to the proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. But, however, this Court
can examine whether there are any latches in approaching the
court and also that no hard and fast rule can be laid down in the
matter and each case should be determined according to its
circumstances.  The power exercised by this Court under
Article
226
of the Constitution of India is plenary in nature and it
cannot be controlled by any provisions of the Code.  In the
aforesaid case, there was delay of 214 days in filing the review
petition therein.  In the instant case order was passed in W.P
No.5977 of 2016 on 14.12.2017 and even as per the learned
Government Pleader, the review has to be filed on or before
13.01.2018, but the review petition is filed on 05.02.2018, i.e.,
in less than 20 days, present review petition is filed by the
petitioner, as such, there are no latches on the part of the
petitioner in approaching this Court.  Therefore, the contention
of the learned Government Pleader for Irrigation that review
petition is barred by limitation, cannot be accepted.
8.      It is next contended by the learned Government Pleader for
Irrigation that this Court cannot review its own order unless
there is an error or mistake apparent on the face of record, as
such; petitioner cannot claim the amount for the work done by
him.  He also submits that except dumping the material, he has
not executed any work, much less 25% of the work.  He also 
submits that the petitioner did not file any document to show
that he has executed a particular work. This Court, while
disposing of the Writ Petition, extracted the relevant portion of
the letter dated 26.05.2015 addressed by the 3rd respondent-
Superintending Engineer to the 2nd respondent-Chief Engineer,
stating that the petitioner has completed 25 per cent of work.
For better appreciation, the relevant portion is extracted
hereunder:
I submit that the Chief Engineer (Projects) Ongole has
administratively sanctioned 6 Nos. of O & M works to
Cumbum Tank vide Memo No.C (P) Ongole     
DD/ATO/Correspondence on estimates/2015 of 1701.2014.    
Initially, the contractor stated the work 25% of work
(Physicall) was completed.  On 2.6.2014 the A.P.State was 
bifurcated. A.P and Telangana Government have issued G.O  
note stating that to stop the works which were not grounded.
As per Executive Engineers report for the estimates
technical sanction was accorded. The work was commenced    
and executed to a land by 25% work was carried out but no
expenditure is incurred sofar. Meanwhile, the
farmers/ayacutdars of Ravipadu villagers approached
through representation stating that the repairs are to be
carried out immediately.
The agency has submitted a report to give permission to
continue the O & M works, the same is herewith submitted 
for necessary action.
It is further submitted that agency is also willing to
continue the O & M works with the same rates. The 
representation submitted by the contractor is herewith
enclosed and necessary permission may kindly be accorded  
for continuing the works at an early date.
A perusal of the aforesaid letter goes to show that by the
date of 26.05.2015, petitioner has completed 25% of the work
entrusted to him and the same is not disputed by the
respondents in their counter in the main writ petition, which
aspect was not considered earlier.  When they have not denied
the same in the counter affidavit filed in the main writ petition,
they cannot deny the same by way of counter in the review
petition filed by the petitioner.  In view of above, this Court had
made it clear that the petitioner had completed 25% of the
work, as such, there is no error apparent on the face of record,
as rightly contended by the learned Government Pleader for
Irrigation, therefore, no interference is called for.
However, as already observed supra, in spite of direction
from this Court to permit the petitioner to complete the work
within a period of two months, till date no extension of time was
granted to the petitioner for completion of the subject works.
Since it is admitted by the respondents that the petitioner has
completed 25% of the work, he is entitled to get the amount for
the same, if Rules permit.
In view of above facts and circumstances, it is for the
petitioner to make an application before the competent
authority for release of the amount for 25% of the work
completed by him and it is for the competent authority to
consider the same and pass appropriate orders on the same, in
accordance with law.
Accordingly, this Review Petition is disposed of
modifying the order dated 14.12.2017 in W.P.No.5977 of 2016.
_________________________    
A.RAJASHEKER REDDY, J      
27-07-2018