[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Srikanth Vairagare vs M/S.Icici Bank Limited., & 3 Others on 3 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 176
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN             

ARBITRATION APPLICATION  No.94 OF 2012       

03-08-2018 

Srikanth Vairagare.. Applicant


M/s.ICICI Bank Limited., & 3 others ..  Respondents


!Counsel for the Applicant: Sri V.Hari Haran

Counsel for respondent Nos.1 and 2 :  Sri N.Harinath
 Counsel for respondent No.3        :  Sri V.Nitesh
 Counsel for respondent No.4  :  Sri B.Nalin Kumar


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED:      


1.[2012] 173 CompCas 476 (Cal)  
2.W.P.No.6409 of 2010 before the High Court of Bombay  

THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN              

ARBITRATION APPLICATION No.94 OF 2012       
ORDER:
Certain aspects of the provision for arbitration in the
Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
; hereinafter referred to
as the Act, for short; arises for consideration in this case.
2.      The fourth respondent is the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
constituted under
Section 3
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
hereinafter referred to as
RBI Act
, for short. The third respondent is
a credit information company; for short, CIC; as defined in
Section
2(e)
of the Act. Respondents 1 and 2 collectively, is a credit
institution as defined in
Section 2(f)
of the Act. The applicant, having
been using a credit card issued by respondents 1 and 2 is the one,
who falls within the term borrower under
Section 2(b)
of the Act.
3.      Detailing different aspects touching transactions as between
him and the credit institution, the applicant pleaded that the third
respondent CIC has erroneously and without verification of any
details, included false information as furnished by the credit
institution, regarding the applicant. Making reference to the different
transactions as between the applicant borrower and the credit
institution relating to a credit card, the applicant has made
allegations against the respondents 1 and 2 in their dealings as a
credit institution. In paragraph 13 of the Application, it is pleaded by
the applicant that there is deliberate failure on the part of the credit
institution to amicably solve the issue and it is therefore that he
sought for appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate the issue. He
has pleaded that there were certain proceedings before the Banking
Ombudsman and also that the applicant had elicited information
invoking the provisions of the
Right to Information Act
. On the
aforesaid premise, the application is filed invoking
Section 18
of the
Act read with
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996; the A&C Act, for short.
4.      The fourth respondent RBI has pleaded and placed on record
materials to the effect that there is no dispute that could be referred
for arbitration under the Act and that it had informed the applicant
that an arbitrator cannot be appointed in relation to the matters
sought to be raised by the applicant, as disputes between him and
the credit institution. The third respondent CIC has filed counter
affidavit denying the allegations made against it by the applicant and
pleading that any dispute as between the applicant as a borrower and
the credit institution is not a dispute that would fall under
Section 18
of the Act for settlement in terms thereof read with the provisions of
the A&C Act.
5.      The learned counsel for the applicant, making reference to the
Judgment of the High Court of Calcutta in
Sunil Agarwal vs. LIC
Housing Finance Limited
, argued that the application is eligible to be
allowed in terms of
Section 18
of the Act read with
Section 11(6)
of
the A&C Act.
Per contra, the learned counsel for the fourth
respondent referred to the Judgment of the Division Bench of the
High Court of Bombay in DSL Enterprises Private Limited vs. the
Chief General Manager, DBOD, Reserve Bank of India (W.P.No.6409 of  
2010) and argued that a dispute between the borrower and the credit
institution which does not relate to the business of CIC is not to be
subjected to the procedure for settlement under
Section 18
of the Act,
though the provisions of the A&C Act are incorporated by reference
through that provision of the Act.
6.
The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
was
enacted to provide for regulation of CICs and to facilitate efficient
distribution of credit and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. Credit information company is defined in
Section
2(e)
of the Act, to mean a company formed and registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
and which has been granted a certificate of
registration under sub-section (2) of
Section 5
of the Act. The Reserve
Bank of India is the authority to grant certificate of registration under
Section 5
of that Act. The grant of certificate of registration enables
the CIC to commence and carry on the business of credit information.
7.
Chapter V of the Act
deals with functions of CICs.
Section 14
falling in that Chapter, enumerates the functions of a CIC. Sub-
section (2) of that Section inhibits every CIC from engaging in any
form of business other than those referred to in sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of the Act.
8.      Sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of the Act enumerates the
functions of a CIC, which reads as follows:-
14. Functions of a credit information company.-
(1) A credit information company may engage in any one or more of
the following forms of business, namely:-
(a)     to collect, process and collate information on trade, credit and
financial standing of the borrowers of the credit institution
which is a member of the credit information company;
(b)     to provide credit information to its specified users or to the
specified users of any other credit information company or to
any other credit information company being its members;
(c)     to provide credit scoring to the specified users or specified users
of any other credit information company or to other credit
information companies being its members;
(d)     to undertake research project;
(e)     to undertake any other form of business which the Reserve Bank
may, specify by regulations as a form of business in which it is
lawful for a credit information company to engage.
Clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of the Act
would show that the activities of the CIC in relation to those clauses
commence with the collection of information on trade, credit and
financial standing of the borrowers of the credit institution, which is
a member of the CIC. Sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of the Act is the
statutory authorization for the CIC to require its members to furnish
such credit information as it may deem necessary, in accordance
with the provisions of that Act. Sub-section (2) of
Section 17
of the
Act obliges the members of the CIC to provide credit information in
response to the notice. Sub-section (4) of
Section 17
of the Act
inhibits, among other things, the disclosure of credit information by
the CIC to any person other than its specified user, that is to say,
those who fall within the definition of specified user, in clause 2(l) of
the Act. Thus, it can be seen that the business of the CIC as
permitted by
Section 4
of the Act is based on the credit information
provided by a credit institution which is its member. Even in cases
where such information is elicited by the CIC in furtherance of a
notice under sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of the Act, the business of
credit information of the CIC with reference to clauses (a) to (c) of
Section 14(1)
of the Act commences only with the collection of
information given by the credit institution. The CIC then processes
and collates such information on trade, credit and financial standing
of the borrowers of the credit institution providing such information.
There upon, it provides such credit information to its specified users.
It also provides credit scoring to the specified users. This is the
manner in which clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of
the Act regulates the business of the CIC.
9.      Thus, the business of credit information, in terms of clauses
(a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of the Act, depends
upon the credit information given to the CIC by the credit institution.
It does not relate to any matter which is beyond the purview of that
information, which is furnished by the credit institution to the CIC.
As a necessary corollary, this would mean that any dispute between
the borrower and the credit institution in relation to the credit
information provided by the credit institution to the CIC is not one
that would relate to the business of credit information, which a CIC
may engage in, in terms of sub-section (1) of
Section 14
of the Act.
10.     Sub-section (1) of
Section 18
of the Act, which is relevant in the
context, reads as follows:-
18. Settlement of dispute.- (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force, if any dispute arises
amongst, credit information companies, credit institutions,
borrowers and clients on matters relating to business of credit
information and for which no remedy has been provided under this
Act, such disputes shall be settled by conciliation or arbitration as
provided in the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(26 of 1996),
as if the parties to the dispute have consented in writing for
determination of such dispute by conciliation or arbitration and
provisions of that act shall apply accordingly.
(emphasis supplied)
Section 18
of the Act is a mechanism for settlement of disputes
relating to business of credit information. It does not relate to
settlement of any dispute as between the borrower and the credit
institution in relation to the credit information given by the credit
institution to the CIC, including the correctness or otherwise of such
information. This will be the legal position also in relation to any
dispute as between a client as defined in
Section 2(c)
(which is an
inclusive definition) of the Act and the credit institution.
Section 18
of
the Act would apply only when dispute arises on matters relating to
business of credit information. A dispute between the borrower and
credit institution, including any dispute as to the correctness or
otherwise of the credit information given by the credit institution to
the CIC, is not a dispute relating to the business of credit
information.
Section 18
of the Act can be invoked only as regards
disputes relating to the business of credit information; that too, for
which there is no remedy provided under the Act. Only such disputes
could be carried for settlement by conciliation and arbitration in
terms of the provisions of the A&C Act by invoking
Section 18
of the
Act.
11.     In view of the aforesaid, based on the interpretation of the
provisions of the Act, I would follow the decision of the Division
Bench of the Bombay High Court in DSL Enterprises Private Limited
(supra).
The decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Sunil Agarwal
(supra) rests on different and peculiar facts of that case and does not
provide any ratio decidendi which could be applied to the issues of
law, in hand.
12.     For the aforesaid reasons, this request filed invoking
Section
11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 read with
Section
18
of the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 fails.
In the result, the Arbitration Application is dismissed. No costs.
_________________________________________       
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
03.08.2018