[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
$Mukkamala Chinna Venkata Reddy And ... vs State Of A.P., Represented By Public ... on 8 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 168
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY and HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                      

Crl.A.Nos.894 of 2011 and batch

08-08-2018 

$Mukkamala Chinna Venkata Reddy and others ..Appellants   

State of A.P., Represented by Public Prosecutor, High Court, Hyderabad ..Respondent 


!Counsel for appellants: Sri T. Pradyumnakumar Reddy 

^Counsel for respondents: Public Prosecutor (AP)


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED :      
1. (2016) 2 SCC 607 
2. (1980) 4 SCC 425 
3. (2003) 3 SCC 355 
4. (1972) 3 SCC 393 
5. (2002) 1 SCC 487 
6. (2011) 6 SCC 288 
7. (2009) 6 SCC 308 
8. (1983) 3 SCC 327 
9. (2004) 8 SCC 660 
10. (2010) 6 SCC 407 
11. (2013) 6 SCC 417 


The Court made the following:

COMMON JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)
        Crl.A.No.894 of 2011 arises out of the Judgment in
S.C.No.341 of 2006 whereby the learned I Additional Sessions
Judge, Anantapur convicted A-1 to A-8 for the offence punishable
under Section 302 r/w.
Section 149
IPC and sentenced them to 
undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- each,
in default of payment of fine to suffer simple imprisonment for
three months; convicted A-1 to A-8 for the offence under
Section
148
IPC and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment  
for one year for the offence under
Section 148
IPC; convicted A-1
to A-8 under
Section 25(1B)(b)
of the Arms Act and sentenced
them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years; convicted
A-2 and A-7 for the offence under
Section 326
IPC and sentenced
them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay
a fine of Rs.3000/- each, in default to undergo simple
imprisonment for two months; convicted A-3, A-5 and A-7 for the
offence under
Section 404
IPC and sentenced them to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.2000/-
each, in default to undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
Crl.A.No.259 of 2013 is filed by the defacto complainant
against the said same Judgment in S.C.No.341 of 2006 whereby the  
learned Sessions Judge acquitted A-9 to A-12 for the offences
under Sections 148, 341, 302 r/w.
Section 149
IPC, 307, 326 and
404
IPC
and
Section 25(1B)(b)
of the Arms Act.
The case of the prosecution, in brief, is as under :
PW-1, the defacto-complainant, was the wife, PW-2 and
LW-10 were the brothers, PW-3 and LW-4 were the cousins and   
LW-9 was the father of Mekala Sreenath Goud (hereinafter
referred to as the deceased).  That A-1 to A-13 led by A-1
belong to Congress Political Party and the deceased belonged to
Telugu Desam Party and they were supporting their respective
political party candidates in the elections in their village.  That there
were bitter feelings between the said two groups since 10 years and
cases and counter cases were pending between them and thus there  
were factious and political rivalry between the accused and the
deceased.  That the deceased used to help poor people in the
village and was getting good name which became eyesore to his 
opponents.  That with the Congress Party coming into power, the
accused got moral courage and decided to do away with the life of
the deceased and accordingly the accused hatched a plan.
That on 3-2-2005 the deceased along with his wife (PW-1)
went to Narpala village on his TVS Victor motor cycle bearing
registration No.AP02K4914 and consulted a doctor as his wife was
suffering from some ill-ness, that the accused came to know of the
deceased visiting Narpala and he would return back to the village
in the evening, that A-6 and A-7 requested and took the motor
cycle of LW-11, that according to their plan, A-1 to A-13 went
near the garden of Venkatapuram Ramana Reddy which is by the   
side of the road in between Chennempalli cross and
Bommalatapalli on Narpala-Anantapur road and way laid for the
arrival of the deceased, that at about 5.30 p.m., on seeing the
deceased and his wife coming on his motor cycle, the accused kept 
the motor cycle (AP02K7857) across the road and made the  
deceased to slow down, that A-1 to A-13, armed with deadly
weapons such as hunting sickles and sticks emerged out of the
hiding place on either side of the road and surrounded the
deceased and his wife (PW-1), that A-1 instigated the other accused
to kill the deceased; that in furtherance of their common object,
the accused hacked the deceased with hunting sickles and dragged 
him out of the motor cycle; that when PW-1 intervened and
requested the accused not to kill the deceased, A-2 and A-7 hacked
on her hands and pushed her aside and that again the accused 
hacked the deceased with hunting sickles and beat him with sticks
indiscriminately and the deceased succumbed to the injuries.  That
PW-2 and PW-3 who were coming on the motor cycle behind the    
deceased witnessed the occurrence and identified all the accused.
That on noticing PW-2 and PW-3, the accused tried to catch them 
in order to kill them but out of fear PW-2 and PW-3 turned back
their motor cycle and fled the place and that the accused
dishonestly took away the motor cycle of the deceased.  PW-4,
LW-4 and LW-6, who came to know about the offence rushed to  
Chennempalli cross road and noticed PW-1 crying for help, took
her to the Government General Hospital, Anantapur and got her
admitted where her statement was recorded by PW-15  Police  
constable and that a case in Cr.No.12/2005 was registered in
Bukkarayasamudram Police Station by the Inspector of Police, 
Itikalapalli circle.  That during the course of investigation, on
4-2-2005 at 2 A.M., the Investigating Officer - PW-18, seized the
blood stained clothes of PW-1 at the Government General 
Hospital, Anantapur under the cover of Ex.P-6  mahazar, attested
by panchdars i.e., PW-11 and LW-12, and held inquest over the
dead body of the deceased at the scene of offence in the presence
of PW-6 and LW-16.  That the on 5-2-2005, at 9.00 A.M., PW-18 
seized the blood stained TVS Victor motor cycle of the deceased
which was abandoned on the road situated on the outskirts of
Danduvaripalli village, B.K.Samudram Mandal, under the cover of
Ex.P-3 mahazar attested by PW-7, LW-17 and LW-19 and that on    
the same day at 6.00 P.M., PW-18 seized the motor cycle bearing 
No.AP02K7857 in front of the house of LW-11, which A-6 and 
A-7 took from LW-11 on the date of the offence.  On 7-2-2005 at
4.00 P.M., PW-18 seized the torn and blood stained black blouse
of PW-1 produced by LW-10 in B.K.Samudram Police Station   
under the cover of Ex.P-7 mahazar attested by PW-12 and LW-22.
That on 12-2-2005 at about 7.00 A.M., PW-18 arrested A-1
to A-9, A-12 and A-13 at Yerra Bavi hillock situated at a distance
of two furlongs from Pulakunta village, Anantapur Rural Mandal,
that the said accused confessed about the offence committed by
them and produced 8 hunting sickles used in the commission of 
the offence and that the said accused also confessed that they have
washed off the blood stains on the sickles after the offence, that on
12-2-2005 at about 7.00 A.M., PW-18 seized the said hunting
sickles under Ex.P-10 mahazarnama, attested by PW-16 and   
PW-17 and that PW-18 sent A-1 to A-9, A-12 and A-13 for judicial
custody.  That A-10 and A-11 surrendered before the Additional
Judicial First Class Magistrate, Anantapur on 16-2-2005 and they
were remanded to judicial custody.  That PW-10 conducted post 
mortem examination on the dead body of the deceased and issued  
Ex.P-5 post mortem report, wherein he opined that the deceased
died due to head injury as a result of multiple cut laceration of
head. That PW-13, the medical officer examined PW-1 at the 
Government General Hospital, Anantapur, and issued Ex.P-8- 
wound certificate and that in Ex.P-14  Report of the Regional
Forensic Science Laboratory, Tirupati, the Assistant Director who
examined some of the material objects, stated that the blood
detected on certain items was of human origin.  After completion
of the investigation, PW-18 laid the charge sheet against the
accused for the offences under Sections 147, 148, 341, 302, 326,
404 r/w.
Section 149
IPC against A-1 to A-13 and under
Section
25(IB)(b)
of the Arms Act against A-1 to A-8.
Accused No.13 died. Therefore the case against him abated.
        The other accused denied the charges framed against them 
by the learned Sessions Judge and stood the trial.  In support of its
case, the prosecution examined PW-1 to PW-18 and marked    
Exs.P-1 to P-14 and produced MOs.1 to 24.  No witnesses were  
examined on behalf of the defence, but however Exs.D-1 to D-4,
relevant portions in the evidence of PWs.2, 4 and 8 were marked.
The learned Sessions Judge, upon appreciation of the oral and
documentary evidence on record, convicted and sentenced A-1 to 
A-8 and acquitted A-9 to A-12 as stated hereinbefore.
Sri T. Pradyumnakumar Reddy, learned Counsel for the 
appellants submitted that the entire prosecution case is vitiated by
the long and inordinate delay in the FIR reaching the court thereby
giving scope for false implications, embellishments and distortions
and that the unexplained delay in this regard is more fatal in faction
cases such as the present one.  He has further submitted that the
evidence shows that the investigation commenced much before the 
FIR was registered and therefore the FIR is hit by
Section 162
Cr.P.C., that the time and the manner in which the incident has
taken place appear to be totally different from that pleaded by the
prosecution, that PW-1 to PW-3 are planted witnesses as their
testimony suffers from many inconsistencies and unnaturalities,
that neither PW-2 and PW-3 nor PW-4 went to the Government   
Hospital in which PW-1 was admitted and that the evidence
regarding the post murder events suffers from lack of credibility.
The learned Counsel relied upon several omissions extracted from
the evidence of PW-18 to drive home his submission that the
evidence let in by the prosecution is not worthy of acceptance and
that PW-16 and PW-17, the alleged panch witnesses for recovery 
of MOs.11 to 18  sickles, under Ex.P-10, having turned hostile,
the prosecution failed to prove the recovery.
Opposing the above submissions, the learned Public 
Prosecutor submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the
case, it cannot be said that there was any delay in the registration of
FIR and that no prejudice was pleaded, much less proved, on
account of the alleged delay in the registration of the FIR.
Alternatively, he has submitted that PW-1 being an injured witness,
her presence at the scene of offence is guaranteed and that
therefore the Court below has rightly believed her evidence.  He
has also sought to justify the conduct of PW-2 to PW-4 and
submitted that at the earliest point of time, PW-1 has referred to
the names of A-1 to A-8 with specific overt-acts and therefore the
prosecution was able to prove their collusion beyond reasonable
doubt.  He has opposed the submission of the learned Counsel for
the appellants that the medical evidence does not corroborate the
oral testimony of PW-1 to PW-3.  As regards the recovery of crime
weapons, the learned Public Prosecutor has submitted that in cases
based on the testimony of eye witnesses, recovery of material
objects does not play a significant role and that therefore it did not
affect the case of the prosecution.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned
Counsel for the parties with reference to the record.
The Point that arises for consideration is whether the
prosecution was able to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt ?
Delay in registration of FIR: According to the prosecution, the
offence took place at 5.30 p.m.  It has come out in the evidence
that the distance between the scene of offence and
Bukkarayasamudram Police Station is 16 K.Ms.  PW-18, the   
Investigation Officer, admitted in his evidence that the distance
between Bukkarayasamudram Police Station and the Magistrates   
quarter is 5 K.M.  PW-15, Constable at the Police Outpost in the
Government General Hospital, Anantapur, deposed that at about 
9.00 P.M., he has received medical admission intimation of PW-1
and that he went to the orthopaedic ward and recorded the report
of PW-1 and sent the same to Bukkarayasamudram Police Station   
along with a Home Guard.  PW-18 deposed that on 3-2-2005 at  
about 6.50 p.m. when he was at the Circle Office of Itikalapalli, the
Sub-Inspector of Police, Bukkarayasamudram Police Station 
informed him on cell phone that the deceased was murdered, that
immediately he informed the same to the Sub-Inspectors of Police
of Rapthadu and Narpala and instructed them to go to K.K.
Agraharam village as well as to the scene of offence and that he
rushed to Bukkarayasamudram Police Station and from there to 
the scene of offence.  In his cross-examination, PW-18 stated that
by about 7 or 7.15 p.m. he was at the scene of offence and that
around 12 midnight, he handed over the FIR to the constable at
the time of leaving the Bukkarayasamudram Police Station.  He
admitted that the distance between the Government Hospital and
the Magistrates quarter is about 1 or 2 furlongs.
The above discussed evidence would show that the police
had knowledge of the murder before 7 p.m., but the FIR was
allegedly registered at 11 P.M., while it reached the jurisdictional
Magistrate at 4.10 A.M. on the following day.  No explanation
whatsoever was forthcoming from the prosecution side for the
inordinate delay in the FIR reaching the Magistrate.  Though in
Ex.P-1, PW-18 has endorsed that he has registered the FIR at 11
P.M., as rightly submitted by the learned Counsel for the
appellants, the same is a self-serving claim, and the truth or
otherwise thereof could be tested based on the time at which the
FIR was received by the Magistrate.
In
State of Rajasthan Vs. Daud Khan
, the Supreme Court,
held at para-26 as under :
The interpretation of
Section 157
CrPC is no longer res
integra.  A detailed discussion on the subject is to be found
in
Brahm Swaroop Vs. State of U.P.
(2011(6) SCC 288) which  
considered a large number of cases on the subject.  The
purpose of the forthwith communication of a copy of the
FIR to the Magistrate is to check the possibility of its
manipulation.  Therefore, a delay in transmitting the special
report to the Magistrate is linked to the lodging of the FIR.
.
In
Marudanal Augusti Vs. State of Kerala
, the Supreme
Court has emphasized on the importance of forwarding of the FIR
to the Magistrate and held, at para-24, as under :
The forwarding of the occurrence report is indispensable
and absolute and it has to be forwarded with the earliest
dispatch which intention is implicit with the use of the word
forthwith occurring in
Section 157
CrPC, which means
promptly and without any undue delay.  The purpose and 
object is very obvious which is spelt out from the combined
reading of
Sections 157
and
159
CrPC.  It has the dual
purpose, firstly to avoid the possibility of improvement in
the prosecution story and introduction of any distorted
version by deliberations and consultation and secondly to
enable the Magistrate concerned to have a watch on the
progress of the investigation.
The decision in Marudanal Augusti (2-supra) was referred to and
relied upon by the Supreme Court in
Rajeevan Vs. State of
Kerala
.
The consequences of not explaining the delay in lodging the
FIR have been discussed in
Thulia Kali Vs. State of Tamil
Nadu
wherein it was inter alia observed as under :
First information report in a criminal case is an
extremely vital and valuable piece of evidence for the
purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced at the
trial.  The importance of the above report can hardly be
overestimated from the standpoint of the accused.  The
object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report to the
police in respect of commission of an offence is to obtain
early information regarding the circumstances in which the
crime was committed, the names of the actual culprits and
the part played by them as well as the names of eyewitnesses
present at the scene of occurrence.  Delay in lodging the
first information report quite often results in embellishment
which is a creature of afterthought.  On account of delay,
the report not only gets bereft of the advantage of
spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of
coloured version, exaggerated account or concocted story as
a result of deliberation and consultation.  It is, therefore,
essential that the delay in lodging of the first information
report should be satisfactorily explained.
The above Judgment was followed in
Maharaj Singh Vs. State of 
U.P.
and
Rajeevan Vs. State of Kerala
(3-supra).
Having regard to the fact that the FIR reached the Magistrate
at 4.10 A.M., it is not possible to believe the version of the
prosecution that it was registered at 11 P.M.  In the absence of any
explanation offered by the prosecution for the long delay, we are
of the opinion that the prosecution case is seriously affected by
such delay.  In the light of the facts and the legal position discussed
above, we have no hesitation to hold that the long and unexplained
delay in the F.I.R. reaching the Court seriously affected the case of
the prosecution.
Analysis of evidence: Coming to the oral testimony of the
witnesses, PW-1 who is the widow of the deceased stated that on 
the day of occurrence, she along with the deceased went to Narpala
village on the motor cycle to meet the doctor at 4 p.m; that after
consulting the doctor and purchasing medicines, they were
returning to their village at about 5.30 p.m. and that when they
reached the place near the garden of Venkataramana Reddy, they 
found one motor cycle placed obstructing their way on the middle
of the road.  She has further deposed that when the deceased
slowed down the motor cycle, all the accused arrived holding
weapons in their hands; that A-1 to A-8 were armed with hunting
sickles; A-9, A-10, A-12 and A-13 (since died) were armed with
sticks and A-11 was armed with a knife; that A-1 has questioned
the other accused as to why they were all waiting without attacking
the deceased; that A-1 beat the deceased with a hunting sickle, A-2
to A-8 also hacked the deceased with hunting sickles all over the
body; A-9 to A-13 also beat the deceased and caused injuries; that
when she intervened and requested the accused to spare and save 
the deceased, A-7 and A-2 beat her with hunting sickles on her
hands; that PW-1 sustained cut injuries on both her hands and fell
down on the spot; that the accused dragged her to one side of the
road and that A-1, A-6, A-7 and A-8 beat the deceased and hacked 
him with hunting sickles indiscriminately all over the body apart
from cutting his hands.  PW-1 further deposed that when the
deceased fell down, the accused left the scene of offence and went
away on the motor bike of the deceased and another bike kept on
the road and also on other vehicles.  The witness further deposed
that at that time, PW-2 and PW-3 had come on motor cycle and  
the accused have taken them away from that place; that the
deceased died on the spot; that she informed the people passing on
the road that the accused killed her husband and that nobody came
near the witness as she sustained bleeding injuries on her hand.
PW-1 has further deposed that she then went to Chennampalli 
cross where LW-4 and PW-4 came and enquired with her as to   
what had happened and that she narrated the details of the incident
to them.  That the said two persons have taken the witness to the
Government Hospital, Anantapur where PW-2 arrived while the 
witness was being admitted in the hospital.  PW-1 further deposed
that she was in the hospital for four days, that later she was
referred to St. Johns Hospital, Bangalore for treatment; and that
later she took treatment for 15 days in Sai Baba Hospital,
Puttaparthi and for one month in the Osmania General Hospital at
Hyderabad.  That while PW-1 was in the Government Hospital, 
Anantapur, Ex.P-1 report given by her was recorded by the Police
and as she sustained injuries on her hand, she had put her thumb
impression on Ex.P-1.  PW-1 was subjected to serious cross- 
examination.  She stated that she does not know whether M.P.P. 
Elections were held in the year 2003 and that she does not know
the various activities taking place in her village. The most crucial
statement made by PW-1 which may seriously affect the credibility
of her evidence is to the effect that she does not know any other
villagers except her relatives in the village.  It is not the case of the
prosecution that the accused are related to the family of PW-1 and
the deceased.
PW-1 has further deposed that the distance between 
Bommalatapalli village and Sanjeevapuram cross is about  K.M, 
that it may be true that the distance between Sanjeevapuram cross
to Chennampalli cross or K.K. Agraharam cross is about 2 K.Ms; 
that the distance between Chennampalli cross and K.K. Agraharam  
village is about 2 K.Ms; that the distance between Sanjeevapuram
cross and K.K. Agraharam is about 2 K.M; and that there is one tar
road from K.K. Agraharam to Bommalatapalli village via
Sanjeevapuram cross.  The witness added that the said road was 
damaged and some autos and other vehicles will travel from
Bommalatapalli to K.K. Agraharam via Sanjeevapuram cross, while 
buses ply between Bommalatapalli and Narpala.  PW-1 admitted  
that buses from Sanjeevapuram to Anantapur will pass through
Bommalatapalli and Chennampalli cross.  She however denied that 
there will be heavy and frequent vehicular traffic on Anantapur  -
Narpala road, but she admitted that vehicles ply on that road.  She
stated that she does not know whether there are clinics adjacent to
the road between their village and Chennampalli cross.  She
admitted that Bukkarayasamudram Police Station is adjacent to the
road, that there is Government Hospital in Bukkarayasamudram 
and that to go to Anantapur from Chennampalli cross, one has to
cross Bukkarayasamudram Police Station and the Hospital.  PW-1   
expressed ignorance whether the distance between 
Bukkarayasamudram and Anantapur is 5 K.Ms. or not.  The   
witness further stated that the doctor at Narpala had not given any
prescriptions but that he gave some medicines.
As regards the attack, PW-1 stated that the deceased was 
attacked and hacked while he was on the motor bike and later he
was dragged, that at that time she got down from the motor cycle
and stood aside and that all the accused beat and hacked the
deceased after surrounding him; that she was standing by the side
of the deceased during the attack and that the accused have not
attacked her and the deceased simultaneously.  PW-1 further stated
that she cannot say how many of the accused have attacked the 
deceased from back and how many from the front.  She added that 
the deceased was attacked from all sides.  She also stated that when
six of the accused attacked him, her husband did not fall down
from the bike, that blood oozed from the injury of her husband
and that the tar road also must have had blood stains.  The witness
further stated that she had requested the passengers on the road to
help her but she did not have any acquaintance with them.  She
admitted that she did not state before the Police that a motor cycle
is placed near the road near Venkataramana Reddy garden.  She  
also admitted that she has not given the names of A-8 to A-13 in
Ex.P-1 report.  She admitted that there is an electric sub-station
near Chennampalli cross, that there is a telephone booth near the
electric sub-station and that she also has a telephone at her house
and that blood was oozing from her hands till she reached
Chennampalli cross.  She also admitted that there is a rice mill near
Chennampalli cross but she does not know whether the people of 
the rice mill had friendly relationship with her husband.  She
further stated that she came to Chennampalli cross at about 6.00 or
6.30 p.m. and went to Anantapur Government Hospital in a bus 
and reached Anantapur at about 7.30 p.m.  She admitted that she
did not make any attempt to give report at Bukkarayasamudram 
Police Station nor did she think of going to the Hospital at that
place or to any doctor till she reached the Government Hospital, at
Anantapur.  The witness initially stated that the Inspector has come
to the hospital on the next day morning and again she stated that
the Inspector came to the hospital two hours after she gave report
to the Police.  The suggestions put to PW-1 that the deceased was
addicted to womanizing, that very often he used to go to meet
other women at Sanjeevapuram and also at Bommalatapalli village 
at around 10.00 P.M., that with regard to the debauchery of the
deceased there were many quarrels with other men, that the
deceased died at some other place and the accused were falsely 
implicated, that the witness did not suffer any injuries and that she
has managed the Police and doctors to foist a case against the
accused, were all denied by her.  In the cross-examination made by
the counsel for A-3, A-4 and A-9, PW-1 stated that her husband
did not raise any cries or sought for any help and that the entire
incident took place within a span of five minutes.  She denied the
suggestion that she has not described the sickles used by the
accused as hunting sickles in her complaint.  She also stated that
she cannot specifically say on which part A-9 and also A-3 and A-4
have beaten the deceased.  She further stated that she cannot
narrate the exact overt-acts against those accused.  She also
deposed that she did not state before the doctor that the incident
occurred at 4.30 p.m.  It was suggested to PW-1 that she did not
sustain any injury in the alleged incident and that the deceased was
beaten by his enemies during night time and that subsequently after
coming to know about the death of her husband, she gave false
report and implicated the accused and obtained false wound
certificate at the instance of the former M.P. Kalava Srinivasulu.
If we closely analyse the evidence of PW-1, it suffers from
the following unnaturalities and improbabilities :
(i)     When PW-1 candidly admitted that she does not know   
any other villagers except her relatives in the village, it
does not pass ones comprehension as to how the  
witness could name as many as six accused who are not  
among her relatives, along with their fathers names in
Ex.P-1 report given by her to the Police.
(ii)    When PW-1 was returning along with the deceased  
after consulting the doctor and purchasing medicines,
the Police neither found medicines at the scene of
offence nor seized them.
(iii)   The incident allegedly took place at about 5.30 p.m.
near Chennampalli cross, close by to which there was
an electric sub-station and a telephone booth.  PW-1
admitted that she has telephone connection at her
house.  She did not attempt to inform the people at her
house by making a telephone call from the telephone
booth near the scene of offence.  She has also not
requested for the assistance of the people either at the
telephone booth or at the electric sub-station.  Instead,
she claimed to have walked to Chennampalli cross 
from the scene of offence and travelled all the way in a
bus to Anantapur Government Hospital via
Bukkarayasamudram.
(iv)    The witness admitted that to reach Anantapur from
Chennampalli cross, they have to pass through
Bukkarayasamudram where there was a Police Station   
as well as a Government Hospital.  A person with
injuries from which blood was allegedly oozing would
not take the risk of travelling longer distance to
Anantapur in a bus instead of alighting at
Bukkarayasamudram and rushing to the nearest  
hospital.
(v)     When the incident took place within the limits of
Bukkarayasamudram Police Station, it defies any logic
or reason for PW-1 to travel all the way to Anantapur
bypassing Bukkarayasamudram.
(vi)    It is not possible to believe that when six accused
attacked him, the deceased did not fall down from the
bike as testified by PW-1.
(vii)   PW-1 being an eye-witness and watched the incident 
standing by the side of the deceased was expected to
remember the overt-acts at least in a broad sense, if not
in a minute manner.  Her testimony that she does not
remember as to how many of the accused hacked her   
husband from the back side and how many hacked   
from the front side, throws any amount of doubt on
her claim of being an eye-witness to the alleged
occurrence.
(viii)  When as many as 13 accused attacked the deceased, his   
not raising any cries or not seeking any ones help,
more so when PW-2  his own brother and PW-3 his   
cousin, were allegedly witnessing the attack from a
close distance as deposed by PW-1, militates against
natural human instincts.
(ix)    The version of PW-1 that PW-2 and PW-3 were taken  
away by the accused after attacking her and the
deceased contradicts the version of PW-2 and PW-3  
who deposed that due to fear of attack by the accused,
they turned their motor cycle and fled away from the
scene of offence.
The learned Public Prosecutor laid strong emphasis on the
injuries sustained by PW-1 and submitted that the testimony of an
injured witness enjoys high probative value.
In support of this
submission, he has placed reliance on
Brahm Swarup Vs. State of 
U.P.
and
State of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Rakesh Kumar
.  We   
shall presently examine this aspect.
PW-1 deposed that when she intervened, all the accused have 
attacked her husband; that A-7 and A-2 had caused injuries to her
with hunting sickles on her hands, that she sustained cut injuries
on both her hands and that thereafter, the accused dragged her to
one side of the road.  In Ex.P-8-wound certificate, the following
injuries are noted :
1.       A lacerated wound of Lt. hand
2.      A lacerated wound with extenser tendency injury of Rt. Hand
with fracture of both bones.
3.      ? Amputation of Lt. thumb

PW-13, the doctor who issued Ex.P-8-wound certificate, in his
chief-examination, opined that the three injuries noted in the said
certificate are possible with hunting sickles like MO-12 to MO-19.
In his cross-examination, while denying the suggestion that
laceration cannot be caused with sharp edged weapon like sickle,
he however admitted that usually sharp edged weapon will cause
incised wound, but cut laceration will be caused with sharp edged
heavy weapon.  He further deposed that he knows the difference
between laceration and cut laceration, that MO-12 to MO-19
would cause only cut lacerations and that he did not find any injury
on the right forearm of PW-1.  He further admitted that whenever
a fracture of ulna and radius is caused with the weapons like MO-
12 to MO-19, there must be an external injury on the fore-arm and
that he did not find any fracture to the left hand.  He further
admitted that as per the medical jurisprudence, amputation means
removal of limb by surgery and that there is no partial amputation
in medical jurisprudence.  He however added that as the thumb
was not completely separated from the hand and it was hanging, he
had put a question mark there but he did not note all that in detail
in Ex.P-8. But he admitted that X-ray report of left hand is not
showing partial or full amputation of the thumb.
It could be deciphered from the medical evidence as
discussed above, there is a difference between a lacerated wound
and cut laceration, the latter of which will be caused by a sharp
edged weapon like sickle. PW-13, who claimed to be conscious of 
the difference between the two types of laceration wounds,
however, referred the wounds as only lacerated wounds but not cut
lacerations.  We also noticed from the evidence of PW-1 that she
made a vague statement that she was beaten by A-2 and A-7 on her  
hands without specifying as to on which parts of the hands she was
attacked.  Ex.P-8-wound certificate described injury No.3 as
amputation of left thumb which was subsequently explained by
PW-13 that what he meant was that the thumb was hanging by the  
skin. PW-1 has not specifically referred to the injury on her left
thumb.  If PW-1 has sustained such an injury, described as
grievous injury in Ex.P-8-wound certificate, we do not see any
reason for her to not refer such an injury in her evidence.  Further,
except the omnibus allegation that A-2 and A-7 have beaten her
with hunting sickles on her hand, PW-1 did not specify as to how
many injuries were caused to her by them.  Thus, the omnibus
overt-acts spoken to by PW-1 not only was with reference to the
attack on the deceased but also the attack on herself.   PW-18, the
Investigation Officer, admitted that PW-1 did not mention in
Ex.P-1 or in her statement recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C.
about A-1 hacking the deceased, about the accused beating the 
deceased with sticks, about A-1, 6 and 8 hacking the deceased after
he was dragged from motor bike and about PW-1 not referring to
the names of PW-2 and PW-3 in Ex.P-1 and her not stating about 
PW-4 accompanying her and PW-2 admitting her in the hospital. 
The failure of PW-1 to refer to the specific overt-acts against A-2
and A-7 who allegedly attacked her and the number of injuries she
has received in such attack, as discussed hereinbefore, raise a
serious doubt on the veracity of her testimony.  The ocular
evidence of PW-1 on the nature of the weapons allegedly used by
A-2 and A-7 vis--vis the nature of injuries referred in Ex.P-8 is
not corroborated by medical evidence.
The shortcomings in the evidence of PW-1 as noted above 
lead to a serious doubt as to whether the incident, at the place and
the time and the manner as pleaded by the prosecution, has
occurred at all.  This doubt is further firmed-up by Ex.P-5 post-
mortem report wherein it is stated that the autopsy was
commenced on 4-2-2005 at 11 A.M and the approximate time of   
death was about 12 hours prior to the post-mortem examination.
Therefore, the case of the prosecution that the offence has taken
place at 5.30 p.m. on the previous day does not fit into the medical
evidence.  All these circumstances lend support to the defences
stand that the occurrence has taken place around 10 P.M. at a
different place and PW-1 was not an eye-witness to it (occurrence).
In Brahm Swaroop (6-supra) relied upon by the learned
Public Prosecutor, the Supreme Court held that in the case of
injured witness, in general there is an inbuilt guarantee of his
presence at the scene of crime and is unlikely to spare his actual
assailants in order to falsely implicate someone.  In the instant case,
the various reasons discussed above exposing the falsity of the
evidence of PW-1 displace the general assumption regarding the
inbuilt guarantee of the presence of the injured witness at the scene
of offence.
In
State of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Rakesh Kumar
(7- 
supra) the Supreme Court relied upon the evidence of PW-1 to
PW-3, the friends of the deceased, who were termed as natural
witnesses.  Therefore, the said Judgment turned on its own facts
and the same does not help the prosecution in the instant case.
PW-2 is none other than the own brother of the deceased.
According to him, at about 5.30 p.m., when he along with PW-3,
who is the son of his junior paternal uncle, were returning to their
village on motor bike, at Bommalatapalli village, he found the
deceased and PW-1 going on a TVS Victor motor bike ahead of  
him, towards their village, that when his brother has reached the
garden land of Ramanareddy, he found one motor cycle placed 
across the road and on seeing the motor cycle, the deceased
stopped his motor cycle, and that thereafter, all the accused
attacked the deceased by coming from either side of the road with
sickles and sticks.  PW-2 further deposed that PW-1 requested the
accused not to beat her husband and spare him, upon which A-7 
and A-2 had hacked PW-1 on her hand with sickles and dragged  
her out of the place.  That at the time of the incident, himself and
PW-3 reached upto a distance of about 20 yards from the place of
offence and that all the accused beat the deceased indiscriminately.
That at that time the witness raised cries saying that they had killed
their brother unnecessarily and thereupon A-1 had asked the other
accused to beat PW-2 and PW-3 and that out of fear the latter
turned their motor bike and went away to their village via
Sanjeevapuram; that after reaching their village, PW-2 informed the
villagers that the accused killed his brother and thereafter himself
and PW-3 proceeded to the Government Hospital, Anantapuram,   
that by the time he reached the hospital he found his sister-in-law
been brought to the hospital by LW-4, PW-4 and LW-6; that PW-2  
admitted PW-1 in the hospital and that thereafter both PW-2 and
PW-3 went to K.K. Agraharam.
In the cross-examination for A-1, A-2 and A-5 to A-7, PW-2
stated that he had seen the deceased and PW-1 for the first time at
a distance of 15 yards at Bommalatapalli village and noticed
obstruction of motor cycle on the road at a distance of 20 yards;
that he has also stopped his motor bike and seen his brother
stopping his motor bike near the obstruction.  He deposed that he
has not alerted his brother on seeing the obstruction placed on the
road.  He further deposed that when the accused were beating the
deceased, he and PW-3 were raising cries, but due to the threat to
his life, he was afraid to go near his brother and save him.  He also
admitted that he cannot say from which side the accused has
caused injuries to the deceased.  He admitted that he did not
inform the Police that A-3 and A-5 to A-7 had attacked the
deceased.  He admitted that PW-1 did not fall on the body of the
deceased and that at the time of attack of PW-1, she was still on
the motor bike and when the deceased had fallen down by the side
of the motor cycle, all the accused had attacked him and beat him
indiscriminately, but he cannot give the details and the exact time
for which the attack took place.  He further deposed that while all
the accused were beating his brother and causing injuries to him
and his sister-in-law, he was sitting on the motor bike till A-1
instigated the other accused to attack him also.  He further stated
that he admitted PW-1 in the emergency ward and went away after 
keeping his wife in the hospital, that he left the hospital at about 11
p.m. and that by that time the Police did not come there.  In the
cross-examination made on behalf of A-3, A-4 and A-9, the
witness deposed that he used to go alone on his business purpose
and that he had never taken anybody to guard him and that only
on the day of the incident, he had taken PW-3 along with him.  He
admitted that even after the motor cycle was placed as obstruction
on the road, there was a possibility of the deceased proceeding
further by the margin of the road.  He feigned ignorance as to how
the accused have held sickles in their hands and as to how many
number of times each accused hacked the deceased.  While   
claiming that he has got love and affection for his brother and
PW-1, he however stated that he did not intervene to save them
when they were being beaten up.  He also stated that he cannot say
on which side the accused have gone after the incident.  He
admitted that while going to his village from the scene of offence,
he did not make any attempt to give report at Narpala Police
Station which was at a distance of 4 K.Ms. from the scene of
offence.  In the cross-examination made on behalf of A-1, A-2,
A-5 and A-7, the witness stated that there was no Police Picket in
the village.  However, in the cross-examination made on behalf of
A-3, A-4 and A-9, he admitted that there was a Police Picket at
their village even prior to the death of his brother and that he did
not either give any report at the Police Picket in their village nor at
any Police Station. PW-18, the Investigation Officer, admitted that
PW-2 did not state that A-3, A-5, A-6 and A-8 hacked the
deceased.
The evidence of PW-2 raises more questions than providing
answers.  Being the brother of the deceased and having got used to
faction in the village, the conduct and behaviour of PW-2 was
wholly unnatural.  We are conscious of the fact that each person
reacts when he witnesses attack on another person in his own way.
In
Rana Pratap Vs. State of Haryana
, the Supreme Court, at
para-6, held :
.. Every person who witnesses a murder reacts in his
own way.  Some are stunned, become speechless and stand    
rooted to the spot.  Some become hysteric and start wailing.
Some start shouting for help.  Some run away to keep
themselves as far removed from the spot as possible.  Yet
others rush to the rescue of the victim, even going to the
extent of counter-attacking the assailants.  Every one reacts
in his own special way.  There is no set rule of natural
reaction.  To discard the evidence of a witness on the
ground that he did not react in any particular manner is to
appreciate evidence in a wholly unrealistic and
unimaginative way.
Similar view was reiterated in
State of Himachal Pradesh Vs.
Mast Ram
.
In
Gopal Singh Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
, 
the Supreme Court did not agree with the view of the High Court
in accepting the testimony of an alleged eye-witness as his conduct
was unnatural.  It observed, at para-25 as under :
We also find that the High Court has accepted the
statement of Feran Singh, PW-5 as the eyewitness of the
incident ignoring the fact that his behaviour was unnatural
as he claimed to have rushed to the village but had still not
conveyed the information about the incident to his parents
and others present there and had chosen to disappear for a
couple of hours on the specious and unacceptable plea that
he feared for his own safety.
In
Lahu Kamlakar Patil Vs. State of Maharashtra
, the alleged
eye-witness hid himself behind the pipes in a hotel after allegedly
witnessing the murder through out the night, fled to Pune in the
early morning and after going home, changed his clothes without
mentioning about the incident to his family members.  He also
failed to explain the reason for his going to Pune.  The Supreme
Court treated this conduct as wholly unnatural.  It is instructive to
excerpt para-26 of the said Judgment, below:
From the aforesaid pronouncements, it is vivid that
witnesses to certain crimes may run away from the scene 
and may also leave the place due to fear and if there is any
delay in their examination, the testimony should not be
discarded.  That apart, a court has to keep in mind that
different witnesses react differently under different
situations.  Some witnesses get a shock, some become  
perplexed, some start wailing and some run away from the
scene and yet some who have the courage and conviction  
come forward either to lodge an FIR or get themselves
examined immediately. Thus, it differs from individuals to
individuals.  There cannot be uniformity in human reaction.
While the said principle has to be kept in mind, it is also to
be borne in mind that if the conduct of the witness is so
unnatural and is not in accord with acceptable human
behaviour allowing variations, then his testimony becomes
questionable and is likely to be discarded.
Coming to the conduct of PW-2, no person of ordinary
human behaviour would continue to sit on the motor cycle either
without intervening or at least without fleeing from the scene all
through the time when the accused were attacking his brother and
sister-in-law.  At least if PW-2 did not have the courage to
intervene, he would have gone to Narpala Police Station on his
motor cycle which is just 4 K.Ms. away from the scene of offence.
If not, at least, he would have informed the Police Picket in his
village as soon as he reached there.  His contradictory answers as
regards the existence or otherwise of a Police Picket, casts a serious
cloud on the veracity of his whole testimony.
The most startling revelation made by PW-2 is that neither
himself nor any of his relatives in the village tried to go to the
scene of offence to find out whether the deceased was alive or not
and if he was alive in what condition he was, till the next day
morning, that he slept in K.K. Agraharam during that night which
is about 1 K.Ms. from the scene of offence and that he along
with his two brothers and father went to the scene of offence on
the next day at 7.00 A.M.  This candid admission also reflects the
improbability of this person being aware of the incident during the
night of occurrence, let alone his being an eye-witness to such an
incident.  No person in the place of PW-2 who claimed to have
love and affection towards his brother and sister-in-law, would just
abandon the deceased and leave PW-1 to her fate and sleep in the
village without even attempting to go to the scene of offence till
the next day morning.  Further, if the incident was in the
knowledge of the father and the other brothers of PW-2 and the
deceased, it is not possible to believe that they had not visited the
scene of offence until 7 A.M. on the next day.  Even if PW-2 was
an eye-witness and did not venture to intervene to save the life of
the deceased and protect PW-1 from being attacked, the least he
would have done was to come back to the scene of offence as soon 
as the offenders left it and try to save the life of the deceased.  In
our opinion, the behaviour of PW-2 is too unnatural to believe him
to be an eye-witness.  Therefore, there is no escape from the
conclusion that like PW-1, PW-2 is also a planted witness.
The version of PW-3 is also on similar lines to that of
PW-2.  PW-3 admitted that he does not do any business in paddy  
with PW-2, that he does not know whether PW-2 does not have  
any licence to do paddy business and that except on the day of the
occurrence he did not go along with PW-2 for purchasing paddy
on any other day.  PW-3 could not state as to how many accused  
came and from which side.  He however stated that all the 13
accused have attacked his brother at the same time, which is at
variance with the evidence of PW-2, who deposed that after A-1 to
A-8 hacked the deceased with sickles, A-9 to A-13 dragged and 
beaten him with sticks.  PW-3 also deposed that himself and PW-2 
did not intervene and tried to save his brother.  While admitting
that there was a Police Picket in the village, the witness further
stated that they neither gave information to the Police at the Picket
nor went to the house of the deceased, but they met his paternal
uncle in the village and informed him about the incident.  PW-3
further stated that by the time he and PW-2 went to the hospital,
PW-1 was standing outside the hospital and that they have not
given any report in the Police Station either before or after
admitting PW-1 in the hospital.  He also deposed that even after
reaching their village, they did not inform the Police and the Police
Picket about the death of the deceased and that during that night
none of them from the village had gone to the place of offence to
see the dead body of the deceased.  He further also admitted that
he does not know the number and colour of the motor bike of
PW-2 and that he cannot say the nature of sticks used by the
accused.  He however added that they were maddi sticks.  The
suggestion put to PW-3 that as himself and PW-2 were related to
the deceased, they were planted as eye-witnesses, was however 
denied by him.
Apart from the evidence of PW-3 being contradictory to that
of PW-2 as to the manner in which the accused attacked the 
deceased, his testimony suffers from the same defects/lacunae with
which PW-2s evidence suffers and for the same reasons for which
we held that PW-2 was a planted witness, we hold that PW-3 is
also not an eye-witness to the occurrence.
PW-4 stated that while he was in the village along with LW-4
and LW-6, one auto came to their village at about 5.45 or 6.00
P.M. that the auto driver informed them that the deceased was
murdered on the road leading from Bommalatapalli to their village;
that he along with PW-2 took another auto and went to
Chennampalli cross, that at that place they found PW-1 with
bleeding injuries on her hands; and that on their enquiry PW-1
informed them that while she along with her husband were
returning from Narpala village, the accused attacked them near
Ramanareddys garden and killed her husband while causing 
injuries to her.  He further deposed that when there was heavy
bleeding from the hands of PW-1, he tore his towel and tied the
same to her hands; that when an R.T.C. bus arrived at
Chennampalli cross, they have shifted PW-1 to the Government 
Hospital, Anantapur, that when they reached the hospital, PW-2
and PW-3 also came to the hospital and admitted PW-1 in the 
Government hospital.  PW-4 further deposed that on the next day
morning he along with LW-4 and LW-6 went to the place of
offence where the dead body was lying and that Police also came
there and examined and recorded his statement.
The evidence of PW-4 is also wrapped in unnaturality.  On
his own admission, PW-4 did not have any special affection for the
deceased and his family and that there is no special reason for him,
LW-4 and LW-6 to follow PW-1 and stay in the hospital and also
to go to see the dead body of the deceased on the next day
morning.  Therefore, it is not possible to believe that PW-4, who
had no special acquaintance with or affection to the family of the
deceased, would have engaged an auto on coming to know about   
the incident and rushed to Chennampalli cross where PW-1 was  
allegedly waiting, sitting under a tree.  It has not come in the
evidence of PW-4 that on hearing about the incident, he made any
attempt to inform the family members of the deceased in the
village.  He specifically stated that he did not try to give report
either at the Police Picket in the village or any other Police Station.
In the normal course of events, a person in the position of PW-4
would not have rushed to the rescue of PW-1 without first
informing her family members in the village about the incident, if
not, without giving a police report.  We noticed another element of
unusual behaviour of this witness in his disengaging the auto in
which he travelled and taking the seriously injured PW-1 in a bus
to a farther place such as Anantapur without disembarking at
Bukkarayasamudram where jurisdictional Police Station and also a
hospital are located.  The explanation offered by PW-4 for
disengaging the auto that though they engaged the auto to go to
the place of offence, the auto driver informed that he will only
drop them at Chennampalli cross, also sounds unconvincing. 
When an event such as murder has taken place, an auto driver
plying in a rural area would not ordinarily refuse to take the
seriously injured person to hospital leaving the person to his/her
fate.  The evidence of PW-4 thus seems incredulous.
PW-5 deposed that he saw A-6 and A-7 coming from   
Anantapur at around 11.30 A.M. or 12 Noon and proceeding 
towards Narpala side.  His evidence would in no way connect the
accused to the offences with which they were charged.
Once we discard the evidence of PW-1 to PW-5, the only 
evidence that remains to be considered is the alleged recovery.
MO-12 to MO-19 were allegedly recovered under Ex.P-10  
panchanama attested by PW-16  VRO and PW-17  Panchayat       
Secretary.  Both of them turned hostile.  Added to that, the said
M.Os. were not sent for examination by the Forensic Science
Laboratory.  Therefore the prosecution failed to prove the
recovery of MO-12 to MO-19 from the accused.
On the analysis as above, we have no hesitation to hold that
the prosecution failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt and hence the appellants/A-1 to A-8 in
Crl.A.No.894/2011 are entitled for acquittal.
As regards Crl.A.No.259 of 2013, it is the case of the
prosecution that A-9 to A-13 attacked the deceased with the sticks
i.e., M.Os.10 and 11.  The Court below has acquitted A-9 to A-12
mainly on the ground that they were not named in Ex.P-1 report
lodged by PW-1.  It has also found that the MO-10 and MO-11 
were recovered from the scene of offence but not at the instance
of A-9 to A-13 and that there is no evidence to corroborate the
case of the prosecution that said M.Os. were used in the
commission of the offence.  Although PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3,   
deposed about A-9 to A-13 beating the deceased with MOs.10 and  
11, for the same reasons assigned hereinbefore based on which we 
disbelieved their evidence, Crl.A.No.259 of 2013 is liable to be
dismissed.
In the result, Crl.A.No.894 of 2011 is allowed by setting aside
the conviction and sentences of the appellants therein and
Crl.A.No.259 of 2013 is dismissed.  Fine amounts, if any, paid by
the appellants in Crl.A.No.894/2011 shall be returned to them and
their bail bonds shall stand cancelled.  The said appellants shall
surrender before the Superintendent, Central Jail, Kadapa, for
completing the legal formalities for their release.
_______________________    
Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy 
________________________    
Justice Gudiseva Shyam Prasad  
Date : 08-08-2018