[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Tempalle Chandra Sekhar vs State Of Andhra Pradesh & 8 Others on 24 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 238, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 604
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN                        

WRIT PEITION (PIL) No.98 OF 2017   

24-07-2018 

Tempalle Chandra Sekhar.. Petitioner

State of Andhra Pradesh & 8 others.. Respondents 

Counsel for the Petitioner:Sri K.S. Murthy

Counsel for respondent Nos.1, 3 & 9:Special Government Pleader 

Counsel for respondent Nos.2, 4 & 6:  G.P. for Home
Counsel for respondent No.5 :  G.P. for Revenue


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CASES REFERRED:      

HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE      
SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN        

AND  

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
        
WRIT PETITION (PIL) No.98 OF 2017   

ORDER (ORAL) : (Per the Honble the Chief Justice Sri Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan)
1.  This Writ Petition was instituted alleging that respondent No.7
was being given possession or custody of animals which were found to
have been transported in violation of the laws governing transport of
animals.
2.  We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, learned
Special Government Pleader for State of Andhra Pradesh for
Government Pleader for Animal Husbandry appearing for respondent 
Nos.1, 3 and 9, learned Government Pleader for Home appearing for
respondent Nos.2, 4 and 6 and the learned Government Pleader for
Revenue appearing for respondent No.5.
3.  Through the course of this Writ Petition, this Court is seen to
have embarked upon its constitutional obligation in furtherance of the
requirement to reach out and support the suffering animals.  It was then
noticed by this Court that no Society, as enjoined by the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (Establishment and Regulation of Societies for
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) Rules, 2001; hereinafter referred to as
SPCA Rules; was constituted in any part of the State of Andhra
Pradesh. Those Rules are framed under
Section 38
of the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). This
led to various queries being raised by the Bench, as well as directions.
That has now culminated with Society for Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals; being constituted in all the thirteen (13) districts of State of
Andhra Pradesh, going by the submissions of learned Special
Government Pleader.  We are told that requisite space has also been
allotted to those Societies; for short SPCAs; to carry out their activities
in terms of the SPCA Rules.
4. The Directive Principles of State Policy are fundamental in the
governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply
those principles in making the laws.  Though the provisions contained in
Part IV of the Constitution are not per se enforceable by any Court
in view of the interdiction to that effect in the opening part of
Article 37
,
what follows such restriction, as part of that Article, delineates the duties
and qualifies the authority of the repositories of governance to be guided
by the principles contained in that Part. This is so because those
principles are, in terms of the Constitution, reckoned and stipulated as
fundamental in the governance of the country. The constitutional
directive through
Article 37
in Part IV operates in the realm of executive
functions as well, since the executive power is co-extensive with the
legislative power. Part IV of the Constitution treats it as fundamental in
the governance of the country that the State shall, in particular, direct its
policy towards securing, among other things, the facilitation of due
operation of the economic system, that would lead to utilizing the
material sources of the community for common good. The provisions in
Part IV of the Constitution tantamount to the constitutional expression of
the avowed national goals of the progression of the national community
of citizens for the common good.  Having regard to the constitutional
goals sought to be achieved and the constitutional values engrained in
the Constitution, spreading over its Preamble and the different Articles,
the common good doctrine is a constitutional value that ought to
course through appropriate modality of reaching out, to support the flora
and fauna as well.  Such approach is absolutely essential for the
sustenance and holistic management of the environment of this parcel of
the Universe called Earth; with its unfathomed living and non-living
elements of which homo sapiens form a negligible lot.  This is an
inseparable and indefeasible component of the constitutional policy of
governance in terms of the guiding beacons as to nation management, as 
envisioned among the Directive Principles of State Policy in Part IV of
the Constitution.
5.  It is among the Fundamental Duties of the citizens enlisted in
Article 51-A
in Part IV A of the Constitution that it shall be the duty of
every citizen of India to have compassion for living creatures, to value
and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture, to abjure
violence, as well as to strive towards excellence in all spheres of
individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to
higher levels of endeavour and achievement.  Humaneness, including
compassionate and humane treatment of animals, is part of the rich
heritage of this nation.  Developing scientific temper, humanism and
spirit of inquiry and reform is part of the constitutional expectations
from citizens, to be reckoned and performed by them as fundamental
duties.
6. The Directive Principles referable to
Articles 40
of Part IV of
the Constitution stand advising the spread of the citizens fundamental
duty in terms of
Article 51A(g).
The fundamental duty of the citizens to
have compassion for living creatures coupled with the constitutional
obligation of the State to protect and improve the environment, gives the
requisite constitutional value infused potency to enjoin the making of
Laws, among other things, to prevent cruelty to animals.  The Directive
Principles of State Policy in Part IV and the fundamental duties of
citizens in terms of
Article 51A
of the Constitution taken together
demonstrate the direct positive duty of the State and the citizens to
ensure animal welfare.
7.
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
was preceded
by the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1890
which was deficient
in various aspects. The 1960 Act is the result of consideration of relevant
issues following the appointment of a Committee to investigate and
suggest measures for the prevention of cruelty to animals. The 1960 Act
was thus brought in as a comprehensive legislation for the prevention of
cruelty to animals.
The Act
provides for establishment of Animal
Welfare Board of India and contains various provisions regulating
experimentation on animals and restrictions on exhibition, training and
performance of animals. Treating animals cruelly is made an offence
punishable under the provisions of the Act. It is the constitutional
obligation of the States to enforce the provisions of the Act and the
Rules framed thereunder, including the SPCA Rules. This is the
obligation of the State.
The Act
, apart from prescribing the prohibited
activities, which would bring the humans to be in conflict with law, also
provides the spectrum of regulatory laws which ought to be operated by
the State to ensure wellbeing and protection of the animals, atleast to the
extent to which such protection and wellbeing is envisioned through the
legislative provisions now in operation. The eligibility to have such
duties to protect them would be part of the entitlements of the animals
attendant to their existence and such entitlement is founded on the
cohesiveness of the States duty to be guided by the Directive Principles
of State Policy and the citizens duty referred to in
Article 51A(g)
of the
Constitution. Taking all these aspects into consideration, we find that the
operation of the regime of legal aid, as enjoined by
Article 39-A
of the
Constitution of India, would be available to be activated in such a
manner, as would be required in the circumstances of the like nature.
8. Rule 3 of the SPCA Rules enjoin, among other things, that
SPCAs should be established by every State Government, in any event 
within six months from 26.03.2001, the date of institution of those
Rules. However, the fact remains that on the teeth of such provision in
the SPCA Rules, the State Government constituted SPCAs only fifteen 
(15) years thereafter; in 2017; that too, only on being prompted by the
Writ Court on behalf of the voiceless creatures, whom we politely refer
to as animals. The State Government has to provide adequate land and
other facilities to the Society for the purpose of constructing infirmaries
and animal shelters. Every infirmary and animal shelter is required to
have a Veterniaray Doctor and an Administrator and staff as are required
in terms of different sub-rules of Rule 4 of the SPCA Rules. SPCAs are
also to be involved in the management of cattle pounds and pinjrapoles
owned and run by the local authorities. While the SPCAs are required to
submit annual reports to the Animal Welfare Board of India in terms of
Rule 5 and we expect that Board to carry out the requisite exercise in
terms of sub-rules (2) and (3) of that Rule; in the present situation, as
noticed in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh, we are of the view
that effective, vibrant and proactive involvement of legal service
institutions is necessary; at least for the time being; to ensure that the
SPCAs operate in conformity with the provisions of the SPCA Rules and
with due vigilance and vigor, as is expected of them, having regard to
the objects sought to be achieved by the making of SPCA Rules as well
as the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
, under which, SPCA
Rules are made. This could be carried out without in any manner
impairing due action of the Animal Welfare Board in terms of the Rules.
9. For the aforesaid reasons, this Writ Petition is ordered directing
that the Government of Andhra Pradesh shall issue immediate 
instructions to all the SPCAs of the thirteen (13) districts which it has
constituted and any other SPCA, which it may constitute from time to
time, that they shall place monthly reports of their performance before
the Chair Person of the District Legal Services Authority (DLSA, for
short) of the District in relation to which each SPCA is constituted. The
SPCAs shall also place annual reports before the DLSA concerned about 
due compliance of the requirements as per Rule 5 of the Rules to submit
annual reports to the Animal Welfare Board of India. The DLSA Chair
Persons are directed to forward such reports to the Member Secretary of
the Andhra Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, who, in turn, shall
make consolidated half-yearly reports including instances, if any, of non
receipt of reports as directed herein; and place it for consideration of the
Executive Chairman of that State Legal Services Authority.  This will
enable Andhra Pradesh State Legal Services Authority to, if necessary,
seek appropriate directions from jurisdictional authorities including
judicial authorities and if needed from this High Court as well.  No order
as to costs.
As a sequel thereto, Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending stand
closed.
______________________________________      
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
___________________________     
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
July 24, 2018