[Cites
10
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. Universal Cables Limited & Others vs State Of Andhra Pradesh & Others on 25 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 659 (HYD.)
Author:
A. Rajasheker Reddy
Bench:
A. Rajasheker Reddy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAJASHEKER REDDY           

WP No.33695 of 2017  

25-01-2018 

M/s. Universal Cables Limited & Others ...Petitioners

State of Andhra Pradesh & Others ...Respondents 


Counsel for Petitioners: Sri S. Niranjan Reddy, Sr. Counsel appeared for Sri Avinash Desai, learned counsel for the petition

Counsel for Respondents: Learned Advocate General for R-2,  Sri S. Ravi, Sr. Counsel appeared for Respondents 3 to 5

<GIST: 

> HEAD NOTE:   

? Cases referred
1. 2003 (1) ALD 463 (AP)
2. AIR 2005 Delhi 247
3. 2005 (1) CTLJ 353 Delhi
4. AIR 2012 SC 2915 
5. 2007 14 SCC 517  
6. AIR 2005 SC 469 
7.2009 (6) SCC 171 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAJASHEKER REDDY           

WP No.33695 of 2017  
ORDER :
:
Universal Cables Limited and KET Industries Limited
and their respective share holders, petitioners 1 to 4 assail
the tender flouted by the 2nd respondent-APTRANSCO   
announced vide IFB/Tender Notice No.APT-e-05/2017,  
bearing ID No.119074  through e-platform.
2.      The nature of work notified in the tender envisage
supply, erection, laying, testing and commissioning of 220
KV UG cables for diversion of 220 KV lines passing across
the seed capital region involving laying of underground
cables for power transmission, on turnkey basis, in Guntur
district, Andhra Pradesh. (The tender work relating to
laying of 132 KV EHT lines is deleted by way of
corrigendum issued on 19-09-2017). The period of
completion of work notified  is 24 months and the estimated
contract value is Rs.670,74,84,205/-.  The tender issued is
for four routes and the routes are as under:-
i)      220 KV VTS Podili DC Line (OH-6 KM); UG cable-14   
KM);
ii)     220 KV VTS-TallapalliCkts I & II (OH-6KM; UG cable-
6KM);
iii)    220 KV VTL-TallapalliCkts III & IV (OH-6 KM; UG cable-
6KM);
iv)     220 KV VTS-TadikondaCkts I & II (OH-6 KM; UG cable-  
9KM)
3.      The petitioners claim themselves as dominant market
players engaged in manufacture, supply and laying of
power cables in power transmission and distribution
industry and have been manufacturing and supplying extra
high voltage (EHV) cables up to 220 KV for the last seven
years including underground cable systems on turnkey 
basis. Petitioners state that the qualification requirements
(QRs) set out in the impugned tender are wholly arbitrary,
irrational and more stringent than the actual requirement
for execution of the tender.
4.      Senior counsel Sri S. Niranjan Reddy, appearing for
the petitioners contended that a bidding manufacturer to
have execution capability of 245 kms of 220 KV and a
copper conductor cable of 1000 Sq.mm or above in one 
continues period of 12 months in the last seven years is far
higher requirement than the tender work to be executed
and prescribing such a far higher standard than the
performance required under the contract is wholly
irrational and unjustified.  It is contended that clubbing of
all the four routes into one single tender is a major
departure from the past procedure and the QRs set out is
tailor made that no Indian manufacturer on its own
credentials would be in a position to qualify.  Learned
senior counsel further contends that the QRs are
restrictive, unrealistic and discourages the fair competition.
It is stated that a subsidiary of a overseas company is
allowed to participate in the tender  with a meagre 2 kms of
220 KV experience and the subsidiary is allowed to rely on
the experience of the overseas manufacturer for satisfying
the QRs.  It is contended that inasmuch as the QRs set out
are tailor made to eliminate other competitors and facilitate
award of tender in favour of 3rd respondent,  the tender QRs
prescribed are violative of the rights of the petitioners
guaranteed under
Articles 14
, 19 (1) (g)
and
301
of the
Constitution besides contrary to the principles of fair play
and justice and, therefore, liable to be struck down and
placed reliance on decisions in
BHARAT BIOTECH   
INTERNATIONAL LIMITED vs. AP HEALTH AND MEDICAL          
HOUSING AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT              
CORPORATION
,
DHINGRA CONSTRUCTION COMPANY              
vs. MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI
, &
GHARDA          
CHEMICALS LIMITED vs. CENTRAL WAREHOUSING           
CORPORATION
.
5.      Learned Advocate General appearing for the 2nd
respondent-AP Transco, on the other hand, contended that 
laying  220 KV underground cable lines which pass through
seed capital region is correlated to the execution of the
construction of capital complex of the State of Andhra
Pradesh and as such  all the four route works made into
one lot for better space management and to attend
complaints in case of failure of any of the four lines by the
single manufacturer and  if four different routes are
awarded to 4 different bidders, blending of cable accessories
would not be technically feasible. Learned Advocate General
states that all reasonable precautions were taken while
formulating the tender QRs including the factor of time
constraint for effective and early completion of work. It is
stated that 18 prospective bidders including the
representatives of 1st and 3rd petitioners have participated
in the pre-bid meeting held on 18052017 and the
prospective bidders have sought clarifications and the
clarifications were also placed in e-platform by the 2nd
respondent.  It is submitted that in matters of tenders and
award of contract, the scope of judicial review is limited and
such review power cannot be invoked to protect private
interest at the cost of public interest. Decision in
MICHIGAN RUBBER (INDIA) LIMITED vs. THE STATE OF        
KARNATAKA  is relied on.
6.      Senior counsel Sri S. Ravi,  appearing for respondents
3 to 5  submitted that 2nd respondent-AP Transco has been 
awarding similar nature of works as a single lot and one
such work is 182 kms of 220 KV lines and in the instant
case the object sought to be achieved in imposing such QRs 
is obviously for  early completion of the tender work so as to
co-relate with the construction work of the capital complex
of the State of Andhra Pradesh, and therefore no motives or
discrimination can be attributed in insisting such QRs by
the 2nd respondent. That the petitioners even without
participating in the bid cannot interdict the process which
is time bound. That the  petitioners having not participated
in the tender process cannot espouse the cause of public
interest in this writ petition and their non-participation
does not render the tender non-competitive as there are
three bidders in the fray as joint venture partners.  Relied
on decisions in
JAGDISH MANDAL vs. STATE OF      
ORISSA
,  &
ASSOCIATION OF REGISTRATION OF         
PLATES vs. UNION OF INDIA (UOI
).
7.      Admittedly the tender flouted by the 2nd respondent is
a global tender and the nature of work involves
sophistication methods with technical know-how with
speedy execution of work. The question that would arise for
consideration in the writ petition is whether the tender QRs
formulated is tailor made to chose a particular bidder of the
choice of the 2nd respondent, as alleged by the petitioners.
8.      The objections raised by the petitioners  is two fold,
firstly that four separate works have been clubbed together
to create a single large tender without any reason or
justification, secondly that the bidder must have past
experience of manufacturing and supply of cable of 220 KV
to 245 km in 12 months, when the tender itself is for 245
km in 24 months and the subsidiary of overseas
manufacturer has to have the experience of only 2 km and
this low limit is fixed, as the Indian subsidiary of LS Cable,
5th respondent has experience of 2 km.
9.      In the light of the fact that the matter relates to tender
and its QRs this Court would not probe into the issue
whether four separate works were clubbed together to
create a single large lot is technically correct or not.  It
would suffice if a reference to the reasons given by the 2nd
respondent in consolidating all the four routes, as one lot. It
is stated in the counter affidavit of the 2nd respondent that
laying of 220 KV underground cable lines passing through
seed capital area is correlated to the execution of the
construction work of the capital complex of the Sunrise
State of Andhra Pradesh and choosing  single joint venture
of companies is aimed at better management of space, time, 
blending of cable accessories, rectification of complaints in
case of failure of any of the four lines.    From technical
point of view,  it is stated that if the four routes are awarded
to four different bidders, blending of cable accessories
would not be technically feasible and a decision to club all
the four routes each containing seven numbers of phase
lines into a single lot is taken for effective execution of the
work so as to have an option to divert the cable from one lot
to other for timely completion of the work. It was also stated
that as under ground cabling is susceptible for failures and
if the work is awarded to more than one bidder, the
respondent has to depend upon several agencies for timely
rectification of such failures. Hence, such consolidation of
the four routes into one lot for effective execution of the
work and reach timely targets cannot be found fault as no
arbitrariness or motive is either visible or latently are
patently discernable.
10.
In
JAGDISH MANDALs
case, (5 supra), the Supreme    
Court ruled that in matters of tender and award of contract
if decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is
in public interest, Courts will not, in exercise of power of
judicial review interfere even if a procedural aberration or
error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out.
11.
In
MEERUT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY vs.        
ASSOCAITION OF MANAGEMENT
, the Supreme Court          
explained what is a tender and the scope of judicial review
in such matters. At para 17 it was mentioned as under:-
17. A tender is an offer. It is something which
invites and is communicated to notify acceptance.
Broadly stated it must be unconditional; must be in the
proper form, the person by whom tender is made must 
be able to and willing to perform his obligations. The
terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to
judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in
the realm of contract. However, a limited judicial review
may be available in cases where it is established that the
terms of the invitation to tender were so tailor made to
suit the convenience of any particular person with a view
to eliminate all others from participating in the biding
process. The bidders participating in the tender process
have no other right except the right to equality and fair
treatment in the matter of evaluation of competitive bids
offered by interested persons in response to notice
inviting tenders in a transparent manner and free from
hidden agenda. One cannot challenge the terms and 
conditions of the tender except on the above stated
ground, the reason being the terms of the invitation to
tender are in the realm of the contract. No bidder is
entitled as a matter of right to insist the Authority
inviting tenders to enter into further negotiations unless
the terms and conditions of notice so provided for such
negotiations.
12.     The next question whether the project requirement
which is only for supply and laying of 245 kms of cable in
24 months, the QRs insisting  for past experience of at least
245 kms with copper conductor of 1000 Sq.mm in one  
continuous period of 12 months, such eligibility criteria is
arbitrary and in violation of rights of the petitioners
guaranteed under
Articles 14
, 19 (1) (g)
of the Constitution
is the core issue.
13.       It is allegation of the petitioners that with the QRs
prescribed,  no Indian manufacturer in its own credentials
would be in a position to qualify as in the last seven years
there has been no tender for supply of 245 kms of power
transmission cable in a period of 12 continuous months. It
is to be seen that the project is a large and key project in
power sector. There is no dispute with the proposition that
the tenderer can choose the best market players to get its
work done. When once it is a global invitation, it is no
surprise to have  participation in such tender process by
the overseas cable manufacturing industries. The purpose
would be better served if the participating cable
manufacturing market players are also large and repute in
the industry to commensurate with the nature and
quantum of work notified in the tender. Further selection of
a Contractor, whether indigenous or overseas, when being
done through a process of open competition by way of
inviting global tenders, there could be little scope for
favouritism. In the counter affidavit, the 2nd respondent has
categorically stated that there are more than four
manufacturers who have the required experience to meet
the eligibility criteria specified in the QRs viz., i) M/s.lljin
Cables Limited, South Korea, ii) M/s.Taihan Cables
Limited, South Korea, iii) M/s.Shenyong Furukawa Cables 
Limited, China, and iv) M/s.J. Power, Japan;  and the
companies at  ii) & iii)  have earlier entered into joint
venture agreements with Indian companies and executed  
approximately similar nature and quantum of work of AP
Transco; during the year 2010, the AP Transco has awarded 
similar nature of work involving 182 kms of 220 KV lines in
addition to supply of 72.5 kms of 132 KV lines as a single
lot to M/s.Indu Projects Limited, Hyderabad, with  joint
venture partner M/s.LS Cables & systems limited, South
Korea-3rd respondent. It is true that though the Indian
manufacturers (Make in India) are well experienced and
have individually more than the required manufacturing
capacity with contemporary technology, that itself does not
create a right to claim that the QRs should match their
manufacturing and execution capabilities. Make in India
concept is to promote innovation and a spirit of the
industry Circle, but is not a norm or a right. Even
otherwise, it is stated that three bids have been received
including the 3rd and 5th respondents combine joint venture
partners, and the following manufacturers are stated to
have submitted bids.
Sl.
No.
Name of the bidder/
Lead Partner
Name of the JV partner
1.
M/s.GVPR Engineers   
Ltd., Hyderabad
M/s.LS Cables & Systems   
Limited
2.
M/s.Megha Engineering  
Infrastructures Ltd., Hyd
M/s.Taihan Elec. Wire 
Company Limited
3.
M/s.L & T Ltd., Chennai
M/s.Sudkabel 
Gmbh,Germany
14.     It is stated that out of the three bids stated above,
two bidders which include the 3 and 5th respondent
combine joint venture partners and the joint venture
partners at serial no.2  qualify the QR requirements and
specifications of the tender. Therefore the contention of the
petitioners that no Indian company could qualify the QRs
set out in the tender, is without any substance.
15.
In
MICHIGAN RUBBER (INDIA) LIMITEDs
case (4    
supra), the Supreme Court   has observed that interference with
policy decisions and in matters challenging the award of
contracts by the State or public authorities may not be resorted
to unless it is contrary to the public interest, discriminatory or
unreasonable. In
the said decision
it was mentioned thus:-
The basic requirement of
Article 14
of the
Constitution is fairness in action by the State, and non-
arbitrariness in essence and substance is the heartbeat of
fair play. These actions are amenable to judicial review
only to the extent that the State must act validly for a
discernible reason and not whimsically for any ulterior
purpose. If the state acts within the bounds of
reasonableness, it would be legitimate to take into
consideration the national priorities.
16.     The Supreme Court while upholding the pre-qualification
criteria for award of tenders prescribed by the Karnataka State
Road Transport Corporation, it was observed that  a Court
cannot interfere with the terms of the tender prescribed by the
government because it feels that some other terms would have
been fair, wiser or logical.  If the government acts in conformity
with certain healthy standards and norms such as awarding of
contracts by inviting tenders, in those circumstances, the
interference by Courts is very limited.  The Bench further
observed that a Court before interfering in tender or
contractual matters, in exercise of the power of judicial review,
should pose to itself the following questions: (i) Whether the
process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide
or intended to favour someone, or so arbitrary and irrational
that the court can say the decision is such that no responsible
authority acting reasonably and in accordance with relevant law
could have reached and (ii) Whether the public interest is
affected.  If the answers are in the negative, then there should
be no interference under
Article 226.
The decision of this
Court in
BHARAT BIOTECT INTERNATIONAL LIMITEDs
case (1 supra) is not applicable to the facts of this case. In
that case this Court found that there was only one
manufacturer of vaccine supply with WHO pre-qualification
and the State had definite information that only one such
manufacturer exists, yet for mysterious reasons the State
chose to call for tenders, which was held to be tailor-made
to suit only one person. The context in which that decision
is rendered is different as imposing the stipulation of WHO
pre-qualification certificate for participating in the tender
was challenged, but in the present case challenge is on a
different ground.
The decisions of the Delhi High Court in
DHINGRA CONSTRUCTION COMPANYs
case (2 supra) and          
in
GHARDA CHEMICALS LIMITEDs
case (3 supra) are also     
not applicable to the facts of the instant case.  Admittedly,
there are more than one bidders in the fray in this case and
it is not the case of monopoly and the concept of fair
competition is not subverted.
17.     It is also to be seen that the petitioners though
participated in the pre-bid meeting held on 18-05-2017, but
did not participate in bid for the tender work. The ruling of
the Supreme Court in
JAGDISH MANDALs
case (5  supra)    
is to the same effect that power of judicial review will not be
permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the
cost of public interest, or to decide contractual disputes.
Merely because petitioners did not qualify to submit tender,
being not in a position to satisfy the QRs laid down therein,
it is not permissible to contend that the QRs are tailor
made, discriminatory, arbitrary and promote parties with
overseas collaborations and exclude Indian manufacturers,
though the petitioners  could be market players,  in their
own field.
18.     On the above analysis, the challenge made to the QRs 
of the impugned tender fail and the writ petition being
devoid of merits is accordingly dismissed. Miscellaneous
petitions, if any pending in this case shall also stand
disposed of. There shall be no order as to costs.
______________________________     
A.RAJASHEKER REDDY,J       
Dated: 25-01-2018