[Cites
15
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Brughumalla Seethamahalakshmi vs Brughumalla Raghunayaka Gupta And ... on 3 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 30, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 743, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 105
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Appeal Suit No.1075 of 2004 

03.07.2018 


Brughumalla Seethamahalakshmi. ... Appellant 

Brughumalla Raghunayaka Gupta and another  Respondents      

Counsel for Appellant   : Sri D.V. Sitharam Murthy

Counsel for Respondents: None appeared  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)AIR 1954 Madras 5 
2)AIR 1966 SC 337  
3)AIR 1996 SC 238  
4)(2011) 3 SCC 556 
5)AIR 1995 SC 2145  
6)(1974) 1 SCC 3 


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             
APPEAL SUIT No.1075 of 2004   
JUDGMENT:
This appeal is preferred by plaintiff aggrieved by the decree and
judgment dated 24.09.2001 in O.S.No.55 of 1995 on the file of Senior
Civil Judge, Chirala, whereby and whereunder the learned Judge
dismissed the suit for setting aside the relinquishment deed dated
15.03.1971 and to direct the defendants to deliver possession of suit
schedule property.
2)      The parties in the appeal are referred as they stood before the
Trial Court.
3)      The factual matrix of the case is thus:
a)      Plaintiff and 1st defendant are wife and husband. Plaintiffs case is
that she purchased the suit schedule property from Achukolu
Raghavaiah under a registered sale deed dated 24.06.1967 with the
money given by her parents towards Pasupu Kumkuma; the 1st  
defendant had aversion  towards her and necked out from the marital
house. The 1st defendant filed divorce petition O.P.No.17 of 1990 on the
file of Subordinate Judge, Chirala for dissolution of marriage. While the
matter stood thus the 1st defendant, just a week prior to marriage of their
eldest daughterChandra Prabhavathi (2nd defendant), informed 
plaintiff that they have to mortgage the suit schedule property to meet
the marriage expenses and made her to believe his words and played 
fraud and obtained registered relinquishment deed on 15.03.1971.
Hence, the suit.
b)      The 1st defendant filed written statement. While denying the
plaint averments, he pleaded that suit is barred by limitation, as the same
ought to be filed within three years from the date of registration whereas
the suit was filed 27 years after its execution inspite of plaintiff having
full knowledge about execution of the document. The plaintiff filed
M.C.No.10 of 1990 on the file of Additional Munsif Magistrate, Chirala
for maintenance wherein she averred that at the time of marriage of
eldest daughter in 1971, 1st defendant beat her and coerced her to
execute the document. Quite contrary to the above stand, she deposed 
that at the time of marriage of their eldest daughter the 1st defendant
threatened her that he would not sit at the marriage unless the house was
kept in his name. The house property was purchased by him with his
own earnings and he himself paid the sale consideration to the vendor
and therefore, the plaintiff has no right over the suit property. The
plaintiff began to live with Kondaiah openly so, he filed divorce petition
which is pending. The 1st defendant orally gifted the suit property to his
eldest daughterChandra Prabhavathi towards Pasupukumkuma on     
l6.07.1986 and delivered possession and also executed a registered
settlement deed dated 17.05.1993.
c)      D.2 filed written statement in similar lines.
d)      Basing on the above pleadings, the trial Court framed the
following issues for trial:
1)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for declaration of her right
and title?
2)      Whether the suit claim is barred by limitation?
3)      To what relief?
Additional issue framed on 29.07.2000.
Whether the 2nd defendant is entitled for the suit
property by way of oral gift deed dated 16.07.1986 and also
under registered settlement deed dated 17.05.1993 as prayed
for?
The following issues have been recasted on the material available
on the file of this Court are as follows:
1)      Whether the relinquishment deed dated 15.03.1971 in favour
of Bhrugumalla Raghunayaka Gupta is true, valid and
binding on the plaintiff?
2)      Whether the suit claim is barred by limitation?
3)      Whether the 2nd defendant is entitled for the suit property by
way of oral gift deed dated 16.07.1986 and also under
settlement deed dated 17.05.1993 as prayed for?
4)      To what relief?
e)      PWs.1 to 3 were examined and Exs.A1 to A31 were marked on
behalf of plaintiff. On behalf of defendants, DWs.1 and 2 were
examined and Exs.B1 to B33 were marked.
f)      The trial Court in its judgment observed that PW1 (plaintiff)
failed to establish that sale consideration under Ex.A1 was paid by her
and DW1 (1st defendant) played fraud and obtained Ex.A2  
relinquishment deed under the guise of mortgage deed. The trial Court
further observed that suit was barred by limitation as it was not filed
within three years from the date of knowledge and ultimately dismissed
the suit.
Hence the appeal by plaintiff.
4)      Heard arguments of Sri D.V.Sitarama Murthy, learned Senior
Counsel for appellant. None appeared for respondents.
5)      Severely fulminating the judgment, learned Senior Counsel Sri
D.V. Sitarama Murthy, would argue that the trial Court grossly erred in
dismissing the suit holding that the plaintiff failed to prove the fraud
committed by D1 on the plaintiff in obtaining Ex.B4relinquishment
deed.
a)      He would firstly argue that the suit property in fact was purchased
by the plaintiff with the amount given by her parents towards Pasupu
Kumkuma and not by the defendant as he had no financial capacity and 
on the other hand he was pulling on the days by securing loans from the
villagers which is evident from the various pro-notes executed by him
which were marked as exhibits. He thus vehemently argued that the suit
property is not a Benami property in the hands of the plaintiff.  Even if it
is assumed to be so, D1 cannot claim it as such in the light of provisions
of
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
(for short
Benami
Act
).
b)      Nextly, he would argue, if it is approved that the property is the
self-acquisition of the plaintiff, the same cannot be conveyed through a
relinquishment deed. In expatiation, he would submit, generally a
relinquishment deed would be executed by one of the co-sharers of the
property relinquishing his share in the aforesaid property in favour of
other co-sharers. That being not the case here and on the other hand
plaintiff being the exclusive owner of the suit property, the conveyance
of the property through Ex.A2relinquishment deed is not valid in the
eye of law. He relied upon the following decisions.
1.
Senthathikalai Pandiya Channathambiar and others vs. 
Varaguna Rama Pandia Chinnathambiar and another
2.
Thayyil Mammo and another vs. Kottiath Ramunni and  
others
c)      Thirdly, he would submit, Ex.A2relinquishment deed is nonest 
in the eye of law mainly for the reason that the same was hit by the
fraud committed by D1. Representing that he would mortgage the suit
house to secure money for performing the marriage of D2, D1 took the
plaintiff to Sub-Registrars Office, Chirala and obtained Ex.B4
relinquishment deed. Learned Senior Counsel sought to project the act
of D1 as intrinsic fraud committed on the plaintiff. He would submit, the
plaintiff being an illiterate housewife, naively believed the version of
her husband and executed Ex.B4 under misconception that the  
document which she executed was only a mortgage deed. The evidence   
of PWs.1 to 3 would manifest the wicked deed of the defendant. Though
these witnesses emphatically deposed about the nefarious act of
defendant, without there being any plausible reason the trial Court
disbelieved their version and held as if the plaintiff failed to prove the
fraud and dismissed the suit.
d)      Finally, he argued the trial Court dismissed the suit also on an
another erroneous finding that the suit was barred by limitation as the
plaintiff failed to file the suit within three years from the date of
execution of Ex.B4, despite plaintiffs emphatic plea that she came to
know the fraud committed by D1 only in 1990 when she was driven out 
of the suit house.
6)      In the light of above argument, the points that arise for
consideration in this appeal are:
1)      Whether 1st defendant is estopped from contending that the suit
property was purchased by him as benami in favour of plaintiff in
view of provisions of
Benami Act
?
2)      If point No.1 is held negatively, whether 1st defendant could
establish that he purchased the suit property in favour of plaintiff
only as a benami but not for her benefit?
3)      Whether plaintiff could by cogent evidence establish the fraud
allegedly committed by D1 in obtaining Ex.A2 (Ex.B4) 
relinquishment deed dated 15.03.1971?
4)      Whether the suit is filed within the period of limitation?
5)      To what relief?
7) POINT No.1: It is the case of the plaintiff that she purchased the suit
schedule property under Ex.A1sale deed dated 24.06.1967 with the  
money given to her by her parents towards Pasupu Kumkuma. In  
contrast, D1 would contend that he purchased the suit property by
paying sale consideration to the VendorAchukolu Raghavaiah and it 
is preposterous to plead that the plaintiff purchased with the amounts
given by her parents. She was never in possession of the suit property in
her own right. Therefore, he obtained Ex.A2relinquishment deed from
her. Later he gifted the suit property to D2 who is his eldest daughter on
16.07.1986. Be that it may, the contention of learned counsel for
appellant/plaintiff is that the suit property is the absolute property of
plaintiff and D1 cannot contend it to be a benami in view of provisions
of
Benami Act
.
8)      In this context, certain relevant provisions of
Benami Act
and
case law need to be discussed to know whether 1st defendant can take 
benami plea or not.
a)
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
(Act 45/1988) came
into force w.e.f. 05.09.1988.  However, as per
Section 1 (3)
of the Act,
certain Sections i.e. 3, 5 and 8 came into force at once and the remaining
provisions of the Act came into force w.e.f. 19.05.1988.
b)
Section 2(a)
defines benami transaction means any transaction
in which property is transferred to one person for a consideration paid or
provided by another person. The above section would tell us that if
consideration was paid by one person to obtain the property in the name
of another person, the said transaction would be regarded as benami
transaction.
c)      Then,
Sections 3
and
4
are germane for our discussion.
Section 3
reads thus:
Section 3
: Prohibition of benami transactions

(1) No person shall enter into any benami transaction.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to
(a) the purchase of property by any person in the name of his
wife or unmarried daughter and it shall be presumed, unless the
contrary is proved, that the said property had been purchased for
the benefit of the wife or the unmarried daughter;
(b) the securities held by a
(i) depository as registered owner under sub-section (1) of
section 10
of the Depositories Act, 1996.
(ii) participant as an agent of a depository.
Explanation.-The expressions Depository and Participants
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses
(e) and (g) of sub-section (1) of
section 2
of the Depositories
Act, 1996.
(3) Whoever enters into any benami transaction shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with fine or with both.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence under this section shall
be non-cognizable and bailable.
To sum up,
Section 3
exhorts that entering into benami
transaction after the advent of the Act is an offence. One of the
exceptions is the purchase of property by a person in the name of his
wife or unmarried daughter with a presumption that the said purchase
was made for the benefit of his wife or unmarried daughter. Since the
presumption is rebuttable, a pertinent question that arises is, whether a
person who purchased the property in the name of his wife or unmarried
daughter either prior or subsequent to the advent of
Benami Act
can take
a plea in the plaint or written statement that such purchase was not for
the benefit of his wife/daughter and it was purchased only as a benami
and he himself is the real owner. The answer lies in
Section 4
and also
in its judicial interpretation.
Section 4
reads thus:
Section 4
. Prohibition of the right to recover property held
benami.
(1) No suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of any
property held benami against the person in whose name the 
property is held or against any other person shall lie by or on
behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such
property.
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any property
held benami, whether against the person in whose name the 
property is held or against any other person, shall be allowed in
any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming to
be the real owner of such property.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply,
(a) where the person in whose name the property is held is a
coparcener in a Hindu undivided family and the property is held
for the benefit of the coparceners in the family; or
(b) where the person in whose name the property is held is a
trustee or other person standing in a fiduciary capacity, and the
property is held for the benefit of another person for whom he is
a trustee or towards whom he stands in such capacity.
d)      A close study of sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 4
gives us an
understanding that benami plea is not available in the form of plaint or
written statement after the Act came into force. Sub-section (3) of
Section 4
prescribed certain exceptions to sub-sections (1) and (2). Since
the transaction in the instant appeal does not fall within those
exceptions, they are not discussed.
9)      There used to be a controversy as to whether
Section 4
of Benami
Act has retrospective effect in the sense whether the Act applies to
benami transactions entered into prior to the Act. This controversy was
resolved by Apex Court in R.Rajagopal Reddy v.
P.Chandrasekharan . The scope and ambit of
Section 4
and its 
retrospectivity are dealt with in
the said decision
.
The said decision was
followed in a subsequent judgment in
Samittri Devi vs. Sampuran
Singh
.
10)     As per the above precedential jurisprudence, it is clear that
Section 4
is prospective in operation i.e. no suit or written statement
contending that the transaction relating to property is benami is
maintainable after the advent of
Benami Act
. However, this section has
limited sphere retrospectivity. Though the original transaction took
place prior to the advent of the Act, still, a suit or written statement
contending that the said transaction was benami cannot be taken after
the Act came into force. To this extent only,
Section 4 (1)
& (2) of the
Act were held retrospective.  It would mean, if a benami transaction and
institution of the suit or filing of written statement, both were taken
place prior to the advent of the Act,
Section 4
of the Act would have no
application.
The above are the statutory provisions and judicial interpretations
with regard to the effect of
Sections 3
and
4
.
11)     Now, again reverting to the question whether a person who
purchased property in the name of his wife or unmarried daughter as
benami can take such plea of benami subsequent to the Act came into 
force, it must be said that his plea does not fall within the ambit of
exceptions engrafted in sub-section (3) of
Section 4
. So, one may think
he cannot take benami plea subsequent to the Act as such a plea is hit by
Section 4(1)
and (2). However, in
Nand Kishore Mehra vs. Sushil
Mehra
the Apex Court held benami plea is available to the appellant.
In that case, plaintiff/husband filed suit in the High Court of Delhi
against defendant/wife for relief in respect of properties alleged to have
been purchased as benami in the name of his wife. The wife filed
petition under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
to reject the plaint on the plea
suit is not maintainable in terms of
Section 4
of Benami Act. A learned
single Judge rejected the application. However, on appeal Division
Bench of the High Court reversed the order and allowed the petition of
the defendant/wife. On appeal by the husband, the Apex Court will be
interpreting
Sections 3
and
4
of Benami Act, observed that
Section 3(2)
of Benami Act permitted a person to purchase in the name of his wife or
unmarried daughter notwithstanding the prohibition to enter into a
benami transaction contained in sub-section (1) of
Section 3
. When
statute created such a right, it was observed, prohibiting such right under
Section 4(1)(2)
would amount to a contradiction which cannot be
attributed to a Statute. Ultimately the Apex Court held thus:
Para-7: Therefore, our answer to the question under
consideration is that neither the filing of a suit nor taking of a
defence in respect of either the present or past benami
transaction involving the purchase of property by a person in the
name of his wife or unmarried daughter is prohibited under Sub-
sections (1) and (2) of
Section 4
of the Act.
12)     Needless to emphasise
,
the above decision
applies in all its fours
to the instant case. Therefore, it is held that 1st defendant is entitled to
take the plea of benami. However, as held in Nand Kishore Mehra he
cannot succeed in his defence unless he proves that property although
purchased in the name of his wife, same has not been purchased for her
benefit and it was purely a benami under compelling circumstances.
This point is answered accordingly in favour of defendants.
13)   POINT No.2:  In view of finding in point No.1, the burden is on
the 1st defendant firstly, to establish that consideration for Ex.A1 sale
transaction was paid by him and secondly, though he obtained sale deed
in favour of the plaintiff it was only for name sake but not for her
benefit.
14)     The trial Court, it must be said, erroneously fixed burden on the
plaintiff and held as if plaintiff failed to prove that she purchased the
suit house with her funds.  It must not be forgotten that Ex.A1sale
deed stands in the name of plaintiff. Hence, the presumption is that she
paid the consideration and obtained sale deed. Since 1st defendant claims
the transaction to be a benami, the burden rests on him.
15)     Jaydayal Poddar (Deceased) through L.Rs. and others  vs.
Bibi Hazra and others  the Apex Court held that the  burden of proving
that a particular sale is benami and the apparent purchaser is not the real
owner, always rests on the person asserting it to be so. This burden has
to be strictly discharged by adducing legal evidence of a definite
character which would either directly prove the fact of Benami or
establish circumstances unerringly and reasonably raising an inference
of that fact. The Apex Court has given certain circumstances to be taken
into consideration for the benami transaction. They are: (1) the source
from which the purchase money came; (2) the nature and possession of 
the property, after the purchase; (3) motive, if any, for giving the
transaction a benami colour; (4) the position of the parties and the
relationship, if any between the claimant and the alleged benamidar; (5)
the custody of the title-deeds after the sale and (6) the conduct of the
parties concerned in dealing with the property after the sale.
Hence, it has now to be seen whether D1 could successfully
establish the benami character of the property.
16)     Ex.A1 reads that sale deed dated 24.06.1967 was executed by one  
Achukolu Ragavaiah for a sale consideration of Rs.7,000/-. The recitals
therein show that plaintiff paid Rs.5,000/- on 20.07.1966 and balance
amount on the date of registration. Nowhere it is mentioned that the
consideration was paid by D1.  He was not even an attester in the sale
deed to infer his presence.
17)     In the light of aforesaid recitals, when the evidence of 1st
defendant (DW1) is perused, he stated that out of the total consideration
of Rs.7,000/- he paid Rs.5,000/- in the first year and remaining
Rs.2,000/- in the next year and obtained the registered sale deed in the
name of his wife.  He asserted as if he paid entire sale consideration out
of his self-acquisition and his father-in-law has not paid any amount by
way of Pasupu Kumkuma at the time of marriage. Though he claimed he   
has paid the sale consideration, his financial status during the relevant
period proved otherwise. In his chief examination itself he stated that he
got five childrentwo daughters and three sons; his eldest daughter
(D2) passed SSLC and for the education of his sons he stopped her
studies.  He stated that as his salary was hardly sufficient to meet both
ends, he started rickshaw business and out of the income derived from
the said business he educated his children. He filed M.C.No.11 of 1994
on the file of Principal District Munsif, Chirala seeking maintenance
against third son wherein he deposed (Vide Ex.A.30) that he worked as
head of the department of Sanskrit in the local college; at the beginning
his salary was Rs.66/- and later it became Rs.104/-; as the salary was not
sufficient to maintain his family, he started rickshaw business with the
help of Rama Murthy; he owned 24 rickshaws; he spent all his income 
for the education of his children and he incurred debts; he has no other
assets; he never had liquid cash; he used to borrow from others
including Kolla Venkateswarlu; Kurma Musalaiah; Yelisetti
Ranganayakulu; Puvvada Varadaiah and used to discharge the debts by  
instalments. So, in his own terms, whatever salary he was getting was
hardly sufficient even to maintain the family and to educate his five
children and therefore, he started rickshaw business and entire income
was spent on the education of his children. Even the said amount was
not sufficient and so he extensively borrowed amounts. It is pertinent to
mention here the plaintiff filed Exs.A9 to A26 which are pro-notes and
hand letters executed by 1st defendant between 1957 and 1966 while 
borrowing amounts from others.  Above all, he has no other assets.
18)     In this backdrop, it is difficult to believe 1st defendant could
purchase property worth Rs.7,000/- under Ex.A1 in 1967 by which time
the said amount was a heavy amount for a person who was hard pressed  
for money to maintain his family and manage the education of his five
children. Therefore, the claim of 1st defendant that he purchased the suit
property as benami in the name of plaintiff cannot be accepted.  Further,
he has not shown any reason muchless convincing reason as to why he  
obtained the property as benami instead of in his name. Though a
husband obtaining the property in the name of his wife is not
uncommon, however, it must be noted that in view of
Section 3(2)
of the
Benami Act, the burden squarely lies on him to establish that he
obtained the property as benami not for her benefit but due to some
other reasons. No such reason is forthcoming in this case. It is true 1st
defendant in his evidence deposed as if the parents of plaintiff had no
worthy properties to confer on her to enable her to purchase the suit
property. However, as already stated supra, the burden is on the 1st
defendant to prove the benami nature of transaction. Since he failed in
that regard, the financial capacity of parents of the plaintiff to give
amounts to her to pay sale consideration pales into insignificance.
This point is accordingly answered against the defendants.
19)  POINT Nos.3 and 4:  Regarding these points, plaintiffs plea in the
plaint is that she and 1st defendant fixed the marriage of their eldest
daughter (D2) and just before a week prior to it, the 1st defendant
informed her that he would get money by mortgaging the suit schedule
property to celebrate the marriage and made her believe his words and
taking advantage of her innocence, he played fraud and obtained
Ex.A2relinquishment deed by concealing the truth and he thus 
grabbed the property. Thus, she pleaded fraud allegedly committed by
D1. To prove this fact, besides herself, plaintiff examined PWs.2 and 3.
Plaintiff (PW1) in her evidence, of course, deposed in tune with her plea
stating that believing the words of D1 she signed on Ex.B4 treating it as
a mortgage deed. In the cross-examination she stated that she can read
and write Telugu. In further chief examination she gave a go-bye to her
earlier statement and deposed as if she was only a signatory and does
not know how to read and write. So, it is evident that she can read and
write Telugu. In that context, it is hard to believe that she did not make
any enquiry about the nature of the transaction and signed on Ex.A2
(B4) without perusing the contents.
a)      Coming to PW2, he is the attester of Ex.A2 (B4).  He admitted his
signature on the deed. He stated that PW1 already signed on the original
of Ex.A1 by the time he went to Sub-Registrars office. In the cross-
examination he stated that scribe will read over the contents of the
document to the executant after execution. He also stated Registrar has
to enquire about the contents of Ex.A2 and PW1 admitted that she
executed the document. A close scrutiny of evidence of PW2 does not 
indicate that D1 obtained document from plaintiff by representing that it
was a mortgage deed.
b)      PW3 is the third son of D1 and plaintiff. He deposed that he was
12 or 13 years old by the date of execution of A2. He stated that on
15.03.1971 his father sent his grant-father to Kavali to bring the
bridegroom and then he demanded his mother to mortgage the house for  
the marriage purpose and he assaulted her when she refused to execute 
mortgage deed and also abused her in filthy language and warned that
unless the mortgage deed was executed marriage would not be  
performed. One hour after the said incident, D1 returned home and
requested her mother to go to Sub-Registrar office and accordingly his
father, mother and himself went to Sub-Registrar office where he (D1)
came with written stamped papers on which his mother put her signature
without going through the contents and nobody read over the contents to
her. At the time of registration also document was not read over to her.
He stated that she signed on the document under the impression that it
was a mortgage deed.  In the cross-examination he stated that by the
time of Ex.A2 he was 11 years old and he was born in 1960. He stated
that his father filed criminal case against him, his mother, other brothers
and younger sister alleging that they attempted to throttle his neck.
c)      The veracity of PW3 is highly doubtful. He is an interested
witness. Since his father filed criminal case against him and others,
naturally a hostile tendency would prevail against his father. Even
otherwise, he was only 11 years old boy and there was no specific
reason for him to associate with his parents to Sub-Registrar office.
Even assuming he followed, considering his tender age, it is difficult to
believe he would understand the nature of transaction that transpired at
the sub-Registrar office. Even assuming what PWs.1 and 3 stated to be
true, certainly PW1 would narrate to her parents that due to the physical
assault and abuse made by her husband she was compelled to execute a   
mortgage deed (as she was under such impression). In that event,
certainly her parents would enquire D1 about the so-called mortgagees
and amount borrowed as loan etc, facts. Hence, there was every
possibility for the truth to come out within short time after execution of
Ex.B4 (Ex.A2). Therefore, the theory of plaintiffs signing on Ex.B4
under a misconception that it was a mortgage deed is unacceptable.
While fraud vitiates everything, its proof must be cogent. Therefore, the
plea of misconception is unacceptable. The further plea of plaintiff is
that she came to know about the nature of document only in the year
1990 also cannot be believed. For another reason also her version cannot
be believed. Admittedly, she field M.C.No.10 of 1990 against D1 (Vide
Ex.B1certified copy of petition in MC.No.10/1990 on the file of II
Additional Munsif, Chirala). In Ex.B1 it appears she got it mentioned
that while the marriage of her eldest daughter was settled to be held on a
particular day in 1971, the respondent/1st defendant attacked the
petitioner/plaintiff, beat her and coerced her to execute a registered
conveyance deed in his name in respect of suit house. When the contents
of Ex.B1 were confronted to PW1, she denied to have got mentioned so 
and therefore, contradictory portions of Ex.B1 were marked as Exs.B2
and B3. (It should be mentioned that this Court had no opportunity to
peruse Ex.B1 to B33 as they were taken return by D1 after disposal of
the suit as per letter dated 06.10.2017 submitted by Senior Civil Judge,
Chirala).  So, Exs.B1 to B3 would clinchingly establish that the plaintiff
had knowledge about the nature of Exs.B4 even as on the date of
execution of the said document. Ex.B4 was executed on 15.03.1971.  
However, the plaintiff did not file the suit till 1992 (O.P.No.47/1992).
Therefore, her suit is barred by limitation as held by the trial Court.
20)     Thus, on a conspectus of the above findings, plaintiff could not
establish the plea of fraud and further, she failed to file the suit within
the period of limitation. The other contention of learned senior counsel
that relinquishment deed is not maintainable in the eye of law does not
hold water and consequently the decisions cited will be of no avail.
21)     In the result, this appeal is dismissed by confirming the judgment
and decree of the trial Court in O.S.No.55 of 1995. No costs.
As a sequel, pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 03.07.2018