[Cites
11
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
P.Suneela And Three Others vs Shaik Kamal And Another on 7 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 100
Bench:
C.Praveen Kumar
,
T. Rajani
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR AND HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI                

M.A.C.M.A.No. 1787 of 2013  

07.09.2018 

P.Suneela and three others .....APPELLANTS  

Shaik Kamal and another..RESPONDENTS       

Counsel for Appellants :Sri Kota Subba Rao

Counsel for Respondents:Sri T.Mahender Rao  

<GIST : 

>HEAD NOTE :   

? Cases referred :
1.(2012) 4 ALD 147 (SC) 
2.(2018) 1 ALD 145 (SC) 
3.(2012) 6 ALD 66 
4.(2011) 4 SCC 693 
5.(2011) 3 SCC 646 
6.(2001) ACJ 428 
7.(2011) 11 SCC 635 
8.(2017) ACJ 2700 
9.(2009) 6 SCC 121 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR         

AND  
HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI     
M.A.C.M.A.No. 1787 of 2013  
JUDGMENT :
(per Honble Sri Justice C.Praveen Kumar)
1)      Aggrieved by the award and decree dated 17.06.2013 
passed in M.V.O.P.No.125 of 2011 on the file of the
Chairman, Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal-cum-I Additional
Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Secunderabad, wherein the
Tribunal dismissed the claim of the claimants, the present
appeal is filed by the claimants under
Section 173
of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short the Act).
2)      For the sake of convenience, the parties will
hereinafter be referred to as arrayed in M.V.O.P.
3)      The facts in issue are as under:
The appellants herein are the claimants.  The first
claimant is the wife and claimant Nos.2 and 3 are the two
minor daughters while claimant No.4 is the father of one
P.Ganesh Reddy (hereinafter referred to as the deceased).
A claim-petition under
Section 166
of the Act, claiming
compensation of Rs.36,00,000/-, came to be filed stating
that on 18.10.2010 at about 5.30 p.m., while the deceased
was proceeding on his motor cycle bearing registration No.
AP 28 BD 4622 slowly on the extreme left side of the road
from JNTU towards Hitech City and when he reached near  
RTO Office, 4th phase, KPHB Colony, the driver of an auto
bearing registration No. AP 28 TB 3035, drove the same in a
rash and negligent manner and at high speed, came in
opposite direction on a wrong side and dashed the motor
cycle of the deceased, as a result of which, the deceased
fell down and sustained injuries.  Immediately thereafter,
he was shifted to Remedy Hospital and from there to NIMS 
Hospital, Panjagutta, Hyderabad, where he succumbed to  
injuries on 19.10.2010.  The motor cycle of the deceased
was also damaged.  In respect of the said incident, a case in
Crime No.424 of 2010 came to be registered against the
driver of the said auto, for an offence punishable under
Section 304-A
IPC.  Having regard to the age of the
deceased; his employment as Area Sales Manager in Neon   
Laboratories Limited, Hyderabad and earning at Rs.30,000/-
per month besides other perks, the claimants sought
compensation of Rs.36,00,000/- against the respondents 1
and 2, who are the owner and insurer of the auto,
respectively.
4)      In spite of service of notice on the 1st respondent,
there was no representation.  Hence, he was set exparte.
5)      A counter came to be filed by the 2nd respondent,
disputing the manner in which the accident took place.  It is
stated that the accident occurred due to negligence of the
rider of the motor cycle ie., deceased and as such the
insurance company is not liable to pay the compensation.
6)      Basing on the above pleadings, the Tribunal framed
the following issues:
1.      Whether the pleaded accident occurred resulting
in death of the deceased viz., P.Ganesh Reddy
due to the rash and negligent driving of the
vehicle (Auto) bearing No.AP 28 TB 3035 by its
driver?
2.      Whether the petitioners are entitled to any
compensation and if so, at what quantum and 
what is the liability of the respondents?
3.      To what relief?
7)      In support of their case, the claimants examined PWs.1
to 3 and got marked Exs.A1 to A9 and Exs.X1 and X2.  No  
oral or documentary evidence was adduced on behalf of the
respondents but Ex.B1-a copy of insurance policy came to be 
marked with consent.
8)      Basing on the evidence available on record, the
Tribunal held that the claimants failed to prove that the
auto bearing No. AP 28 TB 3035 was involved in the
accident.  While deciding the issue as to the amount of
compensation to which the claimants are entitled, it was
held that a sum of Rs.26,45,984 /- can be granted towards
compensation.  In view of the findings with regard to the
manner in which the accident took place, the Tribunal held
that the claimants are not entitled to claim any
compensation against the respondents.  Challenging the
same, the claimants preferred the present appeal.
9)      Sri Kota Subba Rao, learned counsel for the claimants
mainly submits that the finding of the Tribunal in holding
that the claimants have not proved their case beyond doubt
is incorrect.  According to him, it is sufficient if the case is
proved on the touchstone of probabilities.  Since the
involvement of the auto is not in dispute and having regard
to the material on record, more particularly the nature of
injuries sustained by the deceased, it can be said that the
accident in question took place due to the hit by an auto.
He further submits that the finding of the Tribunal is totally
contrary to the averments in the counter filed by the
respondents in O.P.  Much stress is laid by the counsel on
the averments made in the counter filed in O.P. and also the
allegations made in the charge sheet to establish the
involvement of the crime vehicle in the accident.
10)     On the other hand, Sri T.Mahender Rao, learned
counsel appearing for the insurance company would submit 
that there is absolutely no material on record to show the
involvement of the auto in causing injuries to the deceased.
According to him, the version set out in the charge sheet
and the version which is spoken to by the alleged eye
witness is totally inconsistent with each other and the same
cannot be made the basis to award compensation.  He took  
us through the averments in the charge sheet and the
evidence of PW.2 to establish his plea.  Insofar as the
averments in the counter, he pleads that taking a plea in the
counter does not amount to admission and the argument of 
the learned counsel for the appellant that the insurance
company is liable to pay compensation on that score has to
be rejected.  He also submits that if really, the auto was
involved in the accident, definitely there would have been
some damage to the auto, having regard to the version of
PW.2, which according to him is lacking in the instance case.
NATURE OF PROOF REQUIRES TO PROVE AN ACCIDENT:
11)     In
Bimla Devi and others v. Himachal Road
Transport Corporation and others
the Apex Court while
dealing with the nature of proof that is required to prove an
accident observed as under:
15. xxxxx the Tribunal has rightly taken a holistic
view of the matter. It was necessary to be borne in
mind that strict proof of an accident caused by a
particular bus in a particular manner may not be
possible to be done by the claimants. The claimants
were merely to establish their case on the touchstone
of preponderance of probability. The standard of
proof beyond reasonable doubt could not have been
applied. For the said purpose, the High Court should
have taken into consideration the respective stories
set forth by both the parties.
12)     In
Halappa v. Malik Sab
a three Judge Bench of the
Apex Court, observed as under:
The High Court has proceeded to reverse the finding
of the Tribunal purely on the basis that the FIR which
was lodged on the complaint of the appellant
contained a version which was at variance with the
evidence which emerged before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal had noted the admission of RW1 in the
course of his cross-examination that the insurer had
maintained a separate file in respect of the accident.
The insurer did not produce either the file or the
report of the investigator in the case. Moreover, no
independent witness was produced by the insurer to
displace the version of the incident as deposed to by
the appellant and by PW 3. The cogent analysis of the
evidence by the Tribunal has been displaced by the
High Court without considering material aspects of
the evidence on the record. The High Court was not
justified in holding that the Tribunal had arrived at a
finding of fact without applying its mind to the
documents produced by the claimant or that it had
casually entered a finding of fact. On the contrary,
we find that the reversal of the finding by the High
Court was without considering the material aspects of
the evidence which justifiably weighed with the
Tribunal.
We are, therefore, of the view that the finding of the
High Court is manifestly erroneous and that the
finding of fact by the Tribunal was correct.
13)     In Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., Kurnool v.
Muchinthala Bharathamma and others  the issue before 
the Court was Whether the claim requires to be rejected
since the vehicle number was not mentioned in the first
information report and the identification of the vehicle was
done after thorough investigation by the police.  Relying
upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
Ravi v.
Badrinarayan and others
and
Kusum Lata and others v.
Satbir and others
a learned Single Judge of this Court held
as under:
Therefore, in this case there is highly reliable and
convincing evidence in proof of the fact that the
accident was due to rash and negligent driving of the
Tempo Trax AP.21C.7803. Merely because the number    
of the offending vehicle was not mentioned in the
First Information Report it cannot be said that the
offending vehicle namely the Tempo Trax AP. 21C. 
7803 was not involved in the accident. The learned
Tribunal rightly held, basing on the evidence before it
that the accident was due to the rash and negligent
driving of Tempo Trax bearing No. AP.21C. 7803 and
the said finding does not call for any interference in
this appeal.
14)     In Kaushnuma Begum and othes v. New India   
Assurance Co.Ltd., and others , the Apex Court dealt with
an issue as to whether the jurisdiction of Tribunal is not
restricted only to decide the claims arising out of negligence
in use of the motor vehicles.  After considering the law laid
down on the said aspect, the Apex Court held as under:
Hit and run cases where the drivers of the motor
vehicles who have caused the accidents are not
known are increasing in number. Where a pedestrian 
without negligence on his part is injured or killed by a
motorist whether negligently or not, he or his legal
representatives as the case may be should be entitled
to recover damages if the principle of social justice
should have any meaning at all. In order to meet to
some extent the responsibility of the society to the
deaths and injuries caused in road accidents there has
been a continuous agitation throughout the world to
make the liability for damages arising out of motor
vehicles accidents as a liability without fault.
Like any other common law principle, which is
acceptable to our jurisprudence, the Rule in Rylands
vs. Fletcher can be followed at least until any other
new principle which excels the former can be
evolved, or until legislation provides differently.
Hence, we are disposed to adopt the Rule in claims
for compensation made in respect of motor accidents.
No Fault Liability envisaged in
Section 140
of the MV
Act is distinguishable from the rule of strict liability.
In the former the compensation amount is fixed and is
payable even if any one of the exceptions to the Rule
can be applied. It is a statutory liability created
without which the claimant should not get any
amount under that count. Compensation on account  
of accident arising from the use of motor vehicles can
be claimed under the common law even without the 
aid of a statute. The provisions of the
MV Act
permits
that compensation paid under no fault liability can be
deducted from the final amount awarded by the
Tribunal. Therefore, these two are resting on two
different premises. We are, therefore, of the opinion
that even apart from
Section 140
of the MV Act, a
victim in an accident which occurred while using a
motor vehicle, is entitled to get compensation from a
Tribunal unless any one of the exceptions would
apply. The Tribunal and the High Court have,
therefore, gone into error in divesting the claimants
of the compensation payable to them.
15)     In Parmeshwari v. Amirchand  the Apex Court was 
dealing with a situation where on 22.01.2003 at about 12.00
noon the appellant therein, the claimant before the
Tribunal, respondent No.1 before the High Court, was going
from Baganwala to Tosham on a Motor Cycle (No.HR 16C-   
8379), driven by Balwan with the claimant on the pillion
seat. When the Motor Cycle was half a kilometer away from 
Baganwala, Suresh - respondent No.2 herein, came from the 
other direction in another scooter (No.HR 20-5793) from the
wrong side and hit on the right leg of the appellant, as a
result of which she fell down leading to fracture of her right
leg apart from receiving multiple injuries. It has come in
evidence of PW.2-Dr. Parveen Chawla that on 22.1.2003 the 
appellant was admitted with diagnosis of fracture of tibia.
Plating and bone grafting was done by P.W.2-Dr. Parveen
Chawla and the appellant was discharged on 6.2.2003. The 
discharge card was also proved. PW.3-Satbir Singh, deposed 
that the appellant moved a complaint in the office of SSP
Hisar on 11.3.2003 and the same was sent in original on
2.4.2003 by SSP Hisar to SSP Hanumangarh.  The other   
reason in the High Court's order was that as the claim
petition was filed after four months of the accident, the
same is "a device to grab money from the insurance
company". The Apex Court held that this finding in the
absence of any material is certainly perverse. The Court
held that the High Court appears to be not cognizant of the
principle that in a road accident claim, the strict principles
of proof in a criminal case are not attracted.
16)     In view of the judgments referred to above and the
principles laid down by the Apex Court and our High Court,
in the judgments referred to above, it is to be decided
whether the claimants have proved the involvement of the
auto in the accident?
17)     The first information report which lead to registration
of the case in Crime No.424 of 2010 of KPHB Police Station,
for an offence punishable under
Section 304-A
IPC, came to
be issued basing on an information furnished by one
Pamireddy Sudheer Reddy, against the driver of the auto.  It
is said that on 18.10.2010 at about 5.30 p.m., the
informants brother by name Ganesh Reddy while crossing 
the road on his motor bike near RTO Office, KPHB Colony, 
the driver of the auto drove the auto in a rash and negligent
manner and dashed against the bike, as a result of which he
received bleeding injuries and died on 19.10.2010.  Police
investigated into the said crime, examined about 12
witnesses and filed a charge sheet stating that at the time
of the accident, the auto rickshaw bearing No.AP 28 TB 3035
was coming from Hi-tech city road towards JNTU Cross 
Roads, driven by its driver in a rash and negligent manner
and dashed against the vehicle of the deceased.  As a result
of which he fell down on the road and went into an
unconscious condition.  It is to be noted here that the
averments in the first information report and the charge
sheet, show the involvement of the auto in the accident and
the driver of the auto was found to be driving the said
vehicle in a rash and negligent manner and it was he who hit
the vehicle driven by the deceased.
18)     The said version with regard to the involvement of the
auto and its driver driving the said vehicle in a rash and
negligent manner was also spoken to by the eye witness 
examined by the claimants herein, who was also shown as an  
eye witness in the charge sheet filed by the police.  It would
be useful to refer to the evidence of PW.2 (eye witness in
OP), which is as under:
On 18.10.2010 at about 5.30 p.m., while I was
working in Laxmi Durga Mechanic Shop, Phase-IV,  
KPHB Colony, one person by name P.Ganesh Reddy
was proceeding on motor cycle bearing No. AP 28
DD 4622 from JNTU towards Hi-tech city road,
when he reached infront of our shed at RTO Office,
suddenly one auto bearing No. AP 28 TB 3035 came   
in a rash and negligent manner in high speed and
dashed to the motorcyclist.  Due to which Mr.
P.Ganesh Reddy, sustained fatal injuries, myself
and others have gathered there and informed the
same to his relatives by his phone and they have
shifted him to NIMS Hospital and came to know that
Mr. P.Ganesh Reddy, succumbed to his injuries 
while undergoing treatment on 19.10.2010.
19)     As seen from the evidence of PW.2, on 18.10.2010 at 
about 5.30 p.m., while he was working in Laxmi Durga
Mechanic Shop, Kukatpally, one person by name P.Ganesh    
Reddy, was proceeding on motor cycle bearing No. AP 28 DD   
4622 from JNTU towards Hi-tech city and when he reached 
infront of their shed, an auto bearing No. AP 28 TB 3035,
driven by its driver in a rash and negligent manner came and
dashed the motor cyclist.  As a result of which the deceased
fell down and sustained injuries.  PW.2 informed the same
to his relatives over phone and basing on the information
furnished by the deceased, who shifted him to the hospital,
where he succumbed to injuries.  He further states that a
case was registered against the driver of the crime vehicle.
20)     PW.2 was cross-examined at length.  To a suggestion 
that he was not an eye witness to the incident and that he
was deposing falsely, was denied by him.  Though he admits 
that he did not file any documents evidencing his
employment in mechanic shed, but categorically states that
he is working as Mechanic in Laxmi Durga Mechanic Shop.  It 
has been elicited that the accident took place at a distance
of 10 mts., from the mechanic shop.  It was also elicited
that he noted down the auto number.  On seeing the
incident, himself and others rushed to the spot and for some
time the injured was conscious.  During that time, he
informed the name and requested the people gathered there
to inform his relatives through his cell phone.  He further
states that he has informed the auto number to the police,
but does not remember as to the number of persons 
travelling in the auto.  To a suggestion that the accident
occurred only due to rash and negligent act of the motor
cyclist, was denied.  From the evidence on record, it is clear
that he was not only shown as an eye witness to the incident
in the charge sheet (LW3) but was examined by the 
claimants to prove the involvement of the auto.   The only
suggestion given to disprove his presence appears to be that
he was not working in mechanic shop, as no proof was filed
to support the same.  PW.2, who was aged about 20 years,  
was working as a mechanic in a mechanic shop and to insist 
on a proof evidencing his employment as a mechanic would 
be very far fetched.
21)     The reason for disbelieving the incident appears to be
that if really PW.2 has seen the incident, he would have
definitely informed the police about the vehicle number and
the same would have found place in the first information
report, which was sent three days after the incident.  But it
is to be noted here that though there is a delay of about
three days in sending the F.I.R., to the Court, but the first
information report was given on the next day at 2.00 p.m.
The family members of the injured would have been more 
concerned with the health of the injured rather than
informing the police about the accident.  In cases of this
nature, one cannot find fault with the delay in lodging the
report, which in our view is also not abnormal.  Since the
informant, who lodged the report, is not an eye witness to
the incident and his source of information is the information
gathered from the scene, non-mentioning of the auto
number cannot be found fault.  The averments in the charge
sheet, indicate that PW.2 was examined long after lodging
of the report, ie., when they went to the scene of offence
after registering the crime.   When the answers elicited in
the cross-examination of PW.2, were to the effect that he
noted down the auto number and informed the same to the 
police, one cannot find fault with the police in tracing out
the vehicle.
22)     The argument of the learned counsel for the insurance
company is that when the evidence of PW.2 in the cross-
examination is to the effect that the auto dashed against
the motor cycle and vanished from the accident site, it
would be difficult for him to remember the auto number.  It
is urged that since the first information report is silent as to
the involvement of the auto and having regard to the fact
that the auto was not damaged, pleads that auto as a crime
vehicle was set up at a later point of time.
23)     It is to be noted that having elicited an answer from
PW.2 that the auto got vanished from the site after the
incident, there was no necessity for the counsel for the
insurance company to ask him as to whether he noted down  
the auto number.  To the question as to whether he noted
down the auto number, the witness positively states that he
has noted down the auto number and intimated the same to 
the police.  He however rightly states that he does not
remember whether the auto number was mentioned in the  
statement, since the first information report was not given
by PW.2, but the brother of the deceased, who lodged the
report basing on the information furnished by PW.2.  Even in
the charge sheet, the brother of the deceased, who lodged
the report, was not shown as an eye witness to the incident.
Only PW.2 and two others namely Md. Ishaq Ali and  
Md.Azmath were shown as an eye witnesses to the incident.  
Therefore, the presence of PW.2 at the site and he
witnessing the incident cannot be doubted.  Hence, we hold
that the evidence on record amply establish the involvement
of the auto in the accident.
24)     With regard to the finding of the Tribunal that if really
PW.2 has mentioned the number of the auto in his 161
Cr.P.C
. statement, the claimants ought to have produced
the statement in support of their case that the averments in
the charge sheet do not refer to examination of PW.2 as
LW.3 in the charge sheet, on the date of accident or on any
other day shortly muchless before 04.11.2010 on which date
the driver of the auto was arrested, it is to be noted that
these findings on the face of it are incorrect.  Firstly, if the
version of PW.2 with regard to he noting down the vehicle
number and informing the same to the police is doubted,
nothing prevented the insurance company to confront PW.2 
with his earlier statement.  The insurance company could
have obtained a copy of the statement and confront the
version therein to PW2.  On the other hand, their own
counsel in the cross-examination of PW.2, elicited answers
which establish the case of the claimants with regard to
involvement of the auto No.AP 28 TB 3035.  Having elicited
the answers, one cannot now go back and doubt the version 
of PW.2.  Further, as held by us earlier, Ex.A1 was not given
by PW.2.  So, non-mentioning of the auto number in the first
information report in our view cannot be given much weight
to doubt the case of the claimants, more so, when the
claimants have to prove their case on the touchstone of
preponderance of probabilities.
25)     The comment with regard to non-examination of PW.2  
immediately after the accident, the averments in page No.2
of the charge sheet, would show that after handing over the
dead body of the deceased for completing the final rites
under proper acknowledgment, LW.11 along with LWs.7 and   
8 proceeded to the scene of offence, inspected it minutely,
examined LWs.3 to 5 (PW.2 and others), recorded their 
statements in detail and incorporated the same in the case
diary.  The charge sheet further shows that after recording
the statement of the witnesses, the accused was arrested on
04.11.2010.  Therefore, the finding that the arrest of the
accused and recording of the statement happened 
simultaneously appears to be incorrect.
26)     Insofar as the comment with regard to crime vehicle
having no damage marks, it is to be noted that the incident
in question took place on 18.10.2010, the accused was
arrested on 04.11.2010 and thereafter the vehicle was
seized from the owner on 16.11.2010.  Firstly, when the
version of PW.2 and the averments in the charge sheet show
that after causing the accident, the vehicle left the scene,
later one cannot assume the nature of damage done. 
Secondly, nearly a month later the vehicle came to be
seized, by which time the possibility of damage, if any,
caused to the vehicle getting repaired/rectified cannot be
ruled out, more so when the driver is not the owner of the
vehicle.
27)     Therefore, the finding of the Tribunal expressing a
doubt about the involvement of the vehicle as it is not
having any body dents on the auto at the time of its
examination by the M.V.I., cannot be given importance to
throw out the claimants case.  It is no doubt true that in
the charge sheet there is a sentence stating that the auto
rickshaw got rolled over on the road.  Even assuming that it
is correct, but the averments in the very same charge sheet
show that the vehicle left the scene of offence after hitting
the deceased.  Therefore, this inconsistency, if any, cannot
be magnified to say that once the vehicle got rolled over,
the damages would be more, which would be evident even  
on the date of seizure.  If really the damage was such, then
it could not have left the scene after the accident.
Therefore, in our view this discrepancy cannot be given
much importance as the averments in the charge sheet 
explain the same.  Further, there was sufficient time for the
owner of the auto, to get the body dents repaired.
28)     Coming to the averments made in the counter filed in
the O.P., some inconsistent pleas are taken.  Though in para
No.7, the insurance company pleads about the contributory
negligence of the rider of the motorcycle but in para No.9
an alternate plea was taken with regard to involvement of
the auto and the driver of the auto not having a valid driving
licence.  But in view of the above findings, it may not be
necessary for us to go into the said aspect.
29)     Coming to the quantum of compensation as against the 
claim of Rs.36,00,000/-, it is to be noticed though the
Tribunal has rightly fixed the  net salary of the deceased at
Rs.20,040/- after deducting transport allowance and dress
allowance, but added only 30% of the future prospects.
In
view of the judgment of the Apex Court in
National
Insurance Co. Ltd., vs. Pranaysethi and others
,  40% to
the income of the deceased has to be added for calculating
loss of earning towards future prospects, when there is fixed
income and the age of the deceased being below 40 years. 
Admittedly the deceased was having fixed income and he 
was aged about 33 years at the time of accident.  Therefore,
taking the income of the deceased at Rs.20,040/-, as fixed
by the trial Court and if 40% of the income is added to the
actual income of the deceased towards future prospects, the
total income of the deceased would be Rs.20,040/- +
Rs.8,016/- = Rs.28,056/- per month.  After deducting 30%
towards income tax, the income would be Rs.19,639/-.
In
view of the judgment of the Apex Court in
Sarla Verma v.
Delhi Transport Corporation
, the Tribunal rightly applied
multiplier 16 which needs no interference.  After
deducting 1/4th amount towards his personal and living
expenses, the contribution of the deceased would be
Rs.14,729/- per month.  Applying multiplier 16, the total
loss of dependency would be Rs.14,729/- x 12 x 16 =
28,27,968/-.
Apart from that the claimants also entitled
Rs.70,000/- under conventional heads as per the judgment
in
Pranay Sethi
case (8 supra).   Thus in all the claimants are
entitled to Rs.28,97,968/- as compensation.
30)     For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is allowed
enhancing the compensation from Rs.26,45,984/- to 
Rs.28,97,968/- together with interest at 6% p.a. from the
date of petition till the date of realization, payable by
respondents 1 and 2 jointly and severally.   There shall be no
order as to costs.  Miscellaneous petitions pending in this
appeal, if any, shall stand closed.
____________________   
C.PRAVEEN KUMAR, J      
____________  
T. RAJANI, J
07.09.2018