[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. V.Kavitha Reddy And Two Others vs V.Aditya Reddy And Another on 29 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 173, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 644, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 69
Author:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
Bench:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO            

C.R.P.No.1698 of 2018 

29-08-2018 

Smt. V.Kavitha Reddy and two others.Petitioners    

V.Aditya Reddy and another.Respondents     


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

!Counsel for the applicant: Sri Rajagopalan

Counsel for the 1st respondent :     Sri O.Uday Kumar

?Cases referred

  (2010) 10 S.C.C. 512
2 (2005) 2 S.C.C. 217
3 (1999) 3 S.C.C. 573
4 (2007) 12 S.C.C. 27
5 (2011) 12 S.C.C. 18



HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO           
C.R.P.No.1698 of 2018 
ORDER:
This Civil Revision Petition is filed assailing order
dt.16-02-2018 in I.A.No.29 of 2018 in O.S.No.06 of 2009 of the
I Additional District Judge, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh.
2.  The petitioners herein are defendant Nos.1 to 5 in the
above suit.
3.  The suit was filed by 1st respondent/plaintiff for partition
of the plaint schedule properties into 64 equal shares, for allotting
15/64th share to him, and to put him in separate possession thereof and
also to direct the petitioners to pay to him a sum of Rs.93,000/- per
month towards share of rents from the date of suit till the date of
delivery of his share to him.
4.  The 1st respondent/plaintiff  is a minor. He is represented
by his mother P.Lavanya Reddy. The 1st respondents case is that the
plaint A to D schedule properties are the joint family properties of the
1st respondent/plaintiff, the 1st defendant and late V.Raghunatha
Reddy.
5.   The 2nd petitioner late V.Ravindranath Reddy is the 1st
respondents father, and he was D-1 in the suit.    The 3rd petitioner is
D-2 and she is the mother of D-1 and is the paternal grandmother of
1st respondent.  The petitioners 1 and 4 are the daughters of 3rd
petitioner/D2.  Husband of 3rd petitioner/D-2 by name V. Raghunatha
Reddy died on 07-12-2003. The 5th Petitioner/D-5 is purchaser of A
schedule property on 15-02-2008.
6.  There were four schedules mentioned in the plaint i.e
A to D schedules.
7.  The 1st petitioner filed Written Statement in the suit
which was adopted by petitioners 2 to 4.
8.  It is the defence of the petitioners to the claim for
partition that there was a divorce between the 1st defendant and the
mother of 1st respondent/plaintiff.  It is further contended that A-D
schedule properties are all self acquired and separate properties of
V.Raghunath Reddy, the husband of 3rd petitioner/D-2 and
Smt. Rangamma, the mother of the said V. Raghunath Reddy; that  
there was a suit O.S.No.226 of 1971 filed by certain third parties
against V.Raghunatha Reddy, his mother Smt. Rangamma and the 3rd    
petitioner, in which there was a finding recorded that the properties
mentioned in schedules A to D in the instant suit are absolute
properties of V.Raghunatha Reddy and the 3rd petitioner.  It is
therefore contended that the decree dt.04-12-1980 in O.S.No.226 of
1971 having declared that the subject properties belong to
V.Raghunatha Reddy and the 3rd petitioner, the 1st respondent/plaintiff
is not entitled to any relief.
9.  Thereafter, issues were framed and evidence on the side
of the 1st respondent/plainitff was completed.
10. On the side of the petitioners/defendants, the 5th
petitioner/D5 was examined as D.W.1 and the 4th petitioner/D-3 was
examined as D.W.2. Thereafter, the matter was posted for further
evidence of petitioners.
11.   On 22-01-2018, the 1st petitioner/D-4 filed I.A.No.29 of
2018 stating that her mother the 3rd petitioner/D-2 is aged 76 years;
that she was suffering from diabetes mellitus, hypertension and also
transient ischaemic attack and coronary heart disease; that she is also
suffering from senile dementia and has severe arthritis; that she has
restricted mobility and is unable to walk which is certified by medical
certificate dt.07-11-2017 by Dr.A.Latha, Civil Assistant Surgeon,
District Head Quarter Hospital, Chittoor; and therefore the 1st
petitioner may be permitted to adduce evidence on her own behalf and
also on behalf of the 3rd petitioner/D-2.
12. Another I.A.No.22 of 2018 was filed under Order 8 Rule
1 (a) (3)
CPC
to receive certain documents.  I.A.No.22 of 2018 was
allowed by the Court below on 16-02-2018.
13. Coming to I.A.No.29 of 2018, an objection was taken on
behalf of 1st respondent to the authority of the Court to exempt a
party( the 3rd petitioner/D-2) to a suit from entering into a witness box
or not examining her in proceeding and permitting other defendants to
the suit to adduce evidence on her behalf.
14. On 16-02-2018 by a separate order, I.A.No.29 of 2018
was rejected by the Court below upholding the objection raised by 1st
respondent/plaintiff.
THE ORDER DT. 16-02-2018 IN I.A.No.29 of 2018
15. In the said order, the Court below stated that 1st
petitioner/D-4 is entitled to depose on her behalf and also on behalf of
her mother about the facts of the case which are within her
knowledge, but the 3rd petitioner/D-2, who is ill, needs to depose to
facts which are within her knowledge in order to prove her case;  in
view of the Medical Certificate about her restricted mobility and
inability to walk since 2015, she should have better legal advice and
should invoke provisions of law in order to place oral and
documentary evidence which are required to prove her contention.
16. The Court below further expressed an opinion that 1st
respondent/plaintiff has a right to ask the Court to draw an adverse
inference if the 3rd petitioner/D-2 did not choose to enter the witness
box and such right cannot be restricted by the Court.  It opined that if
a defendant, who is contesting the suit and filed Written Statement,
did not prove his version according to law, the plaintiff is entitled to
have adverse inference drawn.  It further held that the 1st petitioner/
D-4 has no right to seek grant to her of leave to adduce evidence on
behalf of 3rd petitioner/D-2.
17. Assailing the same, this Revision Petition is filed by
petitioners.
18. Heard Sri S.Rajagopalan, the learned counsel for the
petitioners and Sri O.Uday Kumar, learned counsel for the 1st
respondent.
CONTENTIONS OF COUNSEL FOR PETITIONERS
19. Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the
law does not require all defendants to be examined and even one
defendant or a witness who is well informed can give evidence,
particularly, when the other defendant is infirm and sick and that only
when a party has to establish something  with reference to state of
mind, he is required to give evidence himself.  He contended that
when all the documents on basis of which title is claimed are
registered documents and there are also Court decrees such as
O.S.No.226 of 1971, the 1st petitioner, being one of the biological
daughters of 3rd petitioner/D-2 and who is conversant and having
knowledge of the circumstances, is competent to give evidence on
behalf of 3rd petitioner/D-2 who is sick and unable to give evidence.
He contended that in these circumstances, there is no question of
drawing adverse inference against 3rd petitioner/D-2.  He relied on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Man Kaur (Dead) by LRs. Vs.  
Hartar Singh Sangha  and contended that the Supreme Court itself
recognized the son or daughter managing affairs of an old and infirm
parents to give evidence on their behalf.
CONTENTIONS OF COUNSEL FOR 1ST RESPONDENT
20. Sri O.Uday Kumar, learned counsel, appearing for 1st
respondent/plaintiff, however refuted the above contentions and
supported the order passed by the Court below.
THE CONSIDERATION BY THE COURT
21. From the facts stated above, it is clear that the 1st
petitioner/D-4 and 4th petitioner/D-3 are the daughters of the 3rd
petitioner/D-2 and V.Raghunatha Reddy and the 1st respondent is the
minor son of the deceased 1st defendant, who was the son of 3rd
petitioner and V.Raghunatha Reddy.
22.  The 1st respondents case is that the plaint A to D
schedule properties are the joint family properties of the 1st
respondent/plaintiff, the 1st defendant and late V.Raghunatha Reddy.
23. The petitioners/Defendants are opposing the same stating
that the plaint schedule properties are self acquired properties of
V.Raghunatha Reddy and his mother Rangamma and that in    
O.S.No.26 of 1971, there is a finding recorded that the properties are
the self acquired properties of V.Raghunatha Reddy and the 3rd
petitioner since Rangamma died pending the suit; and in view of the
said defence, the 1st respondent/plaintiff is not entitled to the relief of
partition. It is the case of the petitioners that the title claim of late
V.Raghunatha Reddy and his mother Rangamma is established by    
registered title deeds and also by the decision in O.S.No.26 of 1971.
24.   The fact that the 3rd petitioner/D-2 is unwell is
evidenced by medical certificate dt.07-11-2017 produced by the
petitioners before the Court below and is sufficient to show that the 3rd
petitioner/D-2 would not be in a position to come to Court and give
evidence in support of the stand taken by her in the suit. The Court
below also did not disagree with the said plea.
25. In these circumstances, the question is whether the 1st
petitioner/D-4 can be permitted to adduce evidence on behalf of the
3rd petitioner/D-2, her sick and infirm mother, or not and whether the
Court below is entitled to draw an adverse inference because the 3rd
petitioner/D-2 did not enter the witness box.
26.
Section 118
of the Indian Evidence Act,1872 states that
all persons shall be competent to testify unless the Courts considers
that they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them
or from giving rational answers to those questions by tender years,
extreme old age, disease, whether of body and mind, or any other
cause of the same kind.  Thus all persons are competent to testify, if
they did not fall under the category mentioned in
Section 118
. Judged
by this, the 1st petitioner is competent to testify.
27.
Order III Rule 2 CPC
recognizes certain agents through
whom parties may act and it include a person holding a power of
attorney.
28. As regards power of attorney holders, the Supreme Court
considered their capacity to give evidence in relation to the principal
who appointed them as their agent in
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani and 
others Vs. Indusind Bank Limited and others
.
29.
In
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani and others
(2 supra), the
Supreme Court held that if the power of attorney holder has rendered
some acts in pursuance of power of attorney, he may depose for the
principal in respect of such acts, but he cannot depose for the
principal for the acts done by the principal and not by him.  It also
held that the power of attorney holder cannot depose for the principal
in respect of matters which only the principal can have a personal
knowledge and in respect of which the principal is entitled to be cross
examined.
30. In Man Kaur (Dead) by LRs. (1 supra), this decision
was followed and further explained. Similar issued had arisen out of a
suit for specific performance of contract. The Supreme Court summed
up the principles in paras 11 and 12 as under:
11. To succeed in a suit for specific performance, the
plaintiff has to prove: (a) that a valid agreement of sale was
entered by the defendant in his favour and the terms thereof;
(b) that the defendant committed breach of the contract; and
(c) that he was always ready and willing to perform his part of
the obligations in terms of the contract.
If a plaintiff has to prove that he was always ready and
willing to perform his part of the contract, that is, to perform
his obligations in terms of the contract, necessarily he should
step into the witness box and give evidence that he has all
along been ready and willing to perform his part of the
contract and subject himself to cross examination on that issue.
A plaintiff cannot obviously examine in his place, his attorney
holder who did not have personal knowledge either of the
transaction or of his readiness and willingness. Readiness and
willingness refer to the state of mind and conduct of the
purchaser, as also his capacity and preparedness on the other.
One without the other is not sufficient. Therefore a third party
who has no personal knowledge cannot give evidence about 
such readiness and willingness, even if he is an attorney holder
of the person concerned.
12. We may now summarise for convenience, the position
as to who should give evidence in regard to matters involving
personal knowledge:
(a) An attorney holder who has signed the plaint and
instituted the suit, but has no personal knowledge of the
transaction can only give formal evidence about the validity of
the power of attorney and the filing of the suit.
(b) If the attorney holder has done any act or handled
any transactions, in pursuance of the power of attorney
granted by the principal, he may be examined as a witness to
prove those acts or transactions. If the attorney holder alone
has personal knowledge of such acts and transactions and not
the principal, the attorney holder shall be examined, if those
acts and transactions have to be proved.
(c) The attorney holder cannot depose or give evidence in
place of his principal for the acts done by the principal or
transactions or dealings of the principal, of which principal
alone has personal knowledge.
(d) Where the principal at no point of time had
personally handled or dealt with or participated in the
transaction and has no personal knowledge of the transaction,
and where the entire transaction has been handled by an
attorney holder, necessarily the attorney holder alone can give
evidence in regard to the transaction. This frequently happens
in case of principals carrying on business through authorized
managers/attorney holders or persons residing abroad
managing their affairs through their attorney holders.
(e) Where the entire transaction has been conducted
through a particular attorney holder, the principal has to
examine that attorney holder to prove the transaction, and not
a different or subsequent attorney holder.
(f) Where different attorney holders had dealt with the
matter at different stages of the transaction, if evidence has to
be led as to what transpired at those different stages, all the
attorney holders will have to be examined.
(g) Where the law requires or contemplated the plaintiff
or other party to a proceeding, to establish or prove something
with reference to his 'state of mind' or 'conduct', normally the
person concerned alone has to give evidence and not an
attorney holder. A landlord who seeks eviction of his tenant, on
the ground of his 'bona fide' need and a purchaser seeking
specific performance who has to show his 'readiness and
willingness' fall under this category. There is however a
recognized exception to this requirement. Where all the affairs
of a party are completely managed, transacted and looked
after by an attorney (who may happen to be a close family
member), it may be possible to accept the evidence of such
attorney even with reference to bona fides or 'readiness and
willingness'. Examples of such attorney holders are a
husband/wife exclusively managing the affairs of his/her
spouse, a son/daughter exclusively managing the affairs of
an old and infirm parent, a father/mother exclusively
managing the affairs of a son/daughter living
abroad.(emphasis supplied)
31. Thus, in
the above decision
, the Court clarified that
where the law requires or contemplates that the plaintiff or other party
to proceed has to establish or prove something with reference to his
state of mind or conduct, normally, the person concerned alone has to
give evidence and not an attorney holder.
32. But it recognized a situation where all the affairs of a
party are completely managed, transacted and looked after by an
attorney (who may happen to be a close family member), and held 
that in such an event it may be possible to accept the evidence of such
attorney even with reference to bona fides or readiness and
willingness.  It gave illustrations of such powers of attorney holders
who are husband/wife, who are exclusively managing affairs or his or
her spouse, a son/daughter exclusively managing the affairs or old
and infirm parent and mother exclusively managing the affairs of a
son/daughter living abroad.
33. Therefore, it is clear that the law recognizes that even
children who are exclusively managing affairs of their old and infirm
parents can give evidence on their behalf even with regard to their
principals state of mind or conduct such as regarding bona fides or
readiness and willingness.
34. No doubt there is also a principle of law as
laid down in
Vidhyadhar Vs. Manikrao and others
that if a party to a  suit does
not appear in the suit and state his own case on oath and does not offer
himself to be cross examined by the other side, a presumption would
arise that the case set up by him was not correct.
35. But the said principle
laid down in
Vidhyadhar
(3 supra)
has no application in the case of exceptions mentioned in the
Janki
Vashdeo Bhojwani and others
(2 supra).
36. It may be in the instant case, the 3rd petitioner/ D-2 has
not given a power of attorney to the 1st petitioner/D-4. But being the
biological daughter of the 3rd petitioner /D-2, she would naturally be
aware of the details of acquisition of title of her mother/D-2, when the
same is more importantly reflected in registered documents/ Court
orders.
37. In my view, where title to property is in issue, and is
based on registered documents and Civil Court decrees as in the
instant case, there is nothing wrong, if on behalf of an aged and infirm
parent like the 3rd petitioner/D-2, her biological daughter, the 1st
petitioner/D-4, gives evidence.
38.  It is not as if proof of title is akin to a state of mind or a
conduct which is only in the personal knowledge of the title holder
and cannot therefore be spoken to by others knowing of it. So it
cannot be said that unless such title holder deposes, the factum of title
does not get proved.
39. Further, in law, the non-examination of the title holder
cannot confer title on the person disputing his/her title by way of
acquiescence, estoppel or silence.
40. As held in
Kamakshi Builders Vs. Ambedkar  
Educational Society and others
, where title to property is in issue,
the finding as to who has got title is an inference of law, arising out of
certain set of facts. The Supreme Court held that if in law, a person
does not acquire title, the same cannot be vested only by reason of
acquiescence or estoppel on the part of the other.  It held that the title
cannot be vested because a witness or a party is not examined.
41. This principle applies on all fours to the instant case.
42. It cannot also be disputed that there is no mandatory rule
that all defendants ought to depose in a suit.
In
Saradamani
Kandappan and others Vs.  S.Rajalakshmi and others
, the 
Supreme Court held that where the entire transaction was done on
behalf of defendant Nos.1, 2 and 3 for the other defendants, it was not
unnecessary for the other defendants to be examined as witnesses and 
duplicate the evidence.
43. In this view of the matter, I am of the view that the Court
below acted perversely in not permitting the 1st petitioner to depose on
behalf of 3rd petitioner/D-2 after having accepted the illness of the 3rd
petitioner/D-2. It could not have held that D-2 should depose or else
adverse inference can be drawn for the benefit of the 1st
respondent/plaintiff.  It would be a travesty of justice to take such a
view in the facts and circumstances of the case.
44. Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is allowed; the
order dt.16-02-2018 in I.A.No.29 of 2018 in O.S.No.6 of 2009 of the I
Additional District Judge, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh,  is set aside; the
said I.A.No.29 of 2018 is allowed; it is further directed that no
adverse inference shall be drawn by the Court below on the ground of
non-examination of 3rd petitioner/D-2 in the suit.  No costs.
45. As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions pending, if any,
shall stand closed.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO         
Date:  29-08-2018