[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. Bhaskara Wines I vs The State Of A.P. Rep., By Its Principal ... on 13 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 122
Author:
M. Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M. Seetharama Murti
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

Writ Petition No.22851 of 2018

13.08.2018 

M/s. Bhaskara Wines I   . Petitioner

The State of A.P. rep., by its Principal Secretary, Revenue Department (Excise), Secretariat, Velagapudi, Guntur District &

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri K. Venugopal Reddy

Counsel for the Respondents  1 to 4 : Government Pleader for Proh.& Excise
Counsel for the respondent no.5 : Sri N. Siva Reddy

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.1996(1) ALD 476 (DB) 
2.2003 (4) ALD 519 
3.2008(1) ALD 138 
4.AIR 2008 SC 2594  
5.2007(3) ALD 128 (DB) 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           
Writ Petition No.22851 of 2018
ORDER:
This writ petition, under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, is filed
by the petitioner requesting to issue a writ of mandamus declaring the action of
the 2nd respondent in permitting the shifting of the 5th respondent A-4 shop vide
proceedings, dated 25.06.2018, in C.R.No.210/2018/CPE/F2, without issuing 
notice to the petitioner and without properly considering the objections of the
petitioner despite the directions, dated 23.04.2018, given by this Court in
IA.No.1 of 2018 in WP.No.14266 of 2018, as arbitrary, illegal, unjust and
contrary to the provisions of
A.P. Excise Act, 1968
.  A consequential direction
not to permit the 5th respondent Shop to conduct operations in the new
premises near the petitioner-A4 shop is also sought.
2.      I have heard the submissions of Sri K. Venugopal Reddy, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioner, of the learned Government Pleader for
Prohibition & Excise appearing for the respondents 1 to 4; and, of Sri N. Siva
Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the 5th respondent.  I have perused the
material record.
3.      From the facts pleaded, submissions made and contents of the material
documents placed on record, the following basic facts are discernable:  The
petitioner shop was granted licence in Form A4 under the provisions of the
A.P. Excise (Grant of Licence of selling by shop and conditions of licence)
Rules, 2012 [hereinafter the Rules, for short] vide licence bearing no.12/2017-
19 for the period from 01.07.2017 to 30.06.2019.  And, the petitioner A4 shop
is being run under the name and style of M/s.Bhaskara Wines I at the
premises bearing door no.4/56-13, Old Bus Stand, Kadapa, YSR Kadapa   
District.  The 5th respondent A-4 shop was granted licence for carrying on
business in Door no.1/443-2, Kotireddy Circle, YSR Kadapa District.  While
so, an application was made by the licencee of the 5th respondent A4 shop for
shifting the said shop from the said premises to the premises bearing door
no.4/505, Old Bus Stand, Kadapa, on the ground that the owner of the
premises, where the shop is presently existing, wanted to demolish the building,
which is in dilapidated condition, and that she is compelling the licencee of the
5th respondent shop to vacate the building.  The Deputy Commissioner of
Prohibtion  & Excise/the 3rd respondent recommended for such shifting.
While so, the licence holder of the petitioner-A4 shop submitted objections for
the proposed shifting.  The petitioner also filed WP.No.1398 of 2018.  This
Court, by order, dated 19.01.2018, directed the Commissioner of Prohibition &
Excise, that is, the 2nd respondent to consider the objections of the petitioner
and pass orders.  Accordingly, the request for proposed shifting of 5th
respondent shop was examined in the light of the objections filed by the
petitioner; and, the request of the 5th respondent was rejected vide rejection
orders, dated 23.02.2018, in C.R.No.210/2018/CPE/F2 on the ground that 
there are no compelling and valid reasons for considering the request for
shifting of the 5th respondent shop from the existing premises to the proposed
premises.  Later, the licencee of the 5th respondent shop filed another
application requesting for permission to shift the 5th respondent shop to a new
premises situated in the building bearing door no.4/498-14 & 15.  When the
said application of the 5th respondent is pending consideration before the
authority concerned, the licence holder of the petitioner shop filed
WP.No.14266 of 2018.  This Court, by an interim order, dated 23.04.2018,
directed the Commissioner to consider the objections of the writ petitioner
before passing any orders on the application in respect of the request for
shifting of the 5th respondent shop.  The 2nd respondent, having considered the
application and also the objections, passed the impugned orders according
permission for shifting of the 5th respondent shop from its existing premises to
the afore-stated new premises.  Aggrieved thereof, the petitioner filed the
present writ petition.
4.      On 05.07.2018, this Court, while admitting the writ petition, granted
interim suspension as prayed for in IA.No.1 of 2018.
5.      Seeking vacation of the said interim suspension order, respondents 1 to
4 filed IA.No.3 of 2018; and, the 5th respondent filed IA.No.2 of 2018.
Nonetheless, learned counsel for both the sides requested to dispose of the writ
petition instead of the vacate petition.
6.      It is pertinent to note that one of the contentions of the 5th respondent is
that the 5th respondent lodged a caveat and the same was duly registered by the
Registry of the Court, on 03.07.2018, but, without prior notice to the counsel
for the caveator  5th respondent, the afore-stated interim order was granted for
the reason that the name of the counsel for the caveator is not printed in the
cause list and further, as the name of the District was also wrongly shown as
Guntur in the cause list.  Be that as it may.
7.      In the above stated backdrop, the question to be examined is  whether
the impugned order of the 2nd respondent granting permission for shifting of
the 5th respondent A4 shop is valid and is sustainable under facts and
circumstances of the case?
7.1     I shall now deal with the contentions of the petitioner in seriatim and
examine whether all or any of the contentions of the petitioner merit
consideration.
8.       The first set of contentions of the petitioner are as under: -
After rejection of the first request for grant of permission for shifting of
the 5th respondent shop from the existing premises to another premises, the
licencee of the 5th respondent shop having filed another application before the
2nd respondent brought political pressure upon the 2nd respondent.  The
licencee of the 5th respondent shop relied upon false averments and placed fake
material before the 2nd respondent, in collusion with the Prohibition & Excise
Superintendent, Excise Unit, that is, the 4th respondent.  The licencee of the 5th
respondent shop relied upon fraudulent documents obtained from the
municipal corporation to falsely show that the building is in dilapidated
condition.  The licencee of the 5th respondent shop misrepresented that the
landlady/owner of the building made an application for removal of the building
on the ground that it is in a dilapidated condition and that she requested him to
vacate the premises in which the 5th respondent shop is being run.  In-fact, the
said owner of the building wrote a letter to the 2nd respondent stating that she
never requested the licencee of the 5th respondent shop to vacate her building
and that her building is not in a dilapidated condition and that she never paid
any amount by way of challan to the municipal authority requesting for
demolition of the above building and that the building is in good condition.
The copy of the affidavit said to be of the said owner of the said building is
also filed along with the writ petition.  Thus, the 4th and 5th respondents
collusively created false documents to support the request for proposed shifting
of the 5th respondent shop.
8.1     Per contra, the case of the 5th respondent, in brief, is this: - The
allegations made against respondents 4 & 5 are all false.  The allegations that
the licencee of the 5th respondent shop brought political pressure upon the 2nd
respondent and colluded with the 4th respondent and misrepresented the facts
and relied upon fraudulent documents etcetera are all false.  Pursuant to the
impugned orders of the 2nd respondent and the revised licence issued by the 4th
respondent, the 5th respondent shop has already been shifted, on 29.06.2018
itself, to the new premises and the licence holder of the 5th respondent shop is
continuing the business in the new premises.  The allegations that the owner of
the house did not make payment vide challan for demolition/removal of the
building and that the building is in good condition are all false.  In-fact, the
application was made by this respondent to the 2nd respondent requesting to
permit shifting of the 5th respondent shop by duly enclosing the notice issued
by the owner of the building and the connected certificates.  The landlady
supported the case of the licencee of the 5th respondent shop by making a
categorical statement at the time of enquiry made by the authority concerned
pursuant to the application and the objections raised by the licence holder of
the petitioner A4 shop.
8.2     Dealing with this first aspect, it is to be reiterated that the petitioner
contends that the landlady,  who is the owner of the premises in which the 5th
respondent A4 shop is originally situated has never demanded the licence
holder of the 5th respondent shop to vacate her building on the ground that it is
in a dilapidated condition and that on the other hand, she submitted to the
authority concerned that her building is in good condition and that she never
paid an amount of Rs.3,000/- vide challan no.1013/CH/1140/17, on
22.06.2017 to the Municipal Corporation, Kadapa, seeking permission for
demolition of the above said building and that she is not interested in
demolition of the said building and that, therefore, the documents being relied
upon by the 5th respondent are fraudulent.  In-fact, the petitioner also filed self
declaration affidavit said to be of the said landlady by name G.L. Vedavathi
along with the material papers.  He specifically contends that the building in
question is ten years old.  On the contrary, the request for grant of permission
for shifting 5th respondent shop is based on the submissions that the building in
which the licence holder of the 5th respondent shop is running the business is
about 39 years old and that it is in a dilapidated condition and that the landlady
is compelling him to vacate the property.  The 5th respondent relies upon the
statement of the landlady to substantiate its stand.  The 5th respondent also
produced the building owners/landladys sale deed, dated 12.08.2010, related
to the subject premises in support of the contention that the building is 39
years old; and, it is particularly pointed out that in the Annexure 1A of the said
document the age of the said building was mentioned as 31 years by the year
2010.
8.3     Now the short question is  which of the two versions is true?
8.4     It is apt to now examine the submissions of the official respondents
which are as under: - The owner of the building in which the 5th respondent
A4 shop is situated obtained structural stability or soundness certificate, dated
07.03.2018, from Municipal Corporations Licensed Structural Engineer
wherein it was stated that the existing building is 39 years old and is not fit for
commercial usage and that it is not structurally safe.  The licence holder of the
5th respondent shop received notice, on 01.04.2018, from the owner of the
premises to vacate the building so as to facilitate demolition of the building,
which is in dilapidated condition.  The building owner paid Rs.3,000/- vide
challan no.1013/CH/1140/2017, dated 22.06.2017, for permission to demolish
the building and for reconstruction.  During enquiry, the Prohibition & Excise
Superintendent, Kadapa, consulted the building owner and enquired with her.
The said owner, G.L. Vedavathi, reiterated that she has requested the licence
holder of the 5th respondent A4 shop to vacate her building so that the building
can be renovated.  She gave written statement, on 19.07.2018, before the Joint
Commissioner (Distilleries), Office of the Commissioner of Prohibition &
Excise, Vijayawada, stating that she has given building bearing door no.1/443-
2, Kotireddy Circle, Kadapa, on rent to the licencee of the 5th respondent A4
shop, C.V. Srinath Reddy, and that her building is in dilapidated condition and
that, on 01.04.2018, she gave notice to the licence holder of the 5th respondent
A4 shop to vacate the building and that in the meantime an unknown person
has given representation to the Commissioner, Prohibition & Excise, with her
forged signature, on 14.04.2018, stating that she did not give any notice to the
licencee of the 5th respondent A4 shop and that she does not know about the
representation, dated 14.04.2018, said to have been given to the Commissioner,
Prohibition & Excise with her forged signature and that she has given notice to
the licencee of the 5th respondent A4 shop stating that the building is in
dilapidated condition and that except that notice she did not give any notice or
affidavit or any representation to anybody contrary to the notice given to the
licencee of the 5th respondent A4 shop.  To her affidavit, she enclosed the
structural stability/soundness certificate issued by the Municipal Corporation
Licensed Structural Engineer and demand note (challan/memo), dated 
22.06.2017, for permission to demolish and reconstruct the building.
Therefore, the contentions of the licence holder of the petitioner shop that the
licence holder of the 5th respondent shop in collusion with the 4th respondent
made false representations and submitted fraudulent documents without the
knowledge of the building owner are not correct.
8.5     Thus, before the authorities concerned, the landlady/owner of the
building in which the 5th respondent A4 shop is situate reiterated her true
version and affirmed her version that her building is in dilapidated condition
and that she paid the amount by way of challan to the municipality and that she
requested the licencee of the 5th respondent A4 shop to vacate her premises
and that the documents to the contra are not given by her and that the same are
forged by some unknown person.  She confirmed her said version in writing
before the competent officer.  Thus, it is sufficiently established that the
impugned orders were passed after examining the reports of field officers; on
securing sufficient proof that the existing premises of the 5th respondent A4
shop is in a dilapidated condition and after its said condition as affirmed by the
building owner was certified by the field officer.  A plain consideration of the
said aspect of the matter supported by documents lays bare that the
contentions of the writ petitioner are untenable, devoid of merit and need no
countenance.
9.      The next set of contentions of the petitioner are as under:  Vide
Gazette No.1260, the R.D.O., Kadapa, issued notification, on 14.03.2014, for
acquiring the proposed premises and other structures in the locality for road
widening for construction of high level bridge to old Bus stand area, Kadapa.
Some structures acquired are already demolished.  Further demolitions of
acquired structures were stopped due to stay order obtained by some of the
aggrieved property owners, whose properties are subject matter of acquisition.
Therefore, the premises proposed for shifting of the 5th respondent shop is the
subject matter of acquisition and is liable for demolition.  Hence, the
permission for shifting granted to the licence holder of the 5th respondent shop
is not valid.  The contentions of the licence holder of the 5th respondent shop,
in reply, are as under:  The proposed building, bearing door no.4/498/14 &
4/498/15, in old bus stand area of Kadapa is below the Buggavanka high level
bridge, that is, on the service road to Ravindra Nagar at Old Bus stand area,
Kadapa.  Further, the bridge was inaugurated by the Minister concerned, on
15.08.2016, and the bridge is being used by the commuters and, therefore, a
request was made for grant of permission for shifting of the 5th respondent A4
shop to the afore-stated building bearing D.No.4/498-14 & 4/498-15 as the
said building was not affected in the acquisition proceedings. The licence
holder of the 5th respondent shop also produced Form I notice calling for
claims for settlement through negotiations committee related to the acquisition
proceedings and also photographs of the bridge to show that the bridge is
inaugurated and is under use and that the proposed building into which the 5th
respondent A4 shop is already shifted is not affected by the said acquisition and
that the grant of permission for shifting, which was granted after due
consideration of the matter, is valid.  The official respondents in the counter
affidavit filed in the matter endorse the said contentions of the licence holder
of the 5th respondent.  Hence, on the above analysis of the matter and taking
into consideration the factual position asserted and prima facie established by the
5th respondent and the official respondents, this Court finds that the
contentions of the writ petitioner are untenable and are devoid of merit.
10.     The next contention of the licence holder of the petitioner A4 shop is
that if the 5th respondent shop is permitted to be shifted to the new proposed
premises, which is in the same area of his shop, it would affect his business
adversely and that he is likely to suffer loss in his business.   The respondents
contentions are that it is not for the rival contender to prevent the grant of
licence or shifting of shop of another licence holder on the ground that the
rival contender would suffer business loss in case of such shifting and that the
petitioner is having vested interest and not any genuine concern.    It is also
urged that the objections of the licence holder of the rival A4 shop are not
tenable for the reason that he, being a rival businessman/competitor, has no
locus standi in the light of the ratio in the decision of the Supreme Court in
The
Nagar Rice and Flour Mills and others v. N.Teekappa Gowda and Bros
. 
& others [AIR 1971 SC 246].  In
the said decision
, the facts reflect that when a
competitor in business sought to prevent change of location of another rice
mill, the Supreme Court held that a competitor in the business cannot seek to
prevent the owner of the other rice mill from exercising their right to carry on
business as the right to carry on business is a fundamental right guaranteed
under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution and such exercise of right is subject
only to restrictions imposed by law in the interests of general public under
Article 19(6)(i)
of the Constitution of India.
In support of the same
proposition, reliance was also placed upon the following decisions of this
Court: (
i) Rajappa Kawati v. G.Hanumantha Rao & Ors.
(ii) Ramya
Wines v. Government of AP and others ; and, (iii) Venkata Ramana
Agencies, HPCL Dealers, Kakinada v. District Collector, East Godavari,
Kakinada and others .
In
Rajappas
case [1 supra], a Division Bench of this
Court held that a business rival has no locus standi to question the grant of
permit to another person under the provisions of
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
.
In
Ramya Wines case [2 supra], the petitioners therein questioned the
notifications issued by the licensing authority inviting applications for grant of
new licences for sale of Indian made foreign liquor to new applicants; however,
this Court held that there cannot be any dispute with the legal proposition that
the petitioners, who are aggrieved of grant of licence to the other shops in the
area where the petitioners are running the shops, cannot be permitted to invoke
the jurisdiction of this Court.
In Venkata Ramana Agencies case [ 3 supra] the
facts and ratio are as under: A dealer of a retail outlet of HPCL approached
this Court seeking a declaration that the proposed action of the respondents 1
to 3 therein and others in permitting the non-official respondents to start a new
retail outlet by issuing no objection certificate without considering the
objections of the petitioner as illegal; the non-official 5th respondent contended
that the writ petition is not maintainable at the instance of a rival trader; this
Court has taken note of a Four-Judge Bench decision of the Supreme Court in
J.M.Desai v. Roshan Kumar
[AIR 1976 SC 578] wherein the Supreme Court   
held as follows:
The instant case falls well-nigh within the ratio of this Court's decision in
Nagar Rice and Flour Mills v. N.T. Gowda
[1970]3SCR846 wherein it was held 
that a rice mill-owner has no locus standi to challenge under
Article 226
, the
setting up of a new rice-mill by another - even if such setting up be in
contravention of
Section 8(3) (c)
of the Rice Milling Industry (Regulation) Act,
1958 - because no right vested in such an applicant is infringed.
51. For all the foregoing reasons, we are of opinion that the appellant had no
locus standi to invoke this special jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
Constitution. Accordingly, we answer the question posed at the commencement  
of this judgment, in the negative and on that ground, without entering upon the
merits of the case, dismiss this appeal with costs.
In the light of the ratios in the decisions of the Supreme Court and our High
Court, it follows that the licence holder of the petitioner A4 shop, who is a rival
businessman/competitor, has no locus standi to file the writ petition.  In this
regard, the respondents also rely on the amended Rule position which is not
disputed.  Further, the 5th respondent also filed the notification vide
G.O.Ms.No.112, Revenue (Excise-II) Department, dated 22.03.2017, whereby  
the Rules of 2012 were amended.  It is also clear from the contentions of the
official respondents that there will not be any revenue loss also to the
Government as the proposed new premises and the old premises of the 5th 
respondent shop are within the same licence fee slab and as the proposed new
premises is also within the same Municipal Corporation area.  Thus, it is
apparent that permission for shifting of the 5th respondent shop is accorded in
accordance with Rule 25 of A.P. Excise (Grant of Licence of Selling by Shop
conditions) Rules, 2012.   The licence holder of the petitioner A4 shop could
not show that the permission for shifting accorded to the licence holder of the
5th respondent shop is not in accord with the provision of Rule 25 of the said
Rules of 2012 or any other Rule.  Therefore, the contentions of the licence
holder of the petitioner A4 shop are untenable and devoid of merit.  And, it
follows that it is not for the rival contender, that is, the licence holder of the
petitioner shop to prevent grant of permission to the licence holder of the 5th
respondent shop for its shifting.
11.     Before parting, it is to be noted that the learned counsel for the
petitioner placed reliance on the following decisions:  (i) The decision in
State
Bank of India and Ors. V. S.N.Goyal
was relied upon in support of the
proposition that when once the request for shifting of the 5th respondent A4
shop was rejected, the authority concerned has become functus officio and that
the said authority cannot review its decision and consider the fresh application
of the licence holder for shifting of his shop, viz., the 5th respondent A4 shop.
A perusal of the decision shows that the question involved was as to when the
appointing authority
in that case
became functus officio.  In this decision, it was
observed that when once an authority exercising quasi judicial power, takes a
final decision, such authority cannot review its decision unless the relevant
statute or rules permit such review.  The further question was as to at what
stage such an authority becomes functus officio in regard to an order made by
him.  On facts, it was held that the appointing authority
in that case
has not
become functus officio.  Reverting to the facts of the present case, it is to be noted
that the statute and the rules do not prohibit entertaining a second application.
Further, the proposed premises in the first application, which was rejected, and
the proposed premises in the second application, in respect of which
permission was granted, are different premises with different door numbers
and the quasi judicial order granting permission was made on ascertaining true
facts and under different set of circumstances, which are already adverted to
supra while dealing with the various contentions of the parties.  Therefore
,
the
above decision
is not helpful to the petitioner.
(ii) The facts in the decision in
D.R.Sridhar Naidu v. Commissioner of Prohibition and Excise, AP,
Hyderabad and others
, reflect that the reason namely, the demolition of
shop by the owner, which was pleaded in support of the request for shifting of
shop from one ward to another, was found to be a non-existent and concocted
ground.  Whereas, in the case on hand, after detailed enquiry and reports from
Field Officers, it was found that the reason assigned is valid.  Such a conclusion
was arrived at after taking into consideration the statement of the
owner/landlady of the building where the 5th respondent A4 shop was
originally situated.  (iii) An unreported decision, dated 05.01.2018, rendered by
a Division Bench in W.A.no.30 of 2018 in W.P.no.43151 of 2017, was also
relied upon in support of the contention that the authority granting permission
for shifting of the shop must exercise the power for valid reasons and such
reasons must be his and not that of the applicant or the recommending
authorities.  In the case on hand, the impugned order reflects that the 2nd
respondent passed the impugned orders as directed by this Court, nevertheless,
by exercising his power independently after going through the material record
placed before him including the proofs produced with regard to the soundness
of the building, namely, the certificate of the Municipal Corporations
Structural Engineer, challan for demolition of the building, and the statement
of the landlady.  Obviously, the impugned order was passed on consideration
of such proofs, which disclosed that the existing premises of the 5th respondent
A4 shop is in dilapidated condition and that the landlady who wanted to
demolish the building had paid the amount under a challan to the Municipal
Corporation and requested the licence holder of the 5th respondent shop to
vacate the said premises.  Further, the 2nd respondent recorded detailed reasons
in the impugned order.  Therefore, the order impugned reflects that it is one
passed on independent exercise of the power but not on mere asking of the
licence holder of the 5th respondent shop and on recommendations of the
recommending authorities. Viewed thus, this Court finds that the decisions
relied upon by the licence holder of the petitioner A4 shop, who has no locus
standi, do not advance the case of the petitioner any further. Further, it is to be
restated that pursuant to the impugned order, the 5th respondent shop is already
shifted to the new premises.
12.     To sum up:  On due consideration of the facts and the Rule position
obtaining and on the above analysis, this Court finds that the impugned order is
passed for valid reasons and hence, the same does not warrant interference.
13.     Accordingly, the Writ Petition is dismissed.  There shall be no order as
to costs.
Miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand closed.
__________________________    
M.SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
13.08.2018