[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
B.Sailesh Saxena S/O Late B.P.C. ... vs 1.The Union Of India, Rep. By Secretary ... on 8 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 147, (2018) 2 ALD(CRL) 1042
Author:
J.Uma Devi
Bench:
J.Uma Devi
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND HONBLE Ms. JUSTICE J.UMA DEVI                  

Writ Petition No.4023 of 2018

08-6-2018 

B.Sailesh Saxena S/o Late B.P.C. Saxena,    Aged 39 years, Occ: Advocate, R/o. G1,  Nandanam Complex, Abids, Hyderabad Peti      

1.The Union of India, Rep. by Secretary of  Ministry for Home Affairs, New Delhi  2. The State of Telangana, Rep. by its Chi
17. A.Shekar S/o late Subhash, Aged 32 years, Occ: Jr. Asst., o/o Deputy Educational Office, Ameerpet Zone, Hyderabad, R/o H.

Counsel for Petitioner: Mr. A.Srinath Reddy

Counsel for Respondents 1&2:    GP for GAD (TG) 
 Counsel for Respondents 3to6:  GP for Home (TG) 
 Counsel for Respondents 7to10: Mr. N.Naveen Kumar  
 Counsel for Respondents 11to 17: ---

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
   1. (2014) 2 SCC 1


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE Ms. JUSTICE J.UMA DEVI      

Writ Petition No.4023 of 2018

Order: (per V.Ramasubramanian, J.) 
      The petitioner, who claims to be practising as
an Advocate, has come up with the above writ petition
challenging the inaction on the part of the 6th respondent viz.,
the Station House Officer, Panjagutta Police Station, in
registering a FIR against the respondents 7 to 17 despite the
orders of the learned XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Nampally, Hyderabad, in Sr.No.662/2018. The 
petitioner is also challenging the alleged harassment of
himself and his family members by the 8th respondent/
Deputy Commissioner of Police. 
      2. Heard Mr. A.Srinath Reddy, learned counsel for the
petitioner. The learned Government Pleader for Home
(Telangana) took notice for the respondents 2 to 6 and filed
a counter on behalf of the 5th respondent.
      3. The averments with which the petitioner has come up
with the above writ petition are that he is the legal advisor for
the family of one Mr. J.C. Diwakar Reddy, a Member of
Parliament belonging to the Telugu Desam Party and also the
legal counsel for one G.Deepak Reddy, Member of the 
Legislative Council belonging to the Telugu Desam Party; that
he had appeared in the cases filed on behalf of those clients;
that the present Government is run by a political party which
has rivalry with the party to which the petitioners clients
belong; that due to political rivalry, the party in power is
interfering in the civil disputes against the clients of the
petitioner, though they are sub judice before the City Civil
Court, the Special Court under the Lang Grabbing Act, the
High Court and the Supreme Court; that with a view to
harass the petitioner, the respondents are foisting false
criminal cases against the petitioner; that there was also
a threat to his life, on account of which he was given
protection by the Government with a gunman; that the
protection was later withdrawn due to political influence; that
the petitioner was attacked in the year 2015 by land mafia
gang belonging to the opposite political parties; that after
getting defeated in the civil cases before various Courts, the
land grabbers with political clout developed grudge against
the petitioner; that with the help of corrupt police personnel,
the petitioner and his family members were subjected to
torture; that due to the harassment at the police station on
21-5-2017, the petitioners father died after suffering a heart
attack; that along with his client, the petitioner has also been
added as a co-accused in Crime Nos.235/2016, 27/2017,  
35/2017 and 49/2017 on the file of the Central Crime
Station, Hyderabad; that the petitioner was sent to judicial
remand in Crime Nos.35/2017 and 49/2017; that with a view
to convert civil litigation into criminal cases, the respondents
7 to 10 conspired with the respondents 11 to 15 and got the
petitioner arrested on 07-6-2017 and sent to judicial remand;
that on 12-6-2017, the Police took the petitioner into their
custody from Central Prison and was brought to the Central
Crime Station; that the respondents 7 to 10 took the
petitioner to Raj Bhavan road on 15-6-2017 at around 2 p.m.;
that at Raj Bhavan road, the vehicle was stopped and some
persons were summoned on phone; that after 3 to 4 minutes, 
the respondents 16 and 17 came near the vehicle and showed  
the material brought by them; that the material brought by
them looked like rubber stamps; that the persons who
brought the material then got into the car and the car
proceeded to the petitioners office; that the 7th respondent
asked the petitioner to open the lock, but the petitioner did
not have the keys as he was in judicial custody; that the
7th respondent called the 9th respondent and told him to bring
someone from Nampally Station Road to break open the lock; 
that in the meantime, the 7th respondent asked the
10th respondent to break the glass of the window in the
backside of the petitioners office; that thereafter, the
7th respondent instructed the 10th respondent to keep the
packet containing material such as rubber stamps inside the
room through the broken window; that the 10th respondent
followed the instructions; that thereafter, the 9th respondent
brought a person to break open the lock of the office; that
thereafter, the respondents 9 and 10 went inside and took
possession of the packet containing certain files and rubber
stamps; that the 9th respondent was then asked to take
photographs of the petitioner along with all persons present
inside the office; that when the petitioner questioned them,
the 7th respondent informed him that he is acting under the
orders of the 9th respondent; that during the whole operation,
the 7th respondent was receiving repeated phone calls on his
mobile phone; that the 7th respondent showed to the
petitioner the numbers of the respondents 8 and 14 and
expressed regret for doing such illegal things; that the
7th respondent also told the petitioner that if he paid a sum of
Rs.50,00,000/-, the 7th respondent will help the petitioner by
ensuring that the panchas of the panchanama viz.,
respondents 16 and 17 will not come to Court at the time of
trial; that thereafter, the 7th  respondent directed the
10th respondent to purchase a new lock for the office; that
after putting a new lock on the petitioners office, all persons
moved to the Central Crime Station; that the respondents
were not aware of the fact that the whole illegal acts
performed by the respondents were recorded in the CCTV 
cameras; that after the petitioner came out on bail, he got the
CCTV camera recording and gave the same to the higher  
officials of the Police Department; that since no action was
taken, the petitioner filed a private complaint before the
XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate along with
a DVD and photographs; that the XIV Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate passed an order in C.C.Sr.
No.662/2018 on 05-02-2018 directing the Station House
Officer, Panjagutta, to take action under
Section 156(3)
of the
Code of Criminal Procedure; that thereafter, the petitioner
went to Panjagutta Police Station and requested the Station
House Officer to register the FIR as per the directions of the
XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate; that the
6th respondent refused to register the crime; that thereafter,
the Police from Central Crime Station came along with anti
social elements to the petitioners house and threatened him
to withdraw the complaint against the officers; that they also
threatened the petitioner that he will be implicated in
multiple FIRs and may also be detained preventively; and that
therefore, left with no alternative, the petitioner was
approaching this Court.
      4. The 5th respondent, who is the Commissioner of
Police, Hyderabad City, has filed a counter affidavit
contending, inter alia, that various criminal complaints came
to be registered against the writ petitioner in different police
stations and that all these complaints were transferred to the
Central Crime Station. The Commissioner of Police has
provided the details of the criminal complaints filed against
the petitioner, in the form of a tabular column, which reads
as follows:
Sl.
No.
Crime No. 
Date of
Registra-
tion
PS where 
registered
Date of
transfer to
CCS and  
Crime No. 
Complainant Name  
1.
187/2016 
u/
S.420
,
466
&
471
IPC 
15-8-2016 
Asif Nagar
8-11-2016 
(235/2016 
)
Ali Mohammed,  
S/o.Mirza
Qhudratullah,
Aged 53 years, Occ: 
Business, 
R/o.H.No.22-4-
431/1, Kotla Ali
Jha, Hyderabad 
2.
137/2017 
u/
S.420
,
468
&
471
IPC 
07-02-2017 
Banjara
Hills
14-2-2017 
(35/2017)
Smt. Chandrakala, 
Tahsildar, Shaikpet
Mandal, Hyderabad  
3.
100/2017 
u/
S.420
,
468
&
471
IPC 
03-4-2011 
Abids 
15-3-2017 
(49/2017)
Sri M.Ravinder
Reddy S/o 
Narayana Reddy,  
Aged 56 years, Spl.
Officer and
Competent  
Authority, Urban
Land Ceiling,
Nampally, 
Hyderabad 
4.
27/2017 
u/
S.447
,
420
,
468
,
471
,
120-B
,
506
IPC 
r/w 34
IPC
07-02-2017 
Central
Crime 
Station
Registered
after
preliminar
y enquiry
M.Radha Krishna  
Murthy S/o 
M.Venkateshwar  
Rao, Aged 73 
years, R/o Plot
No.279, Alekya 
Marie gold, Road
No.6, Kakatiya
Hills, Madhapur,
Hyderabad 
5.
90/2017 
u/
S.419
,
420
,
468
,
471
IPC 
r/w 34
IPC
09-6-2017 
Central
Crime 
Station
Registered
after
preliminar
y enquiry
Sri K.Malleshwara 
Rao S/o Late 
Venkaiah, Aged 68 
years, Occ:
Business, R/o 
H.No.3-3-76 to
79/1, Kingsway, 
Secunderabad  
6.
105/2017 
u/
S.419
,
420
,
466
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
427
&
380
IPC 
17-7-2017 
Charminar 
31-7-2017 
(125/2017 
)
Sri Venkateshwara 
Reddy, District
Judge, on OD as 
Registrar (Judicial),
High Court of
Judicature at
Hyderabad 

      5. Apart from mentioning the details of the complaints
now pending investigation against the writ petitioner, the
Commissioner of Police has also given in paragraph-16 of the
counter affidavit, the details of about 6 writ petitions allegedly
filed by the writ petitioner on behalf of fictitious
non-existent persons. The details of 7 more writ petitions filed
by the petitioner in his capacity as counsel for certain third
parties are also furnished in paragraph-16 of the counter
affidavit. It is stated in the counter affidavit that as per the
directions of the Registry of this Court, efforts were made by
the Police to serve notices on persons in whose name certain
writ petitions were filed by the petitioner. But notices could
not be served as there were no such persons in the addresses
given by the petitioner. Therefore, the Police requested the
petitioner to produce his clients. He failed to produce the
petitioners in those writ petitions. However, one person by
name R.Srinivas, who was arrested in connection with Crime
No.235/2016, is stated to have confessed that the petitioners
in 6 writ petitions filed by the petitioner herein were non-
existent and that he along with the petitioner and others
projected an existing person as a non-existing person in a
land grabbing case and that the petitioner had obtained even
the death certificate in the name of a non-existent person.
      6. As per the counter affidavit filed by the Commissioner
of Police, all the cases where the petitioner herein filed writ
petitions in the names of non-existent persons were heard by
a learned Judge of this Court. By a common order dated
04-7-2017, the writ petitions were dismissed. Even while
dismissing the writ petitions, the learned Judge of this Court
directed the Registrar (Judicial) to lodge a complaint with the
Police for investigation. But later, it came to light that in some
of the writ petitions, the original bundles went missing.
Therefore, the investigation by the Police was directed to
include persons responsible for the misplacement of the case
files also.
      7. It is further stated in the counter affidavit of the
Commissioner of Police that pursuant to the order passed by
the learned Judge in W.P.No.22561 of 2008 batch of cases,
the Registrar (Judicial) lodged a complaint in Charminar
Police Station for alleged offences under
Sections 419
,
420
,
466
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
427
and
380
IPC in Crime No.105/2017. 
Therefore, it is claimed in the counter affidavit filed by the
Commissioner of Police that all acts done by the Police
including the arrest, search and seizure were done after the
registration of the FIR, as part of the investigation following
due procedure.
      8. It is also claimed in the counter affidavit that the
Magistrate erred in referring the complaint of the petitioner
under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., without the previous sanction
of the Government and that under Section 88(3) of the
Hyderabad City Police Act, the officers enjoy some immunity.
The stand taken by the Commissioner of Police is that the
writ petitioner has been filing complaints against Police
Officers only to prevent them from discharging their lawful
duties.
      9. The counter affidavit filed by the 7th respondent, who
is the Assistant Commissioner of Police, is also almost on
identical lines. Therefore, we are not repeating the contents of
the counter affidavit of the 7th respondent all over again.
      10. In the light of the pleadings reproduced in
a nutshell as above, the contention of the learned counsel for
the petitioner is that once the Magistrate issues a direction to
the Police to make an investigation and file a report under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., the concerned Police Officer is obliged
to register the FIR and proceed with the investigation. But in
this case, the Police did not register any FIR. Hence, the
learned counsel for the petitioner repeatedly argued that the
only question raised in this writ petition is as to whether the
superior police Officers are also bound by the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
or not.
      11. The sheet anchor of the case of the petitioner is the
directives issued by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court in Lalita Kumari v. Government of U.P. , and the
Advisory issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Home
Affairs on 12-10-2015. According to the learned counsel for
the petitioner, the provisions of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
are to be followed by both Courts as well as Police
Officers and that once an investigation is ordered under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., a FIR should first be registered.
The failure of the Police to register a FIR and the indifference
of the Court to the failure of the Police, are contrary to the law
laid down by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari. Apart from
the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court
in Lalita Kumari, the learned counsel for the petitioner also
places reliance upon an Advisory issued by the Government 
of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, dated 12-10-2015.
      12. We have carefully considered the submissions of the
learned counsel for the petitioner. The decision of the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari
was a culmination of a series of orders passed over a period of
about five years. In fact, it started with certain directions
issued by a 2-member Bench of the Supreme Court in Lalita 
Kumari v. Government of U.P. [(2008) 7 SCC 164]. When the 
matter came up once again, reliance was placed upon certain
conflicting decisions, some of which took the view that the
officer-in-charge of a police station was entitled to hold some
sort of a preliminary enquiry before registering the complaint
and some others holding a contra view. Therefore, by an order
reported in (2008) 14 SCC 337, the matter was referred to a
Larger Bench. A 3-member Bench, after considering the 
seriousness of the issues raised, by an order reported in
(2012) 4 SCC 1, referred the issue to the Constitution Bench.
As seen from paragraph-1 of the judgment of the Constitution
Bench, the issue that invited the attention of the Constitution
Bench was whether the Police Officer is bound to register a
First Information Report upon receiving any information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence under
Section 154
of the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Police
Officer has the power to conduct a preliminary enquiry in
order to test the veracity of such information before
registering a FIR.
      13. In paragraph-111 of its decision, the Supreme Court
formulated the principle of law to the following effect:
111) In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold:
i) Registration of FIR is mandatory under
Section 154
of the
Code, if the information discloses commission of
a cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry is
permissible in such a situation.

ii) If the information received does not disclose a cognizable
offence but indicates the necessity for an inquiry,
a preliminary inquiry may be conducted only to ascertain
whether cognizable offence is disclosed or not.
iii) If the inquiry discloses the commission of a cognizable
offence, the FIR must be registered. In cases where
preliminary inquiry ends in closing the complaint, a copy of
the entry of such closure must be supplied to the first
informant forthwith and not later than one week. It must
disclose reasons in brief for closing the complaint and not
proceeding further.
iv) The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering
offence if cognizable offence is disclosed. Action must be
taken against erring officers who do not register the FIR if
information received by him discloses a cognizable offence.
v) The scope of preliminary inquiry is not to verify the
veracity or otherwise of the information received but only to
ascertain whether the information reveals any cognizable
offence.
vi) As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry
is to be conducted will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:
a) Matrimonial disputes/ family disputes
b) Commercial offences 
c) Medical negligence cases 
d) Corruption cases
e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating
criminal prosecution, for example, over 3 months delay in
reporting the matter without satisfactorily explaining the
reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all
conditions which may warrant preliminary inquiry.
vii) While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused
and the complainant, a preliminary inquiry should be made
time bound and in any case it should not exceed 7 days.
The fact of such delay and the causes of it must be reflected
in the General Diary entry.
viii) Since the General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is
the record of all information received in a police station,
we direct that all information relating to cognizable
offences, whether resulting in registration of FIR or leading
to an inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously
reflected in the said Diary and the decision to conduct
a preliminary inquiry must also be reflected, as mentioned
above.
      14. On the basis of the principles enunciated in Clauses
(i) and (iv) of paragraph-111 of the decision of the
Constitution Bench, it is contended by the learned counsel for
the petitioner that the moment a Magistrate referred the
matter under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C., the Police have no
option except to register the FIR and that the failure of the
Station House Officer to register a FIR, is in violation of the
law laid down by the Constitution Bench.
      15. But the case on hand is not so simple as to invoke
the mandate issued by the Constitution Bench in Lalita
Kumari. As seen from the counter affidavit, the petitioner
himself is an accused in at least 6 criminal complaints,
3 of which were lodged by public servants. While Crime
No.137/2017 for alleged offences under
Sections 420
,
468
and
471
IPC was registered at the instance of the Tahsildar,
Shaikpet Mandal, Hyderabad, Crime No.100/2017 was   
registered for alleged offences under
Sections 420
,
468
and
471
IPC at the instance of the Special Officer-cum-Competent
Authority, Urban Land Ceiling, Nampally, Hyderabad and
Crime No.105/2017 was registered for alleged offences under
Sections 419
,
420
,
466
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
427
read with 380
IPC
at the instance of the Registrar (Judicial) of this Court.
In fact, the complaint lodged by the Registrar (Judicial) of this
Court was pursuant to a direction issued by a learned Judge
of this Court in a writ petition, in which the writ petitioners
were found to be non-existent persons, but the petitioner
herein acted as their counsel and failed to produce them
when called upon to do so. It is in this background of facts
that the ratio laid down in Lalita Kumari has to be
understood.
      16. The complaint filed by the petitioner on the file of
the XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad,
in C.C.Sr.No.662/2018 refers to certain incidents that took
place on 15-6-2017, after the petitioner was taken into police
custody from judicial custody in connection with Crime
Nos.235/2016, 27/2017, 35/2017 and 49/2017 on the file of
the Central Crime Station, Hyderabad. What allegedly
happened on 15-6-2017 after the petitioner was taken into
police custody constitutes the sum and substance of the
criminal complaint that the petitioner filed on the file of the
XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate against 11
named individuals. In this complaint, the petitioner has
shown the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Deputy 
Commissioner of Police, Sub Inspector (Div.D) and a
Constable, all at the Central Crime Station as accused Nos.1
to 4.
      17. As we have pointed out earlier, 3 out of 6 criminal
complaints pending investigation against the petitioner were
lodged by public servants, one of whom was none other than
the Registrar (Judicial) of this Court. The FIR registered on
the basis of the complaint given by the Registrar (Judicial) of
this Court in Crime No.105/2017 for alleged offences under
Sections 419
,
420
,
466
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
477
,
427
and
380
IPC
was actually pursuant to an order passed by a learned Judge
of this Court on 04-7-2017 in a batch of writ petitions.
The facts leading to the registration of the complaint given by
the Registrar (Judicial) of this Court, as disclosed in the
complaint, read as follows:
The facts of the case as per the order of the Honble High
Court are that one Advocate by name Sri B.Sailesh Saxena 
on behalf of 1) Iqbal Khan S/o late Moinuddun Islam Khan
2) Nijamiuddin Islam Khan S/o Nizamuddin Islam Khan  
3) Habeen Islam Khan S/o late Qutubuddin Islam Khan  
4) Iftar Islam Khan S/o Khaleeluddin Islam Khan filed
W.P.Nos.22561 & 27590/2008, 1155, 1156, 1666 &    
1674/2009 (hereinafter referred to as First Batch of cases)
against the then composite Govt. of A.P. and others as
mentioned in the cause title of the respective W.P. praying
to quash G.O.Ms.No.328, Revenue (UC.V), dated   
12-3-2008, G.O.Ms.No.303, Revenue No.747, dated   
18-6-2008 and G.O.Ms.No.221, Revenue (UC.IV), dated  
22-02-2008 respectively whereunder the Govt. has taken
possession of huge extent of land declared surplus under
the provisions of the
Urban Land Ceiling Act
. Questioning
the very same GOs (mentioned in the above WPs)  
Sri B.Sailesh Saxena, Advocate, filed another batch of
6 writ petitions, on behalf of 1) M/s. Jai Hanuman Estate
2) M.H. Sailaja and 3) G.Deepak Reddy vide W.P. 
Nos.28647, 28648, 28649, 28650, 28651 & 28652/2014   
(hereinafter referred to as the second batch of cases)
pleading that they have obtained a decree for specific
performance of agreement of sale executed by the petitioner
in the first batch of cases. I am to further state that during
pendency of these cases, the first petitioner in the first
batch of cases reportedly died and one person by name 
Shakeel Islam Khan claiming to his legal representative,
filed W.P.M.P.No.12913/2014 in W.P.No.22561/2008 to   
come on record and the same was allowed by order dated  
22-6-2017. Some of the respondents in W.P. 
No.22561/2008 filed W.P.M.P.No.11235/2017 contended    
that the person who filed the first batch of 6 writ petitions,
including the person who came on record as legal
representative of first petitioner, are non-existent and that
they are fictitious and sought for directions of the Registry
to send the notices to them to appear before the Court on
04-7-2017 along with their identity cards. As direct notices
were sent by the Registry and they returned unserved in
respect of petitioner Nos.2 to 4 in respect of the first batch
of writ petitions with an endorsement address not found
while in respect of petitioner No.5 who came on record as
legal representative of the first petitioner, the notice was
returned with an endorsement house vacated 
Respondent No.6 in W.P.No.22561/2008 brought to the  
notice of the Honble Court that an Affidavit is filed by
petitioner No.3 in the second batch of cases in
C.R.P.No.1826/2016 stating that petitioner No.5 came on
record in the first batch of cases of legal representative of
petitioner No.1 is not his son. Therefore, the Honble Court
on 04-7-2017 passed order recalling the order dated
20-6-2017, bringing petitioner No.5 as legal representative
of petitioner No.1 in the first batch of cases. I am further
state that as per the order of the Honble Court,
Sri B.Sailesh Saxena, who filed the first batch and second
batch of cases, on behalf of the petitioners therein filed
W.P.No.2293/2017 questioning the action of police in
registering FIR No.235/2016 and interfering with his
professional duties. One Sri M.Shiva Bhusan, claiming to
be GPA holder of Iqbal Islam Khan, who is petitioner No.1
in the first batch of cases and died during the pendency of
the case, filed W.P.No.2359/2017, questioning the action of
the police in compelling him to give statement that he
himself of Iqbal Ismal Khan. The factual matrix of the case,
from the common order dated 04-7-2017 of the Honble
Court (copy enclosed), reveals that the batch of writ
petitions were filed by non-existent persons and the
petitioner in the second batch of writ petitions are claiming
to have obtained decree of specific performance of
agreement of sale from such non-existent persons, with
a view to grab huge extent of land declared surplus under
the provisions of the
Urban Land Ceiling Act
. The Honble
Court also found that in W.P.Nos.2256/2008, 1155 & 
1156/2006 the original bundles are found missing and the
investigation of the police shall include the persons
responsible for misplacement of the original case also.
Therefore, this report is filed by the Registrar (Judicial) of
the High Court of Judicature, at Hyderabad as directed
with a request to take appropriate action in accordance
with law.

      18. It is relevant to note that the factual basis for the
criminal complaint lodged by the writ petitioner herein
against the unofficial respondents are the events that took
place on 15-6-2017. The FIR at the instance of the Registrar
(Judicial) was filed on 31-7-2017, in pursuance of the
direction issued by this Court on 04-7-2017. In other words,
one of the 6 FIRs lodged against the petitioner was
subsequent to the events that took place on 15-6-2017.
      19. If the registration of multiple FIRs are done with
a view to harass the petitioner, the complaint registered
pursuant to the directions of this Court would also fall under
the same category. While the petitioner may have any amount 
of grievance against the Investigating Officers, he cannot have
a grievance against a judicial order pursuant to which
a responsible official of this Court has lodged a complaint.
Therefore, it is impossible to believe that a few Police Officers
have conspired to fix him up, when it is a matter of record
that a complaint came to be lodged by the Registrar (Judicial)
of this Court pursuant to the directions issued in a judicial
order. At the most, the petitioner can complain of
circumstances conspiring against him and not persons 
conspiring against him.
      20. It is also relevant to note that all the 6 criminal
complaints filed against the petitioner are now under
investigation by the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Central
Crime Station. The petitioner has impleaded the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Central Crime Station, by name as 
the 7th respondent, making serious allegations against him.
At this stage, it is not possible to get into the veracity of the
complaint made by the petitioner against the 7th respondent.
      21. But the registration of a complaint against the
7th respondent at this stage, at the instance of the petitioner,
would result in the immediate consequence of paralysing the
investigation as well as the Investigating Officer. A complaint
about the manner in which the investigation into a crime is
being carried out, can at the most enable a person accused to
seek transfer of investigation, but not to file a FIR against the
Investigating Officer.
      22. The overt and covert acts attributed by the
petitioner against the Police Officers and the de facto
complainants are that all of them are planting and fabricating
evidence against the petitioner in the criminal complaints
lodged against him. These allegations actually constitute the
defence of the petitioner to the criminal complaints lodged
against him. The defence of an accused in a criminal case
cannot become the subject matter of another criminal
complaint against the prosecution. If the evidence on which
the prosecution relies to prove the guilt of an accused in a
criminal case is fabricated, the accused should first get a
finding recorded to the said effect from the Trial Court in that
case. It is only thereafter that a complaint of fabrication of
evidence can be made by the accused in a criminal case 
against the Police Officers and the de facto complainant.
      23. What the petitioner is now attempting to do is to
seek an investigation into his allegation that the evidence
collected by the Investigating Officer in the criminal
complaints filed against him is fabricated. This is nothing but
an attempt at deflecting and derailing the course of
investigation into the complaints lodged against the
petitioner.
      24.
Section 102 (1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 empowers any police officer to seize any property (i)
which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen or (ii)
which may be found under circumstances which create  
suspicion of the commission of any offence.
      25. Similarly,
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 carves out an exception to the rule in
Section 26
of the
Act. Therefore, the discovery of any material or information in
consequence of the information received from a person
accused of any offence assumes relevance even if such a
person is in the custody of a police officer.
      26. Therefore, the materials such as rubber stamps etc.,
claimed by the police (according to the version of the
petitioner) to have been recovered from the premises of the
petitioner constitute evidence in the criminal complaints now
pending investigation against the petitioner. The question
whether this evidence was fabricated by the police or planted
by the police in the premises of the petitioner, should be
decided only by the trial Court where a final report is filed
and charges are framed. It is that trial Court in which the
material allegedly recovered from the premises of the
petitioner by the police, should be put to scrutiny.  But what
the petitioner wants is the registration of a FIR on a
complaint that the said material was not recovered in the
course of investigation, but planted by the police in his office
premises. Ordering the registration of a FIR on the said
complaint would tantamount to putting the evidence in one
criminal case, to test in another criminal complaint, even
before the material is marked as exhibit or material object in
the case in relation to which such evidence was collected.

      27. A case of this nature is not contemplated to be
covered by the ratio in Lalita Kumari. The decision in Lalita
Kumari is intended to clear the confusion about the power of
the Police under
Section 154
Cr.P.C. Lalita Kumari did not
contemplate a situation where the accused in a criminal case
lodges a complaint against the Investigating Officer, even
during the course of investigation, on the allegation that he
was collecting false evidence. The false and fabricated nature
of the evidence collected by an Investigating Officer in the
course of investigation has first to be tested by the Court in
which it is produced. An accused cannot use the decision in
Lalita Kumari to pre-empt the very collection of evidence
against him in the course of investigation.

      28. Let us assume for a minute that a FIR is registered
on the complaint given by the petitioner against the unofficial
respondents. Once it is done, the evidence collected by the
Investigating Officer will have to be proved as genuine in the
case filed by the petitioner, before it can be used as evidence
in the criminal cases filed against the petitioner. The evidence
for the prosecution in a particular case cannot be first
subjected to scrutiny in another criminal case.

      29. The object of the petitioner filing a criminal
complaint appears to be to first put to test the evidence so far
collected by the Police Officers, before they can be used in the
criminal complaints against him. The decision in Lalita
Kumari did not license such a practice. Therefore, the
contention on the basis of Lalita Kumari does not merit
acceptance. 

      30. The reliance placed upon the Advisory issued by the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of India, is also of no avail.
The Advisory issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Union of
India, is nothing but a reiteration of the directives contained
in Lalita Kumari. Therefore, what applies to Lalita Kumari
applies equally to the Advisory issued by the Union of India.

      31. Coming to the last issue that stems from the order
passed by the XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
it may be useful to extract the order dated 05-02-2018 passed
by the Magistrate in C.C.SR.No.662 of 2018. It reads as
follows:
       Heard and perused the records and sworn affidavit
of complainant.
       The counsel and complainant relied on number of
citations by showing that the permission to prosecute the
accused is not necessary further on perusal of fact,
circumstances and averments of the complaint the 
investigation is required, so that the sworn statements are
not recorded and the complaint is forwarded to SHO,
Panjagutta P.S. under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C for enquiry or
investigation and for report.
      32. It appears from the order extracted above that the
learned XIV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate did not
even apply his mind to the fact that the petitioner is seeking
to weave a complaint around the material collected by the
Police as evidence in the course of investigation of several
complaints against the petitioner. The fact that the material
and evidence collected in the course of investigation into a
criminal complaint, cannot become the subject matter of
another complaint especially at the instance of the accused,
even before such material is tested for its evidentiary value,
was not even considered by the Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate.

      33. Though we are not testing the correctness of the
order passed by the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
we are sure of the extent of our jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. A Writ of mandamus can be
issued only to compel the performance of a statutory duty.
What the petitioner is seeking by way of a Writ of mandamus
is to direct the Investigating Officer to first put himself in the
dock along with his material, before they can be relied upon
in the criminal complaints filed against the petitioner. Hence,
the writ petition is thoroughly misconceived and appears to
be an abuse of the process of law and a counterblast to the
series of criminal complaints in which a person belonging to
the so-called noble profession got involved. Therefore, the
writ petition is dismissed.

      The interlocutory applications, if any, pending in this
writ petition shall stand closed. No costs.
___________________________     
V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J
_______________   
J.UMA DEVI, J  
08th June, 2018