[Cites
75
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Government Teachers Association, ... vs Union Of India, Represented By Its ... on 28 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 155, (2019) 3 ANDHLD 616
HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE  SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN                        

Writ Petition Nos.23267 of 2017 and bath

28-08-2018 


Government Teachers Association, Telangana State Represented by its General Secretary, having its Office at H.No.8-1-302/A/3


Union of India, represented by its Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi and 14 others  Respondents

Counsel for the Petitioners: Mr. S. Ramachandra Rao, SC         

Counsel for Respondents:  Mr. V.Giri, SC
                           Mr. Ramachandra Rao, AAG   
                           Mr. K. Lakshman, A.S.G.
                           Mr. Vedula Venkata Ramana, SC
                           Mr. G. Vidyasagar, SC
                           Mr. K. Narayana,
                           Mr. Ramgopal Rao 
                           Mr. P. Veerabhadra Reddy 

<Gist:


>Head Note: 


? Cases referred:

1) 2003 (6) ALD 522 (DB)
2) 2008 (4) ALD 209
3) AIR 1967 SC 884 
4) AIR 1981 SC 53 
5) (1990) 2 SCC 259 
6) (1991) Suppl (2) SCC 367
7) 2004 (2) ALD 1
8) AIR 1970 SC 422 
9) AIR 1971 AP 118 
10) AIR 1973 SC 827 



HONBLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE      
SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN        
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           

Writ Petition Nos.23267, 23274 and 27404 of 2017 

COMMON ORDER:
(per V. Ramasubramanaian, J)       

        The Government Teachers Association along with a few 
Teachers working as School Assistants in various Government 
Schools have come up with these writ petitions, challenging--(1) sub-
para-(2A) of Para 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment 
(Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment)
Order, 1975 and (2) Entries 23A, 26A and 26B of the Third Schedule
to the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local 
Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order, 1975.
2. We have heard Mr. S. Ramachandra Rao, learned senior  
counsel appearing for the writ petitioners, Mr.V. Giri, learned senior
counsel appearing for the State of Telangana along with the learned
Additional Advocate General for the State of Telangana, Mr. K.
Lakshman, learned Assistant Solicitor General, Mr. Vedula
Venkataramana, learned senior counsel and Mr. G. Vidyasagar, 
learned senior counsel appearing for some of the contesting
respondents and Mr. K. Narayana, Mr. Ramgopal Rao and Mr. P.   
Veerabhadra Reddy, learned counsel appearing for the remaining
contesting respondents.
Genesis of the litigation
3. In exercise of the powers conferred by
Article 371D
of the
Constitution, the President issued the Andhra Pradesh Public
Employment (Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct
Recruitment) Order, 1975, hereinafter called the Presidential
Order, directing the State Government to organise classes of posts
in the civil services of the State and classes of civil posts under the
State, into different local cadres for different parts of the State. The
Presidential Order contained three Schedules, with the First
Schedule enlisting the territories that form part of the city of
Hyderabad, the Second Schedule indicating the Districts that will
form part of every one of the six zones into which the State was
divided namely, Zone-I, Zone-II, Zone-III, Zone-IV, Zone-V and
Zone-VI and the Third Schedule enlisting the categories of posts in
different departments, which were to be identified as specified
Gazetted Categories.
4. It appears that in the composite State of Andhra Pradesh,
all schools were historically under the control of the Education
Department. But after the formation of Zilla Parishads and
Panchayat Samithis, the schools run by the District Boards or the
Government, were taken over by the Zilla Parishads, along with the
staff in the year 1959. In the year 1962, two different sets of Service
Rules were issued, one under G.O.Ms.No.728, dated 10-01-1962  
dealing with the categories of posts, method of recruitment,
Educational Qualifications, promotional avenues etc., of teachers
working in Government Schools and another under G.O.Ms.No.936,   
dated 17-07-1962 and G.O.Ms.No.33, dated 25-01-1966, relating to
the recruitment, conditions of service etc., of teachers working in
Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samithis Schools.
5. After the advent of the Presidential Order, 1975, the
teaching and non-teaching staff working in the Education
Department were organised into local cadre under G.O.Ms.No.529, 
dated 14-04-1976. But the teachers working in Zilla Parishads and
Panchayat Samithis Schools were not organised into local cadre.
6. When representations were made, the Government issued  
G.O.Ms.No.168, dated 20-03-1981 provincialising the services of the
teachers working in Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samithis
Schools. It was followed by Ordinance No.20 of 1981, which later
became Andhra Pradesh Act 34 of 1981, treating persons working in 
Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishads as those in the civil services
of and holding civil posts, under the State. As a consequence, a
Government Order in G.O.Ms.No.155, dated 01-03-1983 was issued   
making the General Rules for Andhra Pradesh State and 
Subordinate Services applicable to the employees specified in
Sections 26 and 51 of the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Samithis and  
Zilla Parishads Act. By a separate order in G.O.Ms.No.162, dated
01-03-1983, the Andhra Pradesh Civil Services (Conduct) Rules
were also made applicable to these employees.
7. Thereafter, the conditions of services of teachers working in
Government Schools and teachers working in Panchayat Samithis   
and Zilla Parishads Schools came to be governed by a consolidated
set of Rules issued in G.O.Ms.No.278, dated 02-06-1983. However, 
they were kept as two different streams flowing through watertight
units. Therefore, despite the teachers of the schools run by
Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishads becoming part of the
Education Department, they were kept as separate cadres for the
purposes of appointment, seniority and promotion.
8. By the Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992,
a new part in Part-IX was inserted in the Constitution, providing for
(i) the constitution of Gram Sabhas and Panchayats, (ii) powers,
authority and responsibilities of Panchayats, (iii) elections to
Panchayats etc. A new Schedule namely Eleventh Schedule was    
also inserted in the Constitution, enabling the Legislature of the
States to endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of local
self-government, with respect to matters listed in the Eleventh
Schedule.
9. Pursuant to the Seventy-Third amendment to the
Constitution, the State of Andhra Pradesh enacted the
Andhra
Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
, replacing the Andhra Pradesh  
Mandal Parishads and Zilla Parishads Act, 1986, which itself had
repealed the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Samithis and Zilla 
Parishads Act, 1959.
10. Thereafter, an attempt was made by the Government to 
integrate the service of teachers working in Government Schools
and teachers working in Schools run by Zilla Parishads and
Panchayat Samithies into a common service. When it was  
challenged before the Administrative Tribunal, the Government
issued a revised set of Rules under G.O.Ms.No.538, Education 
dated 20-11-1998. These set of Rules were intended to govern the
service conditions of teachers included in the Andhra Pradesh
Educational Subordinate Service. Therefore, by another Order in
G.O.Ms.No. 505, Education dated 16-11-1998, a separate set of 
rules were issued governing the service conditions of the Gazetted
Officers of the Andhra Pradesh Educational Services. The posts of
Head Masters in Government Schools and Zilla Parishads Schools  
became Gazetted posts.
11. Both these sets of rules, one governing Gazetted Services
and another governing Subordinate Services, issued respectively
under G.O.Ms.No.505 Education dated 16-11-1998 and G.O.Ms.    
No.538 Education dated 20-11-1998, were challenged before the 
Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal by teachers working in
Government Schools. The A.P. Administrative Tribunal upheld the
validity of the rules by an order dated 14-05-2000, but declared that
the rules cannot be given retrospective effect from 30-12-1996 as
sought to be done.  As against the said order of the Tribunal, a batch
of writ petitions were filed on the file of this Court. By a judgment
reported in
M. Kesavulu v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, a Division
Bench of this Court (1) set aside G.O.Ms.No.538 and (2) declared as
illegal G.O.Ms.No.505 in so far as it sought to embrace the posts in
Education Department for which the local cadre has been organised
in respect of the posts of Deputy Inspector of Schools, Head Master
and Educational Officers, the posts of Gazetted Head Master and
Head Mistress and also Gazetted Head Master and Head Mistress   
Grade-II in Government High Schools. However, this Court held that
it was open to the appropriate authority of the Government to
consider the desirability of creating channels of promotions for every
service within permissible limits. It was also left open to the
Government to create avenues of promotion for the teachers in the
Schools of Zilla Parishads and Mandal Parishads, within the
parameters of the powers vested in the Government. This court also
made it clear that it was open to the Government to take action to
organise local cadres in respect of the teachers working in
Panchayat Raj institutions in the State in accordance with the
provisions of the Presidential Order.
12. It must be pointed out at this stage that the main ground
on which this Court set aside one Government Order in full and
another Government Order in part was that once the local cadre has
been organised in respect of the teachers in the department of
Education, such local cadres cannot be merged with other non local
cadres or diluted.
13. After filing Special Leave Petitions as against the judgment
of this Court in
M. Kesavulu v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, the State
Government commenced efforts to organise the cadre of teachers in
Mandal Parishads and Zilla Parishads Schools into local cadres.
When the State Government approached the Central Government    
for appropriate amendment to the Presidential Order, the Central
Government expressed apprehensions in view of the pendency of 
the appeals before the Supreme Court as against the decision in M.
Kesavulu.
14. Therefore, the State thought fit to enact a law and first
issued Ordinance No.12 of 2005, which later became A.P. Act 27 of
2005. In terms of
Section 12 (1)
of the Act, a set of Rules were
issued in G.O.Ms.Nos.95 and 96, dated 25-07-2005.
15. The validity of the Act and the Rules became the subject
matter of challenge in the second round of litigation. The Tribunal
sustained the challenge and declared
Section 1 (3)
of the Act 27 of
2005 as ultra vires the Presidential Order. The Tribunal further held
that the State could not have brought an enactment without the
approval of the President as stipulated in the proviso to para 3 (1) of
the Presidential Order. As a consequence, the Rules issued under
Section 12 (1)
were also declared illegal.
16. The order of the A.P. Administrative Tribunal came to be
challenged in a batch of writ petitions before this Court.
In a
judgment reported in
Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Vema  
Reddy
, a Division Bench of this Court struck down Act 27 of 2005
in entirety, as unconstitutional. Consequently, the set of Rules
issued in G.O.Ms.No.95 and 96 dated 25-07-2005 were also struck 
down. The conclusions reached by the Division Bench were 
summarized in paragraph 80 of the report, which may be usefully
extracted as follows:
80. We summarize our conclusions as under:
(1) Since Clause (10) of
Article 371-D
of the Constitution gives
over-riding effect to the provisions of Section 371-D, and the
Presidential Order made thereunder, over any other provision of
the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force, any
action taken by the State, in exercise of the powers conferred under
the Presidential Order, would be immune from attack for having
violated any other provisions of the Constitution or any other law in
force.
(2) Since Article 371-D, and the Presidential Order made
thereunder, mark a departure from the general scheme of the
Constitution, it is only if the action of the State is traceable to any
specific provision in the Presidential Order would it be entitled for
the protection of Clause (10) of Article 371-D;
(3) Power of the State Government to organize local cadres under
Para 3(1) expired on the completion of the 27 month period from
the date of commencement of the Presidential Order and, after 17-1
-1978, the State Government no longer has the power to organize
local cadres.
(4) It is the President, under the proviso to Para 3(1), who alone
can require the State Government to organize local cadres;
(5) Unless the President requires the State Government to organize
local cadres, any action by the State Government in organizing
local cadres on its own, not having been specifically provided for in
the Presidential Order, would be subject to Constitution
limitations;
(6) Since organizing a local cadre, in effect, amounts to prescribing
'residence' in a part of the State as a qualification for public
employment, such action of the State would fall foul of
Article 16(2)
of the Constitution;
(7)
While the General Clauses Act
applies to the provisions of the
Presidential Order,
Section 21
thereof, which provides that the
power to make an order would include the power to rescind, is not
available to the State Government, since it does not have the power
to make an order, requiring local cadres to be organised, after 17-
1-1978;
(8) Since the power to make the order, requiring the State
Government to organize local cadres, has been specifically
conferred on the President under the proviso to Para 3(1) of the
Presidential Order,
Section 21
of the Genera!
Clauses Act
would
enable the President to make an order rescinding the order
whereby local cadres were organised and, in effect, requiring the
State Government to abolish local cadres;
(9) It is only when the President requires it to do so is the State
Government entitled, under the Presidential Order, to organize
newly created cadres into local cadres and abolish cadres which
hitherto had been organized into local cadres;
(10) It is only after the President has required the State
Government to organize, the newly created cadres, into local
cadres would Para 13 of Presidential Order apply and in the
interregnum, from the date on which the President, by order, has
required the State Government to organize local cadres till the date
on which local cadres are actually organized, appointments made
and promotions effected would only be provisional;
(11) Since the State Government does not have the power to
organize local cadres on its own, in the absence of a specific
provision in the Presidential Order enabling it to do so, any action
in this regard would amount to prescription of "residence" in a part
of the State as a qualification for employment and would be in
violation of
Article 16(2).
Such State action is neither protected
under the Presidential Order nor can any such appointment made, 
or promotions effected ultravires
Article 16(2)
be treated as
provisional under Para 13 of the Presidential Order;
(12) Local cadres can only be organized in respect of departments
of the State Government and not for cadres under any local
authority. As such neither Para 3(1) nor its proviso would enable
organization of cadres, under any local authority, into local cadres;
(13) While the State has the inherent power to create and abolish
cadres in civil services under the State, it does not have the power
on its own, without being required by the President to do so, to
either organize the newly created cadres into local cadres or to
abolish cadres which hitherto were organized into local cadres;
(14) What cannot be done directly cannot be done indirectly. A
conjoint reading, of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of Act 27 of 2005 with its
preamble, would establish that the very purpose and object of Act
27 of 2005 is to integrate cadres of teachers and other employees in
government, mandal parishad and zilla parishad schools.
Sections
3(1)
and
4(1)
of Act 27 of 2005, in effect, abolish local cadres.
Through a circuitous process o' abolishing cadres which were
organized into local cadre and, in effect, abolishing the local
cadres themselves, Act 27 of 2005 seeks to make a law which is 
beyond its legislative competence. Act 27 of 2005 is, thus, a piece of
colourable legislation;
(15) Since the State does not have power to abolish local cadres
without the President requiring it to do so, and as the President has
not so required till date,
Section 3(1)
and
Section 4(1)
of Act 27 of
2005 which abolishes cadres of teachers in government schools and 
other employees in the school education department of the
government, which had been organized into local cadres in
G.O.Ms. No. 529 dated 14-5-1976, is ultravires the Presidential
Order and is liable to be struck down.
(16) Consequent upon
Sections 3(1)
and
4(1)
of Act 27 of 2005
having been struck down, the local cadres, organized under
G.O.Ms. No. 529 dated 14-5-1976, remain in force;
(17)
Section 5(1)
of Act 27 of 2005 which integrates posts of
teachers and other employees in a local cadre with those which do
not belong to a local cadre, is also in violation of the Presidential
Order and the law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in S. Prakasha 
Rao (13 supra) and the Division Bench of this Court in
M. Kesavulu
(supra).
(18) The rules in G.O.Ms. Nos. 95 and 96 dated 25-7-2005 to the
extent teachers in government, mandal parishad and zilla parishad
schools are treated as a unified cadre and a common unit is
prescribed for appointment, seniority, promotion etc., to posts in
this cadre, are ultra vires the Presidential Order and are liable to
be struck down since cadres under a local authority cannot form
part of the local cadres of departments of the Government of A.P.;
(19) Since
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of Act 27 of 2005 constitute the basis
for Act 27 of 2005, and the other provisions of the Act are closely
interwoven and not severable therefrom, Act 27 of 2005 is struck
down in its entirety. The Rules in G.O.Ms. No. 95 & 96 dated 25-
07-2005, do not survive after the parent Act 27 of 2005 has been
struck down.
17. The decision of this Court in P. Vema Reddy was also
challenged before the Supreme court. By a common order dated 30- 
09-2015 passed in the entire batch of Civil Appeals in C.A.Nos.4878
to 4901 of 2009 and S.L.P. (Civil) No.35880 of 2011, a few arising
out of the decision in M. Kesavulu and the rest arising out of the
decision in P. Vema Reddy, the Supreme Court held that there was 
no reason to interfere with the decisions of this Court and that the
appeals were liable to be dismissed. However, liberty was granted to
the State Government to send a proposal to the Union of India for
obtaining the approval of the President. Since the final order passed
by the Supreme Court on 30-09-2015 in the aforesaid appeals, has
a bearing upon the present round of litigation, the order of the
Supreme Court is extracted as follows:
The application for amendment of cause-title and the application
for amendment are allowed as prayed for.
Heard learned counsel for the rival parities.
We see no reason to interfere with the well-considered decision in
exercise of our jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution of
India. While dismissing the appeals and the special leave petition,
we deem it appropriate to make the following
observations/directions:
1. Since the recruitment to the local authorities, the Panchayat
Samitis and the Zila Parishads are said to have been done in
compliance with Para 8 of the Presidential Order, the State
Government is at liberty to send a proposal to the Union of India
for obtaining the approval of the President of India to integrate the
teachers of the Panchayat Samitis and the Zilla Parishads, who
are also government servants with the existing local cadres of
teachers. As and when such proposal is sent to the Union of
India, the same shall be considered at an early date.
In the meantime, it would be open to the State
Government to frame Rules to make suitable promotional 
avenues for teachers and other employees of the Panchayat 
Samitis and the Zilla Parishads.
18. By the time the Supreme Court passed orders on 30-09- 
2015, the composite State of Andhra Pradesh was bifurcated under 
the
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
with effect from 02-
06-2014. It appears that both the State Governments pursued the
matter with the Central Government. As a result, the President of
India issued two orders, one in GSR 637 (E) dated 23-06-2017,
inserting Entries 23A, 26A and 26B in the Third Schedule to the
Presidential Order 1975, and another in GSR 639 (E) dated 23-06-
2017 inserting sub-paragraph (2A) in paragraph 3 of the Presidential
Order, 1975, in so far as the State of Telangana is concerned.
Similar orders were issued by the President in respect of the State of
Andhra Pradesh.
19. After the bifurcation of the composite State with effect from
02-06-2014, the A.P. Administrative Tribunal continued to exercise
jurisdiction over both the States, until the State of Telangana
withdrew from the Tribunal. Therefore, challenging GSR No.637 (E)
dated 23-06-2017, the Government Teachers Association of the 
State of Telangana have come up with W.P.No.23274 of 2017.  
Challenging sub-paragraph (2A) under paragraph 3 of the
Presidential Order inserted by GSR 639 dated 23-06-2017, the
same Association has come up with a writ petition in W.P.No.23267 
of 2017. Two Government High School Teachers have  
independently come up with the third writ petition in W.P.No.27404
of 2017 challenging sub-paragraph (2A) under paragraph 3.
20. It is stated across the Bar that similar Presidential Orders
issued in respect of the State of Andhra Pradesh are under
challenge before the A.P. Administrative Tribunal.
21. Thus, we have on hand three writ petitions, two of which
challenge sub-paragraph (2A) of paragraph 3 of the Presidential
Order, 1975, inserted by GSR 639 (E) dated 23-06-2017 and the 
third challenging the insertion of Entries 23A, 26A and 26B in the
Third Schedule to the Presidential Order, 1975 under GSR No.637
(E) dated 23-06-2017.
Grounds of challenge:
22. Assailing the impugned amendments to the Presidential
Order, it is contended by Mr. S. Ramachandra Rao, learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioners  (1) that
Article 371D
applies only to
persons employed in public services under the control of the State
Government and not to the employees of the local bodies such as
Zilla Parishads and Mandal Parishads, which are not under the
control of the Government; (2) that teachers working in local bodies,
are governed by the Seventy-Third amendment to the Constitution
and particularly
Article 243G
read with the Eleventh Schedule and
hence, they are out of the Government control; (3) that
Article 371D
empowers the President only to direct the State Government to
organise civil posts and the posts in the civil services of the State
into local cadres, but it does not authorise the President himself to
organise posts into local cadre; (4) that the two decisions of this
Court in M. Kesavulu and P. Vema Reddy holding that integration
of teachers working in local bodies with the teachers working in
Government schools is unconstitutional, has already been upheld by
the Supreme court; and (5) that the impugned amendments to the 
Presidential Order are given retrospective effect, thereby taking
away the vested rights of those in service and no amount of self
certification, as found in the Note to the Presidential Order that no
one is adversely affected by the retrospectivity, can cure this defect.
23.
In response to the above contentions, it was argued by Mr.
V. Giri, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State of Telangana
 (1) that the impugned amendments to the Presidential Order were
brought forth, in view of the liberty granted to the State Government
by the Supreme Court in its judgment dated 30-09-2015 rendered in
Civil Appeal Nos.4878 to 4901 of 2009 arising out of the decisions of
this Court in M. Kesavulu and P. Vema Reddy; (2) that therefore,
the impugned amendments cannot be found fault with, especially
when they were brought forth, pursuant to a liberty granted by the
Supreme Court; (3) that in view of the decisions of the two
Constitution Benches of the Supreme Court, one in
State of Assam 
v. Shri Kanak Chandra Datta  and another
in Mathuradas
Mohanlal Kedia v. S. D. Munshaw , the issue as to whether the
servants of the local bodies are in the civil services of the State, is
no longer res integra; (4) that the fact that the teachers of Zilla
Parishads and Panchayat Samithis have already been provincialised 
and brought into State services, was recognized even in the decision
in P. Vema Reddy; (5) that in view of clause (10) of
Article 371D
, the
provisions of any order made by the Parliament shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the
Constitution; (6) that therefore, as pointed out in sub-paragraphs 1
and 2 of paragraph 80 of the report in P. Vema Reddy, the
impugned amendments of the Presidential Order are not amenable  
to challenge on the basis of any other constitutional provision; (7)
that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in
S.
Prakasha Rao v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes
, the  
President alone has been given the power to organise the local
cadre, which he may do by himself without requiring the State
Government to organise local cadres; (8) that since the power given
under clause (1) of
Article 371D
is to do something for the creation
of equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to
different parts of the State, the President has the power even to
order the integration of the cadres; and (9) that the power conferred
upon the President under
Article 371D
being a special power, he is
entitled to provide retrospectivty to the amendments so made.
24. Mr. Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned senior counsel
appearing for some of the contesting respondents submitted  (1)
that on and from 20-11-1998, the power of appointment of teachers
to local bodies vested with the District Committees and hence, the
Chief Executive Officer of the Zilla Parishad ceased to be the
appointing authority; (2) that all the Rules applicable to the holders
of civil posts or the persons in the civil services of the State, are
applicable to teachers of local bodies; (3) that as per the decision of
the Supreme Court in
Government of A.P. v. A. Suryanarayana 
Rao
, the expression in the matter of public employment appearing
in clause (1) of
Article 371D
is of wider import and hence, the
President was well within his power to integrate different posts in the
same department into a common cadre and that therefore, when the 
amendments to the Presidential Order merely seek to remove the 
base on which the amendments struck down on the earlier 
occasions were made, the same cannot be faulted.
25. Supplementing the aforesaid submissions, Mr. G.
Vidyasagar, learned senior counsel appearing for some of the
contesting respondents invited our attention to the decision of a
Larger Bench of this Court in
Ranga Reddy District Sarpanches
Association v. Government of Andhra Pradesh
, in which the
validity of certain provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj
Act, 1994
and the Rules and Government Orders issued, fell for the
consideration of this Court. By a majority, the Larger Bench of this
Court held that the directives envisaged by
Article 243G
are
directory in nature and that
Article 243G
and the Eleventh Schedule
do not curtail the legislative power of the State under
Article 246
and
that in the administration of Panchayat Raj institutions, necessary
Governmental control is essential and it is for the legislature to
decide the extent of such control. The majority held that
Articles
243G
and
246 (3)
have to be read harmoniously and that while
testing the constitutional validity of a statute, the Court is not
concerned with the wisdom or otherwise, the justness or otherwise
of the law.
26. We have carefully considered the above submissions.
Historical Background of
Article 371-D
27. Before we deal with each one of the rival contentions, it
may be necessary to record the historical background of
Article
371D
and the two Presidential Orders issued thereunder. It is true
that this Court as well as the Supreme Court have, on
occasions, brought out this history. But if history can repeat
itself, the repetition of history may not be unwise, since at times
it is sought to be distorted.
28. As brought out by this Court in its decision in
Dr. B. Satish
Kumar v. Union of India
, to which one of us (VRS,J) was a party,
the erstwhile State of Hyderabad comprised of three linguistic areas,
viz., Telangana, Maratwada and Karnataka. In the year 1919, Nizam
issued a Firman promulgating the Mulki Rules, which provide for
requirement of residence in the State for fifteen years as an
essential qualification for public employment. These Rules were
contained in Appendix-N to the Hyderabad Civil Services
Regulations.
29. After the Constitution of India came into effect on
26.01.1950 and Hyderabad was declared as a Part B State, a 
circular dated 14-06-1950 was issued by the Government of
Hyderabad, making that portion of the Mulki Rules which prescribe
birth and descent, as inoperative with effect from 14-06-1950.
However, the other portion of the Mulki Rules not inconsistent with
the Constitution was declared as saved by
Article 35 (b)
of the
Constitution.
30. On and from 01-11-1956 the State Reorganisation took
place and the Telangana region of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad
became part of the newly formed State of Andhra Pradesh, while the
Maratwada and Karnataka regions of the erstwhile State of
Hyderabad respectively became parts of Maharashtra and Mysore  
(present Karnataka State). But the portion of the Mulki Rules saved
by
Article 35 (b)
of the Constitution continued to operate by virtue of
Section 119
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
31. Within a few months of the reorganization of the States
after independence, the Parliament enacted the Public Employment 
(Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957, making a special 
provision for requirement as to residence in regard to certain classes
of public employment in certain areas. By Section 2 of the State Act,
all laws saved by
Article 35 (b)
of the Constitution prescribing in
requirement as to residence, stood repealed. But,
Section 3
of the
Act empowered the Central Government to make Rules prescribing  
a requirement as to residence, within the Telangana area for
appointment to any Subordinate Service or post, under the State
Government.
Section 15
of the Act made it clear that the Rules
framed by the Central Government in terms of
Section 3
would be in
force only for a period of 15 years.
32. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the
State Act, namely Central Act No.44 of 1957, the Central
Government issued a set of Rules known as Andhra Pradesh Public  
Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Rules, 1959 prescribing  
that for appointment to certain posts, within the Telangana area of
the State of Andhra Pradesh, the candidates should satisfy the
requirement prescribed therein as to residence.
33. When the aforesaid Rules were sought to be implemented
by terminating the services of persons appointed in violation of those
Rules, a challenge was made before the Supreme Court to the very
constitutional validity of Central Act No.44 of 1957 and the Rules
issued therein.
In
A.V.S. Narasimha Rao v. State of Andhra
Pradesh
a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court declared
Section 3
of Act No.44 of 1957 as unconstitutional. Consequently,
Rule 3 of the Rules was also struck down. However, the Supreme 
Court refused to go into the validity of the Mulki Rules.
34. But the decision of the Supreme Court in A.V.S.
Narasimha Rao lead to certain ancillary questions, viz., (1) whether
Section 2
of Act No.44 of 1957 would have also died a natural death;
and (2) whether the Mulki Rules would survive or not. These
questions were sought to be answered by a Full Bench of this Court
in
P. Lakshmana Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, which held 
that the entire Act No.44 of 1957 died a natural death in view of the
decision of the Constitution Bench in A.V.S. Narasimha Rao. The
Full Bench also held that Mulki Rules would continue to be valid.
35. But the decision of the Full Bench in P. Lakshmana Rao
was overruled by a Larger Bench in
V. Venkata Reddy v. Director
of Industries and Commerce
. The Larger Bench held that the Mulki
Rules are not valid and operative after the formation of the State of
Andhra Pradesh and after the decision of the Supreme Court in
A.V.S. Narasimha Rao.
36. But the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Larger
Bench, in its decision reported as
Director of Industries and
Commerce v. V. Venkata Reddy
, holding that the Mulki Rules 
continued to be in force by virtue of
Article 35 (b)
though
Section 2
of
Act No.44 of 1957 did not survive.
37. Frustrated by this ping pong game fought by intellectuals
in Courts, people took to streets in the form of agitations, of which
the one in 1969 and the other in 1972 rocked the political
establishment. Therefore, President Rule was imposed in the State
on 10-01-1973 and a Six Point Formula was arrived at by and
between the leaders of the two regions, viz., Telangana and Andhra
Pradesh. The Six Point Formula provided for (1) accelerated
development of the backward areas of the State; (2) Institution of
uniform arrangements throughout the State enabling adequate
preference to local candidates in the matter of admission to
Educational Institutions; (3) Preferential treatment to a specified
extent in the matter of direct recruitment to Non-Gazetted (other than
some posts) posts and corresponding posts under the local bodies
and the posts of Tahsildars, Junior Engineers and Civil Assistant
Surgeons; (4) Setting up of a high-power Administrative Tribunal for
dealing with the grievances of those in public employment; (5) An
amendment of the Constitution in a manner conferring enabling
powers on the President, so that the implementation of the formula
did not lead to further litigation and consequent uncertainty; and (6)
the discontinuance of the Mulki Rules and Regional Committee.
38. Towards implementation of Six Point Formula, the
Constitution (Thirty-Second Amendment) Act, 1973 was enacted. By  
this amendment Clause (1) of
Article 371
, pursuant to which the
Central Act No.44 of 1957 was enacted, was omitted and two new 
Articles, namely
Article 371D
and
371E
were inserted.
39. The statement of objects and reasons for the
Constitution
(Thirty-Second Amendment) Act, 1973
is extracted in Para 14 of the
decision of this Court in P. Vema Reddy. In a nutshell what was
stated in the statement of objects and reasons in the Thirdty-Second
Amendment to the Constitution was (1) that at the time of formation
of the State of Andhra Pradesh in 1956, certain safeguards were
envisaged for the Telangana Area; (2) that clause (1) of
Article 371
was intended to provide such safeguards; (3) that Central Act No.44
of 1957 enacted pursuant to
Article 371(1)
was held by the Supreme
Court to be unconstitutional in A.V.S. Narasimha Rao; (4) that the
failure of the safeguards as envisaged at the time of formation of the
State led to agitations; and (5) that eventually the Public
Representatives on both sides agreed upon a Six Point formula
towards the implementation of which the constitutional amendment
was brought forth.
40. The history behind
Article 371D
is recorded in this
judgment in the foregoing paragraphs, to drive home the point that
any interpretation given to
Article 371D
cannot go contrary to the
Objects and Reasons, which have their foundation in the Six Point
Formula.
Grounds of challenge to the impugned Presidential Order:
41. At the outset, we should make it clear that any Presidential
Order issued in terms of
Article 371D
, is not amenable to challenge
on the ground that it is ultra vires any other provisions of the
Constitution, since the provisions of
Article 371D
and any order
made by the President thereunder is given overriding effect under
Clause (10) of
Article 371D.
But, it is always open to the Court to test
whether the Presidential Order issued in exercise of the powers
conferred by Clause (1), is ultra vires any of the prescription
contained in
Article 371D
itself. Keeping this fundamental premise in
mind, we shall now examine the grounds of challenge to the
impugned Presidential Order.
Grounds 1 and 2
42. The first two grounds of challenge to the impugned
Presidential Order are (i) that
Article 371D
itself is applicable only to
those in service under the control of the State Government and (ii)
that teachers working in local bodies, are governed by the Seventy-
Third Amendment to the Constitution and particularly
Article 243G
read with the
Eleventh Schedule and The Andhra Pradesh 
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
hence, they are out of the Government 
control.
43. The first ground of challenge is sought to be countered by
Mr.V.Giri, the learned senior counsel appearing for the State and the
learned senior counsel appearing for the contesting respondents on
the ground that sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of
Article 371D
of the
Constitution uses the expression posts in the civil service of the
State and classes of civil posts under the State.
In
State of
Assam v. Kanak Chandra Dutta
, the Constitution Bench of the 
Supreme Court held that a person appointed as Mauzadar for the
purpose of collection of revenue in the State of Assam was the
holder of a civil post, though he was virtually a person appointed on
contract for collection of revenue. The Supreme Court held that there
is no formal definition post and civil post. The Court pointed out
that as long as there is a relationship of master and servant and the
existence of such relationship is indicated by the States right to
select and appoint the holder of the post, its right to suspend and
dismiss him and its right to control the manner and method his doing
the work and the payment by it of his wages or remuneration, he will
be deemed to be holding a civil post.
44. The same logic was followed by another Constitution
Bench in Mathuradas Mohanlal Kedia v. S.D. Munshaw. In this 
case, the Court was concerned with officers and servants employed
in several Municipalities constituted under the Bombay District
Municipal Act, 1901 and who were working as employees of the 
Gram panchayats or Nagar Panchayats established in the place of 
Municipalities under the provisions of the
Gujarat Panchayats Act,
1961
. The Court held that the true test for the determination of the
question whether a person is holding a civil post or is a member of
the civil service, is the existence of a relationship of master and
servant between the State and the person holding a post under it.
The existence of such relationship depended upon the right of the
State to select and appoint the holder of the post, its right to
suspend and dismiss him, its right to control the manner and method
of his doing the work and the payment by it of his wages or
remuneration.
45. Therefore, it is contended by the learned senior counsel
appearing on the side of the respondents that the issue as to
whether teachers and other servants working in Panchayats and 
Zilla Parishads are the holders of the civil posts or not, is no longer
res integra.
46. But, the contention of the learned senior counsel for the
respondents loses sight of the fact that the decisions of the Supreme
Court in Kanak Chandra Dutta and Mathuradas Mohanlal Kedia   
were delivered long before the Seventy-Third Amendment to the
Constitution. This is why the Division Bench of this Court, while
dealing with this same issue in Vema Reddy, did not overrule a
similar contention raised on behalf of the petitioners. On the
contrary, this Court rejected the contention of the learned Advocate
General at that time and yet chose to proceed on the basis that even
if they are taken to be the holders of civil posts, the amendments
under challenge in Vema Reddy cannot be upheld. This can be 
seen from paragraphs 21 to 23 of the decision in Vema Reddy,
which read as follows:
21. Panchayats, Mandal Parishads and Zilla Parishads are local
authorities both under Part IX of the Constitution and under the
provisions of the
A.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
. While the local
cadres, organized in the department of school education, in G. O.
Ms. No.529 dated 14-5-1976, included the posts of teachers in
government schools, it did not extend to the posts of teachers under
local authorities. Posts of teachers under local authorities were,
hitherto, not organized into local cadres.
22. The learned Advocate-General would emphasize, placing 
reliance en Mathurdas Kedia v. S.D. Munshaw and
State of Gujarat 
v. Ramanlal Keshavlal Soni
, that posts under local authorities are
also civil posts as the posts have been provincialised, there exists a
master and servant relationship between the State Government and 
such employees, and their salaries are paid from out of the
consolidated fund of the State. It is not necessary for us to examine
whether posts under "local authorities" are civil posts. For the
purpose of these batch of cases we shall presume that they are.
Since only such "local authorities", which are subject to the control
of the State Government, come under the purview of the
Presidential Order, as provided for under Para 2(d) thereof, we
shall also presume that the Mandal Parishad and Zilla Parishad
schools, wherein teachers and other employees are employed, are 
also subject to the control of the State Government. As noted above
the Presidential Order does not require all classes of posts in the
civil services of the State, or all classes of civil posts under the
State, to be organized into different local cadres for different parts
of the State and it is only to the "extent" and in the "manner"
provided in the Presidential Order are such posts required to be
organized into different local cadres. Para 3(2) requires categories
of posts of lower division clerks and below in each "department" in
each District to be organized into a separate local cadre. The
distinction between posts in "departments" of the State Government
and posts under any "local authority" is clear from Paras 6 and 8
of the Order. While the words "local cadre" have been used in
relation to posts in departments of the State Government in Clause
(i) of Para 6(1), when it comes to posts under a local authority, the
words used in Clause (ii) of Para 6(1) is "cadre" and not "local
cadre". A similar distinction is made between Clauses (i) and (ii) in
sub-paras (2) and (3) of Para 6 also. Even when it comes to posts
under the Hyderabad Urban Development Authority, a local
authority, Para 6(4) uses the words "cadre" and not "local cadre".
Similarly under Clause (a) of Para 8(1), while the words ''local
cadre" are used in relation to the State Government, in Clause (b)
for posts under a local authority, the words used are "cadre" and
not "local cadre". This distinction is also maintained in Clauses
C(1) and C(2) of Para 8(1) and Clauses (a) & (b) of Para 8(2). It is
only in respect of classes of civil posts in departments of the State
Government, does the Presidential Order require a local cadre to
be organized and not in respect of classes of civil posts under a
local authority. It is for this reason that, while the cadres/posts of
teachers in government schools was organised into different local
cadres, for different parts of the State, in G. O. Ms.No.529 dated
14-05-1976, cadres/posts of teachers in schools under local
authorities was not. In this context, it is useful to refer lo M.P.
Ananthanarayana v. State of A.P. Division Bench Judgement in 
W.P. No. 26072 of 2006 and batch dated 28-6-2006, wherein a 
Division Bench of this Court observed:
...At this juncture, we must also examine the decision of the
Tribunal, which held that the Presidential Order has a limited
application to the Board. It was held so in O.A. No. 5792 of 2003
and batch on 29-10-2004. The correctness of that decision was
challenged earlier before this Court in three writ petitions stated
supra. Unfortunately, the issue was not decided by this Court as the
petitioners preempted the decision by withdrawing the said writ
petitions. Dealing with the issue, a Division Bench of the Tribunal
held as follows:
xxxx. Thus the provisions contained in para 6 and 8 of the
presidential order relating to local areas and reservation in favour
of local candidates in the matter of direct recruitment to posts
whose scale of pay does not exceed 480 per mensem or any amount    
corresponding to it as may be specified in this regard in the
successive revisions of pay scales granted by the State Government
from time to time are applicable to posts born on the establishment
of a local authority. It is significant to note that in para-3, 4, 5 of
the Presidential Order, there is no mention about the posts born on
the establishment of a local authority where as in para-6 and 8
there is mention about the posts born on the establishment of a
local authority. This clearly goes to show that para-3,4 and 5 of the
Presidential Order has no application to posts born on the
establishment of a local authority.
We have examined the scheme and language of the Presidential  
Order and we approve the findings recorded by the Tribunal
insofar as the applicability of the Presidential Order to the Board is
concerned....
23. The submission of the Learned Advocate General that, since
posts of teachers in Mandal Parishad and Zilla Parishad schools
are civil posts, they come under the control of the department of
education of the State government and, as they are paid salaries
and allowances from the budget of this department, it is always
open to the government to bring such teachers within the
department of education, does not merit acceptance. Even if it
were to be held that such teachers hold civil posts, the fact remains
that they are working in schools of Mandal Parishads and Zilla
Parishads which, under Part IX of the Constitution and the
provisions of the
A.P. Panchayat Raj Act
, are institutions of local
self government. In Hanga Reddy District Sarpanches Association
v. Government of AP. , a larger bench of five judges of this court,
held that it is for the State Legislature to decide, by expressing its
will through legislation or subordinate legislation, as to what extent
Panchayat Raj Institutions should be conferred with power and
authority and that
Articles 40
and
243-G
of the Constitution have
left it to the wisdom of the State Legislature as regards the extent of
the powers and authority to be endowed on Panchayat Raj 
institutions. It is, however, well to remember that the powers to be
conferred on the Panchayats, by the State Legislature, must be such
as are required to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government. Under
Section 4(3)
of the A.P. Panchayat Raj Act,
1994 the Gram Panchayat, under
Section 148(4)
the Mandal  
Parishad and under
Section 177(2)
the Zilla Parishad, are bodies
corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to enter into
contracts and, by its Corporate name to sue and be sued. These
Panchayat Raj institutions are independent legal entities distinct
from that of the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
The A.P.
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
, made pursuant to the Seventy-Third 
amendment and introduction of Part IX to the Constitution could
not have and, in fact, has not treated these Panchayats as forming
part of any department of the State Government, for that would
defeat the very object of making Panchayats institutions of local
self-government.
47. It may be seen from the statement of objects and reasons
appended to the Seventy-Second Amendment Bill 1991 to the  
Constitution, which was enacted as the
Constitution Seventy-Third
Amendment Act, 1992
that the object of inserting Part-IX in the
Constitution was to enable the local bodies to function as units of
Self-Government. The provisions inserted in Part-IX of the
Constitution provided for (1) constitution of Panchayats, (2) elections
to all seats in the Panchayats, (3) fixation of a tenure for
Panchayats, (4) devolution by the State Legislature, of powers and
responsibilities upon the Panchayats, with respect to the preparation
of plans for economic development and social justice and for the
implementation of the development schemes, (5) grants-in-aid to the
Panchayats from the consolidated fund of the State and
appropriation by the Panchayats of the revenues of designated
taxes, duties, tolls and fees, (6) setting up of a Finance Commission
and the review of the financial position of the Panchayats once in
five years, and (7) auditing of the accounts of the Panchayats.
48. This is why
Article 243G
empowers the Legislature of a
State, by law, to endow the Panchayats with such powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as
institutions of self-government. The law so enacted may contain
provisions for devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats with respect to the preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice and implementation of schemes for
economic development and social justice including those in relation
to matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Article 243
H empowers
the Legislature of a State, by law, to authorise Panchayats to levy,
collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in
accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits. The law
so enacted may also provide for making such grants-in-aid to the
Panchayats from the consolidated fund of the State. It may also
provide for constitution of such funds for crediting all monies
received respectively by or on behalf of the Panchayats and for
withdrawal of such monies therefrom.
49. In exercise of the powers so conferred by Part-IX of the
Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra
Pradesh enacted the
Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
,   
providing for (1) constitution, administration and control of Gram
Panchayats, (2) powers, functions and property of Gram Panchayats 
(3) taxation and finance, (4) public safety, convenience and health,
(5) constitution, incorporation, composition, powers and function of
Mandal Parishads, (6) constitution, incorporation, composition,
powers and functions of Zilla Parishads, (7) constitution of Election
Commission for Local Bodies, (8) constitution of Finance
Commission and other various other ancillary matters.
50.
Section 36
of the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act,
1994, hereinafter called the Act, which deals with officers and other
employees of Gram Panchayats, obliges the Government to pay out  
of the Consolidated Fund of the State, the salaries, allowances,
pension etc., of the employees and the officers.
Section 36
of the
Act also left it to the rule making power of the Government under the
proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution, to classify the posts,
prescribe the methods of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and
allowances and discipline and conduct of the officers and employees
of a Gram Panchayat. The Government also reserved to itself under
Section 36 (1)
of the Act, the power to fix and alter the number, the
designations and grades of and salaries, fees and allowances
payable to officers and other employees of a Gram Panchayat. But
Section 74
of the Act provided for the creation of a Gram Panchayat
fund to which the taxes and levies collected by the Gram Panchayat
as well as the grants received from the Government are to be
credited. It is from out of this Gram Panchayat fund that the salaries
and allowances and pensions and pensionary contributions of the
officers and servants of the Gram Panchayat are to be paid, under
Section 75 (2)
of the Act. In other words, the Consolidated Fund of
the State may be the source, but the same is liable to be credited
into the Gram Panchayat Fund and it is only from the Gram
Panchayat Fund that the payment of salaries and allowances to the
officers and servants are to be made.
51.
Part-III of the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
,
deals with the constitution, incorporation, composition, functions and
powers of the Mandal Parishads. Just as
Section 36
of the Act deals
with officers and other employees of the Gram Panchayat,
Section
169
of the Act deals with officers and other employees of Mandal
Parishads.
Section 169 (3)
, which is in pari materia  with
Section 36
(2)
of the Act, obliges the Government to pay out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State, the salaries, allowances, re-
allowances, pensions and contributions of the officers and
employees of the Mandal Parishads. The rules relating to
recruitment, conditions of service, classification, pay and allowances
are also to be regulated in terms of the rules framed under the
proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution.
52.
Section 171
of the Act deals with the creation of a Mandal
Parishad Fund and it is similar to
Section 74
. Just as
Section 75 (2)
(a) (ii) of the Act enjoins upon the Gram Panchayat, the duty to
provide for payment of salaries and allowances of its officers and
servants from out of Gram Panchayat Fund,
Section 172 (3)
makes  
it clear that the expenses of the Mandal Parishads, to be met out of
Mandal Parishad Fund, shall include, the salaries and allowances of
officers and other employees.
53. Likewise,
Section 177
speaks about the constitution of
Zilla Parishads.
Part-IV of the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act,
1994
, which deals with the constitution, incorporation, composition,
powers and functions of Zilla Parishads, contains a unique provision
that is not to be found in Part-II dealing with Gram Panchayats and
Part-III dealing with Mandal Parishads. Under
Section 192 (1) (xv)
,
every Zilla Parishad shall have the power to establish, maintain or
expand secondary, vocational or industrial schools.
54. At this juncture, it may be relevant to note the distinction
between the power conferred upon a Gram Panchayat, the power  
conferred upon a Zilla Parishad and the power conferred upon a
Mandal Parishad.
Section 46
of the Act, which speaks about the
powers of Gram Panchayat, merely enables the Gram Panchayat to   
make provisions for the promotion and development of pre-primary
education, elementary education, social and health education,
cottage industries and trade. It does not talk about the establishment
of schools, though it talks about the establishment and maintenance
of cattle sheds. In contrast,
Section 161
, which speaks about the
powers and functions of a Mandal Parishad, merely enables the
Mandal Parishads to exercise such powers and perform such  
functions as may be entrusted to it by the rules in this behalf in
regard to the subjects enumerated in Schedule-I. The Mandal
Parishad is also conferred under
Section 161 (2)
, the power to carry
out the functions specified in Schedule-II. Schedule-I is actually
common to Gram Panchayats, Mandal Parishads and Zilla   
Parishads, as can be seen from the fact that a reference is made to
Schedule-I in
Section 45 (2)
,
Section 161 (2)
and
191 (1)
of the Act.
55. In other words,
Section 46 (iii)
, which deals with Gram
Panchayat, merely speaks about the power of the Gram Panchayat   
to take measures for promotion and development of pre-primary
education and elementary education. In contrast,
Section 161 (2)
,
which deals with the powers and functions of a Mandal Parishad,
does not elaborate except making a reference to Schedules-I and II.
Entry 17 in Schedule-I reads thus:
Education, including primary and secondary schools
This Schedule-I is common to Gram Panchayat, Mandal Parishads   
and Zilla Parishads.
56. But Schedule-II to which a reference is made only in
Section 161
contains an entry in Entry 5, which is elaborate. Entry 5
under Schedule-II reads as follows:
5. Education:- Maintenance and expansion to Elementary and 
Basic Schools and in particular,-
(i) management of Government and taken over Aided Elementary  
and Higher Elementary Schools;
(ii) establishment of Adult Education Centres and Adult Literacy
Centres;
(iii) provision and improvement of accommodation for schools with
peoples participation;
(iv) conversion of existing Elementary Schools into Basic Schools;
and
(v) taking of such action as may be necessary for the promotion of
education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen
years.
Therefore, the role of Mandal Parishads in the matter of
establishment of schools, appears to be far greater than the
role of Gram Panchayat. But the role of the Zilla Parishads
appears to be far greater than that of the other two as seen from
Section 192 (1) (xv)
of the Act.
57. In fact,
Section 197
speaks about the constitution of a Zilla
Parishad Fund.
Section 198 (1)
, which enumerates the source of
income of Zilla Parishads, gives an indication that the funds of the
Zilla Parishads shall consist of both Central and State Governments
funds allotted to the Zilla Parishads. Under
Section 198 (3)
, the
expenses of the Zilla Parishads include the salaries and allowances
of its officers and other employees.
58. It must be kept in mind that the very object of the
Constitution Seventy-Third Amendment is to make Gram  
Panchayats, Mandal Parishads and Zilla Parishads, independent 
units of Self-Government. The consolidated fund of the State is
only one of the sources of funds received by these three units
of local self-government. The moment a contribution is made by
the State Government to a Gram Panchayat or Mandal Parishad   
or Zilla Parishad, from out of its Consolidated Funds, the colour
of the coin fades. Thereafter, the money paid, partakes the
character of the Gram Panchayat Fund or Mandal Parishad  
Fund or Zilla Parishad Fund and the salaries and allowances of
the officers employed in these units of local self-government
are paid only out of the respective funds and not out of the
consolidated fund of the State.
59. If source of funding can determine the existence of the
relationship of master and servant, the officers and servants of
local bodies will have many masters. The reason is that the
Mandal Parishad Fund under
Section 172 (1) (iii)
is to include
Central as well as State aid and also the aid received from the
All India Bodies and Institutions for the development of cottage
and village industries, Khadi, Silk, Coir, Handicrafts and the
like. Similarly, the funds of the Zilla Parishads, are to include,
under
Section 198 (1)
, the Central or the State Government
funds as well as the grants from All India Bodies and
Institutions.
60. Though the State Government, under various provisions of
the
Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
, has reserved to itself
the power to make rules under the proviso to
Article 309
of the
Constitution for the classifications and methods of recruitment,
conditions of service, pay and allowances and discipline and
conduct of the officers and employees appointed to Gram
Panchayats under
Section 36 (3)
, all Mandal Parishads (under
Section 169 (4)
and all Zilla Parishads under
Section 195 (4)
, the
same may not tantamount to the creation of the relationship of
master and servant between the State Government and the officers
and servants of Gram Panchayats, Mandal Parishads or Zilla
Parishads.
61. We are conscious of the fact that the salaries and
allowances, pension and contributions of the servants or the officers
and other employees of Gram Panchayats are liable to be paid
under
Section 36 (2)
from out of the consolidated fund of the State.
Similarly, the salaries and allowances and pension and contributions
of the officers and servants of Mandal Parishad are to be paid under
Section 169 (3)
from out of the consolidated fund of the State and
the salaries and allowances etc., of the officers and servants of the
Zilla Parishads are also to be paid under
Section 195 (3)
out of the
consolidated fund of the State. But despite these provisions, there
is an incongruity in the statutory prescription.
Section 74
speaks about the creation of Gram Panchayat Fund,
Sections  
171
speaks about the creation of Mandal Parishad Fund and
Section 197
speaks about creation of a Zilla Parishad Fund. It is
into these funds that the grant-in-aid from the State
Government is to be credited. It is from out of these respective
funds that the salaries and allowances of the officers and
servants are to be paid, as seen from
Section 75 (2) (a) (ii)
in the
case of Gram Panchayat,
Section 172 (3)
in the case of Mandal
Parishad and
Section 198 (3)
in the case of Zilla Parishads.
62. Therefore, we are very much doubtful whether the tests
laid down by the two Constitution Benches of the Supreme Court in
Kanak Chandra Dutta and Mathuradas Mohanlal Kedia will stand  
satisfied, after the advent of the Seventy-Third amendment to the
Constitution and the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1994
. 
Before the advent of the Panchayat Raj, the local bodies remained
independent institutions only on paper. Now they have become (at
least on theory) independent units of local self-governments. To say
that (1) they have no power of appointment, (2) they have no
relationship of master and servant, (3) they have no power to
dismiss an employee or regulate his conduct, would actually
strike at the root of the very object of the Seventy-Third
Amendment of the Constitution.
63. It may be true on facts that certain teachers of the Zilla
Parishads and Panchayat Samithis in the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
have already been provincialised and they have been included in the
Andhra Pradesh Education Service and Andhra Pradesh Education   
Subordinate Service.  But, the same may not strike at the autonomy
of the local bodies and make the local bodies be at the mercy of the
State Government even to take disciplinary action against a person
working in a Gram Panchayat, Mandal Parishad or Zilla Parishad.
64. Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that the
teachers working in the schools established and run by Gram
Panchayats, Mandal Parishads and Zilla Parishads may not be the 
holders of civil posts or posts in the civil services of the State.
65. But there is one impediment for us to decide the lis on
hand, solely on that basis. When the appeals arising out of the
decisions of this Court in Kesavulu and Vema Reddy came up for 
final hearing, the Supreme Court gave liberty to the State
Government to approach the Central Government for an amendment   
of the Presidential Order. While doing so, the Supreme Court
recorded, not as a matter of a judicial opinion, but as a matter of
concession by all parties before the Supreme Court, that the
teachers of Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishads have also
become government servants. It is on this basis that liberty was
granted to the State Government to seek amendment of the 
Presidential Order. We would have been better off, if an opinion of a
binding nature had been rendered by the Supreme Court as to
whether the teachers of Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishad
schools are holders of civil posts or holders of posts in the civil
services of the State, within the meaning of these expressions under
Article 371D (2) (a)
of the Constitution. The relevant portion of the
order of the Supreme Court reads as follows:
1. Since the recruitment to the local authorities, the Panchayat
Samitis and the Zila Parishads are said to have been done in
compliance with Para 8 of the Presidential Order, the State
Government is at liberty to send a proposal to the Union of India
for obtaining the approval of the President of India to integrate the
teachers of the Panchayat Samitis and the Zilla Parishads, who
are also government servants with the existing local cadres of
teachers. As and when such proposal is sent to the Union of
India, the same shall be considered at an early date.
In the meantime, it would be open to the State
Government to frame Rules to make suitable promotional 
avenues for teachers and other employees of the Panchayat 
Samitis and the Zilla Parishads.
66. Today, we cannot take a view that will make the basis
on which a liberty was granted by the Supreme Court, a dead
letter. If teachers employed in the schools run by Zilla Parishads
and Panchayat Samithis are not the holders of any post in the civil
services of the State or the holders of civil posts, they cannot even
be organised into local cadre, as
Article 371D (2) (a)
of the
Constitution does not apply to them. But it is not possible for us
today, to hold so, as the same would annul the effect of the order of
the Supreme Court dated 30-09-2015. Therefore, even while
expressing our opinion as indicated above and holding that the first
and second grounds of challenge to the impugned Presidential
Orders are liable to be sustained, we make it clear that our hands
are tied and we are not in position to allow the writ petitions on the
first and second grounds of challenge, as the same may tantamount 
to nullifying the order of the Supreme court dated 30-09-2015.
Third ground of attack:
67. The third ground of attack to the impugned Presidential
Order is that
Article 371D
of the Constitution empowers the
President only to direct the State Government to organise civil posts
and posts in the services of the State into local cadre, but it does not
authorise the President himself to organise posts into local cadre.
68. We do not think that such a dichotomy is borne out by
Article 371D.
A careful look at clause (1) (2) of
Article 371D
would
show-
(i)     that clause (1) empowers the President, by order, to provide
for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people
belonging to different parts of the State, in the matter of public
employment and in the matter of education;
(ii)    that under sub-clause (a) of clause (2), the Presidential Order
made under clause (1) may require the State Government to 
organise any class or classes of posts into different local
cadres;
(iii)   that under sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the Presidential Order
made under clause (1) may specify any part or parts of the
State, which shall be regarded as the local area, for direct
recruitment to posts in any local cadre under the State
Government and for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre
under any local authority within the State; and
(iv)    that under sub-clause (c) of clause (2), the Presidential Order
may specify the extent to which and the manner in which and
the conditions subject to which, preference or reservation
shall be given or made in the matter of direct recruitment.
Clause (1) and (2) of
Article 371D
read as follows:
(1) The President may, by order made with respect to
the state of Andhra Pradesh, provide, having regard to
the requirements of the State as a whole, for equitable
opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to
different parts of state, in the matter of public
employment and in the matter of education, and different
provisions may be made for various parts of the State
(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in particular,-
(a) require the State Government to organise any class or
classes of posts in a civil service of, or any class or
classes of civil posts under, the State into different local
cadres for different parts of the State and allot in
accordance with such principal and procedure as may be 
specified in the order the persons holding such post to the
local cadres so organised;
(b) specify any part or parts of the State which shall be
regarded as the local area-
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre,
(whether organised in pursuance of an order under this
article or constituted otherwise) under the State
Government;
(ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any
local authority within the State; and
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any University
within the State or to any other educational institution
which is subject to the control of the State Government;
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which and
the conditions subject to which, preference or reservation
shall be given or made-
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such
cadre referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in
this behalf in the order;
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such University or
other educational institution referred to in sub-clause (b)
as may be specified in this behalf in the order, to or in
favour of candidates who have resided or studied for any
period specified in the order in the local area in respect
of such cadre, University or other educational institution,
as the case may be.
69. A careful look at clauses (1) and (2) of
Article 371D
would
show that while clause (1) deals with the power to make order,
clause (2) deals with the matters that the Presidential Order
may provide for or deal with. Sub-clause (a), (b) and (c) of
clause (2) deal respectively with (1) the organisation of posts
into local cadres, (2) the demarcation of the State into local area
and (3) the prescription relating to reservation.
70. The source of power of the President is to be found in
clause (1) of
Article 371D
and this clause does not oblige the
President to delegate his power. It is only in clause (2) and that
too with respect to the organisation of local cadres, that a power of
delegation is recognized. When the substantial provision
conferring power upon the President to pass an order does not
stipulate any restriction upon his power, the mere fact that he is
also entitled to require the State Government under sub-clause
(a) of clause (2), to organise posts into local cadre, does not
divest the President of the power to organise posts into local
cadre. Therefore, the third ground of challenge to the impugned
Presidential Order cannot be accepted.
Fourth ground of attack:
71. The fourth ground of attack is that the decisions of this
Court in M. Kesavulu and P. Vema Reddy  to the effect that there
cannot be an integration of the cadre of teachers in local bodies with
the cadre of teachers in Government Schools have attained finality.
But the impugned order tends to overreach the decision of the
Constitutional Court.
72. It is seen from paragraph 68 of the report in M. Kesavulu
that one of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioners therein was that the integration of services of persons
from separate and distinct cadres was illegal. In paragraph 70 of
the report in M. Kesavulu, this Court came to the conclusion
that though the services of teachers in the schools run by
Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishads were provincialised and
the same pay scales and other benefits were extended to them,
they continued to stand on a different footing, in view of the
necessity to protect the autonomy of the Panchayat Raj
Institutions. It was held towards the end of the paragraph 70 of the
decision in M. Kesavulu, that despite the provincialisation of their
services, the teachers in Panchayat Samithis schools cannot be
treated as absorbed teachers in Government services. In paragraph
72 of the decision in M. Kesavulu, the argument of the learned
Additional Advocate General appearing for the State that there was
integration of service, was rejected. Paragraph 72 reads as follows:
72. We also notice another flaw in the order passed by the
Government. Though the learned Additional Advocate-General 
contends that it is integration of the services of the teachers
working in Government schools and also Panchayat Raj  
institutions, but the G.O. does not spell out any integration
obviously for the reasons referred to above. It is only specifically
says that these rules apply to the teachers in Panchayat Raj
institutions and the Government schools. Therefore, they are
applied independently to the teachers working in Panchayat
schools and teachers working in Government schools. Under 
these circumstances and in the absence of specific notification
issued by the Government under the proper statute, the
integration cannot be inferred. Therefore, on this ground also,
G.O. is not sustainable and accordingly, liable to be set aside.
After thus holding that the Government Orders impugned in M.
Kesavulu did not talk about the integration of cadre, this Court also
pointed out in paragraphs 87 to 90 that the posts of teachers
working in Panchayat Raj Institutions were not organised into local
cadre under the Presidential Order. An argument was raised in M.
Kesavulu that once provincialisation had taken place, the posts
so provincialised would automatically form part of local cadres.
But, the said argument was rejected in paragraph 97 of the report.
73. In other words, the decision of this Court in M. Kesavulu
was based upon two important aspects namely (i) that the
Government orders impugned therein did not talk about integration;
and (ii) that the posts in Panchayat Raj institutions had not been
organised into local cadres by any Presidential Order.
74. The procedural defect so pointed out in M. Kesavulu was
sought to be removed by the Government through a legislative
enactment in the form of A.P. Act 27 of 2005. But the same became 
the subject matter of challenge in P. Vema Reddy. This Court struck
down the enactment on the ground that the power of the State
Government to organise posts into local cadres under Para 3 (1) of
the Presidential Order had expired on completion of a period of 27
months from the date of commencement of the Presidential Order 
and that therefore, after 17-01-1978, the State no longer had the
power to organise local cadre.
75. It is this lacuna that is sought to be removed by the
impugned Presidential Order. If seen in this context, it will be clear
that the President has not lost his powers to issue any order under
clause (1) of
Article 371D
either organising any post into a local
cadre or empowering the State to organise any post into a local
cadre. In M. Kesavulu and P. Vema Reddy, the State Government  
sought to integrate the posts in two different cadres, first through the
executive fiat and next through a legislative enactment, for both of
which
Article 371D
or the Presidential Order did not accord any
sanction. But, it does not mean that even the President has
exhausted his power to organise a post into a local cadre.
76. In other words, so long as
Article 371D
remains, the
power of the President to make an order under clause (1)
stands. The order so issued should deal with three things
namely (i) organise posts into local cadres, (ii) specify parts of
the State as local areas and (iii) specify the extent and
conditions subject to which reservation has to be given in
favour of local candidates. In other words, the order issued by
the President under clause (1) will make provisions with regard
to the three things namely (a) local cadre, (b) local area and (c)
local candidates.
77. But, unfortunately, the impugned Presidential Order
does not merely organise the posts of teachers in local bodies
into local cadre. The impugned Presidential Order namely sub-
para (2A) of para 3 goes a step further by integrating the cadre
of teachers of local bodies with the cadre of teachers of
Government Schools. Sub-para (2A) inserted under paragraph 3 
by the impugned Presidential Order reads as follows:
(2A) The posts belonging to each Non-Gazette category of teachers
in Mandal Parishad, Zilla Parishad and Government School in each
District shall be organized into a separate integrated cadre.
78. While we have no doubt that the President himself can
organise any posts into a local cadre or empower the State
Government to organise any classes of posts into a local cadre,
we have our own doubts as to whether the President can go
further and order the integration of two different cadres.
79. We have already extracted clauses (1) and (2) of
Article
371D.
As stated earlier, clause (1) of
Article 371D
confers power
upon the President to make provisions, by order, in the matter of
public employment and in the matter of education. Clause (2)
pinpoints 3 specific aspects to be covered in the Presidential
Order, namely (i) local cadre, (ii) local area and (iii) local
candidate.
Article 371D
does not speak about the integration of
any cadre.
80. Even paragraph 3 of the Presidential Order, 1975 does not
empower the State Government to integrate different classes of
posts. We have no difficulty in accepting the power of the State
Government as an employer to integrate different classes of
posts or different cadres into one. But, the question here is
whether the same can be done in terms of
Article 371D
and the
Presidential Order issued thereunder.
81. The issue can be appreciated better, if sub-paragraph (2A)
is juxtaposed with the other sub-paragraphs of Para 3. Paragraph 3
of the Presidential Order as it will stand amended with the insertion
of sub-para (2A) reads as follows:
Para 3. Organisation of local cadres :- (1) The State Government
shall, within a period of eighteen months from the commencement
of this Order, organize classes of posts in the civil services of, and
classes of civil posts under, the State into different local cadres for
different parts of the State to the extent, and in the manner,
hereinafter provided:
[Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the said period,
the President may by order, require the State Government,
whenever he considers it expedient so to do, to organise any classes
of posts in the civil services of, and classes of civil posts, under, the
State into different local cadres for different parts of the State].
(2) The posts belonging to the category of Junior Assistant, and to
each of the other categories equivalent to, or lower than that of a
Junior Assistant, in each department in each district shall be
organised into a separate cadre.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, and sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph
8, a category shall be deemed to be equivalent to or lower than that
of a Junior Assistant if the minimum of the scale of pay of a post
belonging to that category or, where the post carries a fixed pay,
such fixed pay, is equal to or lower than the minimum of the scale
of pay of a Junior Assistant.
(2A) The posts belonging to each Non-Gazette category of teachers
in Mandal Parishad, Zilla Parishad and Government School in
each District shall be organized into a separate integrated cadre.
(3) The posts belonging to each non-gazetted category, other than
those referred to in sub-paragraph (2), in each department in each
zone shall be organised into a separate cadre.
(4) The posts belonging to each specified gazetted category in each
department in each zone shall be organised into a separate cadre.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraphs (3) and
(4), the State Government may, where it considers it expedient so to
do and with approval of the Central Government, organize the
posts belonging to any of the categories referred to therein, in any
department, or any establishment thereof, in two or more
continuous zones into a single cadre.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraphs (2), (3),
(4) & (5), the Central Government may notify the departments in
which and City of Hyderabad and on such notification, the posts
belonging to each such category in each such department in the
said City (other than those concerned with the administration of
areas falling outside the said City) shall be organised into a
separate cadre and the posts so organised shall be excluded from
the other cadres, organised in pursuance of this paragraph, or
constituted otherwise and comprising of posts belonging to that
category in that department.
(7) In organising a separate cadre in respect of any category of
posts in any department for any part of the State, nothing in this
Order shall be deemed to prevent the State Government from
organising or continuing more than one cadre in respect of such
category in such department for such part of the State.
(8) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is not
practicable or expedient to organise local cadres under this
paragraph in respect of any non-gazetted category of posts in any
department, it may, by notification, make a declaration to that effect
and on such declaration the provisions of this paragraph shall not
apply to such category of posts.
There are 8 sub-paragraphs in paragraph 3 of the Presidential
Order. The first deals with the power of the State to organise
different classes of posts into different local cadres. The second
obliges the State to organise the posts belonging to the category of
Junior Assistant and equivalent or lower categories to be organised
into a separate cadre. The third speaks about the organisation of
posts in non-gazetted categories other than the category of Junior
Assistant etc., into a separate cadre. The fourth sub-paragraph
obliges the posts belonging to each specified gazetted category in
each department in each zone to be organised into a separate
cadre. The fifth sub-paragraph speaks about the organisation of
certain posts in two or more continuous zones into a single cadre,
subject to the prior approval of the Central Government. The sixth
sub-paragraph deals with the City of Hyderabad. The seventh sub-
paragraph recognises the powers of the State Government to
organise more than one cadre in respect of any category of posts,
which has been organised into local cadre. The eighth sub-
paragraph deals with the power of the Central Government to
declare that certain posts in the non-gazetted category cannot be
organised into local cadre.
82. Thus, it is seen that paragraph 3 in entirety speaks only
about the organisation of different classes or categories of posts into
different local cadre and it does not talk about the integration or
merger of different categories of posts. The reason why
Article 371D
as well as paragraph 3 of the Presidential Order remains silent about
the integration of different cadres is that the only object of
Article
371D
is to provide equal opportunities for people belonging to
different parts of the State in the matter of public employment. The
said object has nothing to do with the integration of cadres, which is
necessitated by administrative exigencies.
83. To put it differently,
Article 371D
is an affirmative
action for the removal of regional imbalances. Integration of
different cadres lies in the realm of administrative exigencies,
which has nothing to do with the problem of regional
imbalances. But, in their anxiety to overcome the legal hurdles
created by M. Kesavulu and P. Vema Reddy, the Governments    
secured a Presidential order that goes beyond the scope, the
purport and the express provisions of
Article 371D.
84. Taking advantage of the opinion expressed by the
Supreme Court in Suryanarayana Rao to the effect that the
expression in the matter of public employment is of wider import, it
was contended by the learned senior counsel for the State that
clause (1) of
Article 371D
deserved a liberal interpretation, as it uses
another expression namely equal opportunities. But we do not
think so. While giving any interpretation to the words and
phrases found in Article 371D, the Court should keep in mind
two things namely (a) the Six Point Formula that formed the
basis for the Thirty-Second Amendment to the Constitution and
(b) clause (10) of
Article 371D
, which gives overriding effect to
Article 371D
as well as the Presidential Order issued
thereunder, over the other provisions of the Constitution
including
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
84. Any special provision in the Constitution that eclipses
Articles 14
and
16
has to be construed strictly and not liberally.
With the exponential increase of the field of fundamental rights
in the recent past, any provision of the Constitution that
expressly overrides the fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution should receive strict and
not liberal construction.
85. Keeping this principle in mind, If we look at
Article 371D
, it
will be clear that neither
Article 371-D
nor the Presidential Order,
1975 speak about the integration of two different cadres. The Six
Point Formula aimed at removing the regional imbalances, did not
contemplate integration of different cadres as a method of offsetting
the imbalances. If by inserting sub-paragraph (2A) in paragraph 3,
the Order had merely declared that the teachers in the schools run
by Panchayat Samithis and Zilla Parishads shall be organised into
local cadres, we could not have found fault with the same. In other
words, if sub-paragraph (2A) had used the same language as used 
in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) by merely declaring posts belonging
to each non-gazetted category of teachers in Mandal Parishads, and
Zilla Parishads in each District shall be organised into a separate
cadre, no one could have taken exception to the same. But the
difficulty in sub-paragraph (2A) lies in the insertion of the words
Government Schools and the word Integrated. If the words
Government School and the word Integrated are not found in the
impugned sub-paragraph (2A), the same would have been perfectly 
in tune with the scheme of
Article 371D
of the Constitution and we
would have no hesitation in upholding the same. The reason is that
in the absence of the words Government School and the word
Integrated, sub-paragraph (2A) would be perfectly in line with the
sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 3.
86. At the cost of repetition, it should be pointed out that the
organisation of different posts in each department in each District
into local cadre was to ensure that a major portion of the posts in
every department in every District is filled up by local candidates. At
the time when the Thirty-Second amendment was made to the   
Constitution, it was felt and recognised that all posts in all
departments in all the Districts were occupied by non-locals due to
the social and educational advancement of some parts of the State.
Therefore, with a view to provide a level playing field to socially and
educationally backward Districts, the posts in each department in
each District were organised into local cadres and 85% of the posts
in each District in each department were reserved for the local
candidates. While organising the posts in each department in each
District could sub-serve the object sought to be achieved, the
integration of cadres had no nexus to the object sought to be
achieved. This is the reason why neither
Article 371D
nor the
Presidential Order ever contemplated or whispered about the
integration of cadres, but talk only about the organisation of local
cadres. The theme of the song in all sub-paragraphs of paragraph 3
of the Presidential Order is on each department in each District.  It
is not different departments in each District or different
departments in different Districts. Therefore, we are of the
considered view that sub-paragraph (2A) is ultra vires
Article
371D
, in as much as no power of integration of different cadres
is conferred upon the President under
Article 371D.
Nor can we
read into
Article 371D
, the existence of any power to integrate
different cadres, as part of the power to organise local cadres.
87. Coming to the second impugned Presidential Order by 
which entries 23A, 26A and 26B are inserted in the Third Schedule
to the Presidential Order, 1975, it is seen that the Third Schedule
enlists Specified Gazetted Categories. The expression Specified
Gazetted Category is defined in paragraph 2 (1) (j) of the
Presidential Order to mean any gazetted category specified in the
Third Schedule. It also includes any other gazetted category notified
as such by the Central Government. Sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph
3 of the Presidential Order provides for organising the posts
belonging to each specified gazetted category in each department in
each zone into a separate cadre. Therefore, the entries in the Third
Schedule should be read along with paragraph 2 (1) (j) and
paragraph 3 (4).
88. The emphasis in paragraph 3 (4) is on three things namely
(1) each specified gazetted category, (2) in each department and (3)
in each zone. Keeping this mind, let us now have look at the
impugned entries.
S.No. 
Category 
Name of the Department
(1)
(2)
(3)
23A 
Mandal Educational Officer, Head Master 
and Head Mistress in Government and  
Zilla Parishad High Schools


Education Department  
26A 
Senior Lecturers, District Institutes of
Education and Training

Education Department  
26B 
Lecturers, District Institutes of Education
and Training

Education Department
89. It is not clear as to how the writ petitioners in W.P.No.
23274 of 2017 are affected by entries 26A and 26B out of the three
entries made by the impugned Presidential Order. It is not pleaded
by the writ petitioners, who are working only as School Assistants,
that they have an avenue of promotion to the post of senior lecturers
or lecturers in the District Institute of Education and Training
included in entries 26A and 26B.
90. But Entry 23A deals with the posts of Mandal Educational
Officer, Head Master, Head Mistress in Government and Zilla
Parishad High Schools. In other words, three different gazetted
categories of posts, namely Mandal Educational Officer, Head
Master and Head Mistress in Government High Schools and Head   
Master and Head Mistress in Zilla Parishad High Schools are
brought under a single entry in Entry 23A. But paragraph 3 (4) of the
Presidential Order lays emphasis on the organisation of each
specified gazetted category in each department in each zone into a
separate cadre. Paragraph 3 (4) of the Presidential Order reads as
follows:
(4) The posts belonging to each specified gazetted category in each
department in each zone shall be organised into a separate cadre
91. Therefore, Entry 23A inserted by one of the impugned
amendments to the Presidential Order goes contrary to the express
language of paragraph 3 (4) of the Presidential Order. Entries 26A
and 26B do not suffer from such a vice.
92. Therefore, we are of the considered view that sub-
paragraph (2A) of Paragraph 3 and Entry 23A inserted in the Third
Schedule to the Presidential Order, 1975 are ultra vires of
Article
371D
only and the very scheme of the Presidential Order, 1975.
Ground No.5:
93. The last ground of challenge is to the retrospectivity
conferred upon the amendment to the Presidential Order.
Paragraphs 1 (3) of the impugned GSR 639 (E) dated 23-06-2017 
declares that it shall be deemed to have come into force with effect
from 20th day of November, 1998. A similar provision is found in
paragraph 1 (3) of the GSR 637 (E), dated 23-06-2017 in relation to
Entry 23A.
94. Interestingly, an explanatory memorandum is provided in
the impugned Presidential Order GSR 637 and 639 dated 23-06-  
2017. It reads as follows:
It is certified that no person is adversely affected by making
the said orders effective with retrospective date.
We do not know the basis on which such an explanatory  
memorandum was incorporated in the impugned Presidential  
Orders. The reason as to why the date 20-11-1998 was chosen, to 
give effect to the impugned amendments is that it was on the said
date namely 20-11-1998 that G.O.Ms.No.538, set aside by this Court 
in M. Kesavulu was issued. To be precise, the Government first
issued G.O.Ms.No.505 Education dated 16-11-1998, bringing the 
posts of Parishad Educational Officer and Gazetted Head Masters of
Zilla Parishad High Schools and Mandal Educational Officer into the
Andhra Pradesh Educational Service. By the next order in
G.O.Ms.No.538, Education dated 20-11-1998, the Andhra Pradesh   
School Educational Subordinate Service Rules were made  
applicable to teachers working in Government as well as Panchayat
Raj institutions. Since these two Government Orders G.O.Ms.No.505 
and 538 were set aside by this Court in M. Kesavulu, the impugned
Presidential Orders seek to give retrospective effect from 20-11-
1998, the date of issue of G.O.Ms.No.538.
95. It was submitted by the learned senior counsel appearing
on behalf of the State Government that the Government will ensure
that none of the service conditions such as scales of pay, seniority,
promotions already granted etc., to Government school teachers will
be affected by the impugned Presidential Orders and that at the
most the mere chances of promotion available to them may get 
affected.  Therefore, he contended that none of the vested rights of
the writ petitioners are sought to be taken away by the impugned
Presidential Orders and that even if they do so, they are not
amenable to challenge on account of clause (10) of
Article 371D.
96. But as we have indicated earlier, any interpretation to
Article 371D
should be in conformity with the objects behind the
Thirty Second Amendment to the Constitution and the Six Point
Formula. Such an interpretation cannot be liberal in view of the
insulation of
Article 371D
and the Presidential Order issued
thereunder from attack on the basis of any other provisions of the
Constitution.
97. If we keep the above fundamental premise in mind, it is
doubtful whether the Presidential order can have retrospective
effect. The object of empowering the President to issue an order is
to ensure that the backward areas of the State get a push so as to
enable people of those regions to equip themselves in course of
time and become fit enough to run the race in matters of education
and employment, on equal terms. Putting the clock back and 
organising certain posts into local cadre and integrating them with
retrospective effect, is not at all recognized by the Presidential
Order. The power to issue a Presidential order under
Article 371D
is
not for ratification of any act already done in violation of the
Presidential Order.
Article 371D
merely confers power upon the
President to organise various classes of posts in each department in
each District into local cadres. Once this is done, it will be up to the
Government (1) to merge or integrate different categories of posts
and (2) to give retrospective effect, if permissible in law.
98. Instead of requesting for a Presidential order, merely to
organise the posts of teachers in Zilla Parishad schools and
Panchayat Samithis schools into local cadre in terms of
Article 371D
and thereafter, integrate them with others in terms of the rules
issued under the proviso to
Article 309
, the Government appears to
have taken a shortcut and have the retrospective effect sanctioned
by the Presidential Order itself. If the impugned Presidential Order
had merely stopped with the organisation of the posts of teachers in
Panchayat Samithi institutions into local cadre, it could have fallen
into the domain of the Government to amend the Service Rules to
integrate both the cadres. If the State Government had done this in
exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to
Article 309
, the
same would have become vulnerable to challenge on the ground 
that the retrospective effect given to the rule, sought to take away
the vested rights. In order to insulate the retrospective effect from
any attack on the ground of
Article 14
, the State Governments
appear to have adopted the devious method of seeking a
Presidential Order to integrate 2 different cadres with retrospective
effect. No court can approve of such a game plan. Therefore, the
fifth ground of attack is also liable to be upheld.
99. In view of what is stated above, we are of the considered
view that sub-paragraph (2A) inserted in paragraph-3 of the
Presidential Order 1975 by GSR 639 (E) dated 23.06.2017 is ultra
vires the power conferred by Clause (1) of
Article 371D
and beyond
the purview of the different aspects indicated in sub-clauses (a) (b)
and (c) of clause (2) of
Article 371D
of the constitution. Similarly,
Entry 23A inserted in the Third Schedule to the Presidential Order,
1975 by GSR 637 (E) dated 23.06.2017, in as much as the same   
places Mandal Educational Officer, Headmaster and 
Headmistresses in Government and Zilla Parishad High Schools in 
the same class, is ultra vires
Article 371D.
While there is power
conferred by
Article 371D
to organise any class or classes of posts,
no power of integration or merger of cadres is expressly or impliedly
conferred by
Article 371D(1)
of the Constitution. Hence
W.P.Nos.23267 of 2017, and 27404 of 2017 are allowed and the 
impugned Presidential orders are set aside. W.P.No.23274 of 2017
is partly allowed, setting aside Entry 23A inserted in the Third
Schedule to the Presidential Order, 1975. There shall be no order as
to costs.
As a sequel thereto, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending
shall stand closed.
__________________________________      
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
Date: 28-08-2018