[Cites
26
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Jaladi Sita Rama Koteswara Rao And ... vs Government Of Andhra Pradesh And Others on 19 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 33
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU                          

Writ Appeal No.2163 of 1998 

19-04-2018 

Jaladi Sita Rama Koteswara Rao  and others Appellants  

Government of Andhra Pradesh and others Respondents    

Counsel for the appellants: Mr. M.P. Chandramouli

Counsel for respondent Nos.1 to 3 : G.P. for Land Acquisition (AP)
Counsel for respondent Nos.4 to 6 :  None appeared

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

?CITATIONS: 1. (1993) 4 SCC 369  
            2. AIR 1970 AP 262
            3. AIR 2004 SC 1904
            4. (1970) 2 SCC 149
            5. (1995) 6 SCC 233
            6. (1991) 1 SCC 262

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         
        
WRIT APPEAL NO.2163 OF 1998      


DATED:19-04-2018   


THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:         

JUDGMENT:
(per the Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)  

        This writ appeal is filed against order dt.08.09.1998 in
W.P. No.33513 of 1997.
2.      We have heard M.P. Chandramouli, learned counsel for 
the appellants, and the learned Government Pleader for Land
Acquisition (AP).
3.      The appellants are the owners of certain extents of lands
individually which altogether come to Acs.4.00 in T.S. Nos.209,
210/4, 211 and 214 of Tenali Town (hereinafter referred to as
the subject land).  A 33 K.V. Sub-station of the Andhra
Pradesh State Electricity Board (APSEB) is in existence
opposite to the subject lands.  The Divisional Engineer,
APSEB, Electrical, Operation, Tenali, addressed a letter
dt.25.09.1990 to appellant Nos.1, 3 and 5 informing that
construction of 132 KV/33 KV Sub-station near the subject
land in Telani is proposed and that for that purpose the APSEB
proposes to acquire the subject land.  He requested for giving
consent for such acquisition.  A consent letter was issued by
appellant No.1 on his and also on behalf of other appellants.
Photo type letters of consent were addressed by the appellants
on 05.10.1990 to the Divisional Engineer for handing over the
subject land subject to certain conditions which mainly include
assessment of value of land according to the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(for short, the Act).  Thereafter,
correspondence was exchanged between the parties and   
possession of a part of the land was taken by the Assistant
Executive Engineer, TLC Sub-division, APSEB, Guntur, in 
January, 1991 and that of the remaining land was taken in July,
1991.
4.      Under first phase, vide G.O. Rt. No.613, Energy, Forest,
Environment, Science and Technology, (P.R.11) Department,  
dt.12.8.1991, notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act was
published in the Official Gazette dt.30.09.1991, proposing to
acquire Acs.2.40945 sft. for the purpose of construction of 132
KV Sub-station and Staff Quarters in Tenali and the Sub-
Collector, Tenali, his staff and workmen were authorized to
exercise powers conferred by
Section 4(2)
of the Act.  A
declaration under
Section 6
of the Act was made vide Memo 
dated 11.08.1992, and the same was published in the Official
Gazette dt.15.10.1992.  Under second phase, vide G.O. Rt.
No.568, Energy, Forest, Environment, Science & Technology  
(P.R.11) Department, dt.31.07.1992, notification under
Section
4(1)
of the Act was published in the Official Gazette
dt.15.10.1992 proposing to acquire Ac.1.055227 cents.
5.      Notices under
Sections 9(3)
and
10
of the Act were issued
to the appellants for enquiry on 20.12.1993.  Appellant No.1
appeared before the Sub-Collector, Tenali and claimed
compensation between Rs.600/- and Rs.800/- per sq. yard. 
The appellants were asked to appear before the officers of the
APSEB and accordingly the appellants appeared and claimed  
the market value at the same rate at which they claimed before
the Sub-Collector making it clear that any compensation paid at
the rate less than Rs.800/- per sq. yard will be received under
protest and without prejudice to their rights and contentions
for recovery of enhanced rate from the civil court on a
reference under
Section 18
of the Act.  It is the  pleaded case of
the appellants that subsequently several negotiations took place
during which the Superintending Engineer, TLC Division,
Guntur, offered a sum of Rs.1.00 lakh per acre as
compensation which the appellants claimed to have rejected.
Eventually, the parties failed to arrive at a consensus on the
market value of the subject lands.  This prompted the
appellants to approach this Court by filing W.P. No.33513 of
1997 for a writ of mandamus compelling the respondents to
initiate action in accordance with law as declared by this Court
and to determine the compensation payable to the appellants
and to pay the same to them without prejudice to their rights
for enhancement of the compensation so determined by  
seeking reference under
Section 18
of the Act to the civil court.
6.      Counter affidavits were filed on behalf of the respondents
wherein it was averred that the negotiations between the parties
for fixing the market value of the subject lands did not fructify
as the appellants were claiming exorbitant amount as
compensation.  In the additional counter affidavit filed by the
Executive Engineer of the APSEB it was stated that while the
funds for payment of compensation under the second phase  
were deposited, as the Land Acquisition Officer (LAO), Tenali,
failed to intimate the amount to be deposited for the lands
acquired under phase-I they could not deposit funds for the
said phase.  It was further stated that the LAO, vide his letter
dt.19.2.1996 requested the APSEB to deposit Rs.5.11 lakhs 
stating that the notifications stood lapsed in both the cases as
sufficient funds were not provided to meet the cost of
acquisition and hence fresh notifications have to be issued.  In
the counter affidavit filed by the APSEB it was specifically
stated that as the notifications lapsed, it requested the
Government to issue fresh notifications but the Government
did not oblige.
7.      Having regard to the respective pleadings of the parties,
the learned single Judge framed the following point for
consideration.
The point that arises for consideration is whether the
notifications issued u/Sec. 4(1) of the Act lapsed in view of
the provisions of
Sec. 11A
of the Act?
8.      On behalf of the petitioners it was argued before the
learned Judge that as the Award was not passed within two
years of publication of declaration under
Section 6
of the Act,
the land acquisition proceedings got lapsed by operation of
Section 11-A
of the Act.  It was, however, contended on behalf
of the respondents that as advance possession of the subject
lands was taken, the lands stood vested in the Government
under
Section 17(1)
of the Act and therefore the provisions of
Section 11-A
of the Act do not get attracted and that
consequently the land acquisition proceedings did not lapse on
account of non-passing of the Award within the stipulated time
of two years.
In support of this contention, the respondents
relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Satendra
Prasad Jain v. State of U.P.
and also the judgment of the Full
Bench of this Court in
Revenue Divisional  Officer, Guntur
v. Vasireddy Rama Bhanu Bhupal
.
The learned single 
Judge mainly relied upon the judgment in
Satendra Prasad
Jain
(1 supra) in holding that as possession was taken with the
consent of the appellants, the proceedings did not lapse on
account of failure of the respondents to pass Award within two
years of the publication of declaration under
Section 6
of the
Act as envisaged under
Section 11-A
of the Act.
Incidentally,
the learned Judge also referred to and relied upon the Full
Bench judgment of this Court in
Vasireddy Rama Bhanu  
Bhupal
(2 supra).  The learned Judge also held that the plea
taken in the counter affidavits and additional counter affidavit
that the notifications lapsed was under misconception of law
and that therefore the same does not enure to the benefit of the
appellants.
9.      At the hearing before us, the learned counsel reiterated
the respective stands taken by the parties before the learned
single Judge.  We have carefully considered the submissions of
the learned counsel for the parties with reference to the record.
10.
Section 11-A
of the Act introduced by way of
Amendment by Act 68 of 1984 mandates that the Collector  
shall make an award within a period of two years from the date
of publication of declaration and it also envisaged consequence
of failure to do so, namely, the entire proceedings for the
acquisition getting lapsed.
11.
The Act
prescribed procedure for acquisition of the land.
Under the Scheme of the Act, the process of acquisition
commences from the date of publication of notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act and culminates in the passing of the
Award.  The process in between the said two stages has to
undergo several stages, as succinctly discussed by a three-Judge
Bench of the Supreme Court in R.L. Jain (D) by LRs. v.
D.D.A.  which is apt to be reproduced hereinbelow.
The Land Acquisition Act
makes complete 
provision for acquiring title over the land, taking possession
thereof and for payment of compensation to the landowner.
Part II of the Act
deals with acquisition and the heading of
Section 4
is Publication of preliminary notification and
powers of officers thereupon. Sub-section (1) of
Section 4
provides that whenever it appears to the appropriate
Government that land in any locality is needed or is likely to
be needed for any public purpose or for a company, a
notification to that effect shall be published in the Official
Gazette and in two daily newspapers circulating in that locality
and the Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of
such notification to be given at convenient places in the said
locality. Sub-section (2) provides that thereupon it shall be
lawful for any officer either generally or specially authorised
by such Government in this behalf and for his servants and
workmen, to enter upon and survey and take levels of any
land in such locality, to dig or bore in the subsoil and to do all
other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adapted
for such purpose, etc. etc. This provision shows that the
officers and servants and workmen of the Government get
the lawful authority to enter upon and survey the land and to
do other works only after the preliminary notification under
Section 4(1)
has been published. Section 5-A enables a person
interested in any land which has been notified under
Section
4(1)
to file objection against the acquisition of the land and
also for hearing of the objection by the Collector. If the State
Government is satisfied, after considering the report, that any
particular land is needed for public purposes or for a
company, it can make a declaration to that effect under
Section 6
of the Act and the said declaration has to be
published in the Official Gazette and in two daily newspapers
and public notice of the substance of such declaration has to
be given in the locality. Thereafter the Collector is required to
issue notice to persons interested under
Section 9(1)
of the
Act stating that the Government intends to take possession of
the land and that claims to compensation for all interests in
such land may be made to him.
Section 11
provides for
making of an award by the Collector of the compensation
which should be allowed for the land.
Section 16
provides
that when the Collector has made an award under
Section 11
,
he may take possession of the land which shall thereupon vest
absolutely in the Government, free from all encumbrances.
This provision shows that possession of the land can be taken
only after the Collector has made an award under
Section 11
.
Section 17
is in the nature of an exception to
Section 16
and it
provides that in cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate
Government so directs, the Collector, though no such award
has been made, may, on the expiration of fifteen days from
the publication of the notice mentioned in
Section 9(1)
, take
possession of any land needed for a public purpose and such
land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government, free
from all encumbrances. The urgency provision contained in
Section 17(1)
can be invoked and possession can be taken 
over only after publication of notification under
Section 9(1)
which itself can be done after publication of notification
under
Sections 4(1)
and
6
of the Act. Even here in view of
sub-section (3-A) the Collector has to tender 80 per cent of
the estimated amount of compensation to the persons 
interested/entitled thereto before taking over possession.
12.
In
Satendra Prasad Jain
(1 supra),
Section 11-A
of the
Act fell for consideration of the Supreme Court.  In that case,
notification under
Section 4
of the Act was issued on 29.7.1986
for acquiring 29 bigas of land situated in Patti Baru, Baraut in
Meerut District in the State of Uttar Pradesh.  By applying the
urgency provision under
Section 17(4)
of the Act, enquiry
under
Section 5-A
of the Act was dispensed with.  On
24.10.1986
Section 6
declaration was issued.  After expiry of
fifteen days from the date of notice under
Section 9(1)
, the
State invoked the provisions of
Section 17(1)
of the Act and
took possession of the land without passing an Award.  A writ
petition filed questioning the acquisition proceedings was
dismissed by the Allahabad High Court and the Special Leave
Petition filed by the landowners also ended in dismissal.  On
13.1.1989 the Land Acquisition Officer resolved to exclude the
subject land from the acquisition and a decision was taken by
the authority concerned on the ground that the land was not
suitable for construction of Mandi of the Agricultural Market
Produce Samiti of Baraut.  A writ petition was filed for a
mandamus to make and publish the Award.  The High Court   
dismissed the writ petition on the ground that as Award was
not passed within the stipulated period of two years, by reason
of operation of
Section 11-A
of the Act the proceedings for
acquisition of the land had lapsed.  The High
Court further
held
that by the mere fact that possession had been taken in
pursuance of
Section 17(1)
, the necessity of giving an Award, as
mandated by Section 11-A, within a period of two years from
the date of publication of the notification under
Section 4
could
not be dispensed with.
Reversing the judgment of the
Allahabad High Court, the Supreme Court referred to and
relied upon the judgment in
Lt. Governor of H.P. v. Avinash
Sharma
wherein it was held as under:
after possession has been taken pursuant to a notification
under
Section 17(1)
the land is vested in the Government, and the
notification cannot be cancelled under
Section 21
of the General Clauses
Act, nor can the notification be withdrawn in exercise of the powers
under
Section 48
of the Land Acquisition Act.  Any other view would
enable the State Government to circumvent the specific provision by
relying upon a general power.  When possession of the land is taken
under
Section 17(1)
, the land vests in the Government.  There is no
provision by which land statutorily vested in the Government reverts to
the original owner by mere cancellation of the notification.
13.
In
Satendra Prasad Jain
(1 supra) as the State sought to
abdicate its responsibility of making payment of compensation
having taken possession of the land in pursuance of the
notification issued under
Section 4(1)
of the Act, by taking
shelter under
Section 11-A
of the Act, the Supreme Court held
in no uncertain terms that once possession is taken as per
Section 17(1)
of the Act, the land gets vested in the State and
hence the provisions of
Section 11-A
of the Act would not
have applied to such proceedings.
It therefore necessarily
means that to be able to save the land acquisition proceedings
from getting lapsed, the State has to necessarily prove that it
has taken possession by following the provisions of the Act and
not dehors it.
14.     As explained in detail by the Supreme Court in
R.L. Jain
(3 supra), possession could be taken after publication of
Notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act at different stages,
i.e., if urgency clause is invoked under
Section 17(4)
of the Act,
enquiry under
Section 5-A
of the Act could be dispensed with
and possession could be taken on the expiration of fifteen days
from the date of publication mentioned in sub-section (1) of
Section 9
, as envisaged under
Section 17(1)
of the Act.  Even
while doing so, sub-section (3-A) of
Section 17
of the Act
mandates that the Land Acquisition Officer shall tender
payment of 80% of compensation as estimated by him to the  
persons interested/entitled thereto, unless the contingencies as
provided in sub-clause (b) of the said provision existed.  In case
where there is no urgency, possession could be taken after
publication of award under
Section 16
of the Act.
15.     In the present case on hand, none of the steps envisaged
commencing from
Section 4(1)
of the Act were taken, before
the possession of the land was taken.  There is no provision
under the Act which empowers the State to take possession of 
the land (even with the consent of the land owner) without
following the procedure under the Act as explained
hereinbefore.
16.     This view of ours is fortified by the judgment in
R.L.
Jain
(3 supra).  It will pay us to reproduce the relevant portions
of the observations of the Apex Court
in that case
.
11.  The scheme of the Act does not contemplate taking
over of possession prior to the issuance of notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act and if possession is taken prior to the said
notification it will be dehors the Act. It is for this reason that both
Sections 11(1)
and
23(1)
enjoin the determination of the market
value of the land on the date of publication of notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act for the purpose of determining the
amount of compensation to be awarded for the land acquired
under the Act. These provisions show in unmistakable terms that
publication of notification under
Section 4(1)
is the sine qua non
for any proceedings under the Act.
The above being the indisputable position in law, by no stretch
of imagination can one treat the taking of possession in the
instant case as possession having been taken under
Section 
17(1)
of the Act.
17.
In our opinion, the learned Single Judge has fallen into a
serious error in relying upon the judgment in
Satendra Prasad
Jain
(1 supra) as, as discussed above
,
in that case
, possession of
the land was taken after the whole procedure upto the stages
prescribed under
Sections 4(1)
,
17(4)
,
9
,
10
and
17(1)
was gone
through.  In the light of those facts, the Supreme Court held
that once lawful possession was taken, the land vests in the
Government under
Section 17(1)
of the Act and therefore it
cannot wriggle out of its responsibility to pass Award.
Hence,
the ratio in
Satendra Prasad Jain
(1 supra) would not come to
the aid of the respondents and the learned single Judge has
wrongly applied the said ratio in order to save the land
acquisition proceedings which otherwise lapsed.
18.     As regards the judgment in
Vasireddy Rama Bhanu   
Bhupal
(2 supra) dealing with the issue as to whether interest
was payable if possession was taken before initiation of land
acquisition proceedings, the Full Bench held that the
expression, taking possession of the land under
Section 28
of
the Act would only mean, taking possession under or in
pursuance of the Act and that if in anticipation of the initiation
of the land acquisition proceedings possession was taken with
the consent of the land owner the same can be treated as
possession having been taken under the Act.  The Full Bench
has placed liberal interpretation on
Section 28
of the Act so as
not to deny interest on the enhanced compensation to the
landowner having been deprived of the possession of the land.
It has relied upon various judgments of the Supreme Court and
that of the Privy Council in arriving at the conclusion that the
landowner is entitled to interest on the enhanced compensation
from the date of taking possession of the land.
19.
In the first place, the judgment in
Vasireddy Rama
Bhanu Bhupal
(2 supra) has no relevance or bearing on
interpretation of
Section 11-A
of the Act, as
the said judgment
turned on the language of
Section 28
of the Act.
The learned
single Judge, however, has borrowed the concept of taking
possession from the judgment in
Satendra Prasad Jain
(1
supra) so as to save the land acquisition proceedings, without
keeping in mind the fact that in
the said judgment
possession
was taken in pursuance of the Notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act by following the procedure under the Act.
Even
otherwise, the view taken in
Vasireddy Rama Bhanu Bhupal
(2 supra) as regards the nature of possession taken prior to the
issuance of Notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act runs
contrary to the view taken by the Supreme Court in
Union of
India v. Budh Singh
.  It is profitable to note the subsequent
development of law in this regard.
Conflicting views were
expressed on the entitlement of a party to payment of interest
under
Section 28
or 34 of the Act, between Shree Vijay
Cotton & Oil Mills Ltd. v. State of Gujarat  and Budh
Singh (5 supra).
The issue was referred to a Larger Bench of
three Judges in
R.L. Jain
(3 supra).
On behalf of the
claimants, the judgment in
Vasireddy Rama Bhanu Bhupal
(2 supra) among other judgments was referred to and relied
upon in support of the claim for payment of interest for the
period anterior to the publication of Notification under
Section
4(1)
of the Act as possession was taken by the State prior to
such Notification.
The Supreme Court, however, leaned
towards the view taken in
Budh Singh
(5 supra).
The
following part of the report is apposite to be referred to:
12. The expression the Collector shall pay the amount
awarded with interest thereon at the rate of nine per centum per
annum from the time of so taking possession until it shall have
been so paid or deposited should not be read in isolation
divorced from its context. The words such compensation and
so taking possession are important and have to be given
meaning in the light of other provisions of the Act. Such
compensation would mean the compensation determined in   
accordance with other provisions of the Act, namely,
Sections 11
and
15
of the Act which by virtue of
Section 23(1)
mean market
value of the land on the date of notification under
Section 4(1)
and other amounts like statutory sum under sub-section (1-A) and
solatium under sub-section (2) of
Section 23
. The heading of
Part
II of the Act
is Acquisition and there is a sub-heading Taking
Possession which contains
Sections 16
and
17
of the Act. The
words so taking possession would therefore mean taking
possession in accordance with
Section 16
or 17 of the Act. These
are the only two sections in the Act which specifically deal with
the subject of taking possession of the acquired land. Clearly, the
stage for taking possession under the aforesaid provisions would
be reached only after publication of the notification under
Sections 4(1)
and
9(1)
of the Act. If possession is taken prior to
the issuance of the notification under
Section 4(1)
it would not be
in accordance with
Section 16
or 17 and will be without any
authority of law and consequently cannot be recognised for the
purposes of the Act. For parity of reasons the words from the
date on which he took possession of the land occurring in
Section 28
of the Act would also mean lawful taking of possession
in accordance with
Section 16
or 17 of the Act. The words so
taking possession can under no circumstances mean such   
dispossession of the owner of the land which has been done prior
to publication of notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act which
is dehors the provisions of the Act.
17.1. The normal rule, therefore, is that if on account of
acquisition of land a person is deprived of possession of his
property he should be paid compensation immediately and if the
same is not paid to him forthwith he would be entitled to interest
thereon from the date of dispossession till the date of payment
thereof. But here the land has been acquired only after the
preliminary notification was issued on 9-9-1992 as earlier
acquisition proceedings were declared to be null and void in the
suit instituted by the landowner himself and consequently, he was
not entitled to compensation or interest thereon for the anterior
period.
18. In a case where the landowner is dispossessed prior to
the issuance of preliminary notification under
Section 4(1)
of the
Act the Government merely takes possession of the land but the
title thereof continues to vest with the landowner. It is fully open
for the landowner to recover the possession of his land by taking
appropriate legal proceedings. He is therefore only entitled to get
rent or damages for use and occupation for the period the
Government retains possession of the property. Where 
possession is taken prior to the issuance of the preliminary
notification, in our opinion, it will be just and equitable that the
Collector may also determine the rent or damages for use of the
property to which the landowner is entitled while determining the
compensation amount payable to the landowner for the 
acquisition of the property. The provisions of
Section 48
of the
Act lend support to such a course of action. For delayed payment
of such amount appropriate interest at prevailing bank rate may
be awarded.
In the light of the judgment in
R.L. Jain
(3 supra), the view
taken in
Vasireddy Rama Bhanu Bhupal
(2 supra) can no  
longer be treated as laying down a correct law as regards the
nature of possession taken prior to the initiation of the
proceedings under the Act.
20.     The above discussion will lead us to hold that in view of
the failure of the State to adhere to the provisions of the Act,
the possession taken by the State dehors the provisions of the
Act has no legal sanctity and the same does not exempt 
operation of
Section 11-A
of the Act and save land acquisition
proceedings from getting lapsed due to failure to pass Award
within the stipulated period.
21.     It has now come to light that much after the disposal of
the writ petition, Award Nos.11 and 12 relating to Acs.3.00 and
Ac.1.00 respectively were passed on 15.9.1999.  It is also
brought to our notice that the appellants sought for reference
of the dispute relating to the market value fixed by the LAO,
that in pursuance thereof reference was made, that the
Reference Court has rejected the claim for enhancement and
that the same was questioned in LAAS Nos.1610 of 2005 and  
444 of 2007 by the appellants.  In the light of the view we have
taken that the land acquisition proceedings have lapsed due to
the failure of the respondents to pass the Award within the
stipulated time of two years from the date of publication of
declaration, those Awards are nonest in law and consequently
they do not bind the appellants.
22.     The respondents having taken possession of the land and
been using the same for public purpose, namely, establishment
of Electrical Sub-station, it is their obligation to initiate fresh
acquisition proceedings for payment of compensation as per
the Law of Land Acquisition in force as on the date of such
initiation.  A mandamus shall therefore issue to the respondents
to initiate land acquisition proceedings, determine
compensation in terms thereof and pay the same to the
appellants within three months from the date receipt of this
judgment.
23.     In the result, the judgment of the learned single Judge is
set aside and the writ appeal is allowed, subject to the above
directions.
_________________________    
C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
_________________________    
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
19-4-2018