[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Yerraballi Chinna Subbaiah, S/O Pedda ... vs The State Of A.P., Reptd., By The Public ... on 20 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 171, (2019) 2 CRIMES 554
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
Gudiseva Shyam Prasad
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD                       

Crl.A.No.890 of 2011

20.6.2018 


Yerraballi Chinna Subbaiah, S/o Pedda Subbaiah and five others...... Petitioners

The State of A.P., reptd., by the Public Prosecutor, Hyderabad......Respondent

Counsel for the Petitioners: Mrs. C.Vasundhara Reddy

Counsel for the Respondent: Public Prosecutor for the State of AP


<Gist:


>Head Note: 

? Cases Referred:

1.(1994) 6 SCC 727 
2.(2014) 10 SCC 577 
3.(2010) 3 SCC 152 

HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY          
        AND     
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD            

Crl.A.No.890 of 2011

Date:20.06.2018 

The Court made the following:


JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)   

     Accused Nos.1 to 6 in Sessions Case No.99 of 2009 on the
file of the learned I Additional Sessions Judge, Kadapa, filed this
Criminal Appeal feeling aggrieved by their conviction for the
offence under
Section-304-B
IPC and sentencing them to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for life and further sentencing them to
suffer simple imprisonment for three months for the offence
under
Section-4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, vide judgment,
dated 25.07.2011.
The case of the prosecution in brief is as follows:
P.W-1 was the mother and P.W-2 was the brother of
Y.Eswaramma (hereinafter referred to as the deceased).
Appellant No.1 was the husband of the deceased, appellant No.2
is the brother and appellant No.3 is the mother of appellant
No.1, appellant No.4 is the husband of appellant No.5 and
appellant No.6 is the wife of appellant No.2. That about 1 
years prior to the date of the incident, the marriage of the
deceased was performed with appellant No.1; that the couple
led a happy marital life for some time; that appellant No.1 was
sanctioned a pucca house under Indiramma scheme; that both  
appellant Nos.1 and 2 laid basement at the entrance of the
village; that since then on the instigation of appellant Nos.2 to 6,
appellant No.1 started harassing the deceased both mentally and
physically to bring additional dowry of Rs.20,000/- and an iron
almyrah; that on 24.4.2008, when the deceased accompanied by  
P.W-1 went to the house of the accused, the accused warned  
P.W-1 that if she does not give the said money, they would not
allow the deceased into the house; that P.W-1 expressed her
inability and promised to present some amount if the accused
give some time to her; that on 25.4.2008, P.W-1 went to her
village leaving the deceased there; that on the same day, at about
5 pm., she received the information about the death of the
deceased; that she along with her relatives immediately rushed
to the house of the appellants and found the dead body of the
deceased lying on a cot; that on the next day morning, she
lodged the report-Ex.P-1.
That on 25.4.2008, at about 10 am., on receiving Ex.P-1-
report from P.W-1, P.W-12-the then Sub-Inspector of Police,
B.Kodur Police Station, registered the same as a case in Crime
No.20 of 2008 under
Section-304-B
IPC and issued FIR to all
the concerned; that he visited the scene of offence, prepared a
rough sketch of the same-Ex.P-12; that on his requisition,
P.W-10-Deputy Tahsildar held inquest over the dead body of
the deceased in the presence of P.W-8, L.Ws.14 to 18, observed 
the scene of offence, and seized MOs.1 to 3 under the cover of
Scene of observation panchanama-Ex.P-8; that on 26.4.2008, 
P.W-11-Civil Assistant Surgeon held autopsy over the dead
body of the deceased and opined that the cause of death was due
to cardio respiratory arrest due to neurogenic shock caused by
burns; that on 27.4.2008, P.W-13 visited the scene of offence,
recorded the statements of P.Ws.1 to 6, basing on which, he
altered the Section of law from 304-B
IPC
to Sections 302 and
201 read with 34
IPC
; that on 03.5.2008, he arrested appellant
Nos.1 to 6 in the presence of P.W-9 and L.W-20-Siddhu 
Ramakrishnareddy; that on interrogation, they voluntarily
confessed about the commission of offence and the same was  
recorded under the cover of Confession Panchanama-Ex.P-7;  
and that later they were sent to judicial custody. That after
receiving all the relevant documents and on completion of the
investigation, the charge sheet was filed.
Based on the charge sheet and the material collected by
the Investigation Officer, the Court below framed the following
charges:
That A-1 to A-6 of you on 25.4.2008 at around 4
pm at the baren lands situated on the western side of
Sirigiripalli Harijanawada of B.Kodur Mandal,
committed murder intentionally or knowingly
causing the death of Y.Eswaramma to wit A.3 of 
your brought the kerosene tin followed by A.5 of
your and A.1, A.2, A.4 and A.6 of you took the
deceased to the said place and all of you made the
deceased laid on the ground, A.3 of your poured
kerosene on her body and other accused of you 
throw hay upon her and lit fire to her, as a result of
which the deceased died due to cardio respiratory
arrest due to neurogenic shock, thus A.1 to A.6 of
you thereby committed an offence punishable under
Section-302
of IPC and within my cognizance.
In (SIC:the) alternative
1. That A-1 to A-6 of you on 25.4.2008 at around 4
pm at the baren lands situated on the western side of
Sirigiripalli Harijanawada of B.Kodur Mandal,
caused the death of Y.Eswaramma within seven  
years of her marriage with A.1 of you and before her
death all of you subjected her to cruelty and
harassment with a demand for additional dowry and
valuables and A.1 to A.6 of you thereby committed
an offence punishable under
Section-304-B
of IPC
and within my cognizance.
2. That A-1 to A-6 of you on the above said date
time and place knowing or having reason to believe
that the offence of murder punishable with
imprisonment for life has been committed causing
certain evidence connected with the said offence i.e.,
the dead body of the deceased Y.Eswaramma to   
disappear shifted it to a cot from the scene of offence
with an intention to screen you as the offenders
from the legal punishment and A.1 to A.6 of you
thereby committed an offence punishable under
Section-201
IPC and within my cognizance.
3. That A-1 to A-6 of you about six months prior to
25.5.2008 demanded additional dowry i.e., cash of
Rs.20,000/-and one iron almyrah by subjecting
Y.Eswaramma wife of A.1 of you with cruelty and
harassment physically and mentally and A.1 to A.6
of you thereby committed an offence punishable
under
Section-4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
As the plea of the appellants was one of denial, they were
subjected to trial, during which, the prosecution has examined
P.Ws.1 to 14, got Exs.P-1 to P-14 marked and produced M.Os.1   
to 3. On behalf of the defence, no oral evidence was let in, but
Ex.D-1, a portion in 161
Cr.P.C
. statement of P.W-7 was
marked.
On appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence,
the Court below has disposed of the case in the manner as
indicated above.
We have heard Mrs. C.Vasundhara Reddy, learned counsel 
for the appellants, and the learned Public Prosecutor for the
State of Andhra Pradesh.
Though the appellants have been charged for the offences
under Sections-302 and 304-B
IPC
, the latter being an
alternative charge, the Court below has convicted the appellants
for the offence under
Section-304-B
IPC and sentenced them to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for life.
As regards appellant No.1/accused No.1, P.W-1-the
mother of the deceased, who gave Ex.P-1-report, based on 
which Ex.P-11-First Information Report was registered,
specifically alleged therein that one week prior to the death of
the deceased, appellant No.1 has sent her daughter (the
deceased) to their house with a warning to bring Rs.20,000/-
and an iron almyrah. This version was substantiated by P.W-1
in her evidence. Significant to notice that in the cross-
examination of P.W-1, a suggestion was made that a quarrel
took place between the deceased and her sister-in-law, i.e.
P.W-5, over an assurance given by P.W-1 to give away 0.05 
cents of site to the deceased and her failure to fulfill the said
promise. From this suggestion itself, a presumption could be
drawn that a demand was being made by appellant No.1 to  
bring money/property from P.W-1.
The evidence of P.W-1 has been corroborated by the
evidence of P.W-2-the brother of the deceased as regards the
demand of dowry by P.W-1. The Court below has accepted the  
prosecution version in this regard. In our opinion, the evidence
on record placed by the prosecution relating to the demand of
dowry by P.W-1 is beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, we have 
no reason to differ with the findings of the Court below with
respect to the guilt of appellant No.1 to the extent of demand of
dowry, thereby, causing mental cruelty to the deceased, which
evidently drove her to commit suicide.
As regards appellant Nos.2 to 6, even in Ex.P-1-report,
except a vague allegation that the kith and kin of appellant No.1
were also involved in dowry demand and caused cruelty to the
deceased, no specific allegations have been made against them.
The Court below, therefore, was not justified in finding
appellant Nos.2 to 6 guilty of the offences under
Section-304-B IPC and Section-4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
Hence, the judgment of the Court below to the extent of
conviction and sentencing of appellant Nos.2 to 6 for the above
said offences cannot be sustained and the same is accordingly
set aside.
Coming to sentencing of appellant No.1 to rigorous life
imprisonment for the offence under
Section-304-B
IPC, it is to
be noted that the Supreme Court in
Hem Chand v. State of
Haryana
held as under:
7.  the appellant-accused was a police employee 
and instead of checking the crime, he himself
indulged therein and precipitated in it and that
bride-killing cases are on the increase and therefore
a serious view has to be taken. As mentioned above,
Section 304-B
IPC only raises presumption and lays
down that minimum sentence should be seven years   
but it may extend to imprisonment for life. Therefore
awarding extreme punishment of imprisonment for 
life should be in rare cases and not in every case.
8. Hence, we are of the view that a sentence of 10
years' RI would meet the ends of justice. We,
accordingly while confirming the conviction of the
appellant under Section 304-B IPC, reduce the
sentence of imprisonment for life to 10 years' RI.
In
Hari Om v. State of Haryana
, in similar circumstances,
the Supreme Court has converted the life sentence of the
accused therein into ten years rigorous imprisonment while
holding as under:
17. This issue has been the subject-matter of debate
before this Court in several cases, which arose out of
Section 304-B read with Section 498-A and wherein 
this Court while interpreting the expression may
occurring in
Section 304-B
IPC held that it is not
mandatory for the Court in every case to award life
imprisonment to the accused once he is found guilty
of the offence under Section 304-B. It was held that
the Court could award sentence in exercise of its
discretion between seven years to life imprisonment
depending upon the facts of each case. It was held
that in no case it could be less than seven years and
that extreme punishment of life term should be
awarded in rare cases but not in every case.
..
21. Applying the principle of law
laid down in
the aforementioned cases and having regard to the
totality of facts and circumstances of this case, we
are of the considered opinion that the ends of justice
would meet, if we reduce the sentence of the
appellant from life imprisonment to that of 10 years.
In our view, this case does not fall in the category of
a rare case as envisaged by this Court so as to
award to the appellant the life imprisonment. That
apart, we also notice that while awarding life
imprisonment, the courts below did not assign any
reasons.
In
G.V.Siddaramesh v. State of Karnataka
, considering the
scope of
Section 304-B
of IPC, the Supreme Court held as under:
31. In conclusion, we are satisfied that in the facts
and circumstances of the case, the appellant was
rightly convicted under
Section 304-B
IPC.
However, his sentence of life imprisonment imposed
by the courts below appears to us to be excessive.
The appellant is a young man and has already
undergone 6 years of imprisonment after being
convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge and the
High Court. We are of the view, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, that a sentence of 10
years' rigorous imprisonment would meet the ends
of justice. We, accordingly while confirming the
conviction of the appellant under
Section 304-B
IPC,
reduce the sentence of imprisonment for life to 10
years' rigorous imprisonment. The other conviction
and sentence passed against the appellant are
confirmed.
The Court below has not termed this case as falling under
the category of a rare case for imposing the sentence of
imprisonment for life on appellant No.1 for the offence under
Section-304-B
IPC. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the
sentence imposed on appellant No.1 is liable to be reduced to
rigorous imprisonment for seven years, while sustaining the
sentence imposed on him by the Court below for the offence
under
Section-4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act.
In the result, the Criminal Appeal is allowed in part to the
extent of appellant No.1/accused No.1 and the sentence of life
imprisonment imposed on him, vide judgment, dated 
25.07.2011, in Sessions Case No.99 of 2009 on the file the
learned I Additional Sessions Judge, Kadapa, for the offence
under
Section-304-B
IPC is reduced to rigorous imprisonment
for seven years, while sustaining the sentence imposed on him
by the Court below for the offence under
Section-4
of the
Dowry Prohibition Act. He shall surrender before the
Superintendent, Central Jail, Kadapa, for serving the remaining
sentence.
The Criminal Appeal is allowed in toto as regards
appellant Nos.2 to 6/accused Nos.2 to 6 and the conviction and
sentence recorded against them in the impugned judgment for 
the offences punishable under Section-304-B IPC and Section-4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act are set aside.  Appellant Nos.2 to
6/accused Nos.2 to 6 are acquitted of the offences with which
they are charged.  As appellant Nos.2 to 6/accused Nos.2 to 6 are
on bail, they are directed to surrender themselves before the
Superintendent, Central Jail, Kadapa, for completing the
required legal formalities for their release.
____________________________     
JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY        
______________________________     
JUSTICE GUDISEVA SHYAM PRASAD          
20th June, 2018