[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Pusapati Laxmi Narasayamma vs Alamanda Narayana And Others on 2 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 124
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

AS.No.453 of 1997 

02-08-2018 

Pusapati Laxmi Narasayamma   Appellant/    

Alamanda Narayana and others Respondents     

Counsel for the appellants: Sri M.Adinarayana Raju

Counsel for the Respondents: Sri S.Ashok Kumar  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
  2018 (1) ALT 98
2 2018 (2) ALD 84 
3 (2009) 5 SCC 713 
4 (2014 ) 14 SCC 619 
5 2018 (1) ALT 160
62018 (4) ALT 301 
7 2018 (11) SCC 119 
8 (2012) 6 SCC 430 
9 (2012) 5 SCC 370 
10 (2004) 10 SCC 779 
11 2015 (6) ALT 55
12 (2009) 13 SCC 229 
13 (2007) 6 SCC 59 
14 (2010) 14 SCC 316 
15 (2007) 3 SCC 114 
16 1986 (2) ALT 196 
17 AIR 1966 P 136 
18 AIR 1959 AP 96  
19 AIR 1963(SC) 884 
20 AIR 1966 SC 735  
21 2005 (6) SCC 614 
22 2018 (4) ALT 343 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU         
A.S.No.453 of 1997 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal is filed against judgment and decree dated
31.12.1996 in OS.No.11 of 1996 on the file of the District
Judge, Vizianagaram.
For the sake of convenience as this is a first appeal,
the parties are referred to as plaintiff and defendants as in
the lower Court only.
The suit was filed by the plaintiff against defendant
Nos.1 to 5 initially.  Later defendant Nos.6 to 11 were added
as legal representatives of the deceased defendant No.5.
The plaint is filed by one P.Lakshmi Narasayamma
claiming a relief of declaration and a consequential relief of
delivery of possession after evicting the plaintiff from the
plaint schedule land and for other reliefs.  The case of the
plaintiff is that she purchased the property under a sale
deed of August, 1965 from one Korea Bai.  According to the
plaintiff, the first defendant is the watchman/caretaker of
the property.  Defendant Nos.2 and 3 are sons while
defendant No.4 is the brother of defendant No.1.   Defendant
No.5 is a purchaser of the suit schedule property from the
defendants.  His legal representatives were added as
defendant Nos.6 to 11.  The plaintiff filed the suit on the
basis of the sale deed and she claimed for possession and
recovery.  Defendant No.1 set up an independent title and
enjoyment of the property on his own.  In his written
statement, he took the plea that the plaint schedule property
was initially enjoyed by one Pentaiah, who had a daughter
by name Narasamma.  The said Pentaiah bought Durgayya    
the father of defendant Nos.1 and 4 as an illatom son-in-law
and therefore, after the death of Pentaiah, the father of
defendant Nos.1 and 4 inherited the property.  He also
described various acts showing his title to the property, and
he also raised a plea that the defendant had perfected his
title to the plaint schedule land by adverse possession or by
inheritance also.  He also stated that the defendant
mortgaged the property in favour of a Bank as a guarantor
for a loan obtained by S.Narasinga Rao.  Thus, in all, he set
up a plea of title and ownership for himself.
Based on the said pleadings, the lower Court framed
the following issues:
(1)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the
declaration of title and possession as prayed
for?
(2)     To what relief?
However, during the course of the judgment, the
learned trial judge after reproducing the pleadings and
evidence framed as many as four points in para 19 of the
judgment and ultimately came to a conclusion that the
plaintiff could not prove her title and enjoyment of the suit
schedule property.  It is this judgment that is now impugned
in the appeal.
This Court has heard Sri M.Adinarayana Raju, learned
counsel for the appellant and Sri S.Ashok Kumar, learned
counsel for the respondents, both of whom argued the case
with a great deal of preparation.
The facts which are not in dispute are that both the
parties to the suit traced their title to one Korea Bai.
Plaintiff has a sale deed and claimed possession and
enjoyment on the basis of the sale deed while the defendants
set up a claim of long possession of the very same property.
The lower Court held that the possession of the defendants
is clearly proved and that there is no explanation given why
the original of Ex.A.1 sale deed is not filed. Therefore, in
para 19, after a discussion, the Court below answered the
case against the plaintiff.
The learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff pointed
out that the plaintiff has filed Exs.A.1 to A.14 to prove her
case. Ex.A.1 is the certified copy of the sale deed dated
24.08.1965 and the other documents Exs.A.2 to A.14 are tax 
receipts, title deed book, fair adangal, passbook etc., to
prove the possession and enjoyment of the plaintiff.  For the
plaintiff, PWs.1 to 4 were examined.  For the defendants,
DWs.1 to 8 were examined and Exs.B.1 to B.11 and EX.X.1   
marked.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff/appellant pointed out
that once a sale deed is filed along with other documents
showing the proof of possession including pattadar passbook
and title book, the burden shifts on to the defendants to
disprove the sale deed and or the possession of the plaintiff.
The plaintiffs counsel also pointed out that the written
statement of the defendants is absolutely bereft of details.
In para 5, the theory of illatom-son-in-law was introduced to
plead that Pentaiah enjoyed the property and latter he gave
it to his son-in-law.  The manner in which the title in the
land devolved is not clearly explained as per the learned
counsel. The further devolvement of the land from the
illatom-son-in-law to defendant Nos.1 and 4 is also not
explained according to the learned counsel for the appellant.
In addition, he points out that the defendants have pleaded
the case of adverse possession, which clearly means that in
one way they recognize the title of the plaintiff and her
predecessor because adverse possession can only be claimed  
against a true owner.
In reply to this, the learned counsel for the
respondents pointed out that Ex.A.1 sale deed is not validly
proved; that the possession and enjoyment is not clear from
the documents filed; that the suit is barred by limitation and
that the defendants long possession and enjoyment of the
property clearly goes against the plaintiffs title.
In view of the long and detailed arguments that are
advanced, this Court is looking into the oral evidence briefly.
PW.1 is the husband of the plaintiff.  He was examined to
prove the case of the plaintiff.  Ex.A.1 is the certified copy of
the sale deed marked through him.  In addition, he also filed
the 10(1) account, the fair adangal, cisth receipt etc., which
are marked as Exs.A.2 to A.9.  Ex.A.10 is the certified copy
of the sale deed executed by the defendants. PW.2 was 
examined to show that defendant No.4 was working as a 
gardener in the plaint schedule property and that the
plaintiff was enjoying the property.  PW.3 was examined to
show that Ex.A.1 is a validly executed document.  He is an
attestor to Ex.A.1. PW.4 filed the further documents in
support of the plaintiffs case, namely Exs.A.11 to A.14.
In reply to this, the defendants examined DWs.1 to 8.
DW.1 is the defendant No.1 in the suit. He agrees that his
grandfather K.Pentaiah was working with Korea Bai in the
land.  He denies the title and enjoyment of the plaintiff.
DW.2 is the defendant No.7. He talks about the enjoyment of
the property by the defendants and their family. DW.3 is the
brother of defendant No.1.  He also speaks about the
illatom-son-in-law and the enjoyment of the property.  He
also agrees that his brother was working as a servant under
Korea Bai.  Defendant Nos.4 and 5 are examined to show the 
possession and enjoyment of the defendants. Defendant 
No.6 was examined to prove the mortgage supposedly  
created by the defendants. DWs.7 and 8 are Government  
Officials, who are summoned to produce certain documents.
This Court, after verifying the oral and documentary
evidence, notices that both the parties agree that the original
title holder of the property is Korea Bai.  Ex.A.1 is the sale
deed executed by Korea Bai in favour of the plaintiff.   The
defendants set up a case of independent title.  They do not
clearly explain how they actually acquired the rights in the
property from Korea Bai.  They assert their long possession
and enjoyment of the property and also assert the rights of
ownership that are exercised like the mortgage of the
property etc.  Therefore, this Court will have now to decide
in whom does the title vest in.
Ex.A.1 is the certified copy of the sale deed that is
marked by the plaintiff. The learned counsel for the
appellant pointed out that a registered document has a
certain presumption under law in its favour and that once
the plaintiff proves that she has title to the property, it is for
the respondents to prove that the title to the property did not
pass under the sale deed.  The learned counsel for the
appellant pointed out that the lower Court rejected Ex.A.1
on the ground that certified copy is filed and that no
explanation is given why the certified copy is filed.  He points
out that the certified copy of Ex.A.1 was marked without any
objection from the defendants. The witness clearly deposed
that the original of the sale deed was misplaced and is not
traced and hence the certified copy of the sale deed is filed
as Ex.A.1. The counsel pointed out that there is no objection
to the marking of this document at all. He also argued that
Clause (c) of
Section 65
of the Evidence Act, is fulfilled and
that secondary evidence is admissible.
Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the
plaintiff was not examined and that an adverse inference
should be drawn against her for not appearing in the
witness box. He also relied upon various judgements
including the judgement of this Court in
Mallamma v.
N.Gangamma
.  His agreement is that Ex.A.1 is not proved.
In reply to this, learned counsel for the appellant
pointed out that under
section 120
of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 (for short the Act) the husband is a competent
witness for the wife.  He also pointed out that the judgement
in
Ankam Laxminarayana v. Ankam Bixapathy
, relied  
upon by the respondents themselves shows that husband is  
a competent witness on behalf of his wife.  He, therefore,
argued that the objection to the admissibility and the mode
of proof of Ex.A.1 is not tenable.  This Court also agrees with
the contentions of the learned counsel for the appellant on
these points.  No objection was raised when the certified
copy of Ex.A.1 was tendered in evidence along with an
explanation stating that the original is lost and is not traced.
Once the document is received in evidence, without any
objection about its admissibility, no further argument can be
advanced on the admissibility.  PW.1 is the husband of the
plaintiff.  Therefore, he is competent to depose about the
same.
The second point that was very vehemently contested
by the learned counsel for the respondents is about the
sham or nominal nature of this document.  Learned
counsel for the respondents argued that the payment of sale
consideration under the document is not correctly proved.
He points out that in Ex.A.1 the balance sale consideration
is mentioned as having been paid by cheque, but he points
out that the evidence of PW.3 shows that amount was paid 
in cash.  Therefore, he argues that the document is not a
valid document and that it should be ignored.
In reply to this, the learned counsel for the appellant
argued that the registered sale deed carries certain
presumption that the transaction was a genuine one.  Once
the execution of the sale deed is proved, the onus moves on
to the defendants to prove that it was a sham transaction.
Learned counsel relies upon
Vimalchand Ghevarchand  
Jain v. Ramakant Eknath Jadoo
and points out that in
Para 37, the Honble Supreme Court held as follows:
37. A heavy burden of proof lay
upon the defendant to show that the
transaction was a sham one. It was not a
case where the parties did not intend to
enter into any transaction at all.
Admittedly, a transaction had taken
place. Only the nature of transaction was
in issue. A distinction must be borne in
mind in regard to the nominal nature of a
transaction which is no transaction in
the eye of law at all and the nature and
character of a transaction as reflected in
a deed of conveyance. The construction
of the deed clearly shows that it was a
deed of sale. The stipulation with regard
to payment of compensation in the event
appellants are dispossessed was by way  
of an indemnity and did not affect the
real nature of transaction.
In para 22 of the very same judgement, the Honble
Supreme Court of India clearly held as follows:
22. The deed of sale being a
registered one and apparently
containing stipulations of transfer of
right, title and interest by the vendor
in favour of the vendee, the onus of
proof was upon the defendant to show
that the said deed was, in fact, not
executed or otherwise does not reflect
the true nature of transaction.
Evidently, with a view to avoid
confrontation in regard to his
signature as an attesting witness as
also that of his father as vendor in the
said sale deed, he did not examine
himself. An adverse inference, thus,
should have been drawn against him 
by the learned Trial Court.
Further under
section 92
of the Evidence Act, oral
evidence contrary to the terms of a document is not
permissible.  However, the proviso provides that oral
evidence can be introduced under certain circumstances.
Proviso (1) to
Section 92
of the Act says, the fact which is
invalidate any document such as fraud, intimidation,
illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any
contracting party, failure of consideration or mistake in fact
or law can be proved.
In the case on hand, the due execution of the
document is not in doubt.  As a certified copy/registration
extract is filed, the only point urged was that the oral
evidence is contrary to the contents of Ex.A.1.  While the
document said that the balance sale consideration was paid
by cheque, the witness talked of cash.  Other than this, no
other vitiating factor has been pointed out.  The mere fact
that after more than three decades of the execution of the
document, the witness made a mistake in speaking about  
the manner of payment of the balance sale consideration
cannot lead to a conclusion that the entire sale deed is false.
Human memory is what it is and with the passage of time
mistakes due occur.  Men are not machines and the sale 
deed cannot be set aside only on the ground that the witness
made a small mistake.  As was pointed out by the Honble
Supreme Court of India in
Pargan Singh
V. State of Punjab
, human memory does not work like a 
video recorder.  An initial memory is not cast in stone.
Hence, some amount of forgetfulness will occur especially
when the witness is deponing after such a long time.  The
sanctity attached to a registered document and the
presumption attached to the registered document as
recognised by the Honble Supreme Court is in favour of
Ex.A.1.   The certified copy was filed and an attestor was
also examined to prove the execution.
The dicta
laid down
in
Mrs. M.Pratima Reddy v. NICCO UCO Alliance Credit  
Ltd.
,  is also met.
The defendants did not discharge the
heavy burden that is cast upon them, as was noticed by the
Honble Supreme Court of India in the case of
Vimalchand
(3 supra).  Therefore, this Court holds that Ex.A.1 document
is validly proved and both the objections taken are not
sustainable.  The so called error in the evidence is not fatal
for the plaintiffs case.
In contradistinction to this assertion of title by the
plaintiff, the defendants have also set up their own title.
They do not plead the manner in which they have acquired
their right to the property.  There is no certainty in their
pleading.  The written statement merely states that they
have got the property. The witnesses examined for the
defendants admit that Pentaiah was working in the garden
and was employed by Korea Bai. The so-called transfer of
title from Korea Bai to Pentaiah was not explained.  Further,
they state that Pentaiah brought the father of defendant
Nos.1 and 4 by name Durgayya as an illatom-son-in-law and 
that after the death of Pentaiah, Durgayya inherited the
property.  An illatom-son-in-law or the practice of bringing
an illatom-son-in-law is a custom that is prevalent in few
communities in Andhra Pradesh.  It is a custom by which a
son-in-law is brought into the family because of the lack of a
male successor.  As this is a custom, this has to be pleaded
and proved with certainty.
In a recent judgment of this
Court, reported in
Marripudi Narasimha Rao v. Marripudi
Chenchaiah
this Court has analysed the case law on the
subject including the latest judgement of the Honble
Supreme Court of India reported in Ratanlal @ Babulal
Chunilal Samsuka v. Sundarabai Govardhandas   
Samsuka , in which it was held that the practice of bringing
an illatom-son-in-law is confined to a couple of communities
only. Both the existence of the custom and the agreement
between the father-in-law and son-in-law so as to enable the
son-in-law to claim property will have to be pleaded and
proved.  In this case, there is absolutely no pleading or proof
of the existence of the custom or the inheritance of the
property. Therefore, this Court has no hesitation to hold that
the plea of the illatom-son-in-law is not proved.
The evidence of the witnesses examined for the
defendants is clear.  DW.1, who is defendant No.1, in his
chief-examination itself stated that the maternal grandfather
Pentaiah was working with Korea Bai.  He was attending to
cultivation operations of the land of Korea Bai.  In his cross-
examination also, he agrees that he was paying the sum of
Rs.70/- to Rs.100/- per year to Korea Bai as batta.  In
addition to DW.1, DW.3-A.Gangulu, who is defendant No.4  
in the suit also, clearly states that his brother was working
as a servant under Korea Bai for about 30 years.  Therefore,
it is clear from the evidence of the defendants that their
predecessors were workers under Korea Bai.
Counsel for the appellant relied upon the judgement of
the Honble Supreme Court of India reported in
A.Shanmugam v. Ariya Kshatriya Rajakula Vamsathu    
Madalaya Nandhavana Paripalanai Sangam .
This   
judgement of the Honble Supreme Court of India followed
the earlier judgment in
Maria Margarida Sequeria
Fernandes v. Erasmo Jack
de Sequeria .
These two judgments of the Honble Supreme Court of
India make it very clear that a watchman, caretaker, agent,
servant etc., who are persons in gratuitous possession/
permissive possession, cannot have any rights in the
property irrespective of his long stay or occupation. The
Honble Supreme Court clearly held that the mere
production of documents like ration cards, tax receipts, etc.,
would not establish a claim of adverse possession. In these
two leading judgments and particularly in Shanmugams 
case (8 supra), Honble Supreme Court of India held that a
watchman, caretaker, or a servant employed to look after the
property can never acquire interest in the property
irrespective of his long possession. The Supreme Court
further held as follows:
43.6. Watchman, caretaker or a servant
employed to look after the property can
never acquire interest in the property
irrespective of his long possession. The
watchman, caretaker or a servant is
under an obligation to hand over the
possession forthwith on demand.
According to the principles of justice,
equity and good conscience, Courts are
not justified in protecting the possession
of a watchman, caretaker or servant who
was only allowed to live into the premises
to look after the same.
43.7. The watchman, caretaker or agent
holds the property of the principal only
on behalf the principal. He acquires no
right or interest whatsoever in such
property irrespective of his long stay or
possession.
This Court, on an examination of the evidence, finds
that the witnesses for the defendants categorically admitted
that their ancestor was working as a servant.  Later,
defendant No.1 continued to work for Korea Bai. Therefore,
the question of either Pentaiah or his illatom-son-in-law or
the children of the illatom-son-in-law acquiring any right to
the property does not arise.  In fact, by following the
judgment of the Honble Supreme Court of India in
Shanmugams case, and by reading of the entire pleadings 
in order to discern the truth leads to the conclusion, they
could not plead their claim with certainty in the written
statement. In the entire written statement, there is no clear
averment of the manner in which the title was acquired by
the employees of Korea Bai, namely Pentaiah or his son-in-
law or defendant No.1. This Court, therefore, has no
hesitation to hold that the defendants could not plead or
established their title to the property.
Adverse Possession: The next point for consideration
on the question of title is the plea of adverse possession. In
fact, in the written statement itself, they have pleaded both
the title and also adverse possession.  The plea of adverse
possession is mutually destructive of the plea of title.
Unless the defendants abandon one, they cannot rely on the
other. In the case on hand, the defendants/respondents
continued to urge on both.
As far as the plea of adverse possession is concerned,
as noticed by the Honble Supreme Court of India in a large
number of decisions, including the judgment relied upon by
the counsel for the appellant in
Karnataka Board of Wakf
v. Government of Indian and others
in which the Court
held as follows:
11. Physical fact of exclusive possession
and the animus possidendi to hold as
owner in exclusion to the actual owner
are the most important factors that are to
be accounted in cases of this nature. Plea
of adverse possession is not a pure
question of law but a blended one of fact
and law. Therefore, a person who claims
adverse possession should show (a) on 
what date he came into possession, (b)
what was the nature of his possession,
(c) whether the factum of possession was
known to the other party, (d) how long
his possession has continued, and (e) his
possession was open and undisturbed. A  
person pleading adverse possession has 
no equities in his favour. Since he is
trying to defeat the rights of true owner,
it is for him to clearly plead and establish
all facts necessary to establish his
adverse possession. (
Dr. Mahesh Chand  
Sharma v. Raj Kumari Sharma
AIR  
1996 SC 869 ).
12. Plaintiff, filing a title suit
should be very clear about the origin of
title over the property. He must
specifically plead it. (See: S M Karim v.
Bibi Sakina).
In
P Periasami v. P
Periathambi
((1995) 6 SCC 523) this
Court ruled that - "Whenever the plea of
adverse possession is projected, inherent
in the plea is that someone else was the
owner of the property."
The pleas on title and adverse
possession are mutually inconsistent and
the latter does not begin to operate until
the former is renounced.
Against this backdrop of the law
laid down by
the
Honble Supreme Court, this Court is examining the case
laws cited. The learned counsel for the respondents relied
upon number of cases to prove adverse possession.  In fact,
the judgement cited by the learned counsel in Girajala
Subbarao v. Kamireddi Satyanarayana , it is clearly
stated that mere long possession of the property without the
required animus, cannot ripen into title.
The learned counsel for the appellant also relied upon
a number of judgments of the Supreme Court of India
including
L.N.Aswathama v. P.Prakash
,
P.T.Munichikkanna Reddy v. Revamma
, and
Chatti   
Konati Rao v. Palle Venkata Subba Rao
and argued that 
the necessary pleading and proof as observed by the Honble
Supreme Court of India are not made out in this case.
In para 14 of
Chatti Konati Rao
(14 supra) case, the
Honble Supreme Court of India clearly held that the burden
is squarely upon the defendant, who claims adverse
possession to show that his possession has been 
adverse/hostile and to the knowledge of the plaintiff.
Learned counsel also relied upon M.Durai v. Muthu  and
pointed out that Honble Supreme Court in this case held
that once the plaintiff proves his title, burden shifts on the
defendants to prove his adverse possession.
In the case on hand, this Court notices that neither the
pleading nor the proof is adequate for coming to a
conclusion that the defendants have perfected their title by
adverse possession.
In view of the judgement of the Honble
Supreme Court of India in the case of Shanmugam (8 
supra) following
Maria Margarida Sequeria Fernandez
,
(9 supra), the possession of the defendants in this case is
only the possession of a caretaker or a watchman of the
property. There are no equities in their favour both in view of
these judgments of the Supreme Court and in view of the
fact that they pleaded adverse possession.  Therefore, this
Court has no hesitation to hold that the defendants have not
proved their title to the property.  The fact that the
defendants mortgaged the property to a Bank etc., will not
clothe them with any title as there is no evidence to show
what documents were relied upon by the Bank for creating a
mortgage.  The plaintiff is also not a party to the same.
The other question that survives for consideration on
this issue is about the so-called interpolations and
corrections in the revenue records. Counsel for the
respondents argued that the revenue records, which are
filed, contain a number of interpolations and corrections.
What is interesting to note is that the documents filed by the
defendants themselves show the name of the plaintiff as the
person in possession. Ex.B.5, B.10 and B.11 clearly show
the name of the plaintiff as the pattadar of the property.
Learned counsel argued that there are a number of
interpolations and corrections in these documents. These
documents are relied upon and filed by the defendants. If
the defendants felt these documents cannot be relied upon,
they should not have been produced. Every correction in a
document is not a result of fraud or a deliberate deception.
Sometimes, genuine errors occur and these can be 
corrected. An inadvertent error can be corrected.  Similarly a
wrong entry made on the basis of certain facts can be
corrected when the full details are available.  The mere fact
that a document contains corrections, does not lead to
inescapable conclusion that the correction was made with a
malafide intent or to cheat the opposite party of his right.
The documents, the explanation for the corrections etc.,
must be seen in their totality to come to any conclusion.  In
the case on hand, the documents filed by the defendants do
contain certain corrections. The witnesses, who marked
these documents, did not comment about the corrections. 
None of the defendants witnesses said that these corrections
made deliberately to defeat their interest.
On the other hand, DW.7, who is a Senior Assistant in
the Mandal Revenue Office, was summoned to produce the   
accounts etc.  In his chief-examination, no documents were
marked.  In the cross-examination, interestingly the certified
copies of Exs.B.10 and B.11 were shown to him and he  
agrees that the Director of Survey Settlement and Land
Records signed on the register. The corrections are made
with an initial by the authorities whenever they are made. In
the cross-examination, he was confronted with Exs.A.6, A.3
and A.2, which were marked by the plaintiff and he admits
that these three documents were issued to the plaintiff. In
addition, another witness was summoned as DW.8. He   
marked Ex.X.1. He stated that Ex.X.1 is the survey land
record. Therefore, the available evidence in this case even
though it contains corrections, particularly the B series
exhibits support the case of the plaintiff. The defendants
failed to examine any witness or elicit any answers from the
available witnesses about the so-called corrections.  Whether
these are genuine corrections or interpolations made with a
motive is not spelt out clearly. Therefore, this Court is of the
opinion that the so-called corrections in the documents do
not really affect the case of the plaintiff or further the case of
the defendants.
Limitation: The learned counsel for the defendants
also argued that the suit is barred by limitation.  It is his
contention that the plea of limitation can be raised at any
time under
Section 3
of the Limitation Act.  The learned
counsel relied upon The Senior Regional Manager, Food 
Corporation of India, Hyderabad v. the Hyderabad
Roller Flour Mills Company Limited , Syed Jalaluddin
Hasan Quadri v. M/s. Tarapharmacy rep., by its
Managing Partner , Pyda Subbaramayya Chetty v. The   
Premier Bank of India Ltd.
,  and argued that even if there
is no pleading under
Section 3
of the Limitation Act, a plea
of limitation can be urged at any time.
He also relied upon
Nedunuri Kameswaramma v. Sampati Subba Rao
and
Bhagwati Prasad v. Shri Chandramaul
and argued that 
even if no specific issue is framed, if both the parties are
aware of the of the point in dispute, and they lead evidence
on that issue/point, the Court can take notice of the fact
and pronounce judgment even if there is no specific plea.
This Court is of the opinion that
Section 3
of the
Limitation Act can be applied in cases where the pleading is
very clear and an ex-facie reading of a pleading would
disclose that the case is barred by time.  Limitation in most
cases is a mixed question of fact and law. Hence it is
desirable that there should be adequate pleading and the
applicable article should also be set up. The Honble
Supreme Court of India in
Narne Rama Murthy v. Ravula 
Somasundaram and Others
held as follows:
5. We also see no substance in the
contention that the Suit was barred by
limitation and that the Courts below
should have decided the question of
limitation. When limitation is the pure
question of law and from the pleadings
itself it becomes apparent that a suit is
barred by limitation, then, of course, it is
the duty of the Court to decide limitation
at the outset even in the absence of a
plea. However, in cases where the
question of limitation is a mixed question
of fact and law and the suit does not
appear to be barred by limitation on the
face of it, then the facts necessary to
prove limitation must be pleaded, an
issue raised and then proved.
This Court in
G.Shyamlal v. G.Ishwarji
emphasised
the need for adequate and proper pleadings on limitation.
In the case on hand, the cause of action para of the
plaint clearly shows that the cause of action in the suit arose
on 25.03.1987 when the defendants proposed to prepare 
sale deed in favour of defendant No.5 in June, 1987; when
they entered upon the land and tried to assert the rights.
This is the specific cause of action that is pleaded in this
suit.  The defendants in their written statement did not deny
this cause of action. They did not urge that the cause of
action stated is not correct. They merely pleaded that the
plaintiff can not maintain the suit as it is time barred.  The
cause of action in this suit arose in the year 1987 as per the
pleadings and the suit is filed within three years there from.
Therefore, apart from a lack of pleading of limitation, this
Court holds that the suit is filed within time.
The defendants, who are now urging that the suit is
barred by time, urge this Court to take up the issue of
limitation without adequate pleading in line with
Nedunuri
Kameswaramma
(19 supra) and
Bhagwati Prasad
(20    
supra).  Having failed to introduce any evidence on limitation
which is also in the notice of the plaintiff they cannot ask
the Court to dismiss the suit on the ground of limitation.   In
fact, though they plead adverse possession they do not
mention the dates from which their possession has become 
adverse with that of the plaintiff.  Neither the date nor the
period is spelt out with clarity.  Therefore, this Court is of
the opinion that the plea of limitation is not available at all
to the plaintiff.  The plea was not spoken of in the evidence
also with any certainty.
Counsel for the respondents also argued on the land
being part of an erstwhile estate and cited a number of
judgments on the question of ryotwari pattas, Melavaram
and Kudivaram rights etc.  This Court is of the opinion that
these issues do not arise for consideration in this case.
Neither the Estate Abolition Act nor the grant of pattas etc.,
are pleaded or proved.  Therefore, this Court is not
considering the arguments on this subject as they are not
based on any pleading or proof.
In view of this discussion, this Court is of the opinion
that the plaintiff has proved her title to the property.  Her
title and possession are made out by the available
documents on record. Therefore, this Court holds that issue
No.1 should be decided in favour of the plaintiff and against
the defendants. Plaintiff is declared as the owner of the
property.  The defendants are directed to forthwith vacate
and deliver possession of the property within sixty (60) days
from the date of this judgement. If the defendants do not
voluntarily deliver the property, plaintiff is at liberty to
proceed through Court for eviction of the defendants. The
plaintiff is it a liberty to file an application for mesne profits
also in line with paras 34 to 39 of Shanmugams case (8
supra).
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the judgment
and decree of the lower Court are set aside. In the
circumstances, no costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in
this appeal shall stand closed.
___________________________     
D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU, J     
Date:02.08.2018