[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. Sunita Agarwal vs G.Sudershan & 2 Others on 20 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 (NOC) 106 (HYD.), AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 315
Author:
T. Sunil Chowdary
Bench:
T. Sunil Chowdary
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          

cIVIL REVISION PETITION No.3968 OF 2017     

20.08.2018 

Smt. Sunita Agarwal ...Petitioner

G.Sudershan & 2 Others...Respondents   

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri R.A.Achuthanand 

Counsel for the respondent: Sri M. Siva Sekhar
                                                        

<GIST: 


>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

  (1994) 2 SCC 392 
2 (2008) 15 SCC 673 
3 AIR 1998 SC 634  
4 (2005) 4 SCC 315 
5 (1977) 4 SCC 467 
6 AIR 1968 SC 471  
7 (2007) 14 SCC 183 
8 (2008) 12 SCC 661 
9 2015 (3) ALT (SC) 14 (D.B.)


THE HONBLE JUSTICE SRI T. SUNIL CHOWDARY          
CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.3968 of 2017    
ORDER:
1       Challenge in this Civil Revision Petition, filed under
Article
227
of the Constitution of India, is to the order dated 28.6.2017
passed in I.A.No.28 of 2015 in O.S.No.301 of 2014 on the file of the
Court of the I Junior Civil Judge, City Civil Court, Secunderabad.
2       The factual matrix leading to the filing of the present Civil
Revision Petition, is as follows:
3       The respondents are owners of the shop bearing D.No.3-4-
242 situated behind Mahankali temple, Tobacco Bazaar, 
Secunderabad (hereinafter referred to as the suit schedule
property). The respondents let out the suit schedule property to
the petitioner on a monthly rent of Rs.4,000/- under a registered
lease deed dated 18.8.2004 for a period of 25 years.  The
respondents got issued a legal notice under
Section 106
of Transfer
of Property Act on 07.10.2013 directing the petitioner to vacate the
suit schedule property and handover vacant possession of the
same to them.  The petitioner got issued a reply notice on
18.12.2013 denying the various averments made in the notice.
Having no other alternative the respondents filed O.S.No.301 of
2014 on the file of the Court of the I Junior Civil Judge, City Civil
Court, Secunderabad against the petitioner seeking eviction from
the petition schedule premises.  During the pendency of the suit,
the petitioner filed I.A.No.28 of 2015 under Order VII rule 11 (a) &
(d) r/w 151
CPC
for rejection of the plaint. The respondents filed
counter inter alia contending that the petition is not maintainable
either on facts or in law. The trial Court, after affording reasonable
opportunity to both parties, dismissed the petition on merits by
order dated 28.6.2017. Hence, the present Civil Revision Petition.
4       The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
three fold: 1) The trial Court misconstrued the scope of clauses (a)
& (d) of Rule 11 of
Order VII CPC
and dismissed the petition on
untenable grounds, 2) the trial Court failed to consider the fact
that the respondents filed a premature suit which is not
maintainable under law, and 3) the trial Court committed grave
error while interpreting the clauses of the lease deed, more
particularly Clauses 13 and 15.
5       Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents
submitted that the trial Court, while deciding the petition under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
, has to take into consideration the
pleadings in the plaint only.  He further submitted that the trial
Court considered the clauses of the lease deed in right perspective
and dismissed the petition. He further submitted that this Court
shall not lightly interfere with the findings recorded by the trial
Court while exercising revisional jurisdiction unless there is an
error ex faice.
6       Basing on the rival contentions, the point that arises for
consideration in this Civil Revision Petition is whether the impugned
order suffers from any irregularity, illegality or impropriety, warranting
interference of this Court while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 227
of
the Constitution of India?
7       The learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously submitted
that the respondents, having taken a plea of fraud, failed to
furnish material particulars, therefore, the suit is liable to be
rejected in limine.
8       As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioner the respondents have taken a specific plea in Para No.III
(f) of the plaint that the petitioner fraudulently got drafted the lease
deed suppressing the actual period of tenancy.  To substantiate the
argument, the learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn the
attention of this court to the following judgements:
9
Mohan Rawale vs. Damodar Tatyaba Alias Dadasaheb
wherein the Honble apex Court while considering the scope of
Section 81 (1)
and
Section 83 (1) (a)
of Representation of Peoples
Act, made the following observations at para Nos.10, 12, 13 and
16:
10. We may take up the last facet first. As Chitty, J.
observed, "There is some difficulty in affixing a precise meaning
to" the expression "discloses no reasonable cause of action or
defence". He said: "In point of law ... every cause of action is a
reasonable one." (See Republic of Peru v. Peruvian Guano Co.') A
reasonable cause of action is said to mean a cause of action with
some chances of success when only the allegations in the
pleading are considered. But so long as the claim discloses some
cause of action or raises some questions fit to be decided by a
Judge, the mere fact that the case is weak and not likely to
succeed is no ground for striking it out. The implications of the
liability of the pleadings to be struck out on the ground 1 (1887)
36 Ch D 489 that it discloses no reasonable cause of action are
quite often more known than clearly understood. It does
introduce another special demurrer in a new shape. The failure of
the pleadings to disclose a reasonable cause of action is distinct
from the absence of full particulars. The distinctions among the
ideas of the "grounds" in
Section 81(1)
; of "material facts"
in
Section 83(1)(a)
and of "full particulars" in
Section 83(1)(b)
are
obvious. The provisions of
Section 83(1)(a)
and (b) are in the
familiar pattern of Order VI, Rules 2 and 4 and Order 7, Rule I (e)
Code of Civil Procedure
. There is a distinction amongst the
'grounds' in
Section 81(1)
; the 'material facts' in
Section
83(1)(a)
and "full particulars" in
Section 83(1)(b)
.
12. Further, the distinction between "material facts" and
"full particulars" is one of degree. The lines of distinction are not
sharp. "Material facts" are those which a party relies upon and
which, if he does not prove, he fails at the time.
13. In Bruce v. Odhams Press Ltd.2 Scott L.J. said: "The
word 'material' means necessary for the purpose of formulating a
complete cause of action; and if any one 'material' statement is
omitted, the statement of claim is bad." The purpose of "material
particulars" is in the context of the need to give the opponent
sufficient details of the charge set up against him and to give him
a reasonable opportunity.
16. The distinction between 'material facts' and
'particulars' which together constitute the facts to be proved or
the facta probanda on the one hand and the evidence by which
those facts are to be proved facta probantia on the other must be
kept clearly distinguished. In Philipps v. Philipps3, Brett, L.J.
said:
"I will not say that it is easy to express in words what
are the facts which must be stated and what matters need
not be stated. ... The distinction is taken in the very rule
itself, between the facts on which the party relies and the
evidence to prove those facts. Erie C.J. expressed it in this
way. He said that there were facts that might be called the
allegata probanda, the facts which ought to be proved, and
they were different from the evidence which was adduced to
prove those facts. And it was upon the expression of opinion
of Erie C.J. that Rule 4 [now Rule 7(1)] was drawn. The
facts which ought to be stated are the material facts on
which the party pleading relies."
10
Ranganayakamma vs. K.S. Prakash
wherein the Honble   
apex Court held at Para Nos.39, 40 and 41 as follows:
39.     Another aspect of the matter cannot also be lost sight of.
Order VI, Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure
reads as under:
"4. Particulars to be given where necessary in all cases in
which the party pleading relies on any
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, willful default,
or undue influence, and in all other cases in which
particulars may be necessary beyond such as are 
exemplified in the forms aforesaid, particulars (with
dates and items if necessary) shall be stated in the
pleading."
40.     When a fraud is alleged, the particulars thereof are
required to be pleaded. No particular of the alleged fraud or
misrepresentation has been disclosed.
41.     We have been taken through the averments made in the  
plaint. The plea of fraud is general in nature. It is vague. It was
alleged by the plaintiffs that signatures were obtained on several
papers on one pretext or the other and they had signed in good
faith believing the representations made by the respondents,
which according to them appeared to be fraudulent
representation. When such representations were made, what was  
the nature of representation, who made the representations and
what type of representations were made, have not been stated.
Allegedly, on some occasions, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 used to 
secure the signatures of one or more of the plaintiffs and
defendants No. 3 to 8 on several papers but the details therein
had not been disclosed.
11      As per the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, a
party to the proceedings who pleads fraud has to furnish the
material facts as well as material particulars.
12
I.T.C. Limited vs. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal
wherein
the Honble apex Court held at Para No.27 as under:
As stated above non-movement of goods by the seller 
could be due to a variety of tenable or untenable reasons, the
seller may be in breach of the contract but that by itself does not
permit a plaintiff to use the word ''fraud'' in the plaint and get
over any objections that may be raised by way of filing an
application under
Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
. As pointed out by
Krishna Iyer,J. in T.Arivandandam's case, the ritual of repeating a
word or creation of an illusion in the plaint can certainly be
unravelled and exposed by the Court while dealing with an
application under Order 7 Rule 11(a). Inasmuch as the mere
allegation of drawal of monies without movement of goods does
not amount to a cause of action based on 'fraud', the Bank
cannot take shelter under the words 'fraud' or 'misrepresentation'
used in the plaint.
13      As per the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, mere
drawal of money without movement of goods does not amount to  
fraud.
14      Let me consider the facts of the case on hand in the light of
the above legal principle.
15      The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is
that the petitioner fraudulently got drafted the lease deed by
mentioning the lease period as 25 years instead of 5 years. The
respondents having taken such a plea, ought to have mentioned
the material facts and material particulars in the plaint.  The very
purport of
Order VI Rule 4 CPC
is that the plaintiff has to furnish
all the material facts and material particulars so as to enable the
defendant to set up his/her defence by laying proper foundation in
the written statement.  In the instant case the petitioner and the
respondents are parties to the lease deed dated 18.8.2004.   Mere
suppression of fact may not be a fraud in each and every case.
Taking plea of fraud is a material fact. Material particulars in
relation to a lease deed prima facie are (1) names of the parties, (2)
date of the execution, and (3) reference to its clauses. The
respondents have furnished all the material particulars with
reference to alleged fraud. If the gist of the plaint is taken into
consideration the petitioner played fraud while drafting the lease
deed with reference to duration of lease.  Whether the lease deed is
for a period of 25 years or 5 years will be decided at the time of full
fledged trial only. The petitioners have complied with the
provisions of
Order VI Rule 4 CPC
.  Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case and also the principle enunciated in the
cases cited supra, I am unable to accede to the contention of the
learned counsel for the petitioner that the plaint is liable to be
rejected for non-compliance of
Order VI Rule 4 CPC
by the
respondents.  Even assuming, but not conceding, that the plaint is
bereft of ingredients of
Order VI Rule 4 CPC
, so far as alleged fraud
is concerned, that itself is not a valid ground to reject the plaint,
for the simple reason that the suit for eviction is not filed basing on
this ground alone.
16      The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner
is that the respondents have no right whatsoever to file the suit till
expiry of lease period. Refuting the said contention, the learned
counsel for the respondents submitted that in view of Clause 15 of
the lease deed, the respondents are entitled to file the suit for
eviction.  To substantiate the argument, the learned counsel for
the petitioner has drawn the attention of this court to the following
judgments:
17
Vithalbhai (P) Ltd vs. Union Bank of India
wherein the
Honble apex Court held at para No.21 as follows:
Where the right to sue has not matured on the date of the
institution of the suit an objection in that regard must be
promptly taken by the defendant. The Court may reject the plaint
if it does not disclose the cause of action. It may dismiss the suit
with liberty to the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on its maturity. The
plaintiff may himself withdraw the suit at that stage and such
withdrawal would not come in the way of the plaintiff in filing the
suit on its maturity. In either case, the plaintiff would not be
prejudiced.
18      As per the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, the
court may reject the plaint if the suit is a premature one. As rightly
pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner
has taken a specific plea in the written statement that the suit filed
by the respondents is a premature one.
19
T. Arivandandam vs. T.V. Satyapal
wherein the Honble
apex Court held at Para No.5 as follows:
We have not the slightest hesitation in condemning the
petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of the court
repeatedly and unrepentantly resorted to. From the statement of
the facts found in the judgment of the High Court, it is perfectly
plain that the suit now, pending before the First Munsif's Court,
Bangalore, is a flagrant misuse of the mercies of the law in
receiving plaints. The learned Munsif must remember that if on a
meaningful-not formal-reading of the plaint it is manifestly
vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear
right to sue, be should exercise his power under Or. VII r. 11
C.P.C
. taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is
fulfilled. And, if clever, drafting has created the illusion of a cause
of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing by examining the
party searchingly under
Order X C.P.C
. An activist Judge is the
answer to irresponsible law suits. The trial court should insist
imperatively on examining the party at the first bearing so that
bogus litigation can be shot down at the earliest stage. The Penal
Code is also resourceful enough to meet such men, (Cr.XI) and
must be triggered against them. In this case, the learned Judge to
his cost realised what George Bernard Shaw remarked on the 
assassination of Mahatma Gandhi  
        "It is dangerous to be too good."
20      As per the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, the
defendant in the suit is entitled to file an application under
Order
VII Rule 11 CPC
if the suit filed by the plaintiff is a vexatious one.
21
Calcutta Credit Corporation Ltd vs. Happy Homes (Private)
Ltd
wherein the Honble apex Court held at para No.7 as follows:
But, it was contended, the notice intimating an intention
to quit at 3-30 P.m. on August 31, 1953, was not a notice "duly
given" within the meaning of
s. 111(h)
of the-
Transfer of Property
Act
. It is not necessary to decide for the purpose of this case
whether the month of the tenancy of Allen Berry expired on the
midnight of the first day of every calendar month for', in our
judgment, a notice which is defective may still determine the
tenancy, if it is accepted by the landlord. A notice which complies
with the requirements of
s. 106
of the Transfer of Property
Act operates to terminate the tenancy, whether or not the party
served with the notice assent,; thereto. A notice which does not
comply with the requirements of
S. 106
of the Transfer of
Property Act in that it does not expire with the end of the month
of the tenancy, or the end of the year of the tenancy, as the case
may be, or of which the duration is shorter than the duration
contemplated by
S. 106
, may still be accepted by the party served
with the notice and if that party accepts and acts upon it, the
part.), serving the notice will be estopped from denying its
validity. The defect in the notice served by one, party may
undoubtedly be relied upon by the other party and he may plead
that the tenancy does not stand determined but after the notice is
accepted by the other party who acts upon it, the party serving
the notice cannot contend that the notice served by him was
defective, and on that account the tenancy was not determined.,
The reason of the rule is clear. A tenancy is determined by service
of the notice in the manner prescribed by
S. 111 (h)
read with
S.
106
of the Transfer of Property Act. If the notice is duly given, the
tenancy stands determined on the expiry of the period of the
tenancy. Even if the party served with the notice does not assent
thereto, the notice takes effect. If the notice is defective, it does
not operate to terminate the tenancy by force of the statute. But a
tenancy is founded in contract, and it is always open to the
parties thereto to agree that the tenancy shall be determined
otherwise than by notice served in the manner provided by
S.
106
of the Transfer of Property Act, or by a notice of a duration
shorter than the period provided by the Act. If the parties so
agree, the tenancy will conic to an end.
22      This decision deals with the effect of defective notice.  As per
the principle enunciated in the case cited supra, a person who fails
to raise objection with regard to the validity of the notice issued
under
Section 106
T.P.Act at the earliest point of time, deemed to
have waived his right at a subsequent stage.
23      On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents
has drawn the attention of this Court to the
ratio
laid down in
C.Natrajan vs. Ashim Bai
, Kamala vs. K.T. Eshwara SA  and P.V. 
Guru Raj Reddy rep. by GPA Laxmi Narayan Reddy vs. P.Neeradha    
Reddy . As per the principle enunciated in all these cases, the
averments in the plaint have to be read as a whole to find out
whether it discloses a cause of action or whether the suit is barred
under any law.  At the stage of exercising power under
Order VII
Rule 11 CPC
, the stand of the defendant in the written statement
or in the application for rejection of plaint is wholly immaterial.
24      Suffice it to say that there is no golden yardstick to define
"cause of action. Cause of action consists of bundle of facts. Each
fact by itself would create a cause of action for legal redressal.  All
the facts put together may give rise to a cause of action. To put it
in a different way, a particular fact may create a cause of action or
all the facts put together may give rise to a cause of action
depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.  Cause 
of action is heart and soul of a civil suit. Accruing of cause of
action in favour of the plaintiff is sine qua non to file a civil suit.
Premature suit presupposes non-accruing of cause of action in
favour of the plaintiff as on date of filing of suit. Inarticulation of
cause of action para in the plaint eventually leads to dismissal of
the suit.
25      There is no second opinion with regard to the proposition of
law submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that a
premature suit is liable to be dismissed in limine.
26      The petitioner also filed the petition under Clause (d) of Rule
11 of
Order VII CPC
as if the suit is barred by any other law for the
time being in force.
27      The petitioner is not disputing the jural relationship of
tenant and landlord between him and the respondents. The
petitioner is also not disputing the execution of the lease deed
dated 18.8.2004.  The landlord is entitled to file a suit for eviction
against the tenant on various grounds. Merits or demerits of the
grounds will be considered at the time of full fledged trial. There is
no specific law, which prevents the landlord to file a suit against
the tenant.
28      In view of the facts and circumstances of the case I am of the
considered view that the plea taken by the petitioner falls outside
the purview of Clause (d) of Rule 11 of
Order VII CPC
.  Therefore,
the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner on this
aspect is liable to be rejected.
29      The learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously submitted
that the respondents have no right whatsoever to issue legal notice
dated 07.10.2013 to the petitioner under
Section 106
of Transfer of
Property Act before expiry of the lease period or without taking a
specific plea that the petitioner violated Clause 13 of the lease
deed.
30
Section 106
of Transfer of Property Act deals with issuance
of quit notice.  A plain reading of
Section 106
T.P.Act clearly shows
that the landlord is entitled to issue a notice under
Section 106
of
the T.P.Act to terminate the tenancy.  There is no bar for issuance
of a notice. A perusal of
Section 106
in juxtaposition with
Section
111 (h)
of Transfer of Property Act indicates that a landlord is
entitled to issue a quit notice even prior to the expiry of the lease
period if the exigency so warrants.  The decision relied upon by the
learned counsel for the petitioner in
Calcutta Credit Corporation
case (6 supra) is no way helpful to the case of the petitioner.  The
facts of the case on hand are entirely different to the facts of the
case cited above.
31      The learned counsel for the respondents strenuously
submitted that the finding of the trial Court that Clause 15 of the
lease deed enjoins the respondents to file the suit.  On the other
hand, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
trial Court ought to have considered Clause 15 of the lease deed in
the light of Clauses 13 and 14 and allowed the petition.
32      In order to appreciate the rival contentions, it is not out of
place to extract Clauses 13 to 15 of the lease deed which read as
hereunder:
13.     If the lessee commits breach of any terms,
stipulations or conditions of this Lease Agreement or fails to pay
rent for any 3 months, then notwithstanding the period of
tenancy, the Lessors shall be entitled with due notice of
termination of tenancy, to re-enter upon and resume possession
of the Schedule Mulgi and this agreement shall cease and stand
terminated.
14.     The lease period may be extended by mutual 
consent after the expiry of the said term of 25 years.  The Lessors
shall not seek eviction up to 25 years excepting under the
circumstances for breach of this agreement.
15.     In case of vacation of the premises on or before the
expiry date of the agreement or terminating of the tenancy, either
of the parties liable to give three months notice in advance.
33      Clause 13 enables the respondents to file a petition for
eviction of the petitioner from the petition schedule premises,
notwithstanding the period of tenancy, in the following
circumstances:
i.       breach of any terms, stipulations or conditions of              
                the Lease deed by the petitioner, and
       ii.      If the petitioner fails to pay rent for a period of three               
                months.
34      Clause 14 deals with extension of lease period by mutual
consent after expiry of the lease period.  This clause has no
relevancy for disposal of this Civil Revision Petition.
35      The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner alone can terminate the lease by issuing three months
prior notice taking aid of Clause 15 of the lease deed.
36      If the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
accepted, the respondents have no right whatsoever to file a suit
for eviction before the expiry of lease period, unless the petitioner
violates the conditions of the lease deed or commits default in
payment of rent for three months as stipulated in Clause 13 of the
lease deed.  To put it in a different way, Clause 15 is subservient to
Clause 13 of the lease deed.   In order to ascertain the underlying
object of the lease deed one has to read all the clauses
harmoniously.   One clause cannot be read in isolation of other
clauses.  Some times, one clause of the deed has to be read in
juxtaposition with the other clauses so as to ascertain the
intention of the parties to the deed. Whether a particular clause is
an independent one or relies on other clause of the deed depends
on facts and circumstances of each case.
37      A perusal of Clause 15 of the lease deed at a glance
demonstrates that it consists of two parts.  First part deals with
rights of the petitioner/tenant to vacate the suit schedule property
before expiry of the lease period and the second part deals with
termination of tenancy by the landlords/respondents.  If either of
the parties intend to terminate the lease, issuance of three months
prior notice is mandatory.  The term on or before expiry of the date
of the agreement as deployed in Clause 15 itself prima facie
indicates that either of the parties to the deed is entitled to
terminate the lease even without pressing into service Clause 13.
If the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
accepted, the petitioner alone is entitled to take advantage of
Clause 15.  When the petitioner is entitled to terminate the
contract before expiry of the lease period, without assigning any
reasons, why not the landlord is entitled to terminate the lease
deed taking aid of Clause 15? The rights and obligations flow from
Clause 15 equally apply to both parties.  A party to the lease deed
cannot interpret a particular clause in such a way to claim rights
by him alone thereby preventing other party under any
circumstances to exercise such right.  Adducing of evidence by
both parties is inevitable in order to ascertain the intention of the
parties to the deed for deploying Clause 15 in the lease deed.  With
what intention the parties to the lease deed have used these words
has to be considered at the time of full fledged trial only. The devil
does not know the human mind.  The intention of the parties to
the lease deed can be gathered basing on the facts pleaded and
proved.  If this court expresses any opinion on Clause 15, certainly
it would cause prejudice to any one of the parties to the
proceedings.  Therefore, this Court is consciously restraining itself
to express any opinion on Clause 15 of the lease deed in view of
the settled principles of law.  Whether Clause 15 is subservient to
clause 13 or clause 15 is an independent clause de hors Clause 13
is a debatable issue, which requires a full fledged trial.  Clause 15
prima facie enjoins the respondents to file a suit. I am fully
agreeing with the findings recorded by the trial Court that Clause
15 gives rise to a cause of action for filing of the suit. Apart from
that, the other facts pleaded in the plaint, prima facie, accrues
cause of action in favour of the respondents.
38      There is one another interesting aspect, which was not
addressed by both parties either wittingly or unwittingly.  Though
both counsel have not addressed a particular fact knowingly or
unknowingly, still it is the duty of the Court to address such vital
fact or issue.  It is needless to say that the court has to take into
consideration the pleadings of both parties so as to render
substantial justice.
39      To appreciate the rival contentions, it is apt to extract para
No.3 (g) and (h) of the plaint, which read as under:
(g)     The plaintiff submit that the Defendant thereafter failed to
pay the monthly rents from September 2013 onwards, and the  
Defendant with dishonest intention sent a Legal Notice
dt:17.10.2013, demanding the plaintiffs to name a bank standing
in the name of the plaintiffs for depositing the monthly rents and
further sent a Demand Draft for Rs.6,084/- bearing No.025349,
dt:7.10.2013 Drawn on ICICI Bank M.G. Road Branch,  
Secunderabad in the name of Ganga Sudarshan & Brothers,   
wherein the plaintiffs are not having any such bank account on
the said names, as such the plaintiffs have returned the said
Demand Draft to the Defendant.
(h)     Thus in view of the aforesaid reasons, the Plaintiffs got
issued Termination Notice dt:11.11.2013 determining the
Tenancy of the Defendant immediately after expiry of (3) THREE
MONTHS from the date of receipt of Termination Notice and
further demanded the Defendant to vacate and deliver the vacant
physical possession of All that Plaint Schedule Property, and so
also demanded to pay arrears of Rents from September 2013  
onwards till the date of termination by cash, without prejudice to
Plaintiffs rights as Plaintiffs are not holding any Bank Account
under three names jointly.
40      A perusal of the above two paras clearly indicates that the
respondents/plaintiffs have taken a plea that the petitioner /
defendant committed default in payment of rent for more than
three months. It is not out of place to extract hereunder the
relevant portion of the cause of action para of the plaint.
.since September 2013 when the Defendant stopped   
paying the rents by cash from the month of JULY 2010 onwards 
when the Defendant committed wilful default in paying monthly
rents..
41      A perusal of Sub-Paras (g) & (h) of Paragraph No.III in
consonance with the above relevant portion of cause of action i.e.,
para IV of the plaint, clearly indicates that the respondents have
taken a specific plea that the petitioner committed wilful default in
payment of rent. Clause 13 encompasses in it the above referred
paras.
42      The trial Court has not focused its attention to the above
referred paras in the plaint.  Simply because this aspect was not
considered by the trial Court and not addressed by the counsel
before this court that itself would not compel this court to close its
eyes and pass orders mechanically without applying mind.
43      As observed earlier, each fact gives rise to a cause of action.
Taking of specific plea of non-payment of rent by the petitioner for
a period of three months eventually accrues a right in favour of the
respondents to file a suit.   Accruing right in favour of the plaintiff
is the genesis of cause of action.
In view of the principle
enunciated in
C.Natrajan
(7 supra), Kamala (8 supra) and P.V. Guru
Raj Reddy (9 supra) the court has to take into consideration the
facts pleaded in the plaint only in order to ascertain whether there
is a cause of action to file the suit.
44      This Court has to consider the scope of Order VII Rule 11 (a)
& (d) in touch stone with the facts pleaded in the plaint only.  If
there is no pleading in the plaint, coupled with absence of specific
finding by the trial Court, it certainly would preclude this court to
express any opinion on such aspects.  On contra, if there is a
pleading in the plaint that itself legally enjoins the court to address
such factual aspect even at the stage of revision notwithstanding
recording of a specific finding by the trial Court and not addressing
of that aspect by the learned counsel.  The facts pleaded in the
plaint prima facie reveals a cause of action in favour of the plaintiff
to file the suit.  I am fully agreeing with the finding recoded by the
trial Court so far as Clause 15 of the lease deed is concerned.
45      Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and
in the light of the foregoing discussion, I have no hesitation to hold
that the petitioner miserably failed to establish that there is no
cause of action in favour of the respondents to file the suit for
eviction.  The petitioner equally failed to establish that the suit is
barred by any law for the time being in force.  The petitioner failed
to establish that the facts of the case on hand fall within the ambit
of Clauses (a) & (d) of Rule 11 of
Order VII CPC
.
46      This Court can exercise jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India if there is an error manifest on          the face
of the impugned order.  From a careful scrutiny of the impugned
order as well as the material available on record, this court is of
the considered view that there is no illegality, irregularity or
impropriety in the impugned order warranting interference of this
Court while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India.
47      In the result, the Civil Revision Petition is devoid of merit
and is accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs. Consequently
miscellaneous petitions if any pending in this Civil Revision
Petition shall stand dismissed.
-------------------------------------
T. SUNIL CHOWDARY, J.
Date: 20th August, 2018