[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kunchakurthy Veera Sangaiah And Others vs G.Sakunthala (Since Died) Represented ... on 10 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 123
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU                     

APPEAL SUIT No.242 of 2008   


10-08-2018 

Kunchakurthy Veera Sangaiah  and others Appellants   

G.Sakunthala (since died)  represented by her  legal representatives  and others  Respondents


COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANTS: Mr. B. Nalin Kumar         

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENT NOs.2 o 22: Mr. N. Vijay         
 COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENT NOs.23 to 28: Mr. M.  Rajamalla Reddy          



<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    
? CASES REFERRED:      

1. 1962 KLJ 867 
2. AIR 2004 SC 1893 
3. (2009) 4 SCC 780 
4. (1995) 2 SCC 543 
5. 2007 (6) ALD 348 (DB)
6. AIR 1955 SC 346 
7. AIR 1929 Patna 401 
8. 1881(6) Cal. 17
9. 1888 (11) Cal. 429
10. 1900(27) Cal.  169
11. AIR 1922 Patna 402 
12. AIR 2002 SC 637 = (2002) 2 SCC 85  
13. (1987) 1 SCC 690 
14. (2017) 9 SCC 332 
15. 1995(2) SCC 543 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         
        
APPEAL SUIT No.242 of 2008 and   
CROSS-OBJECTIONS (SR) No.4246 of 2008      


DATED: 10-08-2018  

THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:         
JUDGMENT:
(per the Honble Sri Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy)  

        Defendant Nos.1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 in O.S.No.2 of 2002
filed this appeal under
Section 96
of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (
CPC
) read with
Order XLI of CPC
, feeling
aggrieved by judgment dt.29.01.2008 in the said suit, on the file
of the Principal District Judge, Medak, at Sangareddy.
2.      Respondent No.1 (since died) presently represented by
respondent Nos.23 to 28, filed the cross-objections in respect
of item No.3 of the plaint schedule properties allotting the said
item to the shares of appellant Nos.1 and 5 to 7, for being
allotted to their purchasers, who are defendant Nos.11 to 28.
For convenience, the parties are referred to as they are arrayed
in the suit.
3.      Brief facts leading to the filing of this appeal are that late
K. Veeraiah (hereinafter referred to as the testator) is the
original owner of the plaint schedule properties comprising A
to C schedules.  Defendant No.1 is the son, and the plaintiff
and defendant No.2 are the daughters of the testator.  The
testator died on 19.12.1990 allegedly leaving behind a Will,
which is the source of the litigation between the plaintiff and
defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10.  The plaintiff married long prior
to the death of her father.  In February 2002, she filed the suit
for partition of the suit schedule properties into three shares
and allotment of one such share to her.  The suit was originally
filed against defendant Nos.1 and 2 only.  During the pendency
of the suit, defendant Nos.1 and 2 died.  Hence, defendant
Nos.8 to 10, sons of defendant No.1, defendant Nos.4 to 7,
children of defendant No.2, were impleaded.  Defendant Nos.3
and defendant Nos.11 to 28, the alleged third party purchasers
of the property also came on record.  The basis for the claim of
the plaintiff for partition was that the suit schedule properties
were self-acquired properties of her father K. Veereaiah, who
died intestate and that therefore she succeeded to 1/3rd share of
her father.
4.      Defendant No.1 filed a written statement wherein he has
averred that during his fathers life time, he executed a Will
dt.14.05.1984 bequeathing the suit schedule properties and also
certain other properties in his and also in favour of his three
sons, i.e., defendant Nos.8 to 10, and that by virtue of the said
Will they became absolute owners of the suit schedule
properties without any right, title or interest in the plaintiff.  He
further averred that subsequent to the execution of the said
Will, the testator has sold Ac.5.28 guntas in Sy. No.107 of
Chintapalli, that in the year 1985 the testator has divided the
remaining properties into four shares and gave one such share
to each of the four defendants, i.e., defendant Nos.1 and 8 to
10, that in accordance with the said division, the testator also
applied to the revenue authorities on 25.06.1989 to mutate the
names of the defendants in the record of rights and that their
names were accordingly mutated and since then they have been  
in exclusive possession and enjoyment of their respective shares
to the exclusion of other legal heirs of the testator.
5.      Defendant No.3 filed a written statement stating that
after verifying the revenue records and on being satisfied with
the genuine ownership and possession of defendant Nos.1 and 
8 to 10, he entered into an agreement of sale on 07.10.2001 in
respect of item No.3 of the plaint A schedule land for the
purpose of plotting the same into house sites and sold the plots
to various persons duly registering the same in favour of the
said purchasers through defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10.  That
therefore, the plaintiff cannot claim any right, title or ownership
over the said land.
6.      The plaintiff filed a rejoinder terming the Will deed as a
fabricated document brought into existence to knock away the
suit schedule properties and that the revenue records were
manipulated based on such false document.
7.      Based on the respective pleadings of the parties, the lower
Court framed the following issues:
Issue No.1: Whether Late K. Veeraiah executed will deed
Dated 14-5-1984 bequeathing the suit schedule properties in
favour of the defendant No.1, and 8 to 10?
Issue No.2: Whether Late K. Veeraiah divided the suit
schedule properties and gifted the same in favour of the
defendant No.1 and 8 to 10 in 1985?
Issue No.3: Whether the applications filed by Late K.
Veeraiah before ROR authorities requesting to mutate the
name of Defendant No.1 and 8 to 10 in respect of the suit
schedule properties amounts to an admission of factum of
transfer and binding on the plaintiff?
Issue No.4: Whether the applications by Late K. Veeeraiah
requesting to transfer of the suit land in favour of the
defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10 estops the plaintiff from
challenging the said application/statements?
Issue No.5: Whether the defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10 have
been in exclusive possession and enjoyment of their
respective properties after gifts, hostile and adverse to the
plaintiff and whether the defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10
perfected their title by adverse possession in respect of the
suit properties?
Issue No.6: Whether the plaintiff paid proper court fee?
Issue No.7: Whether the plaintiff is entitled for partition?
Issue No.8: Whether equities can be worked out in respect of
the suit land in Sy.No.383 purchased by the defendant Nos.2
to 7 and 11 to 28?
8.      The Court below, however, in its judgment restructured
the issues as under:
Issue No.1: Whether Late K. Veeraiah executed will deed
dated 4-5-1984 bequeathing the suit schedule properties in
favour of the defendant No.1 and 8 to 10?
Issue No.2: Whether Late K. Veeraiah divided the suit
schedule properties in 1985 and whether consequently he
applied for mutation of these divisions in favour of defendant
Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10?
Issue No.3: Whether the defendant No.1 and 8 to 10 have
been in exclusive possession and enjoyment of their
respective properties, after gifts, hostile and adverse to the
plaintiff and whether the defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10
perfected their title by adverse possession in respect of the
suit properties?
Issue No.4: Whether the claim of the plaintiff is not barred by
limitation and if so, whether she is entitled for partition?
Issue No.5: Whether equities can be worked out in respect of
the suit land in Sy. No.383 purchased by the Defendant
Nos.11 to 28?
Issue No.6: To what relief?
9.      In support of her case, the plaintiff examined herself as
P.W.1 and got Exs.A.1 to A.36 marked.  On the defendants 
side, D.Ws.1 to 8 were examined and Exs.B.1 to B.55 were  
marked.  On appreciation of the oral and documentary
evidence, the lower Court answered the reframed Issue Nos.1
to 4 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.  As
regards issue No.5, it has allotted item No.3 of schedule A
land to the extent of Acs.11.12 guntas to defendant Nos.1, and
8 to 10, vendors of defendant Nos.11 to 28, while observing
that the Court can work out equities while allotting Ac.12.01
guntas of land towards 1/3rd share of the plaintiff in the final
decree proceedings.  A preliminary decree was accordingly
passed.
10.     At the hearing, Mr. B. Nalinkumar, learned counsel
appearing for defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10, submitted that
though D.Ws.2 and 3 have not attested the Will proper, they
have attested on the sealed cover of the Will which was signed
by the testator in their presence.  He further submitted that in
the light of the evidence of D.Ws.2 and 3 that the testator has
signed the Will in their presence, the requirements of
Section
63(a)
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (for short, the
Succession Act
) were satisfied and that by examining the said
two witnesses defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10 have also complied 
with the legislative mandate of proving the document by
examining at least one attesting witness.  In support of his
submission, he has placed reliance on the judgment in Kurian
v. Martha .
11.     Mr. N. Vijay, learned counsel appearing for defendant
Nos.3 and 11 to 28, while supporting the submissions of Mr. B.
Nalinkumar, placed heavy reliance on clause (c) of
Section 63
of the Succession Act and submitted that under the said
provision, it is not necessary that the witnesses must see the
testator sign and that it is sufficient if the testator personally
acknowledged his signature and mark evidencing his signing the
Will.  That in the present case D.Ws.2 and 3 have categorically
stated that the testator has signed the Will in their presence and
after the testator placed the same in the sealed cover both the
witnesses have attested on the cover of the Will, which
amounts to the witnesses attesting the Will itself.  In other
words, the learned counsel submitted that the sealed cover in
which the Will is kept and deposited with the Registrar must
also be treated as a part of the Will and that the lower Court
has committed a serious error in holding that the Will is not
valid as it was not attested by two witnesses.  Referring to the
findings on issue Nos.3 and 4, both the learned counsel
appearing for the defendants submitted that as per the
admission of the plaintiff, examined as P.W.1, since five years
prior to the death of her father defendant Nos.1 and 2 to 8
were exclusively cultivating the lands and managing agricultural
activities, that therefore the limitation of filing the suit
commenced in the year 1985 and expired in 1997 and that 
accordingly the suit is barred by limitation.
In support of their
submission the learned counsel relied upon
Articles 65
and
110
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
and the judgment in
Vasantiben
Prahladji Nayak v. Somnath Muljibhai Nayak
.
12.     Countering the above submissions, Mr. M. Rajamalla 
Reddy, learned counsel for the plaintiff, referred to and relied
upon
Sections 42
and
43
of the Registration Act, 1908, and
submitted that by signing on  the cover, which was presented
by the testator for the purpose of depositing the Will, D.Ws.2
and 3 have testified to the identity of the testator, that
accordingly they were the identifying witnesses and not the
attesting witnesses, that as the Will was not attested by at least
two witnesses as envisaged by
Section 63(c)
of the Succession
Act, it was not a valid Will and that therefore the lower Court
has rightly discarded the same.
In support of his submission,
the learned counsel has relied upon the judgment in
Yumnam 
Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi v. Yumnam Joykumar Singh
.    
As regards the adverse possession and the plea of limitation
advanced for the defendants, the learned counsel submitted
that the Court below has rightly held that the right to sue
accrued with the death of the original owner and that the suit
was filed within the period of twelve years from the date of
accrual of such right.
In support of his submission, he relied
upon the judgment in
Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil v. 
Balwant
.  Referring to the documentary evidence produced by
both the parties, such as, record of rights and pahanies, the
learned counsel submitted that for the first time in 1993-94, the
names of defendant Nos.1 and 8 to 10 were entered and that
the suit was filed within twelve years therefrom.  He has also
argued that issue of notice before mutation is mandatory and
that in the absence of such notice, adverse possession cannot
be claimed.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel
relied upon the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in
Chinnam Pandurangam v. Mandal Revenue Officer,   
Serilingampally Mandal
.  Advancing his submission on
cross-objections, the learned counsel submitted that item No.3
of plaint-A schedule property is the most prime property whose
value exceeds the value of all other properties put together.
13.     Having regard to the respective submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties, the following points emerge for
consideration.
(i)     Whether the Will set up by defendant Nos.1
and 8 to 10 is valid in law?
(ii)    Whether the plaintiff was ousted from
possession for a statutory period of twelve years
and the suit is barred by limitation?
(iii)   Whether the allotment of item No.3 of the plaint
A schedule property in favour of defendant
Nos.1 and 8 to 10 by the lower Court is
sustainable?
Re point (i):
14.     The word Will is defined by
Section 2(h)
of the
Succession Act as under :
Will means the legal declaration of the intention of
a testator with respect to his property which he desires
to be carried into effect after his death.
15.
Section 63
of the Succession Act deals with execution of
unprivileged wills.  It reads as follows:
63. Execution of unprivileged Wills. -  Every testator, not
being a soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in actual
warfare, or an airmen so employed or engaged, or a mariner at sea,
shall execute his Will according to the following rules:-
(a)     The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the
Will, or it shall be signed by some other person in
his presence and by his direction.
(b)     The signature or mark of the testator, or the
signature of the person signing for him, shall be so
placed that it shall appear that it was intended
thereby to give effect to the writing as a Will.
(c)     The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses,
each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his
mark to the Will or has seen some other person
sign the Will, in the presence and by the direction
of the testator, or has received from the testator a
personal acknowledgement of his signature or
mark, or the signature of such other person; and
each of the witnesses shall sign the Will in the
presence of the testator, but it shall not be
necessary that more than one witness be present at
the same time, and no particular form of attestation
shall be necessary.
16.     In Yumnam Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi (3-supra)   
the Supreme Court while dealing with the importance of
attestation of Will, with reference to
Section 63
of the
Succession Act, observed as under:
11. As per provisions of
Section 63
of the Succession Act,
for the due execution of a will:
(1) the testator should sign or affix his mark to the will;
  (2) the signature or the mark of the testator should be so
placed that it should appear that it was intended thereby to give
effect to the writing as a will;
(3) the will should be attested by two or more witnesses, and
  (4) each of the said witnesses must have seen the testator
signing or affixing his mark to the will and each of them should
sign the will in the presence of the testator.
12. The attestation of the will in the manner stated above is
not an empty formality. It means signing a document for the
purpose of testifying of the signatures of the executant. The
attested (sic attesting) witness should put his signature on the
will animo attestandi. It is not necessary that more than one
witness be present at the same time and no particular form of
attestation is necessary. Since a will is required by law to be
attested, its execution has to be proved in the manner
laid down
in
the section and the
Evidence Act
which requires that at least
one attesting witness has to be examined for the purpose of
proving the execution of such a document.
13. Therefore, having regard to the provisions of
Section
68
of the Evidence Act and
Section 63
of the Succession
Act, a will to be valid should be attested by two or more
witnesses in the manner provided therein and the
propounder thereof should examine one attesting witness to
prove the will. The attesting witness should speak not only
about the testator's signature or affixing his mark to the will
but also that each of the witnesses had signed the will in the
presence of the testator.
17.     It is not in dispute that D.Ws.2 and 3, who are the
attestors, have not signed the Will.  They have, however,
deposed that they were called to the Registrars Office when
they were at their homes, where the testator has signed the Will
deed and also affixed his thumb impression in the presence of
the Registration Officer and then kept the same in the envelope
and sealed it.   It could be culled out from the evidence of
D.Ws.2 and 3 that the testator has signed the document in their
presence and put his thumb impression on it.  They also
admitted that they only attested the contents superscribed on
Ex.B.45 cover.
18.
In
Girija Datt Singh Vs. Gangotri Datt Singh
, a three
Judge Bench of the Supreme Court discussed the requirements  
of
Section 63
of the Succession Act 1925 with particular
reference to attestation of a will by two attestors and observed
as under :
..In order to prove the due attestation of the will
Ex.A-36 Gangotri would have to prove that Uma Dutt
Singh and Badri Singh saw the deceased sign the will and
they themselves signed the same in the presence of the
deceased.  The evidence of Uma Dutt Singh and Badri 
Singh is not such as to carry conviction in the mind of
the Court that they saw the deceased sign the will and
each of them appended his signature to the will in the
presence of the deceased    (Emphasis added)
19.     The facts in Girija Dutt Singh (6-supra) vary with that
of the case on hand as in the former case the attestors attested
the will but their evidence that they have seen the testator sign
the will was not believed.  However, the case decided by the
Division Bench of Patna High Court in Umakanta Das 
Bairiganjan Bhuyan Mahapatra Vs. Biswambhar Das    
Mahapatra  as far back as 1929 bear similarity with the facts of
the present case on hand.  In that case also the attesting
witnesses have not signed on the will proper.  As in the present
case, the testator, after executing the will, put it in a sealed
cover and deposited it with the Registrar under
Section 42
of
the Registration Act with the following endorsement in Oriya
on the cover :
I, Sri Balbhadra Prasad Das Bairiganjan Bhuyan
Mahapatra, of mauza Mangalpur Samil mouza   
Gopinathpur, pargana Banchas, district Balasore, do
execute this last will, Finis.  The legatees are No.1 Sri
Tikayat Babu Umakanta Das Mahapatra, No.2 Sri Babu   
Biswambhar Das Mahapatra, No.3 Sri Babu Nityanand   
Das Mahapatra and No.4 Sri Babu Sachidananda   
Mahapatra, who are my (Balbhadraprasad Das   
Bairiganjan Bhuyan Mahapatras) sons, Dated 14th 
December 1916.
Below the signature of the testator, an endorsement in English
was made by the Sub-Registrar, which reads as follows:
Presented this 14th December 1916, at 1 p.m. by
Balbhadraprasad Das Bairiganjan Bhuyan Mahapatra,   
son of Raghunath Das Rajkumar Bairiganjan Bhuyan   
Mahapatra of Mangalpur samil mauza Gopinathpur,  
pargana Banchas, thana Soro, by caste Karan, by 
profession zamindar, who is identified by Babu Hem
Chandra De, Pleader, Balasore.
The said endorsement made by the Sub-Registrar did not bear 
any signature.  There was however, a signature, on the margin,
of the testator, and below it, the Pleader Babu Hem Chandra
De, signed.  The superscription on the cover was copied by the
Registrar in his Register No.5 and the same was signed by him.
20.     The propounder of the will submitted before the Court
that the scribe Nilamber Pattnaik, the pleader Hem Chandra
De and the Sub-Registrar were all attesting witnesses to the will.
The District Court rejected the said contention and held that
the scribe did not purport to have attested the will as a witness.
The Court also observed that even assuming that the scribe
signed the document not only as the scribe but also as an
attesting witness, the law requires that the will must be attested
by two or more witnesses each of whom must have seen the  
testator sign and affix his mark to the will or must have
received from the testator a personal acknowledgement of his
signature or mark, and each of the witnesses must sign the will
in the presence of the testator and that these facts have not
been proved in that case.  As regards the signature of the Sub-
Registrar, it was contended that the endorsement on the cover
containing the will must be taken to be a part of the will and
further that the acknowledgement of the testator before the
Sub-Registrar and the pleader Babu Hem Chandra De to the  
effect that the document contained in the cover was his will
and that he executed the same and followed by the signature of
the Sub-Registrar and of the pleader would be a sufficient
compliance with the provisions of
Section 50
of the Indian
Succession Act 1865 (corresponding to
Section 63
of
Succession Act 1925) and that the Sub-Registrar and the
Pleader must be considered to be the attesting witnesses.  While
rejecting this submission, the District Judge observed :
It is extremely doubtful whether the cover in
which the will was placed and which was presented to
the Sub-Registrar for deposit under
Section 42
,
Registration Act can be treated as a part of the will..
The High Court, however, relied upon certain Judgments,
which incidentally raised a similar issue as in the present case.
These Judgments bearing the facts as discussed by the Patna 
High Court in Umakanta Das Vs. Biswambhar (7-supra) are  
discussed hereunder.
21.
In
Hurro Sundari Dabia Vs. Chander Kant 
Bhuttacharjee
, the testatrix admitted the signature on the will
to be hers before the Registrar of Assurances and was
identified before him by one of the witnesses to the signature
and both the Registrar and the identifier signed their names as
witnesses to the admission.  Garth, C.J., and Mitter, J held that
such an attestation was a sufficient compliance of
Section 50
of
the Succession Act 1865.
Another Division Bench, in Nitye
Gopal Sircar Vs. Nagendranath Mitter  held that the
admission of execution of will before the Registrar and his
signature on the endorsement of registration was held to be
attestation of the will.  In Amarendranath Chatterji Vs.
Kashi Nath Chatterji , the registration of a will by the testator
and his signature to the certificate of admission of execution
testified by the signatures of the Sub-Registrar and of a witness
was held sufficient attestation to satisfy the requirements of
Section 50
of Succession Act 1865.
After referring to the
above referred Judgments and also some other cases, the Patna 
High Court, in
Sarada Prasad Vs. Trigunacharan Ray
held
that the signature of the Registrar to the endorsement of
admission of the will by the testator was a sufficient compliance
in respect of attestation of a will as required by Section 50 of
the 1865 Act.  Upon discussing
the above case
law, the
Division Bench, in Umakanta Das (7-supra) observed as 
under :
. There is therefore, considerable force in the
argument of the learned advocate for the appellant in
support of the view that the signature of the pleader on the
cover containing the will should be regarded as the signature
of an attesting witness although he signed the endorsement
made by the Registrar as an identifier and not the
endorsement in Oriya characters and the signature of the
testator appearing on the cover.
(Emphasis added)
22.     In Yumnam Ongbi (3-supra) the dispute as arising in
the present case, namely, whether attestation on the cover
constitutes attestation of the will did not arise.  No Judgment
has been cited laying down any contra opinion to the one
expressed in the above mentioned Judgments of the Calcutta 
and Patna High Courts on the subject issue as arising in this
case.  It can be deduced from these Judgments that what is
important is that the testator must sign the will in the presence
of at least two witnesses.  The Courts, in the said Judgments,
however, adopted a liberal approach in treating the attestation
on the cover in which the will is placed at the time of
registration and deposit of the cover as sufficient compliance of
Section 50
of the Succession Act 1865 which is in pari materia
with
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act 1925, if the
testator signed the will in the presence of the attestors of the
cover of the will.
23.     In the present case on hand, the testimony of DW-2 and
DW-3 clearly reveals that the testator has signed on the will in
their presence and requested them to sign on the cover after
placing the will inside and sealed the cover.  In this fact-
situation, we respectfully follow the ratio discussed in the above
Judgments of the Calcutta and Patna High Courts and hold that
the attestation on the cover - Ex.B-45 amounts to attestation of
the will.
24.     The further question however remains is whether even if
the will is shown to have been properly attested, the same
satisfies the other legal tests for a valid will ?
25.     In order that a will stands the judicial scrutiny, it must
overcome suspicious circumstances.
In
Madhukar D. Shende   
Vs. Tarabai Aba Shedage
, at paras 8 and 9, the Supreme 
Court made a luminous exposition of legal position on the
requirement of proof of a will.  We can do no better than
reproducing the relevant portion of the opinion herein below :
The requirement of proof of a will is the same as any
other document excepting that the evidence tendered in
proof of a will should additionally satisfy the
requirement of
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act,
1925 and
Section 68
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
If after considering the matters before it, that is, the
facts and circumstances as emanating from the material
available on record of a given case the court either
believes that the will was duly executed by the testator or
considers the existence of such fact so probable that any
prudent person ought, under the circumstances of that
particular case, to act upon the supposition that the will
was duly executed by the testator, then the factum of
execution of will shall be said to have been proved.  The
delicate structure of proof framed by a judicially trained
mind cannot stand on weak foundation nor survive any
inherent defects therein but at the same time ought not
to be permitted to be demolished by wayward pelting of
stones of suspicion and supposition by wayfarers and
waylayers.  What was told by Baron Alderson to the Jury
in R Vs. Hodge 1838 2 LCC 227 may be apposite to  
some extent.  The mind was apt to make a pleasure in
adapting circumstances to one another and even in
straining them a title, if need be, to force then to form
parts of one connected whole; and the more ingenuous 
the mind of the individual, the more likely was it,
considering such matters, to overreach and mislead
itself, to supply some little link that is wanting, to take
for granted some fact consistent with its previous
theories and necessary to render them complete.  The
conscience of the court has to be satisfied by the
propounder of will adducing evidence so as to dispel any
suspicious or unnatural circumstances attaching to a will
provided that there is something unnatural or suspicious
about the will.  The law of evidence does not permit
conjecture or suspicion having the place of legal proof
nor permit them to demolish a fact otherwise proved by
legal and convincing evidence.  Well founded suspicion
may be a ground for closer scrutiny of evidence but
suspicion alone cannot form the foundation of a judicial
verdict  positive or negative.
It is well settled that the one who propounds a will
must establish the competence of the testator to make
the will at the time when it was executed. The onus is
discharged by the propounder adducing prima facie
evidence proving the competence of the testator and
execution of the will in the manner contemplated by law.
The contestant opposing the will may bring material on
record meeting such prima facie case in which event the
onus would shift back on the propoundeer to satisfy the
court affirmatively that the testator did know well the
contents of the will and in sound disposing capacity
executed the same.  The factors, such as the will being a
natural one or being registered or executed in such
circumstances and ambience, as would leave no room  
for suspicion, assume significance.  If there is nothing
unnatural about the transaction and the evidence
adduced satisfies the requirement of proving a will, the
court would not return a finding of not proved merely
on account of certain assumed suspicion or supposition.
Who are the persons propounding and supporting a will
as against the person disputing the will and the pleadings
of the parties would be relevant and of significance.
26.     Uneven disposition of property or denial of property to
one or more family members is treated as a suspicious
circumstance in considering the legality of a will.  In Malkani
Jamadar  the testator has settled the property in favour of his
nephew as against his married daughter.  The Supreme Court 
held that the will suffers from suspicious circumstances due to
disinheritance among the heirs of equal degree and the testator
has not explained the reason for exclusion of such a legal heir.
27.
In
Prakash Soni Vs. Deepak Kumar
, the Supreme   
Court held that presence of suspicious circumstances naturally
tends to make the initial onus very heavy and unless it is
satisfactorily discharged, Courts would be reluctant to treat the
document as the last will of the testator.
28.     The lower Court examined the contents of the will and
noted certain aspects which create suspicious circumstances 
viz.,
(i)     that it is written in the will that though the testator
knows reading and writing of Telugu, he affixed his
thumb impression as presently his right hand is not
functional;
(ii)    that though the testator claimed that he has placed
his insignia in bronze containing his name in
English on the will, the same is not found on the
will;
(iii)   that there was no date on any page of the will;
(iv)    that it is not clear when exactly the will deed was
typed;
(v)     that defendant No.1 himself pleaded that his father
sold Ac.5-28 guntas in Sy.No.107, which is a part of
the properties conveyed under the will, subsequent
to the execution of will; and
(vi)    that the disposition under the will only in favour of
the son and grand sons of the testator ignoring the
plaintiff and defendant No.2, the daughters of the
testator, is ex facie unfair.
29.     In addition to the above shortcomings, we notice the
following deficiencies:
D.W.2 deposed that there was no endorsement on   
Ex.B.45 that the testator has executed the Will in full state of
consciousness and with his free will and that he has voluntarily
signed on Ex.B.45.  He has also admitted that the Will deed
was not read over to him and the other attesting witness and
that the testator orally informed him about the contents.  It
could thus be seen that the attestors were not aware whether
the testator executed and signed the will with his free will
without being influenced by the legatees under the will.
In his cross-examination, D.W.3 deposed that he went to
the Registrars office on being called by the testator who
informed him that he has to attest on the cover in which the
testator was keeping the Notenama and sealing it, that the
note was contained in Telugu typed matter and that he does not
know the contents of the typed matter.  He further deposed
that he did not enquire from the testator the nature of the
property or the document being kept in the sealed cover.
While stating that he was at the Registrars office for five
minutes, the witness admitted that there was no endorsement 
on Ex.B.45 showing the nature of the document kept in the
sealed cover, that the Will Deed was not read over to himself
and to D.W.2 and that the attestor orally informed them.
Though the plaintiff and defendant No.2 are the
daughters of the testator, neither any property was given to
them nor the testator offered any explanation in the will for
completely disinheriting them.  The learned counsel for the
appellants and those respondents who sailed with them in this
appeal have not advanced any submissions on these aspects.  
Even though they succeeded in convincing this court that the
will is duly attested, the above noted features in general and the
failure of the testator to make any provision in favour of his
two daughters in particular, constitute strong suspicious
circumstances to disbelieve the will.  Therefore, we are of the
opinion that the will propounded by the appellants does not
stand the legal tests to deny the plaintiff of her share in the
properties left by her father.  This Point is accordingly held
against the appellants.
30. Re Point (ii):  The Court below has found that Ex.B-1
receipt issued by the Mandal Revenue Inspector shows that the
defendants paid the land revenue in 1989 itself.  It referred to
Ex.A-8  ROR for the years 1989 to 1997 showing the names  
of defendant Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10 and concluded that the
defendants are holding the lands to the exclusion of the
plaintiff.  The lower Court taking into consideration the fact
that as K. Veeraiah, the father of the plaintiff died on 19-12-
1990 held that limitation of 12 years began to run from the said
date and expired on 18-12-2002 and that the suit having been
filed on 13-2-2002, was within the period of limitation.
31.     Under
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act
, the period of
limitation of 12 years for filing a suit for possession of
immovable property or any interest therein based on title
begins to run when the possession of the defendants becomes 
adverse to the plaintiff.
In
Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil Vs.
Balwant
, the Supreme Court, at para-16, held as under :
In the case of a Hindu joint family, there is a
community of interest and unity of possession among all
the members of the joint family and every coparcener is
entitled to joint possession and enjoyment of the
coparcenary property.  The mere fact that one of the
coparceners is not in joint possession does not mean
that he has been ousted.  The possession of the family
property by a member of a family cannot be adverse to
the other members but must be held to be on behalf of
himself and other members.  The possession of one, 
therefore, is the possession of all.  The burden lies
heavily on the member setting up adverse possession to
prove adverse character of his possession by establishing
affirmatively that to the knowledge of other member he
asserted his exclusive title and the other members were
completely excluded from enjoying the property and that
such adverse possession had continued for the statutory
period.  Mutation in the name of the elder brother of the
family for the collection of the rent and revenue does
not prove hostile act against the other.  The right of the
plaintiff to file suit for partition had arisen after the Act
has come into force and re-grant was made by the
Collector under sub-section (1) of
Section 5
.  The
defendant, therefore, must plead and prove that after the
re-grant, he asserted his own exclusive right, title and
interest to the plaint schedule property to the knowledge
of the plaintiff and the latter acquiesced to such a hostile
exercise of the right and allowed the defendant to
remain in continuous possession and enjoyment of the 
property in assertion of that hostile title during the entire
statutory period of 12 years without any let and
hindrance and the plaintiff stood thereby.
32.     In the instant case the plaintiff, having been married prior
to the amendment of
Section 6
of the Hindu Succession Act 
1956, she may not be a co-parcener.  However, the properties
being the self acquired properties of the testator, till his death,
the right and title in the properties were vested in him.  De hors
the will, none of the children acquired any right over the
properties till the demise of the testator.  Therefore, during the
life time of the testator, the right to sue did not accrue to the
plaintiff.  Only from the date of death of her father, the right to
sue accrued to the plaintiff.  In this view of the matter, the
finding of the lower Court that the suit is not barred by
limitation is not liable for interference.  This Point is
accordingly held in favour of the plaintiff.
33.  Re Point (iii):  Sri M. Rajamalla Reddy, learned Counsel
submitted that the sale deeds were not executed in favour of
defendant No.3 by defendant No.1 or defendant Nos.8 to 10,
his three sons.  That the alleged agreements of sale were not
produced before the Court and that the sale deeds executed in
favour of defendant Nos.10 to 28 by defendant No.1 and
defendant Nos.8 to 10 were hit by the doctrine of lis pendens.
34.     Mr. N. Vijay, the learned Counsel, submitted that the suit
was originally filed against defendant Nos.1 and 2 and that
defendant Nos.8 to 10 have sold the property before they were
impleaded.  When the plaintiffs right to her share is recognised
and relief by way of decree is granted by the court, she must be
placed on equal footing as the other co-sharers such as
defendant No.1.  Whether the sales are hit by the doctrine of lis
pendens or not, the plaintiff is entitled to 1/3rd of the plaint
schedule properties towards her share.  It is submitted by the
learned Counsel for the plaintiff and the same is not denied that
item No.3 of the plaint schedule properties is the most valuable
of all the properties and that therefore the Court below without
assessing the value of the said item qua the remaining items of
the suit schedule properties unjustly allotted the same to
defendant Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10.  We find merit in this
submission.  While on the one hand holding that the court has
to work out equities based on the values of properties in the
final decree proceedings, the lower court on the other hand is
not justified in allotting item No.3 of the A-schedule property
exclusively to the share of defendant Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10 so as to
be eventually allotted to defendant Nos.10 to 28.  Once the
case set up by defendant Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10 based on the will is
not accepted by the court, it necessarily follows that the
plaintiff cannot be subjected to any disadvantage in the
allotment of properties merely because defendant Nos.1, 8, 9
and 10 have chosen to assert their right under the will and sell
the most valuable item of the property to others to the
detriment of the plaintiff.  In this view of the matter, the
decree, to the extent of allotment of share of plaint A-Schedule
property to defendant Nos.1, 8, 9 and 10 is liable to be set-aside
and the Cross Objections deserve to be allowed.
35.     In the result, the appeal is dismissed.  The Cross
Objections are allowed.
36.     As a sequel to the dismissal of the appeal, interim order
dated 18-4-2008 in A.S.M.P.No.646 of 2008 is vacated and 
ASMP No.646 of 2008, I.A.No.1 of 2012 (ASMP   
No.2218/2012) and I.A.No.1 of 2016 (ASMP No.323/2016)   
are disposed of as infructuous.
_______________________    
Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy 
______________________    
Justice D.V.S.S. Somayajulu 
Date : 10-08-2018