[Cites
14
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
G.Shyamlal vs G.Ishwarji And Others on 21 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 25
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.1471 of 1999 

21-06-2018 

G.Shyamlal  Appellant/  

G.Ishwarji and others  Respondents  

Counsel for the appellants: Sri  P.Venugopal

!Counsel for the Respondents: Sri O.Manohar Reddy and SriV.N.Ansari. 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1 (2006) 5 SCC 353 
2 AIR 1989 SC 1269  
3 2011 (5) ALD 53 
4 AIR 2003 Orissa 146 
5 2005 (6) SCC 614 
6 AIR(Gujarat) 1970  284
7 (2004) 2 SCC 712 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No. 1471 of 1999 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal is filed against judgment and decree dated
29.01.1999 in OS.No.49 of 199 which is filed for a declaration
of title, recovery of possession, recovery of arrears of rents
etc., on the file of the District Judge, Nizamabad.
For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to
as they are arrayed in the suit.
The brief facts of the case are as follows:
The plaintiff and his elder brother Narsoji were native of
Khajapur Village of Medak District.  The plaintiff came over to
Nizamabad and secured private employment in the year 1959.  
His brother Narsoji shifted to Nizamabad in the year 1964.
On the advice of Narsoji, the plaintiff had purchased the
plaint schedule site measuring 525 sq.yards from A.Rajaiah
under a registered sale deed No.2187 of 1977 dated
27.04.1977 for a consideration of Rs.16,000/-.  On the
application made by the plaintiff, the then Gram Panchayat,
Kamareddy granted permission to the plaintiff for
construction of a shop and residential building in its
proceedings No.63/1983/A3, dated 25.09.1983.  The plaintiff
constructed the front portion of the ground floor comprising
two shops. On up-gradation to Municipal Council, the
Kamareddy Municipal Council assessed the tax for the suit
building in the name of the Narsoji, on the basis of mistaken
representation made by the tenant of the plaintiff.  Coming to
know of it, the plaintiff applied to the Municipality/defendant
No.5 to change the name.  Defendant No.5 refused to change 
the name in the records.  Defendant No.4 is the son of
Narsoji. The front portion shops were leased out to defendant
Nos.1 and 2 on a monthly rent of Rs.1,500/-.  The defendant
paid rents upto the month of December, 1990.  Defendant
Nos. 1 and 2 failed to execute the lease deed and to pay rents
from 01.01.1991. Then the plaintiff got issued notices to
defendant Nos. 1 and 2.  Thereafter, they inducted defendant
No.3 into possession of the suit premises illegally. The
plaintiff got issued notice under
Section 106
of the Transfer of
Property Act to defendant Nos.1 to 4 on 02.03.1993
terminating the tenancy and claiming arrears of rents. There
was no response.  Hence, the suit.
Defendant No.3 filed his written statement stating that
the suit property was in the custody of defendant No.4 and he
was looking after the affairs of the suit site and building.
Defendant No.4 represented that he was one of the owners of
the suit premises. Defendant No.3 verified from the Municipal
Council, Kamareddy and found that the suit building stood in
the name of the father of defendant No.4.  Defendant No.3
entered into an agreement with defendant No.4 on
24.05.1990.  Defendant No.3 established a hotel in the name
and style of Udipi Hotel Sri Krishna Prasad and the
inaugural function was held on 29.09.1990.  Defendant No.4
brought the plaintiff to the inaugural function.  Since
defendant No.4 was acting at the instance of the plaintiff,
defendant No.3 presumed that the plaintiff and the defendant
No.4 were the co-owners of the suit premises. Defendant No.3
paid rents to defendant No.4 upto the date of filing of the suit.
The rents were paid with the consent of the plaintiff.  The
notice issued by the plaintiff under
Section 106
of the
Transfer of Property Act is not in conformity with the
provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act
. The notice is illegal
and cannot determine the lease.  Defendant Nos.1 and 2 filed
memo adopting the written statement of defendant No.3.
Defendant No.4 filed his written statement stating that
the plaintiff and the father of defendant No.4 had opened a
hotel in Nirmal and jointly ran that hotel till the year 1969.
In or about the year 1973 Narsoji purchased an open plot
measuring 525 sq.yards in Kamareddy from Angul Rajaiah  
S/o Laxmaiah, R/o Kamareddy.  But before registration of the
plot in his name, the mother of Narsoji expired.  So
registration could not be affected.  Later, in the year 1977,
Narsoji got the plot registered in the name of the plaintiff out
of love and affection.  The plaintiff neither paid the sale
consideration nor met the expenses for registration of the sale
deed.  Defendant No.3 is in possession of the suit premises as
the tenant of defendant No.4 paying rent to him.  Narsoji got
the property recorded in his name in the Gram Panchayat
records. He was paying the property tax in respect of the suit
property.  Narsoji died in the year 1987.  Defendant No.3 has
been paying rent to defendant No.4.  The plaintiff has no right
to claim any arrears of rent as he is not the owner of the suit
building. The notice given by the plaintiff did not terminate
the lease in favour of defendant No.3. The plaintiff is not
entitled to the relief of declaration or for possession of other
reliefs.
On the basis of the above pleadings, the lower Court
framed the following issues for trial:
(1)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration
of title, recovery of possession over the
scheduled property?
(2)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover
arrears of rent of Rs.78,300/-?
(3)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mandatory
injunction in respect of the suit premises?
(4)     Whether the plaintiff is not the owner and
possessor of the scheduled property?
(5)     Whether the schedule property was 
purchased by the father of the fourth
defendant and latter he constructed mulgies
in the year 1983 to 1985?
(6)     Whether the defendant (third) is in
possession of the suit property as a tenant?
On behalf of the plaintiff, PW.1 was examined and
Exs.A.1 to A.15 were marked.   For the defendants, four
witnesses were examined and Exs.B.1 to B.71 were marked.   
After the trial and hearing the parties, the District Judge,
Nizamabad passed the impugned judgment holding that the  
plaintiff is entitled to a decree as prayed for.  The suit was
thus decreed.  It is this decree that is now challenged in the
present appeal.
This Court has heard Sri P.Venugopal, learned counsel
for the appellant and Sri O.Manohar Reddy and Sri
V.N.Ansari, learned counsel for the respondents.
Learned counsel for the appellant/defendant 4 argued
the matter and also submitted a written note along with the
case law.  The gist of the learned counsels submission is that
the plaintiff miserably failed to prove his title to the property.
It is his contention that the burden cast upon the plaintiff
was not discharged at all and that the plaintiff was not able to
explain the passage of consideration under Ex.A.1.  The
learned counsel argued that the mere fact that a sale deed is
in the name of the plaintiff will not enable him to get a
declaration unless he proves that he actually paid the
consideration. Learned counsel for the appellant/defendant
No.4 also pointed the fact that the municipal taxes were paid
over a period of time in the name of defendant No.4.  The
books of accounts that were exhibited show that
appellant/defendant No.4 spent money for construction of the
building and this further strengthens the case of the
appellant/defendant No.4 that he is the actual owner of the
premises in question.  Learned counsel also argued that the
suit filed is hopelessly barred by time and that under
Section
3
of the Limitation Act, the Court has a duty to dismiss the
suit on the ground of limitation.
In reply to this, the learned senior counsel Sri Ravinder
Rao appearing for the plaintiff/respondent has argued that
the plaintiffs case is proved by Ex.A.1-sale deed, which is a
registered sale deed in the plaintiffs name.  Learned senior
counsel argued that Exs.A.1 to A.3, A.5, A.6 and A.13 to A.15,
apart from the admissions made in the pleadings and the
evidence, go to show that the defendants themselves
recognize the title of the plaintiff.  Learned counsel also
argued that the admissions are sufficient evidence along with
the title deed Ex.A.1 to prove the plaintiffs case for a
declaration.  The learned counsel also argued that it is the
defendants who set up a plea of nominal nature of the sale
deed and therefore, he argued that it is not for his clients to
prove the nature of the sale deed-Ex.A.1.  Learned counsel
also argued that the suit is well within time for the relief
sought and also argued that in the absence of pleading, the
plea of limitation cannot be heard or considered.
This Court, after hearing the submissions of the learned
counsels and their concentration on the issue of title, is of the
opinion that issue Nos.4 and 5 are to be decided first since
they form the crux of the arguments of the learned counsels.
Both these issues relate to the title of the plaintiff to the suit
property.  If these issues are decided in favour of one of the
party, all the other issues can be decided as a necessary
corollary to this.
Learned counsel for the appellant/defendant No.4
argued that Ex.A.1-sale deed by itself does not prove title of
the plaintiff.  It is his case that the property was purchased in
the name of the plaintiff by father of defendant
No.4/appellant out of love and affection.  The expenditure for
registration of the sale deed was not borne by the plaintiff.
Learned counsel also argued that defendant No.4 acted as the
owner of the property subsequent to the death of his father,
leased out the same to the other defendants and the
municipal tax was also assessed in the name of defendant
No.4 as can be seen from the large number of municipal
receipts, which are filed and marked as exhibits in the B
series.  The rental receipts, which are filed by the
appellant/defendant No.4, also show that he has been renting
out the property to the tenants.  The demand notices received
from the municipality also strengthen the plaintiffs case.  In
addition, the learned counsel also pointed out that the
account books filed by him as Ex.B.64 etc., show that the
expenditure for the construction of the building was borne by
the appellant/defendant No.4 and his father.  Learned
counsel argued that nothing contrary to these documents has
been filed and that therefore, the plaintiff failed to prove his
title while the defendant proved his title and possession.
In reply thereto, learned counsel for the appellant
submitted that the registered sale deed of 1997-Ex.A.12, the
Gram Panchayat approvals by Exs.A.2 to A.3, the notices 
issued by the municipality to the plaintiff show the plaintiffs
title, possession and enjoyment of the property.  Learned
counsel also pointed out that the admissions in the written
statement are also enough to grant a decree in favour of the
plaintiff.
This Court, on an examination of the pleadings, notices
that defendant No.3, who is inducted as a tenant and has
filed a written statement, wherein he pleaded as follows:
It was represented to this
defendant by defendant No.4 that he too
was one of the owners of the suit
premises.
Similarly, he states that since defendant No.4 was
acting at the instance of the plaintiff, the defendant presumed
that the plaintiff and defendant No.4 are the co-owners of the
suit schedule property. The learned senior counsel pointed
out that the admission of tenant in a written statement filed
in a Court deserves to be given due weight.  As per the
learned senior counsel, defendant No.3 admitted that the
plaintiff has title to the property.  But he presumed that he
was a joint owner because of the fact that defendant No.4
dealt with the tenant.
Learned counsel also pointed out that in the written
statement of the appellant/defendant No.4 it was initially
pleaded that his father purchased the property in the name of
the plaintiff out of love and affection for his nephew.  The
learned counsel points out that in the cross-examination of
PW.1, a suggestion was put to him, (when he was cross- 
examined, after being recalled as per order in IA.No.1494 of
1997) that the registration was affected in 1977 from out of
the joint family funds.  Learned senior counsel pointed out
that there is no consistency.  The later suggestion clearly goes
to show that the property according to the cross-examination
was purchased from out of the joint family funds. The learned
senior counsel also points out the following admissions in the
cross-examination of DW.1:
I never obtained consent of the
plaintiff in writing about the payment of
rents to D.4.  There is no evidence either
orally or written to the effect that the
plaintiff has consented for the transaction
between me and D.4.  It is a fact that
except property receipts, there is no other
record at the time of transaction that D.4
was the owner of the suit premises.
Learned counsel also argued and pointed out that the
present appellant was examined as DW.2 and when he was    
examined in chief on 13.11.1997, he deposed as follows:
In 1977 my father got the said plot
registered in the name of plaintiff.  My
father paid sale consideration of
Rs.9,600/- and he also borne the
registration expenses in respect of the said
plot.  I do not know why my father got the
said plot registered in the name of
plaintiff.
The learned counsel argued that in the written
statement the plea was taken that the sale deed was
registered out of love and affection.  But in the evidence, the
witness says that he does not know why the property was 
registered in the name of the plaintiff.  He also points out that
Ex.A.1-sale deed, ex facie, shows that the consideration is
Rs.16,000/- whereas, DW.1 deposed in the deposition that
sale consideration of Rs.9,600/- was paid.  Learned counsel
also pointed out the cross-examination of the very same
witness on 15.11.1997, wherein he deposed as follows:
The entire consideration for suit
plot was paid in the year 1973 in October
or November. As my father was not having 
money for registration charges of the suit
site, hence he got it registered in 1977.
There is no date for the payment of
Rs.8100/- on one occasion and 
Rs.1,500/- on another occasion in
Ex.B.63.
In view of this, the learned counsel for the respondents
argued that the appellant/defendant No.4 has come up with
contradictory stands at different points of time.  It is the
appellant/defendant No.4, who raised the plea that the
property was purchased nominally in the name of the
plaintiff.  Therefore, the learned senior counsel submits that a
duty was cast upon defendant No.4 to discharge the burden.
He points out that the burden is not discharged at all.
Learned senior counsel also pointed out that to prove the
nominal nature of the sale deed, the defendants have
examined defendant No.3, who is an attestor to the sale deed-
Ex.A.1.  In the chief-examination itself, the witness deposes
as follows:
As late Narsoji taken me to
Registrar Office, hence I thought the suit
property will be of Narsoji.  The plaintiff
used to come to Ramareddy when there   
were family functions.
Again in the cross-examination, on 19.11.1997, the
witness clearly states that he does not know the contents of
the said document.  He also deposes that he was told that the
consideration was paid, but he do not know on what date and
how many days or months earlier to execution of document 
the consideration was paid.  In the penultimate line of the
cross-examination, he also states that there was no talk by
him or discussion with late Narsoji regarding title of the suit
house.
The learned senior counsel, therefore, argued that the
appellant/defendant No.4 did not have any personal
knowledge about Ex.A.4 and he took contradictory stands. 
Even the witness examined by them to prove their contention
deposed that he had no knowledge about the title, or about
the passage of sale consideration. Hence, the submission of
learned senior counsel is that the defendants failed to prove
their case.
In support of the plaintiffs case, the learned senior
counsel points out that Ex.A.1sale deed has been filed in
original by the plaintiff.  Learned counsel argues that a
registered document carries a certain sanctity. He relies upon
Section 114(e)
of the Evidence Act and argues that there is a
presumption that an Official act i.e the registration has been
validly done.
In addition, this Court notices that
Prem Singh
and others v Birbal and others
is the relevant case on this
point wherein the Honble Supreme Court held as follows:
13. There is a presumption that a
registered document is validly executed. A
registered document, therefore, prima facie
would be valid in law. The onus of proof,
thus, would be on a person who leads
evidence to rebut the presumption.
Learned counsel also argues that after the sale deed was
obtained in 1977, the plaintiff applied to the Municipality
seeking permission for construction and the same was 
granted by Exs.A2 and A.3, which are of the year 1983.
According to the learned counsel, Ex.A.4-income tax return
also shows the rent paid as income.  Exs.A.5 and A.6 are the
applications made by the plaintiff for further construction in
the year 1991-92 which are in the knowledge of defendant
No.4. Learned counsel points out that appellant/defendant
No.4 in his cross-examination on 15.11.1997 categorically
admits as follows:
It is true that plaintiff has taken
permission for construction of first floor
on 11.02.1991. It is also a fact that in first
floor some pillars are raised and after
dispute started, the further construction
work was stopped.
Learned counsel for the appellant argues that the
various documents filed and the actions taken are in
consonance with the ownership of the property and that
therefore, the plaintiff has proved his case.
This Court, on an examination of the facts and
considering the submissions, notices that Ex.A.1 is the
registered sale deed in favour of the plaintiff.  The subsequent
actions of the plaintiff in applying the municipality, the
admissions of the defendants as to co-ownership in the
pleadings, that defendant No.4 was acting for the plaintiff, the
admission of the appellant that the plaintiff applied for the
municipal plan for the second floor in 1991 which is long
after Ex.A.1 sale deed strengthens the case of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff, in the facts and circumstances of the case, has
proved that he is the lawful owner of the suit schedule
property. The defendant has not discharged his burden. The
tenant himself admits the plaintiffs title. The co-ownership
set up by the defendant is clear from the pleadings. The
plaintiffs case is that as he was living away, defendant No.4
looking after the property. As can be seen from the plaint,
because defendant No.5-municipality wrongfully mutated the
name of defendant No.4, the present litigation arose.  Because
of this wrongful mutation, a suit had to be filed against the
tenant; the present appellant who setup a rival claim, against
defendant No.5/Muncipal Council, Kamareddy etc. 
       This Court, on a review of the entire evidence and
documents, holds that the defendants were not able to
discharge the burden cast upon them.  The combined affect of
admissions in the written statement, contradictory stands of
the defendant about the consideration and the existence of
Ex.A.1-sale deed and the applications for construction etc., is
that the plaintiff is the owner of the property.
The other point that is urged by the learned counsel for
the appellant is about the books of accounts, which are filed
and marked in this case. These documents are filed to show
that defendant No.4 spent some money for construction of the
property. Exs.B.63 and 64 are the said documents.  These 
two documents are supposedly account books, which are  
maintained by defendant No.4.  However, the appellant
admits in his cross-examination that other pages of the book
are closed by pasting with gum.  Similarly, in Ex.B.64 also
pages 1 to 24 are closed with pins.  No explanation is
forthcoming why these documents are closed with gum and  
pins.  In addition, books of accounts, without supporting
entries, cannot be relied upon as authentic evidence.  The
element of self-interest cannot be ruled out when a book of
account is prepared.  It is for this reason that the Courts
insist on corroboration of entries by calling upon the party to
file supporting entries for this corroboration.  The entries by
themselves cannot be treated as proof.
In
Smt.Chandrakantaben & Another v Vadilal Bapalal Modi &  
Others
the Honble Supreme Court clearly held that unless
the entries in the account books are supported by evidence
they cannot be relied upon. Even
Section 34
of the Evidence
Act says that the entries by themselves are not enough to
fasten liability.
In the case on hand, these documents do not inspire
confidence.  Even otherwise, the appellant admits as follows:
According to me, I spent
Rs.1,87,000/- for said construction.  I
have not maintained any accounts for
construction of rear portion.
Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that entries in
these documents cannot support the defendants case of 
proving his title to the property.
Learned senior counsel rightly pointed out that in para
12 of the impugned judgment, the lower Court has correctly
considered the  heading of the document also and came to a
conclusion that if the account book is treated as correct, it
shows that the account was maintained for the plaintiff.
In addition, the learned senior counsel rightly pointed
out that as per the settled law, the entries in the revenue
records or municipal tax records cannot support the case of
title.  This Court does not seek to repeat the law on the
subject.  It is so well settled that entries in revenue records,
tax receipts are not proof of title. The case of the plaintiff is
that he has title but defendant No.5 wrongly assessed tax in
the name of defendant No.4.  This is why the suit is filed for a
relief against defendant No.5 also.
Therefore, on a review of the facts and submissions
made, this Court is of the opinion that the plaintiff discharged
the burden cast upon him by proving his title to the property.
Hence this Court upholds the findings of the Court below on
issue Nos.4 and 5. As a consequence of these findings on
issue Nos.4 and 5, the plaintiff is entitled to relief of
declaration of title, recovery of possession of the suit schedule
property, which is issue No.1. As a consequence to these
decisions on issue Nos.4 and 5, the plaintiff is entitled to a
mandatory injunction to get his name mutated in the
municipal records as the owner of the property.  Hence, issue
No.3 is also decided in favour of the plaintiff/respondent
No.1.
Issue Nos.2 and 6 were not really argued by the learned
counsels and no serious dispute was raised on these two
issues which also of a corollary to other issues.  This Court
upholds the findings on issue Nos.2 and 6 which are
discussed in paragraphs 16 to 21 of the judgment in
question.
PLEADING ON LIMITATION: - The last point that
survives for consideration is the question of limitation.
Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently argued
that the suit is barred by time.  Learned counsel relied upon
Harijana Chinna Thippanna and another v Smt. 
Harijana Eramma   and argued that even though a separate 
issue was not framed, still by virtue of
Section 3
of the
Limitation Act, the defendant is entitled to argue that the suit
is barred by time.
In addition to Harijana Chinna
thippannas case he also relies upon
A.Papa Rao and 
Others v The Jeypore Sugar Co. Ltd. and Others
and also
relies upon
Articles 58
and
120
of the
Limitation Act
.
In reply thereto, learned counsel for the respondent
pointed out that there is no pleading in the written statement
about the two articles of the
Limitation Act
mentioned in the
oral submissions.  Para 5 of the written statement of the
appellant is to the following effect: the contents of para 6 are
not correct.  The suit is not within time.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the
plaintiff/respondent relies upon judgment of the Honble
Supreme Court of India reported in
Narne Rama Murthy 
v Ravula Somasundaram and Others
.  He points out that 
in
the said judgment
, the Honble Supreme Court held as
follows:
5. We also see no substance in the
contention that the Suit was barred by
limitation and that the Courts below
should have decided the question of
limitation. When limitation is the pure
question of law and from the pleadings
itself it becomes apparent that a suit is
barred by limitation, then, of course, it is
the duty of the Court to decide limitation
at the outset even in the absence of a plea.
However, in cases where the question of
limitation is a mixed question of fact and
law and the suit does not appear to be
barred by limitation on the face of it, then
the facts necessary to prove limitation
must be pleaded, an issue raised and then
proved.
His contention, therefore, is that in this case, limitation
is a mixed question of law and fact, that it is a matter of
evidence and that there should be clear/sufficient pleadings
on limitation, since it has the effect of throwing out the
plaintiffs suit in its entirety.
This Court also notices the following two judgments in
addition to the judgments cited by the learned senior counsel.
Kiritsinhji Bhagwatsinhji v Pharamroj Pirojshah Wadia
and
Food Corporation of India and Others
v Babulal Agrawal
.
In
Kiritsinhji Bhagwatsinhjis
case, the Honble
Gujarat High Court held as follows:-
..It is true that
Section 3
of the
Limitation Act requires that although
limitation has not been set up as a defence,
every suit instituted after the period of
limitation prescribed therefore by the
First
Schedule to the Limitation Act
shall be
dismissed. But, this cannot be taken to mean
that when limitation has not been specifically
pleaded in the defence and the facts are not
apparent on the face of the record, the Court
is bound to speculate upon possible questions
of limitation that may arise in the suit.
In
Babulal Agrawals
case, the Honble Supreme Court
held as follows:
.the learned counsel for the
defendant appellant, however, relying
upon
Section 3
of the Limitation Act
submits that it was the duty of the Court
to see as to whether the suit was within
limitation or not. A suit filed beyond
limitation is liable to be dismissed even
though limitation may not be set up as a
defence. The above position as provided
under the law cannot be disputed nor it
has been disputed before us. But in all
fairness it is always desirable that if the
defendant would like to raise such an
issue, he would better raise it in the
pleadings so that the other party may also
note the basis and the facts by reason of
which suit is sought to be dismissed as
threshold as to whether the suit is within
limitation or not. There is always an office
report on the limitation at the time of filing
of the suit. But in case the Court does not
prima facie find it to be beyond time at
that stage, it would not be necessary to
record any such finding on the point much
less a detailed one. In such a situation at
least at the appellate stage, if not earlier, it
would be desired of the defendant to raise
such a plea regarding limitation. In the
present case except for making a passing
reference in the list of dates/synopsis no
such ground or question has been raised
or framed on the point of limitation. It is
quite often that question of limitation
involves question of facts as well which are
supposed to be raised and indicated by
the defendant. The objecting party is not
supposed to conveniently keep quiet till
the matter reaches the Apex Court and 
wake up in a non-serious manner to argue
that the Court failed in its duty in not
dismissing the suit as barred by time 
      In line with these two judgments and in line with what
is cited by the Honble Supreme Court in
Narne Rama 
Murthys
case (5 supra), this Court holds that sufficient and
adequate pleading is necessary in cases where limitation is a
mixed question of fact and law. Where from an ex facie
reading of the pleading, it appears to the Court that the lis is
barred  by time then a pleading may  not be necessary as the
facts are clearly visible and clear to uphold the plea of
limitation. But where the question of limitation is a mixed
question of fact and law, where there is an issue about the
applicable article of the
Limitation Act
to the facts of the case
and the suit does not appear to be barred by limitation on the
face of it, then adequate and proper pleading is necessary to
show that the suit is barred by time.  This is the correct
interpretation of
Section 3
of the Limitation Act in the view of
this Court.
Coming to the facts of this case, the pleading in para 5
of the appellants written statement is a very bald pleading
bereft of any details whatsoever.  The Honble Supreme Court
in
Babulal Agrawals
case (7 supra) also held that such a
pleading on limitation is not enough.
This Court, therefore, holds that the
appellant/defendant No.4 cannot raise a plea of limitation or
pursue the same without laying an adequate foundation for
the same in his pleadings.
Even otherwise, on facts, this Court holds that the suit
which is filed in June, 1993 is within time as the cause of
action in the suit arises after defendant No.5 refused to
change or mutate the name of the plaintiff and the
tenant/defendants defaulted in payment of rents.  These
incidents occurred in 1991 and the suit that is filed in 1993
is in time.
For all these reasons, this Court holds that there are no
merits in the appeal and the judgment and decree of the lower
Court are confirmed in toto. The plaintiff/respondent in
appeal is entitled to all the reliefs that he has  prayed for in
the plaint .
The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.  In the
circumstances of the case, no costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in
this appeal shall stand closed.
___________________________    
D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU, J     
Date:  21.06.2018