[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Central Power Distribution Company Of ... vs The Consumer Grievances Redressal ... on 25 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 19, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 257
Author:
Ramesh Ranganathan
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN                           

WRIT APPEAL No.1159 of 2016    

25.10.2018 

Central Power Distribution Company of A.P. Ltd., and others.  Appellants

The Consumer Grievances Redressal forum of APCPDCL And another. Respondents       

Counsel for the appellants : R.Vinod Reddy (SC for TRANSCO)  

Counsel for the respondent No.1 : Sri P.Srinivasa Rao
 Counsel for the respondent No.2: Sri Chavali Ramanand

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

(1997) 3 SCC 261 

THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN              
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN             

WRIT APPEAL No.1159 of 2016    

JUDGMENT:
(Per the Hon'ble the Chief Justice Sri Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan)           
                        

        The first appellant is a distribution licensee as defined in
Section 2(17)
of the Electricity Act, 2003; hereinafter referred to
as the Act. The second respondent is a consumer as defined in
Section 2(15)
of that Act. The first respondent is the Consumer
Grievances Redressal Forum, hereinafter referred to as the
Redressal Forum established by the first appellant distribution
licensee in terms of
Section 42(5)
of the Act. The second
respondent consumer presented a grievance for redressal before
the first respondent Redressal Forum. After hearing the
consumer and the distribution licensee, the Redressal Forum
issued a decision. The distribution licensee filed writ petition
invoking
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, challenging the
decision issued by the Redressal Forum. The learned single
Judge held that the writ petition is not maintainable and the
distribution licensee is bound to give effect to the decision of the
Redressal Forum. The learned single Judge held that clause 14
of Chapter IV of the Andhra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory
Commission (Establishment of Forum and Vidyut Ombudsman     
for Redressal of Grievances of Consumers) Regulation, 2004;
hereinafter referred to as the Regulations; provides power to
remove difficulties could be resorted to by the distribution
licensee and not otherwise. It is also held that clause 5(11)(c) of
the Regulations makes it mandatory that the distribution
licensee shall implement the decisions and orders of the
Redressal Forum made in favour of the complainant. For these
reasons, the writ petition was dismissed as not maintainable.
Hence, this Appeal by the distribution licensee.
2.      Heard the learned standing counsel for the appellants and
the learned counsel for the second respondent.
3.      Making reference to different judicial precedents, in
particular
L.Chandra Kumar v. Union of India
, the learned
counsel appearing for the appellant distribution licensee argued
that the writ petition ought not to have been dismissed as not
maintainable. He argued that there is no exclusion of judicial
review through any of the provisions of the Regulations or the
Act; and, more importantly, there can be no exclusion of judicial
review if requisite grounds are established. It is pointed out that
even as per the impugned Judgment, no alternative efficacious
remedy has been noticed and the power to remove difficulties
available to the Commission under the Regulations is not a
remedy available to a distribution licensee against a decision of
the Redressal Forum. He also argued that it cannot be taken
that the distribution licensee has no right at all to challenge the
decision of the Redressal Forum; even if, the question whether
the writ Court would interfere, would be an issue in the realm of
judicial discretion.
4.      On behalf of second respondent consumer, reference was 
made to the contents of the decision rendered by the Redressal
Forum and it is pointed out that there is no ground whatsoever
to interfere with the redressal of the consumers grievance as
has been extended by the Redressal Forum through the decision 
impugned in the writ petition.
5.
Section 42(5)
of the Act obliges the distribution licensee to
establish a Forum for redressal of grievances of the consumers
in accordance with the guidelines as may be specified by State
Electricity Regulatory Commission, defined in
Section 2(64)
of
the Act and constituted under sub-section (1) of
Section 82
of
the Act. Rule 7 of the Electricity Rules, 2005, hereinafter
referred to as the Rules, provides that the distribution licensee
shall establish a Forum for Redressal of Grievances of
Consumers under sub-section (5) of
Section 42
of the Act,
which shall consist of officers of the distribution licensee and
independent member, who is familiar with the consumer affairs,
as nominated by the Appropriate Commission. That  
Commission issues guidelines for different purposes including
those which matters relating to Redressal Forum. The manner 
of appointment and the qualification and experience of the
persons to be appointed as member of the Forum and the 
procedure of dealing with the grievances of the consumers by
the Forum and other similar matters would be as per the
guidelines specified by the State Commission, going by the
proviso to Rule 7(1) of the Rules. Sub-section (6) of
Section 42
provides that any consumer, who is aggrieved by non-redressal
of his grievances under sub-section (5), may make a
representation for the redressal of his grievance to an authority
to be known as Ombudsman to be appointed or designated by   
the State Commission. Sub-section (7) of
Section 42
provides
that the Ombudsman shall settle the grievance of the consumer
within such time and in such manner as may be specified by
the State Commission. These provisions in sub-sections (5), (6)
and (7) of
Section 42
of the Act shall be without prejudice to the
rights, which the consumers may have, apart from the rights
conferred under those sub-sections.
6.
Regulation 5
of the Regulations deals with the functions of
the Forum. Clauses (1) to (3) provide the process of decision
making by the Forum on the basis of majority of the members
present and voting. The co-opted member from the consumer  
sector in terms of Regulations 3 and 4 shall not have the right
to vote. There is also provision for casting a duty by the
Chairperson in certain situations. These provisions in clauses
(1) to (3) of
Regulation 5
of the Regulations unequivocally show
that there is a process of decision making by the Redressal
Forum in relation to the grievance of the consumer. Such
decision making would lead to a result on the grievance of the
consumer as between the consumer and the distribution 
licensee. If the consumers grievance is not redressed by that
process, the consumer would have the opportunity to carry that
dispute to the Ombudsman. Under clause (11) (a) of
Regulation
5
of the Regulations, the Forum shall decide the complaint and
shall give the reasons in support of its decision. The Forum has
also the power to pass such interim orders on the request of the
complainant as the Forum considers appropriate pending the
final decision on the complaint. While clause (11) (c) of
Regulation 5
provides that the distribution licensee shall duly
implement the decisions and orders of the Forum made in 
favour of the complainant, such statutory responsibility to
implement the Forums decisions cannot by itself denude the
distribution licensee to challenge a particular decision of the
Forum on grounds which are sustainable at the instance of the
distribution licensee. This is so because judicial review is an
inexcusable basic guarantee of the constitutional scheme and
such judicial review through writ Court invoking
Article 226
of
the Constitution would not stand excluded by the mere
prescription of a duty on the distribution licensee to implement
the decision and orders of the Forum made in favour of the
complainant.
7.      The Commission has the power to remove difficulties. If
that power available in
Regulation 14
of the Regulations is to be
operated vis--vis the decision of the Redressal Forum, that
would amount to saying that the power to remove difficulties
can be converted to be a redressal mechanism for adjudication
and resolution of a dispute as to the correctness of the decision
of the Redressal Forum on a grievance placed by a complainant
for redressal. This is not the purpose of conferring the
Commission with the power to remove difficulties under
Regulation 14
of the Regulations. The finding in the impugned
Judgment that the power to remove difficulties is the proper
course to be adopted by the distribution licensee is, therefore,
unsustainable.
8.      The upshot of the aforesaid discussion is that the
distribution licensee is entitled to challenge a decision of the
Redressal Forum. The question whether a writ petition filed by a
distribution licensee is to be entertained or not depends upon
the facts and factors of each case and duly applying the
fundamental principles that govern Writ jurisdiction including
the context and purpose of issuing such grievance redressal
decisions by the Redressal Forum constituted by the
distribution licensee on statutory compulsion.
9.
Electricity Act, 2003
is a comprehensive legislation
enacted to consolidate the laws relating to generation,
transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and
generally for taking measures conducive to development of
electricity industry. As spelt out even in its Preamble, it aims at
taking care of various aspects including protecting interest of
consumers. Therefore, the statutory device provided through
Section 42(5)
of the Act, Rule 7 of the Rules and the Regulations
is to ensure a fine balance between the interest of the
consumers and the distribution licensees. The bridging of this
equation comes in the form of the quality of combination of
persons, who are to be members of the Redressal Forum.
Regulation 3
provides for the constitution of the Forum and
affirms the statutory command in the Act to have the Forum
established within the time limit fixed by the Act. It further
provides that the Forum shall consist of three members
including the Chairperson. It is the distribution licensee who
appoints the Chairperson and the Members of the Forum. The 
composition of the Forum shall be in terms of the different sub-
clauses in clause (2) of
Regulation 3
of the Regulations. Sub-
clause (i) is affirmation of the inexcusable principle that
members of the Forum shall be persons of ability, integrity and
standing. The sub-clause (ii) of clause (2) provides that the
Chairperson of the Forum shall be a serving officer of the
distribution licensee or a retired person possessing degree in
electrical engineering and having at least 20 years of experience
in the distribution of electricity and having served not below the
rank of Superintending Engineer. Sub-clause (iii) of clause (2)
provides that one member who is a serving officer of the
distribution licensee or a retired person having at least 10 years
of experience in Accounting out of which at least 5 years in
revenue matters and having served not below the rank of Senior
Accounts Officer. Sub-clause (iv) of clause (2) provides that one
member is a serving officer of the distribution licensee or a
retired person having at least 5 years of experience in legal
matters and having served not below the rank of Assistant
Secretary. Thus, the constitution of the Forum is statutorily
required to be a combination of a person well informed in the
field of electrical engineering and allied sciences, another in the
field of accounting and another in legal matters. The Forum so
constituted; when works with ability, integrity and standing;
deserves to be treated as one with due expertise and capable to
provide redressal for the grievance of the consumers on the
basis of the particular facts and factors of a particular case or
grievance of the consumer. This is the purpose of creation of the
Redressal Forum. Therefore, the decision that it renders
deserves to be treated as one rendered by a statutorily
constituted Forum with persons of due expertise from the
relevant fields. In such cases, the scope of judicial review, as is
understood through the plethora of judicial precedents, is to be
regulated in such manner that interference ought to be
minimal.
10.     We state the aforesaid here because though we have 
examined the decision of the Redressal Forum, which is
impugned by the distribution licensee in the writ petition, we do
not see that there was any adjudication on that issue by the
learned single Judge. Nor do the grounds raised in the Writ
Appeal elaborate on that aspect of the matter; obviously
because, that does not appear to have been an issue
adjudicated at the hands of the learned single Judge. The
proper course that would be open for us would be to make an
order of remand after delineating the legal principles as
aforesaid and holding that the writ petition filed by the
distribution licensee was not liable to be dismissed on ground of
alternative remedy, including on a ground referable to the
Commissions power to remove difficulties as per the
Regulations.
11.     In the result, this Writ Appeal is allowed setting aside the
impugned order. The writ petition is remitted for
reconsideration by the learned single Judge in the light of what
is stated aforesaid. The writ petition be listed before the learned
single Judge as per roster at the earliest.
Miscellaneous petitions pending in this Appeal, if any,
shall stand closed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
______________________________________      
THOTTATHIL B. RADHAKRISHNAN, CJ       
______________________________________      
RAMESH RANGANATHAN, J        
25.10.2018