[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kacharagarala Venkateswarlu @ ... vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 23 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 120
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.1247 of 2018

23.08.2018 

Kacharagarala Venkateswarlu @ Venkatesh Naidu and 15 others.... Petitioners/Accused  

The State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad, For the State of Telangana

Counsel for Petitioner: Sri T.Pradyumna Kumar Reddy 

Counsel for Respondent No.1 : Public Prosecutor (AP)
 Counsel for Respondent No.2 :  None appeared. 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)AIR 1998 SC 2001  
2)(1985) 2 SCC 537 
3)AIR 2017 SC 774 = (2017) 4 SCC 177  
4)(2009) 9 SCC 129 
5)1990 CriLJ 456 = MANU/UP/0285/1988    
6)2002 CriLJ 1754 = MANU/OR/0468/2002    
7)(2013) 5 SCC 762 
8)Crl.R.C.No.1569/2008 dt.21.03.2012 of High Court of Judicature at Madras


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          

Criminal Petition No.1247 of 2018

ORDER:
The important and interesting point involved in this Criminal
Petition is:
Whether after taking cognizance of a case and accused made 
their appearance, a Court can direct further investigation by
Investigating Officer (IO) at the request of the accused?
2)      The factual matrix of the case briefly is thus:
a)      In Crime No.31 of 2015 of Pedavadugur PS of Anantapur District,
the facts are that the deceased contested and elected as President of
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Society (PACS), Kristipadu village in
February, 2013 which became an eye-sore for accused, who belonged to  
rival political party and they were waiting for an opportunity to get rid.
On 30.03.2015, the deceased requested LW7Chief Executive Officer,  
PACS, Kristipadu to hold General Body Meeting on 31.03.2015 and to 
inform the same to the Directors of the society and accordingly LW7
informed the same to all concerned. Then it is alleged, A1 and others
hatched a plan to eliminate the deceased and in furtherance of their
common intention, all the accused conspired together and came to the
PACS office on vehicles by getting sticks in the vehicles. On 31.03.2015
at about 10:00 AM, the deceased along with LWs.5, 9 to 12 reached the 
PACS office, Kristipadu for attending the General Body Meeting. At
about 10.30 AM, A2 and A4 went to the meeting place and informed the 
deceased that one of the Directors by name Gopal Reddy of 
Kodaraguttapalli Village died and asked the deceased to enter the said
information in the Minutes book and send proposals for which the
deceased replied that it was not under his purview. On that, wordy
altercation took place between deceased and accused and in that melee 
the deceased pushed A2 towards wall and he sustained injury. Then A1, 
A3, A5 to A16 picked up the sticks from the Bolero vehicle and went
upon the deceased. A1, A2, A4 attacked the deceased with sticks. A3, 
A7, A10 and A12 also attacked the deceased and beat him  
indiscriminately causing severe injuries. When LWs.9 to 12 questioned,
A9 to A16 attacked them and caused injuries. The deceased sustained 
grievous injuries to his head and other parts of the body and died on the
spot. On the report given by wife of the deceased, the police registered a
case in Cr.No.31 of 2015 for the offences under Sections 147, 148, 324,
307, 302 r/w 34
IPC
and after investigation filed charge sheet. The
learned Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Gooty has taken
cognizance of the charge sheet and registered as PRC No.18 of 2015 and 
committed the case to Sessions Court, Anantapur. The case was  
registered as S.C.No.421 of 2016 and made over to the VI Additional
Sessions Judge, Gooty, Anantapur District.
b)      The petitioners/accused filed Crl.M.P.No.113 of 2017 under
Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C before the Trial Court seeking a direction for
further investigation of the case on the ground that LWs.5 to 12 stated in
their 161
Cr.P.C
. statements that four Directors of Kristipadu PACS were
also present and witnessed the incident but those four Directors were not
examined and their statements were not recorded by the IO. Their
evidence is important and material to unravel the truth relating to the
incident. The petitioners sent petitions and representations to all higher
authorities including the Honourable the Chief Minister seeking further
investigation. Further, the petitioners filed W.P.No.42807 of 2016
wherein the High Court in its order dated 19.01.2017, has given liberty to
the petitioner/A4 to move the concerned Court for appropriate directions.
The accused thus prayed for further investigation. Learned Additional
Public Prosecutor filed counter and opposed the petition contending that
further investigation can be ordered only on the request of investigating
agency on finding additional material but not on the request of either the
complainant or the accused. The Trial Court agreeing with the Addl.P.P,
dismissed the petition.
Hence, the Criminal Petition at the instance of petitioners/A1 to
A16.
3)      Heard arguments of Sri T.Pradyumna Kumar Reddy, learned   
counsel for petitioners and learned Public Prosecutor for the State (A.P).
Though notice to respondent No.2 was served but there is no
representation on his behalf.
4)      The term further investigation with which we are now concerned
has been succinctly narrated by the Apex Court in
K.Chandra Sekhar v.
State of Kerala
, thus:
Para 25: x x x x  The dictionary meaning of further' (when used
as an adjective) is 'additional'; more; supplemental. Further
investigation therefore is the continuation of the earlier
investigation and not a fresh investigation or reinvestigation to be
started ab-initio wiping out the earlier investigation altogether. In
drawing this conclusion we have also drawn inspiration from the
fact that Sub-section (8) clearly envisages that on completion of
further investigation the investigating agency has to forward to the
Magistrate a 'further' report or reports - and not fresh report or
reports-regarding the 'further' evidence obtained during such
investigation.
Thus
the above decision
differentiates further investigation on one
hand and fresh investigation/re-investigation on the other, as per which,
further investigation is only a sequential to the earlier investigation made
in quest of further evidence by the investigating agency to add to the
stock of evidence already gathered and stored. Thus, further investigation
is not to sequester the earlier investigation unlike in the case of fresh
investigation or re-investigation or de novo investigation. This difference
is expounded pellucidly in
the above decision
.
5)      The concept of further investigation was alien to
Code of
Criminal Procedure
, 1898 and it was ofcourse, introduced in
Section
173(8)
of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 due to the recommendation
made in 41st Report of Law Commission of India, wherein at Para 14.23,
it was observed thus:
Para 14.23: Re-opening InvestigationA report under
Section
173
is normally the end of the investigation. Sometimes, however,
the police officer after submitting the report under
section 173
comes upon evidence bearing on the guilt or innocence of the
accused. We should have thought that the police officer can collect
that evidence and send it to the magistrate concerned.  It appears,
however, that courts have sometimes taken the narrow view that
once a final report under
section 173
has been sent, the police
cannot touch the case again and cannot re-open the investigation.
This view places a hindrance in the way of the investigating agency,
which can be very unfair to the prosecution and for that matter,
even to the accused.  It should be made clear in
section 173
that the
competent police officer can examine such evidence and send a 
report to the magistrate.  Copies concerning the fresh material must
of course be furnished to the accused.
The Law Commission of India in fact recommended the recast
Section 173
also, wherein under sub-Section (7) it postulated a provision
for further investigation. The reinforced
Section 173
has been
incorporated in
Cr.P.C
, 1973.  This Section as it stands now reads thus:
Section 173-Report of police officer on completion of
investigation
(1) x x . . .
(2) x x . . .
(3) x x . . .
(4) x x . . .
(5) x x . . .
(6) x x . . .
(7) x x . . .
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further
investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-
section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon
such investigation, the officer-in-charge of the police station obtains
further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the
Magistrate a further report or reports regarding, such evidence in
the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6)
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as
they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (2).
Thus in the context of
Section 173(8)
, the power of a Magistrate to
direct further investigation has to be tested now.  Since the issue of a
Court directing further investigation arises after the IO files his report
under
Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C, it has now to be seen what are the different
courses that are available to a Magistrate after IO files his report under
Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C. This aspect has been considered by the Apex 
Court in
Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police and another
, as
follows:
Para 4:  Now, when the report forwarded by the officer-in
charge of a police station to the Magistrate under Sub-section
(2)(i) of
Section 173
comes up for consideration by the
Magistrate, one of two different situation may arise:
The report may conclude that an offence appears to have been
committed by a particular person or persons and in such a case,
the Magistrate may do one of three things:
1)      he may accept the report and take cognizance of the offence
and issue process or
2)      he may disagree with the report and drop the proceeding or
3)      he may direct further investigation under Sub-section(3) of
Section 156
and require the police to make a further report.
The report may on the other hand state that, in the opinion of the
police, no offence appears to have been committed and where
such a report has been made, the Magistrate again has an option
to adopt one of three courses:
1)      he may accept the report and drop the proceeding or
2)      he may disagree with the report and taking the view that
there is sufficient ground for proceeding further, take
cognizance of the offence and issue process or
3)      he may direct further investigation to be made by the police
under Sub-section (3) of
Section 156
.
In
the above decision
, Courts adopting the third method i.e,
directing IO to conduct further investigation under
Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C
should be understood as further investigation at pre-cognizance stage.
This aspect has been clarified in
Amrutbhai Shambhubhai Patel v.
Sumanbhai Kantibhai Patel and others
, wherein the Apex Court 
observed thus:
Para 40: The rendition in
Bhagwant Singh
(supra) was also relied
upon.
It was eventually held, by drawing sustenance from the
pronouncement in
Bhagwant Singh
(supra) that a Magistrate, 
before whom a report Under
Section 173(2)
of the Code had been
filed, was empowered in law to direct further investigation and
require the police to submit a further or a supplementary report.
To
reiterate, in
Bhagwant Singh
(supra), this Court had in particular
dealt with the courses open to a Magistrate, once a charge-sheet or
a closure report is submitted on the completion of investigation
Under
Section 173(2)
of the Code and thus did essentially
concentrate at the pre-cognizance stage of the proceedings
(emphasis supplied).
6)      Be that it may, whether a Court has power to direct further
investigation at post-cognizance stage is precisely the question that is
engaged with us now. After the IO filed report under
Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C, which was accepted and summons were issued to the accused    
and they made their appearance, at this stage whether the Court under its
suo motu power or on the application of either the complainant or the
accused but not on the request of the investigating agency, can direct
further investigation is a mootable question. When once the report filed
by the IO is accepted and cognizance is taken, the Court is said to have
applied its judicial mind to the facts and evidence submitted by the IO
and at that stage the Court on its own or on the application of the
complainant or the accused cannot order for further investigation as there
is no enabling provision to undertake that exercise.
Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C
can be pressed into service only at the instance of the investigating
agency but not at the option of the complainant or accused. That the
Magistrate has no suo motu power to order further investigation at the
post-cognizance stage has been held by the Apex Court in Reeta Nag v.
State of West Bengal and others , wherein it was observed thus:
Para 25: What emerges from the above-mentioned decisions of 
this Court is that once a charge sheet is filed under
Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C. and either charge is framed or the accused are discharged,
the Magistrate may, on the basis of a protest petition, take
cognizance of the offence complained of or on the application made
by the investigating authorities permit further investigation under
Section 173(8)
. The Magistrate cannot suo motu direct a further
investigation under
Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C. or direct a re-
investigation into a case on account of the bar of
Section 167(2)
of
the Code.
a)      In a recent judgment in
Amrutbhai Shambhubhai Patel
(3 supra),
the Apex Court held that the Court cannot order further investigation at
the post-cognizance stage on the request of the defacto complainant. On a
survey of various judgments of its own, the Apex Court concluded thus:
Para 49: On an overall survey of the pronouncements of this
Court on the scope and purport of
Section 173(8)
of the Code and
the consistent trend of explication thereof, we are thus disposed to
hold that though the investigating agency concerned has been
invested with the power to undertake further investigation desirably
after informing the court thereof, before which it had submitted its
report and obtaining its approval, no such power is available
therefor to the learned Magistrate after cognizance has been taken
on the basis of the earlier report, process has been issued and the
accused has entered appearance in response thereto. At that stage,
neither the learned Magistrate suo motu nor on an application
filed by the complainant/informant can direct further
investigation (emphasis supplied). Such a course would be open
only on the request of the investigating agency and that too, in
circumstances warranting further investigation on the detection of
material evidence only to secure fair investigation and trial, the life
purpose of the adjudication in hand.
Para 51:  In contradistinction,
Sections 156
,
190
,
200
,
202
and
204
Cr.P.C clearly outline the powers of the Magistrate and the courses
open for him to chart in the matter of directing investigation, taking
of cognizance, framing of charge, etc. Though the Magistrate has
the power to direct investigation under
Section 156(3)
at the pre-
cognizance stage even after a charge-sheet or a closure report is
submitted, once cognizance is taken and the accused person 
appears pursuant thereto, he would be bereft of any competence to
direct further investigation either suo motu or acting on the request
or prayer of the complainant/informant.
x x x x . . . . .
If the power of the Magistrate, in such a scheme envisaged
by
Cr.P.C
to order further investigation even after the cognizance is
taken, the accused persons appear and charge is framed, is
acknowledged or approved, the same would be discordant with the 
state of law, as enunciated by this Court and also the relevant
layout of
Cr.P.C
adumbrated hereinabove. Additionally had it been
the intention of the legislature to invest such a power, in our
estimate,
Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C would have been worded 
accordingly to accommodate and ordain the same having regard to 
the backdrop of the incorporation thereof.
Therefore, the Apex Court in this decision emphatically held that
the Magistrate is not vested with either suo motu power or on the
application of the complainant to order further investigation in a post-
cognizance stage.  It must be noted that this decision though rendered in
the context of a complainants request for further investigation, in my
considered view, the principle laid down therein applies in all its fours
also to the instances where accused seeks further investigation as in the
instant case.
7)      We have the decisions relating to the request made by accused for
further investigation. In Shyama Charan Dubey v. State of U.P. , the
High Court of Allahabad encountered the question as to whether the
accused possesses a right to get further investigation ordered through
Magistrates Court in supposed exercise of powers under Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C.
Para 16: Reverting back to the said sub-section as enacted by the
legislature, it has to be noted that it is only permissive in character.
The Investigating Officer (or Officer-in-Charge of Police Station)
may undertake a further investigation even after filing of a charge-
sheet. If he does so, the further evidence collected by him shall be
forwarded to the Magistrate along with a further report. Therefore,
I am clearly of the view that neither the prosecution, i.e. the
informant nor the accused can claim as a matter of right a direction
from a Court commanding further investigation by the Investigating
Officer under Sub-section (8) of
Section 173
after a charge-sheet
was filed after investigation.
Subsequently a similar issue had come up before the High Court of
Orissa in Dara Singh alias
Rabindra Kumar Pal and others v. Republic
of India
represented by the Superintendent of Police, Special Crime
Branch, Central Bureau of Investigation .
Relying upon the judgment
of the High Court of Allahabad in Shyama Charan Dubey (5 supra), the
High Court of Orissa also held that neither informant nor the accused can
claim further investigation as of right after charge sheet was filed.
8)      Therefore, the argument of learned counsel for petitioners that in
the interest of justice and to exhume the truth, the Trial Court has power
to direct further investigation cannot be countenanced, as, such a
direction for further investigation in the words of Honble Apex Court is
discordant with state of law, as enunciated by the Apex Court and also
relevant layout of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
.
9)      It must be held at this juncture, the decision in
Vinay Tyagi v.
Irshad Ali @ Deepak and others
, relied upon by the petitioners will not
help their cause, because
in that case
the Apex Court on a perusal of the
various judgments has held that the Magistrate has power to direct further
investigation after filing of a police report in the light of
Sections 156(3)
and
173(8)
Cr.P.C. Obviously, the said power of further investigation
refers to pre-cognizance stage. The Apex Court held thus:
Para 40: Having analysed the provisions of the Code and the
various judgments as aforeindicated, we would state the following
conclusions in regard to the powers of a Magistrate in terms of
Section 173(2)
read with
Section 173(8)
and
Section 156(3)
of the
Code:
40.1. The Magistrate has no power to direct reinvestigation or
fresh investigation (de novo) in the case initiated on the basis of
a police report.
40.2. A Magistrate has the power to direct further investigation
after filing of a police report in terms of
Section 173(6)
of the Code.
40.3. The view expressed in Sub-para 40.2 above is in conformity
with the principle of law stated in
Bhagwant Singh
case [
Bhagwant
Singh v. Commr. of Police
, (1985) 2 SCC 537 : 1985 SCC (Cri)
267] by a three-Judge Bench and thus in conformity with the
doctrine of precedent.
40.4. Neither the scheme of the Code nor any specific provision
therein bars exercise of such jurisdiction by the Magistrate. The
language of
Section 173(2)
cannot be construed so restrictively as
to deprive the Magistrate of such powers particularly in face of the
provisions of
Section 156(3)
and the language of
Section 173(8)
itself. In fact, such power would have to be read into the language
of
Section 173(8)
.
10)     The petitioners also relied upon an unreported judgment of the
High Court of Madras in Crl.R.C.No.1569 of 2008 dated 21.03.2012
(V.Siva Kumar v. Ravi Kapoor and another) , wherein the order of the
Trial Court directing further investigation on the request of the accused
was upheld by the High Court.  However, since the same is against the
spirit of the Apex Court judgments, no reliance can be placed on the cited
judgment.
11)     In view of the judicial jurimetrics on the subject in issue, it can
only be held that the Court at the post-cognizance stage, cannot direct the
I.O to conduct further investigation at the request of the accused. As
rightly observed by the Trial Court, the petitioners/accused should
vindicate their defence by way of exposing the lacunae in the
investigation if any, and also by way of cross-examination of the
prosecution witnesses and by way of producing the defence witnesses if
they are so advised.
12)     Accordingly, this Criminal Petition is dismissed by confirming the
order dated 10.01.2018 in Crl.M.P.No.113/2017 in S.C.No.421/2016 
passed by the learned VI Additional Sessions Judge, Anantapur at Gooty.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 23.08.2018