[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bandhana Deepika vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 28 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 112
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.11937 of 2017

28.06.2018 

Bandhana Deepika.... Petitioner/Accused No.3 

The State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad, For the State of Telangana

Counsel for Petitioner : M/s. G. Rama Gopal

Counsel for Respondent No.1 : Public Prosecutor (AP)

 Counsel for Respondent No.2: Sri R. Satyanarayana Murthy 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)  AIR 2012 SC 497 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Criminal Petition No.11937 of 2017

ORDER:
In this petition filed under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., the petitioner/A3
seeks to quash the proceedings in Cr.No.652 of 2017 on the file of
Pendurthy PS, Visakhapatnam City registered for the offences under
Sections 498A
,
497
IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 (for short
DP Act
).
2a)     The complainant is the wife of A1. A2 is the mother of A1. In the
complaint, the complainant made a long narration of cruelty meted out by
her husband and mother-in-law. Thus, police registered crime and
investigating into.
b)      We are not much concerned with the accusations made against A1   
and A2.  Petitioner/A3 is concerned, the allegations precisely are that while
complainant and A1 were residing in Balaji Apartment, Simhapuri layout as
tenants, A1 developed illicit intimacy with the daughter of house owner i.e.
A3 who is their distant relation and both of them used to have sexual
intercourse. A3s husband was working in Dubai leaving his wife and
children at Visakhapatnam. When questioned, A1 threatened with dire
consequences. Investigation is under way.
3)      Heard.
4a)     Severely fulminating her inclusion as Accused No.3 in the FIR,
learned counsel for petitioner/A3 would argue that none of the offences
under
Sections 498A
,
497
IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of DP Act can be  
attributed against petitioner/A3 even if the complaint allegations are
accepted to be true for, the petitioner is a stranger.  He would argue that
offences under
Section 498A
IPC is concerned, though the complainant is
the daughter-in-law of petitioners uncleSeshavataram, except alleging
that A1 and A3 had illicit connection there is no allegation that
petitioner/A3 had caused any harassment to the complainant.  Hence, the
offence under Section 498A has no application.
b)      The offence under
Section 497
IPC is concerned, he would argue A3 
under law is only a victim and she cannot be arrayed as an accused. Only
A1 will be liable for punishment under
Section 497
IPC if the adultery
charge is established.
c)      Then, with regard to the offence under
Sections 3
and
4
of DP Act, he
would submit that absolutely the said charge is not applicable against
petitioner/A3.  He thus prayed to allow the petition.
5)      Learned Additional Public Prosecutor opposed the petition stating
that petitioner/A3 is liable under
Section 498A
IPC though not for other
offences.
6)      The point for determination is:
Whether there are merits in the Criminal Petition to allow?
7) POINT:       The offence of adultery is concerned,
Section 497
IPC reads
thus:
497. Adultery.Whoever has sexual intercourse with a 
person who is and whom he knows or has reason to  
believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent
or connivance of that man, such sexual intercourse not
amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of
adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five
years, or with fine, or with both. In such case the wife
shall not be punishable as an abettor.
A close scrutiny of the Section would manifest that it is only a male
person who is guilty of sexual intercourse with the wife of another person
without the consent or connivance of the husband of that woman and if such
intercourse does not amount to offence of rape, shall be punished for the
offence of adultery. The section specifically excludes the wife being an
abettor. As already argued by learned counsel for petitioner, even if the FIR
allegations are true, still petitioner/A3 cannot be held guilty for the charge
under
Section 497
IPC. Law in this aspect is no more res integra.
8)      In similar circumstances, the Apex Court in
W.Kalyani vs. State
tr.
Inspector of Police and another  held thus:
Para-7: The provision is currently under criticism from certain
quarters for showing a strong gender bias for it makes the
position of a married woman almost as a property of her
husband. But in terms of the law as it stands, it is evident from a
plain reading of the Section that only a man can be proceeded
against and punished for the offence of adultery. Indeed, the
Section provides expressly that the wife cannot be punished even
as an abettor. Thus, the mere fact that the Appellant is a woman
makes her completely immune to the charge of adultery and she 
cannot be proceeded against for that offence.
Therefore, there can be no demur petitioner/A3 cannot be charged under
Section 497
IPC.
9)      Sofaras offence under
Section 498A
IPC is concerned, no doubt, the
petitioner/A3 is a distant relative of A1. She is the daughter-in-law of
complainants uncleSeshavataram. As per Section 498A, the husband or   
relative of husband of a woman shall be guilty of the charge under Section
498A if they subject her to cruelty. In the instant case, petitioner/A3 is
concerned, the allegations are mostly aimed at picturising the illicit intimacy
between A1 and A3 and we do not find any specific allegation of
petitioner/A3 causing harassment to the complainant within the sphere of
Section 498A
IPC. So, in my view, the offence under Section 498A is also
not attracted against petitioner/A3.
10)     Then, offence under
Sections 3
and
4
of DP Act is concerned, it is
needless to emphasize that the said offence cannot be attributed to the
petitioner/A3.
11)     So, at the outset, none of the offences are maintainable against
petitioner/A3 even if the FIR allegations are accepted on their face value.
Therefore, continuation of FIR and investigation against petitioner/A3
amount to sheer abuse of process of Court.
12)     In the result, Criminal Petition is allowed and proceedings in
Cr.No.652 of 2017 of Pendurthy PS, Visakhapatnam are quashed sofaras  
petitoenr/A3 is concerned.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 28.06.2018