[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (A Govt. Of ... vs M/S.Alekya Graphic Pvt. Limited, Rep. ... on 1 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 40, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 312 (2019) 1 CIVLJ 235, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 235
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S.Somayajulu
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy and The Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S.Somayajulu 

C.R.P.No.1315 of 2006 

01.05.2018 

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (A Govt. of India Enterprise) Rep. by its General Manager, Visakhapatnam    Petitioner

M/s.Alekya Graphic Pvt. Limited, Rep. by its Director, Visakhapatnam    Respondent
Counsel for the petitioner:Dr.P.Bhaskara Mohan,
                            SC for BSNL
Counsel for the respondent:None appeared 


<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
?Cases cited:
AIR 2003 SC 2881  
AIR 1989 SC 952  
(2003) 5 Supreme Court Cases 531  

The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
and 
The Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S.Somayajulu 

CRP.No.1315 of 2006  
Dated 01.05.2018 


The Court made the following:
Order:  (per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna  Reddy)

        This Civil Revision Petition is filed by the Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited, who is the plaintiff in OS.No.41 of
2002, on the file of the IV Additional District Judge,
Visakhapatnam, against Order, dated 04-04-2005, in
IA.No.1266 of 2002 filed therein.
By the aforementioned order, the lower Court has
directed the petitioner to refer the disputes raised in the suit
for arbitration in terms of Condition No.23 of Contract
Agreement, dated 11.07.1994.
Though notice was received by the respondent-
Company, it has not entered appearance.  We have heard  
Dr.P.Bhaskara Mohan, learned Counsel for the petitioner,
and perused the record.
The petitioner entered into a contract for execution of
the work relating to printing of Visakhapatnam Telephone
Directory.  As the respondent, allegedly, failed to perform its
part of obligations under the contract, the petitioner has
levied royalty as well as penalty for the delay in execution of
the contract.  It has later filed the abovementioned suit for
recovery of a sum of Rs.1,54,32,098/- under various heads
including royalty and penalty.  The respondent has filed
IA.No.1266 of 2002 under
Section 8
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short the Act), for reference of
the disputes raised in the suit for Arbitration under Clause 23
of the Contract Agreement, dated 11-07-1994, entered
between the parties.  The petitioner has opposed the said
Application on the ground that the disputes relating to
collection of royalty and imposition of penalty are excepted
matters, which are not referable for Arbitration.  It has also
raised the plea that where the disputes between the parties
include excepted matters, such disputes cannot be segregated 
and the matters other than the excepted matters cannot be
referred for Arbitration.  The lower Court, however, by the
order under revision, allowed IA.No.1266 of 2002 filed by
the respondent directing the petitioner to refer the disputes
raised in the suit for Arbitration in terms of Condition No.23
of the Contract Agreement.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that
the lower Court has fallen into a serious error in allowing the
IA by placing reliance on the Judgment of the Supreme
Court in United Petroleum Corporation Limited vs.
M/s.Pink City Mid Way Petroleums  .  With reference to
the said judgment, the learned Counsel submitted that in the
said case, none of the disputes fall in the excepted matters;
that therefore, the observations made therein, on which
reliance was placed by the lower Court, have no application
to the present case; and that those observations were
referred to and relied upon by the lower Court out of
context.  The learned Counsel further argued that once a
dispute is raised in respect of an excepted matter, the
Arbitrator is denuded of his jurisdiction to decide the dispute
and consequently, the aggrieved party cannot invoke the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court under
Section 8
of the Act.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the
learned Counsel for the petitioner with reference to the
record.
The fact that few of the aspects, in respect of which
the petitioner filed the suit viz., royalty and penalty fall under
the excepted matters is not in dispute.  Clause 23 of the
Contract Agreement between the parties reads as under:
In the event of any question, dispute/difference arising
under this agreement or in connection therewith (except as
to matters the decision of which is specifically provided
under this agreement) the same shall be referred to the sole
arbitration (herein after referred to as THE SAID
OFFICER), or any officer nominated by him.  There will
be not objection to any such appointment that the
Arbitrator is a Government Servant, he will not be one
who had an opportunity to deal with the matter to which
the agreement relates to that in Course of his duties as
Government Servant, he has expressed his views on all or
any of the matters in the dispute or in differences.  The
Award of the said Arbitrator shall be final and binding on
both the parties.  It is a term of the agreement that in the
event of such Arbitrator to whom the matter originally
referred to being transferred or vacating his office,
resigning, or refusing to work or neglecting his work, or
being unable to act for any reasons what so ever the
SAID OFFICER shall appoint another person to set as an 
Arbitrator in place of outgoing Arbitrator, in accordance
with the terms of this agreement, and the person so
appointed shall be entitled to proceed with the reference
from the stage at which it was left out by his predecessor ?
In the aforementioned Clause, the obligation to refer
the disputes for Arbitration is in respect of matters other
than those the decision on which is specifically provided
under the Contract Agreement.
Clauses 18.b and 19 of the Contract Agreement, which 
are relevant for the present purpose, read as under:
18.b. In the event of delivery of any defective work, which
owing to urgency or for any other reasons, cannot be
wholly rejected, the Telecom District Manager,
Visakhapatnam shall have the power to demand from the  
contractor the payment of an amount not exceeding to
10% (ten) of the agreed amount, irrespective of the
quantum of defective work.  Decision of the Telecom
District Manager, Visakhapatnam in this regard is final.
The amount demanded shall be remitted in cash or in the
form of crossed bank draft from any one of the
nationalized banks payable to the Accounts Officer (Cash)
% TDM  Visakhapatnam within the time limit specified in
the letter of demand.
19. An amount equivalent to 1% (one) of the royalty
offered will be levied as penalty from the contractor for
every weeks delay, or part thereof in the supply of (i)
specimen copy  of the Telephone Directory, (OR) (ii) the
first batch of telephone directories (OR) (iii) the required
number of copies of telephone directory.  This clause shall
not operate if the delay is caused by reasons beyond the
control of the contractor to the opinion of the Telecom
District Manager, Visakhapatanam who shall have the 
power to waive or impose reduced penalty under this
clause and whose decision shall be final.
Evidently, Items 2 and 4 of the plaint under the head
Details of Valuation fall under Clauses 18.b and 19 of the
Contract Agreement as reproduced above.  It is clear from
these Clauses that the decision of the prescribed officer
under the said two clauses shall be final and accordingly, they
fall outside the scope of arbitration being excepted matters.
In
Viswanath Sood vs. Union of India and Anr
, the
Supreme Court held that the view taken by the Division
Bench of the High Court, that the clause laying down that
the Superintending Engineers decision shall be final as
referring only to a finality qua the department and that the
same cannot be construed as excluding the jurisdiction of the
Arbitrator, was not sustainable and that such a clause has to
be construed to mean that where a dispute falling under the
excepted matter arises, the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator for
deciding the same is ousted.  Once the Arbitrator has no
jurisdiction to decide the disputes falling under the excepted
matters, the Civil Court is denuded of its jurisdiction to refer
such disputes for Arbitration.
As rightly submitted by the
learned Counsel for the petitioner, M/s.Pink City (1 supra)
is not concerned with the issue as to whether an excepted
matter can be referred for Arbitration under
Section 8
of the
Act.
Though the suit claim includes certain disputes, which
do not fall within the excepted matters, as held in
Sukanya
Holdings (P) Ltd.  vs.  Jayesh H.Pandya and another
,
where the disputes pertain to excepted and other matters,
they cannot be segregated so as to permit the suit to
continue in respect of the excepted matters and refer the
other matters for Arbitration.  The observation of the
Supreme Court on this aspect are relevant and are extracted
herein below:
"12. For interpretation of
Section 8
,
Section 5
would have
no bearing because it only contemplates that in the matters
governed by Part I of the At, the judicial authority shall not
intervene except where so provided in the Act. Except
Section 8
, there is no other provision in the Act that in a
pending suit, the dispute is required to be referred to the
arbitrator. Further, the matter is not required to be referred
to the Arbitral Tribunal, if: (1) the parties to the arbitration
agreement have not filed any such application for referring
the dispute to the arbitrator; (2) in a pending suit, such
application is not filed before submitting first statement on
the substance of the dispute; or (3) such application is not
accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or duly
certified copy thereof. This would, therefore, mean that the
Arbitration Act
does not oust the jurisdiction of the civil
court to decide the dispute in a case where parties to the
arbitration agreement do not take appropriate steps as
contemplated under sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 8
of
the Act."
"13. Secondly, there is no provision in the Act that when
the subject-matter of the suit includes subject-matter of the
arbitration agreement as well as other disputes, the matter
is required to be referred to arbitration. There is also no
provision for splitting the cause or parties and referring the
subject-matter of the suit to the arbitrators.
14. Thirdly, there is no provision as to what is required to
be done in a case where some parties to the suit are not
parties to the arbitration agreement.  As against this, under
Section 24
of the Arbitration Act, 1940, some of the parties
to a suit could apply that the matters in difference between
them be referred to arbitration and the court may refer the
same to arbitration provided that the same can be
separated from the rest of the subject-matter of the suit.
The section also provided that the suit would continue so
far as it related to parties who have not joined in such
application.
15. The relevant language used in
Section 8
is: in a matter
which is the subject of an arbitration agreement.  The court is
required to refer the parties to arbitration.  Therefore, the
suit should be in respect of a matter which the parties
have agreed to refer and which comes within the ambit of
arbitration agreement. Where, however, a suit is
commenced  as to a matter which lies outside the
arbitration agreement and is also between some of the
parties who are not parties to the arbitration agreement,
there is no question of application of
Section 8
.  The words
a matter  indicate that the entire subject-matter of the suit
should be subject to arbitration agreement.
16. The next question which requires consideration is -
even if there is no provision for partly referring the dispute
to arbitration, whether such a course is possible under
Section 8
of the Act? In our view, it would be difficult to
give an interpretation to
Section 8
under which bifurcation
of the cause of action that is to say the subject matter of
the suit or in some cases bifurcation of the suit between
the parties who are parties to the arbitration agreement and
others is possible. This would be laying down a totally new
procedure not contemplated under the Act. If bifurcation
of the subject matter of a suit was contemplated, the
legislature would have used appropriate language to permit
such a course. Since there is no such indication in the
language, it follows that bifurcation of the subject matter of
an action brought before a judicial authority is not allowed.
17. Secondly, such bifurcation of suit in two parts, one to
be decided by the arbitral tribunal and the other to be
decided by the Civil Court would inevitably delay the
proceedings. The whole purpose of speedy disposal of
dispute and decreasing the cost of litigation would be
frustrated by such procedure. It would also increase the
cost of litigation and harassment to the parties and on
occasions there is possibility of conflicting judgments and
orders by two different forums."
In the light of the above discussion, we are of the
opinion that the lower Court has committed a serious error
in directing the petitioner to refer the disputes raised in the
suit for Arbitration.
The order under revision is, therefore, set aside and the
Civil Revision Petition is, accordingly, allowed.
_____________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
____________________   
(D.V.S.S.Somayajulu, J) 
Date: 01-05-2018