[Cites
5
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Chittuluri Venkata Subramanya Rajaram vs Kotagiri Shivani And Another on 19 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 91
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.2889 of 2018

19.06.2018 

Chittuluri Venkata Subramanya Rajaram. .... Petitioner

Kotagiri Shivani and another.... Respondents

Counsel for Petitioner:  M/s. Bharadwaj Associates

Counsel for Respondent No.1 : Sri L.Venkateshwar Rao  
 Counsel for Respondent No.2 : Public Prosecutor (Telangana)

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)Judgment dt.04.12.2008 in Crl.M.C No.3869/2007 of High Court of Delhi at
  New Delhi.
2)(2002) 6 SCC 426 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          
Criminal Petition No.2889 of 2018
ORDER:
In this petition filed under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., the petitioner/
accused seeks to quash the proceedings in C.C.No.113 of 2017 on the 
file of Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Karimnagar
registered against him for the offence under
Section 138
of Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 (for short
N.I Act
).
2)      The brief allegations of the private complaint are the complainant
married one Chittuluri Venkata Subba Naveen Kumar cousin of 
accusedChittuluri Venkata Subramanya Rajaram, who is looking   
after the family affairs. While so, complainant and Ch.V.S.Naveen
Kumar took divorce by mutual consent in O.P.No.985 of 2012 on the 
file of Family Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad. Before taking
divorce, the accused and Ch.V.S.Naveen Kumar agreed to pay lumpsum    
amount of Rs.83 lakhs towards permanent alimony including the return
of gifts presented by the father of complainant at the time of her
marriage. On 07.02.2013, on which date divorce was sanctioned by the
Court, the accused and his brotherNaveen Kumar returned jewellery 
worth Rs.60,75,000/- which were presented by the father of the
complainant at the time of her marriage and for the balance amount of
Rs.22,25,000/- accused requested the complainant and her father to
accept the post-dated cheques by giving consent for divorce.
Accordingly, the accused issued three post-dated cheques of various
dates for the balance amount of Rs.22,25,000/-. Thereafter, the accused
approached the father of the complainant stating that due to financial
constraints he failed to arrange the payments and requested to accept
fresh cheques. Believing his words, the complainant accepted three
fresh cheques. When she presented first cheque bearing No.012339 
dated 28.12.2013 for Rs.4,25,000/- with her banker HDFC Bank 
Limited, Karimnagar, it was returned with the endorsement insufficient
funds. Likewise, when the complainant presented the other two
cheques bearing Nos.012340 and 012341 dated 07.01.2014 and   
16.01.2014 respectively for Rs.9,00,000/- each, they too were returned
on the ground payment stopped by the drawer. Hence, the accused is 
liable for the offence punishable under
Section 138
of N.I Act. The
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Karimnagar took
cognizance of the case and registered the same as C.C.No.113 of 2017.
Hence, the instant Criminal Petition.
3)       Heard arguments of Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana, learned senior 
counsel appearing for petitioner and learned Additional Public
Prosecutor for the State.
4)      Learned Senior Counsel Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana, would   
fulminate the maintainability of the complaint on the argument that
even if complaint allegations were taken to be true, the accused, who is
the brother of the husband of complainant took upon himself the
responsibility of payment of the balance amount of Rs.22,25,000/- due
to the complainant from her husband and therefore, it is clear that the
accused himself was not indebted to the complainant nor there was any
legally enforceable debt existed between the complainant and accused
and hence the offence under
Section 138
of N.I Act is not maintainable
against the accused. The liability if at all was on the part of the husband
of the complainant but was not on the accused. He relied upon the
decision reported in
Harish Kapoor v. Akansha Gupta
.
5)      In oppugnation learned counsel for 1st respondent argued that the
accused is none other than own brother of the husband of the
complainant and when the marital relation between the complainant and
her husband was strained, they entered into a memorandum of 
settlement deed dated 12.07.2012 agreeing to obtain a divorce by
mutual consent before a competent Court of law and it was also agreed
that the husband shall pay Rs.83,00,000/- to complainant towards
permanent alimony on the date of dissolution of marriage.  Thereafter,
the accused and the husband of the complainant have returned the
jewellery worth Rs.60,75,000/- on 07.02.2013 to the complainant and
there remained balance of Rs.22,25,000/-.  For the said amount, the
accused stood as a guarantor on behalf of his brother and requested the
complainant and her father to receive the post-dated cheques and give
consent for divorce. Since the accused was a businessman at 
Hyderabad, believing him the complainant and her father agreed for the
said course.  Accordingly, the accused issued three post-dated cheques
drawn on IDBI Bank, S.D Road Branch, Secunderabad.  Thus the   
accused offered the cheques on his free volition without any force by
anybody. The consideration for him is the consent accorded by the
complainant for mutual divorce. Therefore, his liability in respect of the
cheques issued by him is as that of a guarantor on behalf of the principal
borrower and therefore, the liability covered by three cheques is legally
enforceable under
Section 138
of N.I Act. Hence the complaint is
maintainable. He placed reliance on the decision reported in ICDS Ltd.
v. Beena Shabeer and another 
6)      The point for determination is:
     Whether there are merits in the petition to allow?
7)      POINT: The facts would reveal, the marital tie between the
brother of the accused and the complainant was severed due to the
strained relationship between them and they proposed to obtain divorce
by mutual consent and in that context, they entered into a memorandum 
of settlement deed dated 12.07.2012 whereunder, it appears, the brother
of the accused had agreed to pay Rs.83,00,000/- to the complainant
towards her permanent alimony. It is not in dispute that out of the said
amount, already the accused and his brother have paid Rs.60,75,000/- in
the form of jewellery to the complainant and her father. With regard to
the balance amount of Rs.22,25,000/-, the accused offered three post-
dated cheques to the complainant to make herself agreeable to attend
the Court to obtain divorce by mutual consent. In the backdrop of those
facts, it can be said, the accused stood as a guarantor for his brother in
respect of the balance amount of Rs.22,25,000/- and offered post-dated
cheques to complainant. As rightly argued by the counsel for 1st
respondent, the consideration for him is the consent given by the
complainant for the mutual divorce in a Court of law. No threat or
coercion in issuance of the cheques by the accused was pleaded in the
quash petition.  Therefore, as rightly argued by the 1st respondent, the
issuance of the cheques can be regarded as out of free volition of the
accused.  It is true that the accused is not personally liable to pay the
alimony to the complainant and his brother alone is liable.  He only
stood as guarantor, we may say, and offered the cheques for the balance
of the alimony. Now the pertinent question is, whether the proceedings
under
Section 138
of N.I. Act are maintainable vis-a-vis a guarantor.
This legal issue is no more res integra, since the Apex Court in Beena
Shabeers case (2 supra) has clarified that the employment of the words
where any cheque discharge of any debt or other liability in
Section
138
of N.I Act left no room for doubt that for whatever reason it may
be, the liability under this provision cannot be avoided in the event the
cheque is returned by the banker unpaid.
In the above case, the husband of 1st respondent entered into a
hire purchase agreement with the appellant for purchasing a Maruthi
Car on hire purchase basis. The 1st respondent issued a cheque for
Rs.80,490/- towards part payment and the said cheque was dishonoured  
by the bank with the remark insufficient funds. The appellant filed a
complaint under
Section 138
of N.I Act against 1st respondent.  The
respondents filed a quash petition under
Section 482
Cr.P.C before the
High Court.  The High Court allowed the petition on a finding that the
cheque issued by the guarantor could not be said to have been issued for
discharging any debt or liability and hence
Section 138
of N.I Act
cannot be maintained.  Reprobating the same, the Apex Court held thus:
Para 10: The language, however, has been rather specific as
regards the intent of the legislature. The commencement of the
section stands with the words Where any cheque. The above 
noted three words are of extreme significance, in particular, by
reason of the user of the word any  the first three words
suggest that in fact for whatever reason if a cheque is drawn on an
account maintained by him with a banker in favour of another
person for the discharge of any debt or other liability, the
highlighted words if read with the first three words at the
commencement of
Section 138
, leave no manner of doubt that for 
whatever reason it may be, the liability under this provision cannot
be avoided in the event the same stands returned by the banker
unpaid. The legislature has been careful enough to record not only
discharge in whole or in part of any debt but the same includes
other liability as well. This aspect of the matter has not been
appreciated by the High Court, neither been dealt with or even
referred to in the impugned judgment.
Para 11: The issue as regards the coextensive liability of the
guarantor and the principal debtor, in our view, is totally out of
the purview of
Section 138
of the Act, neither the same calls for
any discussion therein. The language of the statute depicts the
intent of the law-makers to the effect that wherever there is a
default on the part of one in favour of another and in the event a
cheque is issued in discharge of any debt or other liability there
cannot be any restriction or embargo in the matter of application
of the provisions of
Section 138
of the Act. Any cheque and
other liability are the two key expressions which stand as
clarifying the legislative intent so as to bring the factual context
within the ambit of the provisions of the statute. Any contra-
interpretation would defeat the intent of the legislature. The High
Court, it seems, got carried away by the issue of guarantee and
guarantor's liability and thus has overlooked the true intent and
purport of
Section 138
of the Act. The judgments recorded in the
order of the High Court do not have any relevance in the
contextual facts and the same thus do not lend any assistance to
the contentions raised by the respondents.
The above judgment, in my view, applies to the facts of the
present case in all its fours. In the instant case also, the petitioner/
accused offered the three cheques voluntarily as a guarantor on behalf
of his brother and they were bounced back.  It may be true that
originally his brother was alone liable to pay the balance of the alimony
amount.  However, the petitioner stood as a guarantor and offered the
cheques to make the complainant and her father agreeable for obtaining
the divorce by mutual consent.  Therefore, the liability of the petitioner
falls within the ambit of debt or other liability employed in
Section 138
of N.I Act. The petitioner cannot take recourse on the argument that he
does not owe any liability to the complainant to pay the alimony and
therefore, the issuance of cheques does not fall within the ambit of
Section 138
of N.I Act. The decision cited by him i.e, Harish Kapoors
case(1 supra), will be of no avail to him, firstly for the reason that the
judgment of the Apex Court in Beena Shabeers case (2 supra) was not 
cited before the Delhi High Court and secondly for the reason that in
that case, by facts, it was held that the cheques offered by father-in-law
towards the claim of the complainant therein for return of dowry articles
and maintenance, which liability was on his son but not on him, cannot
be said to be towards payment of debt which could be legally
enforceable by the complainant against the petitioner/father-in-law. The
post-dated cheque issued in a criminal case in a compromise between 
the parties cannot be considered as payment of any debt or other
liability which is legally enforceable against the petitioner/father-in-law.
In that case, on FIR lodged by the complainant therein against her
father-in-law and her husband for the offences under Section 498-A,
406 r/w 34
IPC
, both of them were arrested and pending bail
application, there was a compromise, whereunder the petitioner/father-
in-law agreed to pay her Rs.2.5 crores towards settlement of her claims,
regarding maintenance etc., against her husband.  One of the cheques
issued by the petitioner/father-in-law was bounced on presentation.
Hence, the complainant filed complaint under
Section 138
of N.I Act,
against the petitioner/father-in-law and also her husband.  The Trial
Court dismissed the complaint against the husband. Then the
petitioner/father-in-law filed petition before High Court of Delhi to
quash the proceedings against him arguing that the settlement was
entered into between the parties under duress and coercion. However,
the facts in the instant case are quite different. In the instant case, the
petitioner himself offered the cheques to make the complainant
agreeable for the divorce. Hence the cited decision has no application.
8)      In the result, this Criminal Petition is dismissed.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall
stand closed.
__________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 19.06.2018