[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Madhavabotla Venkata Dattatreya ... vs Gunda Rama Rao, S/O. Sarvaiah, R/O. ... on 25 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 10
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

AS No.2274 of 1998 

25-01-2018 

Madhavabotla Venkata Dattatreya Sarma,s/o. Venkateshwarlu, r/o. Piduguralla, Guntur District. Appellant/Plaintiff

Gunda Rama Rao, s/o. Sarvaiah, r/o. Piduguralla,  and 2 others. Respondents/Defendants  

Counsel for the appellant: Sri O. Ramesh
                                        
Counsel for the Respondents: Sri N. Subba Rao. 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.2274 of 1998 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal is filed by the unsuccessful plaintiff against
the judgment and decree dated 27.08.1998 in O.S.No.306 of 
1995 passed by the Senior Civil Judge, Gurajala.
2.        The brief facts of the plaintiffs case are as follows:
a)        Originally, the suit was filed before the
Subordinate Judges Court, Narasaraopet and numbered as  
O.S.No.80 of 1994 and subsequent to the constitution of
Senior Civil Judges Court at Gurazala, the suit has been
made over and renumbered as O.S.No.306 of 1995.
b)        The suit is filed for the specific performance of
contract of sale deed dated 08.05.1991 and in alternative for
refund of the advance paid and also to grant of Rs.1,00,000/-
as damages in case the sale deed could not be executed by 
defendants 1 & 2 in addition to the relief of granting of
interest on earnest money.
c)        The suit schedule property is purchased by Gunda
Saravaiah under the registered sale deed and the same
devolved upon defendants 1 & 2 after the demise of Gunda
Sarvaiah. Ever since, they have been in possession and
enjoyment of the said property. The 3rd defendant was given
in adoption to Batchu family. He acquired the property from
his adoptive parents and has been treated as member of
adoptive family and he has no right over the suit schedule
property. The defendants 1 & 2 contracted to sell the suit
schedule property to the plaintiff at the rate of Rs.7,800/- per
each cent of land and tentatively the area has been estimated
to be Ac.0.13  cents.  The defendants 1 & 2 received
Rs.25,000/- on 08.05.1991 and executed a contract of sale
and agreed to get the land measured to arrive at the actual
area and to receive the exact amount after measurements.
d)        As a dispute was raised by the 3rd defendant, the
2nd defendant made an endorsement to the effect on the foot
of the contract on 28.09.1991 that after the disputes raised
by the 3rd defendant are settled, the defendants would
execute a regular registered sale deed and the plaintiff need
not pay any interest for the balance of consideration. The 3rd
defendant also filed O.S.No.303 of 1991 on the file of Sub-
Court, Narasaraopet, which was pending them.
e)        The plaintiff also claimed that he is entitled to the
interest on Rs.25,000/- at 24% per annum from the date of
notice till the date of execution of sale deed.  The defendants
1 & 2 received the said notice but did not give any reply.
The 3rd defendant gave reply notice with false allegations.
Under the said circumstances, the plaintiff filed the suit for
specific performance of contract of sale deed dated
08.05.1991 and also for interest at 24% per annum on
Rs.25,000/-, which was paid as an advance and in the
alternative for damages at Rs.1,00,000/-.
3.        The 2nd defendant filed a written statement stating
that the suit schedule property is the absolute property of
Gunda Saravaiah, who is none other than of his father. The
said property had devolved upon defendants 1 & 2.  The
plaintiff, who is not ready and willing to perform his part of
contract, invented the false story to delay the specific
performance and to gain time. The defendants never gave any
consent or authorization to the 1st defendant at any time to
act on behalf of the 2nd defendant in the transaction between
the plaintiff and defendants 1 & 2 with regard to the suit
document. The payment of interest on the earnest money 
would not arise for consideration. The plaintiff is not willing
to perform his part of contract and as such, he is not entitled
to the relief and the agreement of sale is barred by limitation
and it is unenforceable. The suit is bad for mis-joinder of
parties as the 3rd defendant is unnecessarily impleaded in the
suit.  Hence, it is prayed that the suit may be dismissed with
costs.
4.        On the basis of the said pleadings, the parties
went to trial.  For the plaintiff, six witnesses were examined
as PWs.1 to 6 and Exs.A.1 to A.13 were marked. For the  
defendants, one witness was examined as DW.1 and no   
documents were marked. The lower Court framed the  
following 6 issues for trial.
i)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the relief of specific
performance of the contract of sale dated 08.05.1991?
ii)     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim interest on
Rs.25,000/-.
iii)    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim damages in
the event of defendants 1 & 2 cannot execute the sale
deed due to internal disputes of defendants 1 to 3?
iv)     Whether the suit agreement for sale is barred by
limitation?
v)      Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of parties?
vi)     To what relief?
5.        The lower Court, after assessment of the oral and
documentary evidence, dismissed the suit for the relief of
specific performance as also the claim for damages. The court
only granted the alternative relief of the refund of the advance
amount paid.  It is this judgment that is assailed in the
present appeal.
6.        For the sake of convenience and as this is a first
appeal, this Court will refer the parties as plaintiff and
defendants only.
7.        This Court has heard Sri O. Ramesh, learned
counsel for the appellant/plaintiff and Sri N. Subba Rao,
learned counsel for the respondents/defendants.
8.        This Court proceeds to analyze the evidence and
the judgment in the same serial order as in the lower Court,
as this was the order adopted by the learned counsels, also in
the course of their submissions.
9.        Issue No.5 decided by the lower Court is about the
mis-joinder of party.  The third defendant, who is not a party
to the agreement, was added as party to the suit. Since the
suit is for specific performance, the plaintiff can only claim a
relief against the agreement holders only. Admittedly, the
third defendant is not a party to the suit agreement.
Although the third defendant has not really contested the
suit, the second defendant has filed a written statement
wherein he raised the plea that the third defendant is a bona
fide, necessary and proper party. This objection is in
accordance with the
Order I Rule 13 CPC
, which states that
objection as to mis-joinder shall be taken at the earliest
instances. In addition, this Court also noticed that as per the
provisions of
Order I Rule 3 CPC
a right to relief in respect of
or arising out of the same transaction in which the
defendants are involved jointly or severally or if separate suits
were brought, a common question would arise, then only a
party can be joined to the suit.  In this case, admittedly, the
third defendant is not a party to the agreement. Neither Order
I Rule 3 or Rule 3 (a) or (b)
CPC
mentioned above will apply.
Therefore, this Court holds that the third defendant is not a
proper party and the suit is bad for mis-joinder.  Therefore,
this Court holds that the name of the third defendant should
be struck off as he was improperly joined as a party to the
suit.
10.       Issue Nos.1 to 4 were decided jointly. These issues
are the crux of the matter. As this is a suit for specific
performance, a duty was cast upon the plaintiff to prove that
he was ready and willing to get the sale deed executed in his
name. Readiness implies the availability of funds and
willingness applies to the behaviour of plaintiff to get the sale
deed registered in his name. Therefore, readiness in the form
of ready availability or a proper arrangement of the sale
consideration and the willingness in the form of prompt
action to get the sale deed registered should be manifest in a
case from the date of the agreement till the date of the decree.
This is a settled proposition of law that does not require
further repetition.
11.       In this case, Ex.A.1 is the agreement of sale dated
08.05.1991.  The agreement stipulates payment of advance of
Rs.25,000/- and the payment of balance within three months
i.e., 07.08.1991.  The balance payable according to the terms
and conditions of the agreement is Rs.76,250/-.
12.       Ex.A.1 contains two endorsements, which are
Exs.A.2 & A.3 dated 19.08.1991 and 28.09.1991.  These  
endorsements are only by the first defendant and not by the
second defendant.  No clear explanation is forthcoming for
this.  This factor and the absence of any proof to show that
the second defendant authorized the first defendant to make
these endorsements leads this Court to the conclusion that
the endorsements cannot be treated as extensions of time of
the time stipulated.
13.       Even otherwise, it is worthwhile noting that Ex.A.4
is the notice that is first issued by the plaintiff demanding
execution of the sale deed, subject to the following conditions:
a) to get suit O.S.No.303 of 1991 filed by third
    defendant disposed off;
b) to execute the sale deed after measurements; and
c) payment of interest on the paid amount of
    Rs.25,000/- that is given as advance.
The learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff strongly
stressed upon the conduct of the plaintiff and argued that the
plaintiff showed his readiness and willingness to get the sale
deed registered.  It is the submission of the learned counsel
that the third defendant filed a suit for partition against the
defendants 1 & 2 and therefore, as a prudent purchaser, his
client cannot be called upon to take a property, which is the
subject matter of litigation.  Therefore, he argues that the
plaintiff rightly demanded the defendants 1 & 2 to get the suit
disposed off and also to get the sale deed registered.
14.       On the contrary, it is the argument of the learned
counsel for the respondents/defendants that there was no
difficulty to get the sale deed registered because of the
pendency of the suit O.S.No.303 of 1991.  He argued that the
plaintiff was satisfied about the measurements of the plot and
that further measurements were not necessary.  His last
submission is that the plaintiff was not ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract and he did not have the
funds also. Therefore, to get over this, he has urged that
measurements are to be taken and that the suit O.S.No.303 
of 1991 is to be disposed of.
15.       This Court also after a review of the entire
evidence and hearing the submissions comes to the following
conclusions.
a)        The evidence of PW.1 is very clear on the issue of
the measurements.  On 19.11.1997, he deposed as follows:
I have verified the boundaries and the extent of property
that was sought to be purchased by me prior to execution
of Ex.A.1.  . I inspected the suit            
property prior to Ex.A.1.  After getting myself satisfied only,
I got executed Ex.A.1. .
Therefore, it is clear that the measurements or the alleged
lack of measurements that are relied upon by the plaintiff are
not a serious ground at all.
b)        As far as the suit O.S.No.303 of 1991 is
concerned, certified copies of the plaint, written statement
and the judgment dismissing the suit are filed as Exs.A.10 to
A.12, which reveal that the suit was dismissed on 27.11.1996
itself.  The certified copies of these documents were obtained
in November 1996 and were filed by PW.1 during the course 
of his evidence on 03.07.1998 when he was recalled.  Other
than marking these documents, the plaintiff did not depose in
any manner about the contents.  He did not state in his
evidence that the pendency of this suit was a fetter or bar for
him to obtain the sale deed.  He did not state how this suit
would bar him from getting a sale deed. It is also apparent
that even if the pendency of the suit was considered as a bar,
the dismissal of the suit in November 1996 removed the bar,
if any.
c) The cross-examination of PW.1 reveals that right from
the inception, an issue was raised about the availability of
funds with PW.1 to complete the transaction. PW.1 in the
course of his cross-examination on 19.06.1998 clearly states
to enable him to secure necessary finances, three months
time was fixed for getting the document registered. I do not
keep the balance sale of consideration in bank deposit.
He denies the suggestion that he was not in possession for
sufficient funds. Apparently, to get over this cross-
examination, the plaintiff was recalled and on 03.07.1998
along with other exhibits, he filed Ex.A.13 bank passbook.
However, he does not depose about the contents of the pass
book. In the cross-examination on Ex.A.13, PW.1 admits that 
there is no proof in Ex.A.13 that there are sufficient funds
available during the years 1993-94 and 1996.
16.       Even in the deposition of DW.1, it is asserted that
PW.1 does not have sufficient funds.  Irrespective of other
submissions made, a perusal of Ex.A.13 reveals that in July,
1991, the plaintiff only had Rs.36,341/- to the credit of his
account.  In August and September, 1991, which was the 
date fixed for the performance of the agreement, the plaintiff
had approximately about Rs.90,000/- in his account.  But
the same got depleted to Rs.21,154.70 and the balance went 
down to Rs.1,154/- by October 1991.  Thereafter, by the date
of Ex.A.4 i.e., January1994 on which date the plaintiff
demanded specific performance, the balance available was in
a few hundred rupees (Rs.314/- to Rs.144/-).  In fact, by the
end of January, 1994, (the date of Ex.A.4 notice), the balance
was only Rs.144/-.  Similarly, on the date of filing of the
plaint viz., July, 1994, the balance was approximately
Rs.2,000/- to Rs.3,000/-.  The witnesses also deposed in
September, 1996 and October 1997 and on 01.11.1997, the  
balance is Rs.242/-.  Even in November, 1996, when the suit
O.S.No.303 of 1991 was dismissed and the so-called obstacle 
was removed, the balance available with the plaintiff was only
Rs.204/- as on 21.11.1996.
17.       Therefore, this Court finds that readiness to seek
a decree for specific performance is not proved in this case.
The ready availability of the money or the availability of a
source or arrangement for raising money is not proved in this
case.  The plaintiff must prove that he had the money or that
an effective arrangement like a proper loan was made to pay
the sale consideration. Such evidence is missing in this case.
Therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to plead that he was
ready and willing to take the sale deed.  The continuous
examination of his conduct and more so, the document filed
by him (Ex.A.13) reveals that he was never having necessary
resources to get the sale deed registered in his name.
Therefore, this Court agrees with the finding of the lower
Court that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief of specific
performance, as the plaintiff was not ready and willing.
Therefore, issue No.1 is held against the plaintiff and in
favour of the defendant.
18.       Issue No.2 is whether the plaintiff is entitled to
claim interest on Rs.25,000/-.  The lower Court awarded
interest at 12% per annum from the date of institution of the
suit till the date of the realization.  Interest prior to the suit is
not a matter of right. Interest prior to the suit can be awarded
only if there is an agreement between the parties or there is a
statute governing the agreement which permits interest; or on
the ground of equity or trade custom and usage. All of these
are, however, matters of pleading and evidence.  There should
be pleading about the right to interest prior to the suit and
there should be evidence about the interest rate.  In this case,
there is neither pleading nor proof for award of interest prior
to the filing of the suit.  As far as interest after the suit is
concerned,
Section 34
CPC empowers the court to award  
interest.  In this case, the Court awarded interest at 12% in
its discretion and the same is not really objected by the
respondents in this appeal.  Therefore, this Court also does
not wish to interfere with the award of interest from the date
of the suit till realization.
19.       Issue No.3 is about the damages of Rs.1,00,000/-
claimed as an alternative relief.  This Court notices that there
is neither pleading nor proof for the claim of damages.
Damages can only be awarded in order to compensate the  
plaintiff for any loss that he has sustained. There is no
pleading or proof about the damages claimed.  A single prayer
for damages of Rs.1,00,000/- is made. The provisions of
Section 21 (2)
and (4) of the
Specific Relief Act
are very clear
about the compensation and the methodology for awarding 
the same in such cases.  The plaintiff must prove the breach
of contract by the defendant.  For assessing the compensation
for such breach, the principles of
Section 73
of the Indian
Contract Act will apply.  Lastly, sub-
section 5
of
Section 21
makes it clear that there should be adequate pleading for the
loss.  In this case, there is no pleading let alone evidence to
show that the plaintiff sustained any loss.  Therefore, this
Court is of the opinion that the plaintiff is not entitled to the
alternative relief for compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- also.
20.       As far as issue No.4 about the limitation is
concerned, no serious arguments were advanced about the  
same.
21.       In conclusion, this Court agrees with the findings
of the lower Court.  The order of the lower Court is a correct
and reasoned order.     The appeal is therefore dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.  Miscellaneous Petitions,
if any, pending in this appeal shall stand closed.
_________________________    
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
Date: 25.01.2018