[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
D. Muralidhar Rao vs 1.M/S. Srinivasa Constructions Rep.By ... on 2 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 28
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
,
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU                     

C.R.P.No.6384 of 2017 


02-05-2018 

D. Muralidhar Rao  Petitioner/Respondent No.1/ Plaintiff

1.M/s. Srinivasa Constructions  rep.by its Managing Partner, D. Appa Rao,  Saidabad, Hyderabad,2. D. Appa Rao, s/o. late D.
 3. M/s. Suyosha Health Care Pvt. Ltd.,  rep.by its Director, Dr. Manjula Anagani,    Srinagar Colony, Hyderabad. Respondent

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri D. Madhava Rao
                                        
Counsel for the Respondents: Sri K. Prabhakar

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
  2011 (5) SCC 532 
2 2016 (10) SCC 386 
3 2017 (4) CCC 55 (SC) 
4 AIR 1955 Calcutta 65
5 (2013) 10 SCC 535 
6 AIR 2003 SC 2252  


        THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S.SOMAYAJULU          

C.R.P.No.6384 of 2017 

Date:  02.05.2018


The Court made the following:



ORDER:
(Per the Honble Sri Justice D.V.S.S. Somayajulu) 


        This Civil Revision Petition is filed under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India against the order, dated 11.10.2017, passed in
I.A.No.460 of 2016 in O.S.No.575 of 2016 by the XV Additional
District Judge, Ranga Reddy District at Miyapur.
2.      The said suit O.S.No.575 of 2016 is filed by one D.
Muralidhar Rao against i) Sri Srinivasa Constructions, represented
by its Managing Partner, Sri D. Papa Rao, ii) Sri D. Papa Rao and
iii) Suyosha Health Care Private Ltd.
3.      The brief averments of the plaint are that the plaintiff entered
into an agreement with second defendant to develop a property
measuring 1136.20 square yards in Madhapur Village on 17.08.2007. 
Later, another agreement dated 28.06.2009 was concluded between  
the plaintiff and the first defendant firm represented by the second
defendant as Managing Partner for development of the same
property.  The building was then constructed and the third
defendant is in occupation of the building as a tenant.
4.      The case of the plaintiff is that the two agreements dated
17.08.2007 and 28.06.2009 are not valid as they are not properly
stamped or registered.  The plaintiff also pleads that the lease deed
executed in favour of the third defendant by the plaintiff and the
second defendant is also not valid, as it is not properly stamped and
registered.  Hence, the suit is filed for the following reliefs:
a)      Declaring defendant No.3 as the tenant of the plaintiff
in respect of plaint schedule property consequentially
direct defendant No.3 by mandatory injunction to pay
rents to plaintiff.
b)      Direct defendant No.3 to pay the arrears with effect
from 01.10.2015 to 30.04.2016 amounting to 
Rs.53,09,696/- being the arrears of rent and continue to
pay future rents.
c)      To grant permanent injunction restraining the
defendant Nos.1 & 2 or anyone else claiming through
them not to interfere into the suit schedule property.
d)      To grant permanent injunction restraining the
defendants 1 & 2 or anyone else claiming through them
not to execute any nature of documents in respect of
the suit schedule property.
e)      Allow costs of the suit.
f)      And pass other and further orders as this Honble Court
deems fit and proper.
5.      After the suit was filed, the defendants 1 & 2 filed an
application in I.A.No.460 of 2016 under
Section 8 (1)
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for brevity the Act)
requesting the Court to refer the disputes spelt out in the plaint to
arbitration, as per Clause 15 of the Development Agreement dated
17.08.2007.  This application was resisted by the plaintiff/revision
petitioner on the ground that the agreement dated 17.08.2007 is not
valid in law; that the reliefs claimed in the suit cannot be referred to
arbitration; that the defendants 1 & 2 are not parties to the second
agreement which contains the arbitration clause etc.
6.      After considering the respective pleadings and hearing the
parties, the lower Court passed the impugned order holding that the
first agreement is not superseded by the second agreement; that the
parties to the agreement are the same as the first defendant is a firm
represented by the second defendant and therefore, it cannot be
said that the parties are different.  The trial Court ultimately referred
the parties to arbitration, as per clause 15 of the Development
Agreement dated 17.08.2007.  It is this order that is now impugned
in the appeal.
7.      This Court has heard Sri D. Madhava Rao, learned counsel
for the petitioner/plaintiff and Sri K. Prabhakar, learned counsel
for the respondents/defendants.
8.      The learned counsel for the petitioner/plaintiff argued that
the second agreement supersedes the first agreement and that the
second agreement does not contain an arbitration clause.
Therefore, it is his contention that for any dispute arising under the
second agreement dated 28.06.2009, it is only the Civil Court that
has the jurisdiction to entertain the same.  He argued that under the
second agreement, there are fundamental changes in the terms of
the contract and that there is a novation and not merely a variation
of the earlier contract. He also points out that as the reliefs claimed
in the suit are substantially against the third defendant who is not a
party to the arbitration agreement, the dispute cannot be referred to
an arbitrator.
9.      In reply thereto, the learned counsel for the
respondents/defendants argued that the earlier agreement is not
superseded by the subsequent agreement and that both of them can  
be harmoniously read together. He argued that there are some
variations in the terms, but not a novation of the contract.  He also
argued that the reliefs claimed by the plaintiff/present revision
petitioner can also be granted by the arbitrator who is a substitute
for a Court.  He vehemently argued that the impugned order is
correct and is valid.
10.     After hearing both the learned counsel and considering the
submissions made and the evidence introduced, the following
points arise for determination:
i)   What are the disputes that can be referred to arbitration
and what are the reliefs that can be granted by an
arbitrator?
ii)   Is there novation or an alteration to the earlier contract
of 17.08.2007, in view of the subsequent agreement
dated 28.06.2009?
iii) Can a dispute be referred to the arbitration under
Section 8
of the Arbitration Act, 1996 when there are
third parties in the suit who are not parties to the
arbitration agreement?
Re Point No.(i):
11.     It is a fact that arbitration is an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism chosen as an alternative forum to a civil Court.
However, it is clear in view of the decided law on the subject that
an arbitrator is not equal to a Court and does not have all the
powers that are vested in a civil Court. Even as on date the powers
of arbitrator can be circumscribed by the agreement between the
parties. As an example, this Court notices
Section 31 (7)(a)
of the
Act clearly stating that if there is a term in the contract prohibiting
the award of interest, the arbitrator cannot award interest.
Therefore, this Court holds that while an arbitrator is a substitute or
alternative forum, he does not have all the powers of a civil Court.
The Honble Supreme Court of India in a judgment reported in
Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd.
spelt
out that the following disputes are not capable of reference to
arbitration.  Para-22 of the judgment is reproduced here:
22. Arbitral tribunals are private fora chosen voluntarily by the
parties to the dispute, to adjudicate their disputes in place of courts
and tribunals which are public fora constituted under the laws of the
country. Every civil or commercial dispute, either contractual or non-
contractual, which can be decided by a court, is in principle capable
of being adjudicated and resolved by arbitration unless the
jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals is excluded either expressly or by
necessary implication. Adjudication of certain categories of
proceedings are reserved by the Legislature exclusively for public fora
as a matter of public policy. Certain other categories of cases, though
not expressly reserved for adjudication by a public fora (courts and
Tribunals), may by necessary implication stand excluded from the
purview of private fora. Consequently, where the cause/dispute is
inarbitrable, the court where a suit is pending, will refuse to refer the
parties to arbitration, under
Section 8
of the Act, even if the parties
might have agreed upon arbitration as the forum for settlement of
such disputes.
The well recognized examples of non-arbitrable disputes are: (i)
disputes relating to rights and liabilities which give rise to or arise out
of criminal offences; (ii) matrimonial disputes relating to divorce,
judicial separation, restitution of conjugal rights, child custody; (iii)
guardianship matters; (iv) insolvency and winding up matters; (v)
testamentary matters (grant of probate, letters of administration and
succession certificate); and (vi) eviction or tenancy matters governed
by special statutes where the tenant enjoys statutory protection
against eviction and only the specified courts are conferred
jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the disputes.
This was followed by
A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam
, in which 
para-9 is relevant, which is reproduced here:
9. ... the Act does not make any provision      
excluding any category of disputes treating them as non-arbitrable.
Notwithstanding the above, the Courts have held that certain kinds
of disputes may not be capable of adjudication through the means of
arbitration. The Courts have held that certain disputes like criminal
offences of a public nature, disputes arising out of illegal agreements
and disputes relating to status, such as divorce, cannot be referred to
arbitration. Following categories of disputes are generally treated as
non-arbitrable1:
(i) patent, trademarks and copyright;
(ii) anti-trust/competition laws;
(iii) insolvency/winding up;
(iv) bribery/corruption;
(v) fraud;
(vi) criminal matters.
12.     On an examination of the plaint filed in this case and the
prayers made therein, this Court is of the opinion that the prayers
made/sought are not those that are prohibited by law from being
referred to arbitration.  Such prayers can be made even before an
arbitrator.  This point is accordingly answered.
Re Point No.(ii):
13.     For an easy understanding, a tabular statement is given below
setting out the important clauses of Exs.P.1 & P.2.
Sl.
No.
Particulars
Ex.P.1 agreement  
Dated 17.08.2007 
Ex.P.2 agreement  
Dated 28.06.2009
1.
Parties
a) D. Muralidhar Rao
   (Owner)
b) D. Papa Rao 
    (Developer)
a) D. Muralidhar Rao
    (owner)
b) Srinivasa Cosntructions
   rep.by Managing Partner
   D. Papa Rao
   (Developer)
2.
Building
Ground + five floors
Ground + 4 floors
3.
Period
3 (three) years after
permission from the
concerned authorities
18 months from the date of
handing over.
Site to be handed over within
30 days
4.
Disputes 
To be settled by Arbitration
Nil
5.

GPA to developer to sell
GPA after payment of 
goodwill only.
6.
Share 
Ratio of sharing is
52.5 : 47.5
Ratio of sharing is
52.5 : 47.5
7.
Consideration
over and above
SHARE   


Non-refundable good will
of Rs.65 lakhs.
8.
Delay 

Agreed penalty of Rs.3.50
lakhs per month for failure to
deliver within 18 months.
14.     Based on the clauses in the new agreement, the learned
counsel for the revision petitioner argued that there is an altogether
new contract i.e., a novation of the contract and not a mere
alteration.  The learned counsel for the respondents however
argued that the overall purpose and intent remain the same; that in
both the agreements the percentage of sharing (52.5 to 47.5) remain
the same; but only a few terms are altered.  He, therefore, argued
that the first agreement and the arbitration clause are not changed
or superseded.
15.     This Court notices that there are certain very important and
fundamental changes in the second agreement which in the opinion 
of the Court go to the root of the matter viz.,
a)   The period of construction is reduced to 18 months
from 36 months and a penalty/compensation  
clause is also included for delay of delivery.
b)  The overall size of the building is changed from
ground + five floors to ground + four floors.
c)  In the second agreement, consideration is also
specified in the form of non-refundable goodwill,
apart from the built-up area.
d)      The alternate dispute resolution to arbitration is
eliminated.
e)   The parties to the agreement are a partnership firm
in place of an individual.
f)   The second agreement does not say that the new
agreement is entered into alter a few terms etc.
The entire gamut of operations/obligations is again
spelt out in the new agreement.
16.     On a review of the clauses, this Court is of the opinion that
the argument of the learned counsel for the revision
petitioner/plaintiff is correct and that there is a novation of the
contract in view of the fundamental changes introduced in the size
of the building, period of construction and the consideration
payable. Referring to the doctrine of novation, the Supreme Court
in
Chrisomar Corporation v. Mjr Steels Private Limited
held as
under:
33. It is clear that where parties to a contract agree to
substitute a completely different contract for the first, or to
rescind a contract, the performance under the original contract
and/or rescinded contract comes to an end.  When parties to a
contract alter a contract, the question that has to be answered
is as to whether the original contract is altered in such a manner
that performance under it is at an end.
17.     The Honble Supreme Court of India also noticed and
approved the judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
Juggilal
Kamlapat v. N.V. Internationale Credit-En_Handels Vereeninging
Rotter-dam
.  This Court holds that the changes effected by
Ex.P.2 are fundamental in nature and go to the root of the matter.
Therefore, this Court has no hesitation to hold that there is a
novation and substitution of existing contract-Ex.P.1 with Ex.P.2-
agreement.  In this view of the matter, the finding of the lower
Court that Ex.P.2 is only in continuation of Ex.P.1 is erroneous.
The appellant allowed the building to be constructed and in fact he
states that the tenant was inducted with his consent into the
building. However, his contention is that the lease deed is not
stamped/registered as per law and hence void.  The point however
remains that the second agreement was entered into after two years
and also acted upon.
The judgement in
Young Achievers v. IMS 
Learning Resources Private Limited
is also relevant in this
context.  Paras 7 and 8 are reproduced here:
7. . The principle laid down is that if the contract is
superseded by another, the arbitration clause, being a component
part of the earlier contract, falls with it. . .
8. We may indicate that so far as the present case is concerned,
parties have entered into a fresh contract contained in the Exit paper
which does not even indicate any disputes arising under the original
contract or about the settlement thereof, it is nothing but a pure and
simple novation of the original contract by mutual consent.
.
Hence, this Court is of the opinion that the arbitration clause
in the earlier Ex.P.1-agreement does not exist as Ex.P.2-agreement
is a fresh agreement; which does not provide for arbitration.
Re Point No.(iii):
18.     The last question that survives for consideration is whether
an order under
Section 8
of the Act could be passed directing the
parties to go to arbitration, when the plaint includes reliefs and also
parties who are not parties to the arbitration agreement.  A reading
of the record makes it clear that the third defendant in the suit viz.,
Suyosha Health Care Pvt. Ltd. is not a party to either Ex.P.1,
agreement dated 17.08.2007 or the subsequent agreement dated  
28.06.2009.  The reliefs claimed in the suit are for a declaration that
the third defendant is a tenant in the premises for a direction to pay
the arrears of rent from 01.10.2015 onwards and also the future
rents to the plaintiff, besides the relief of permanent injunction.
Therefore, a reading of the plaint makes it clear that a substantial
relief is claimed against the third defendant in the suit.
19.     The plaintiffs case is that there is a breach committed by the
defendants 1 & 2 and that on the basis of some untenable
documents, construction of the building was carried out.  It is also
his alternative case that defendants 1 & 2 are collecting the entire
rent for the building, instead of limiting it to the development to the
share of 47.5%.  The issues such as breach of contract and whether
the third defendant could be inducted to the tenancy are the matters
to be decided in the suit after a full-fledged trial.  The reliefs
claimed against third defendant cannot be segregated and decided
separately.  The suit consists of reliefs which are claimed both
against defendants 1 & 2 who are parties to the agreement and
against third defendant who is not a party to the agreement.
20.     The Honble Supreme Court of India in
Sukanya Holdings 
Pvt. Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya
clearly held that the reliefs cannot be
separated in a case like this.  There is also a likelihood of conflicting
decisions arising if the cause of action is separated and decided by
two different tribunals viz., civil Court as far as the third defendant
is concerned and the arbitrator as far as defendants 1 & 2 are
concerned.  To avoid such likelihood of conflicting decisions and to
ensure that the lis is decided comprehensively among all the parties,
this Court is of the opinion that the suit needs to be adjudicating on
merits by the civil court instead of by the arbitrator.  Therefore, this
Court is of the opinion that the lower Court committed an error in
referring the parties to arbitration, when a third party is included as
a defendant in the suit.  This point is answered accordingly.
21.     For all the above reasons, this Court is of the opinion that the
impugned order, dated 11.10.2017, passed in I.A.No.460 of 2016 in
O.S.No.575 of 2016 by the XV Additional District Judge, Ranga
Reddy District at Miyapur, is not sustainable and the same is set
aside.  Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is allowed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order
as to costs.
22.     As a sequel to the disposal of the main revision, CRP MP
No.8223 of 2017 shall stand disposed of as infructuous.
__________________________    
C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY, J      
_______________________    
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
Date:  02.05.2018