[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Amar Kumar Dixit And Others vs T.K.Surendera Sharma And Another on 12 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 244
Author:
Shameem Akther
Bench:
Shameem Akther
THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE SHAMEEM AKTHER             

M.A.C.M.A.No.2798 of 2005  

12.09.2018 

Amar Kumar Dixit and othersPetitioners/Claimants  


T.K.Surendera Sharma and another..Respondents   


Counsel for the appellants:MANIK RAO, Advocate  


Counsel for the Respondents:P.BHANU PRAKASH, Advocate       
                                                
<Gist :

>Head Note: 
?  Cases Referred:

1.AIR 1988 Bom 248  
2.1999 (2) ACJ 1520 
3.2017 (6) ALD 170 (SC) 


THE HONBLE Dr. JUSTICE SHAMEEM AKTHER          
M.A.C.M.A.No.2798 of 2005  

JUDGMENT:
-
This appeal, under
Section 173
of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 (the Act, for brevity), is filed by the appellants-claimants,
challenging the Order, dated 08.12.2004, passed in O.P.No.582 of
1998, by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal-cum-I Additional
District Judge, Mahabubnagar (the Tribunal, for brevity).
2.      Heard the learned counsel for both sides and perused the
record.
3.      The learned counsel for the appellants-claimants would
contend that the Tribunal held that the place of the subject
accident, i.e., within the compound of Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad, is a
private place and dismissed the claim against the 2nd respondent-
Insurance Company, which is unsustainable under law.  The 
compound of Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad, is not a private place since
many Government officials perform their official duty there.  The
office of the Governor of a State is a Public Office and as such, the
place from where the Governor performs his official duties is
deemed to be a public place.  The claimants, along with others,
went to Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad, for a meeting with the Governor
on Satya Establishment at village level.  The Tribunal erroneously
dismissed the claim against the 2nd respondent-Insurance
Company.  Further, grant of compensation of Rs.2,30,280/- with
interest @ 9% per annum from the date of petition till the date of
payment by the Tribunal in favour of the appellants-claimants is
meagre and ultimately prayed to fasten the liability to pay the
compensation against the 2nd respondent-Insurance Company and   
to enhance the same.
4.      On the other hand, the learned Standing Counsel for the 2nd
respondent-Insurance Company would contend that P.W.1 (first 
claimant) admitted in his evidence that the place of occurrence of
the subject accident is a private place.  As per
Section 147(1)(b)(ii)
of the said Act, the insurance coverage is valid only in case of
occurrence of accident in a public place.  Considering all these
aspects, the Tribunal rightly dismissed the claim against the 2nd
respondent-Insurance Company.  Further, the Tribunal had taken
into consideration all the relevant factors and granted just and
reasonable amount as compensation.  There are no circumstances  
to interfere with the impugned order and ultimately prayed to
dismiss the appeal by confirming the order under challenge.
5.      In view of the above rival contentions, the points that arise
for determination in this appeal are as follows:-
1.      Whether the place of occurrence of the subject
accident, i.e., within the compound of Raj Bhavan,
Hyderabad, is a public place or a private place.
2.      Whether the compensation of Rs.2,30,280/- with 
interest @ 9% per annum from the date of petition
till payment granted by the Tribunal in favour of the
appellants-claimants is liable to be
enhanced/reduced?
3.      Whether the 2nd respondent-Insurance Company is   
jointly and severally liable to pay the compensation
to the appellants-claimants.
6.      The averments in the claim petition, in brief, are that on
26.05.1997, sixteen people, including the deceased-Pravina Dixit,
went to Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad, for a meeting with the Governor
of the erstwhile Andhra Pradesh at 05:30 PM on the said day with
regard to social work concerning Satya Establishment.  The said
meeting concluded by 08:30 PM.  All the delegates came out the 
meeting hall.  The deceased-Pravina Dixit and another person were
standing in front of the offending Tata Sumo Jeep bearing
registration No.AP-22-A-7500, which was about ten to fifteen yards
away from the deceased.  All of a sudden, the driver of the said
offending Tata Sumo Jeep started the jeep and drove the same in
rash and negligent manner and hit the deceased.  The deceased 
fell down and the offending Tata Sumo ran over the body of the
deceased.  The deceased was immediately shifted to NIMS,  
Hyderabad, and the doctors at NIMS, Hyderabad, declared that the
deceased was brought dead.
Point No.1:-
7.      The first and foremost contention of the learned counsel for
the appellants-claimants is that the place of occurrence of the
subject accident, i.e., within the compound of Raj Bhavan,
Hyderabad, is a public place and not a private place.  In this
context, it is apt to extract to the definition of 'public place" under
Section 2 (34)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
2(34) 'public place' means a road, street, way or other
place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the public
have a right of access, and includes any place or stand at
which passengers are picked up or set down by a stage 
carriage.
8.      A plain reading of the definition of 'public place', shows that
the place, whether or not a thoroughfare, can be considered as a
'public place', if the public have got a right of access thereto. In
other words, even a private place, to which the public at large have
a right of access in any manner whatsoever, would also fall within
the meaning of 'public place'.  Thus, when a private place is made
accessible to the members of the public, though restricted or
regulated, the only plausible conclusion that could be drawn is that
such private place would amount to 'public place' as defined under
Section 2(34)
of the Act.
9.      This issue has been considered in detail by a Full Bench of
Bombay High Court in
Pandurang v. New India Life Insurance
Company Limited and Others
. In the said case, the accident
took place in the compound of Tata Engineering and Locomotive 
Company Limited. The entire premises, including the main road
where the accident took place, belonged to the said company.
Generally a person entering the factory premises is supposed to
have permission or authority.  The Full Bench of the Bombay High
Court, on consideration of the relevant statutory provisions, held
that the place where the accident took place was a public place. It
is relevant to note the following observations made by the Full
Bench.
"The term 'public place' is a term of art, the same
having been defined specifically by Sub-clause (34) of
Section 2
of the Act. The first thing to remember with
regard to the definition is that it is an inclusive one.
Secondly, it, in terms, makes it clear that any road,
street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or
not, is a public place for the purposes of the Act, the
only condition being that the public should have a right
of access to it. Thirdly, the expression used in the
definition is "a right of access" and not "access as of
right". Lastly, when it states that any place or stand at
which passengers are picked up or set down by a stage 
carriage, is a public place, it shows that it is not so
much concerned with the ownership of the place as
with its user. The definition of "public place" under the
Act is, therefore, wide enough to include any place
which members of public use and to which they have a 
right of access. The right of access may be permissive,
limited, restricted or regulated by oral or written
permission, by tickets, passes or badges or on payment
of fee. The use may be restricted generally or to
particular purpose or purposes. What is necessary is
that the place must be accessible to the members of
the public and be available for their use, enjoyment,
avocation other purpose."
10.     Similar view has been expressed by a Full Bench of Madras 
High Court in
United India Insurance Company Limited v.
Parvathi Devi and Others
, wherein, it was held as follows:
"The definition of 'public place' is very wide. A perusal
of the same reveals that the public at large has a right
to access, though that right is regulated or restricted.
It is also seen that this Act is beneficial legislation, so
also the law of interpretation has to be construed in the
benefit of public. In the overall legal position and the
fact that if the language is simple and unambiguous, it
has to be construed in the benefit of the public, we are
of the view that the word 'public place', wherever used
as a right or controlled in any manner whatsoever,
would attract
Section 2(34)
of the Act. In view of this,
as stated, the private place used with permission or
without permission would amount to be a 'public
place'."
11.     In the instant case, admittedly, the subject accident took
place within the compound wall of Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad.  This
itself makes it clear that the place of subject accident was
accessible to the members of the public, though permissive,
limited, restricted or regulated.  Further, no rebuttal evidence has
been adduced on behalf of the 2nd respondent-Insurance Company  
to show that the entry into Raj Bhavan, Hyderabad, was restricted
or obstructed as on the date of accident.  In the absence of same,
this Court is unable to agree with the conclusion reached by the
Tribunal that the place where the subject accident took place is not
a 'public place' within the meaning of
Section 2(34)
of the Act.  As
stated above, even a private place to which members of public
have a right of access, though permissive, limited, restricted or
regulated, shall be held to be a 'public place' and the said question
has to be determined taking into consideration the facts and
circumstances of the case and on the basis of the evidence on
record.
12.     For the reasons stated supra, I have no doubt whatsoever to
hold that the subject accident took place is a 'public place', within
the meaning of
Section 2(34)
of the Act. Thus the requirement
under
Section 147(1)(b)(ii)
of the Act is satisfied and the 2nd
respondent-Insurance Company cannot be absolved of its liability
to pay compensation awarded by the Tribunal.  This point is
accordingly answered in favour of the appellants-claimants and
against the 2nd respondent-Insurance Company.
Point Nos.2 and 3
13.     As far as quantum of compensation by the Tribunal in favour
of the appellants-claimants is concerned, the Tribunal, after
analysing the entire evidence on record, took the monthly income
of the deceased as Rs.2,000/-, deducted 1/3rd of it towards
personal expenses of the deceased and by applying relevant
multiplier 16 to the age of the deceased, granted an amount of
Rs.2,13,280/- towards loss of dependency.  The Tribunal also
granted an amount of Rs.10,000/- towards loss of consortium,
Rs.5,000/- towards loss of estate and Rs.2,000/- towards funeral
expenses.  In all, the Tribunal granted a compensation of
Rs.2,30,280/- with interest @ 9% per annum from the date of
petition till the date of payment.
14.     It is apt to refer to the recent decision of the Apex Court in
National Insurance Co. Ltd., Vs. Pranay Sethi and others
,
wherein, it was held as follows:-
Reasonable figures on conventional heads, namely, loss
of estate, loss of consortium and funeral expenses should
be Rs.15,000/-, Rs.40,000/- and Rs.15,000/-
respectively.  The aforesaid amounts should be enhanced
at the rate of 10% in every three years.
Taking into consideration the aforementioned decision of the Apex
Court, this Court is inclined to grant Rs.40,000/- to the 1st
appellant/1st claimant (husband of the deceased) towards loss of
consortium, Rs.15,000/- to the appellants-claimants towards loss
of estate and another Rs.15,000/- towards funeral expenses.
Thus, the appellants-claimants are entitled for a total
compensation of Rs.2,83,280/- rounded off to Rs.2,83,000/-
(Rs.2,13,280/- + Rs.40,000/- + Rs.15,000/- + Rs.15,000/-).  The
Tribunal awarded interest at the rate of 9% per annum on the
amount granted as compensation from the date of petition till the
date of payment.  This Court is inclined to award interest @ 7.5%
per annum on the enhanced amount of compensation, from the  
date of petition till realisation.
15.     Accordingly, this appeal is allowed in part, modifying the
Order, dated 08.12.2004, passed in M.V.O.P.No.582 of 1998 by the 
Tribunal, enhancing the compensation from Rs.2,30,280 to
Rs.2,83,000/-.  The enhanced amount of compensation carries 
interest @ 7.5% per annum from the date of application till
realisation.  The 2nd respondent-Insurance Company is jointly and
severally liable to pay the said compensation to the appellants-
claimants along with the 1st respondent herein/driver-cum-owner
of the offending Tata Sumo Jeep bearing registration No.AP-22-A-
7500.  The other terms of the Order under challenge remain
unaltered.  No costs.
Miscellaneous Petitions pending, if any, shall stand closed.
____________________   
Dr. SHAMEEM AKTHER, J     
12th September, 2018