[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Nuthalapati Munaswamy Naidu vs N.A.Chengama Naidu And Others on 3 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 306, 2018 (191) AIC (SOC) 30 (HYD)
Author:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
THE HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO            

SECOND APPEAL No.816 of 2002      

03.07.2018 

Nuthalapati Munaswamy Naidu.. Appellant  

N.A.Chengama Naidu and others.. Respondents   8
Counsel for the Appellant: Smt. K.Sesharajyam 
                                 for M.Koteswara Rao

Counsel for the respondents: Sri D.V.Sitarama Murthy
                              for M.Suguna

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?CITATIONS:  

1.      (2015) 6 SCC 412 
2.      2017 (3) ALD 260 
3.      AIR 2000 SC 2626  
4.      1999 (1) ALT 211 
5.      2017 (6) ALT 59
6.      2018 (1) SCC 604 
7.      1989 (3) ALT 629 
8.      2004 (2) ALD 152 NOC  
9.      AIR 1968 AP 239  
10.     AIR 1941 Madras 929  
11.     AIR 2001 Delhi 338 
12.     AIR 1962 AP 372  



HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           
S.A.No.816 of 2002 

JUDGMENT:
The plaintiff is the appellant in Second Appeal and the
defendants 1 to 10 are the respondents and out of said
defendants, from death of the defendants 2 & 9, the legal
representatives came on record as the respondents 10 to 13
and respondent No.14 respectively as per the orders dated
11.06.2008 in S.A.M.P.No.1550 of 2007 and 11.10.2017 in 
S.A.M.P.No.2203 of 2017.  The Second Appeal is maintained  
against the concurrent findings of the Courts below by saying
it involves the substantial question of law and the said
concurrent findings are perverse and unsustainable and
contrary to law.  The Second Appeal was admitted originally
on 21.11.2003 showing the substantial questions of law raised
in the grounds 1 to 4, though as contemplated by
Section 100
CPC the Court has to formulate the substantial question of law
from reading of the material and after hearing the appellant,
if any, or relied upon any ground mentioned in the appeal as if
the substantial question of law for maintainability of the
Second Appeal arising of the substantial question of law no
doubt mandatory for the appellant, and the scope of the
formulation of substantial question of law by the Court
therefrom is thus different.  Thereby, this Court formulated
on 27.04.2018 from involvement of the substantial questions
of law as under:
1.      Whether the trial Court was in error in dismissing the
suit instead of return of the plaint having found the
plaintiff under valued the suit, with reference to the sale
deed of 1989 relied on by the defendants to show the same
for placing reliance instead of directing the plaintiff for not
an functo-officio to deliver of the judgment, atleast
invoking Order VII Rule 11 clause (b) and (c)
C.P.C
. read
with 11 of the
A.P. Courts Fees and Suits Valuation Act,
1956
and the impugnment of the same by the plaintiff in
the appeal attacking the whole judgment and confirmation
of the same by the lower appellate Court is correct?
2.      Whether the concurrent findings of the Courts below
in this regard and otherwise on appreciation of fact and
law are perverse or unsustainable and requires
interference?
3.      To what result?
2.      Heard both sides at length and perused the material on
record.  The factual background necessary to mention is that
for a total extent of Ac.11.92 cents there was a joint patta
granted in the year 1958 by Survey and Settlement authorities
under the provisions of the
Estates Abolition Act
for each 1/3rd
in favour of three persons viz., Nuthalapati Abbayi Naidu @
Munaswamy Naidu for 1/3rd, Muppala Nagamma Naidu for 1/3rd    
and Muppala Seshama Naidu for 1/3rd.  Said Abbayi Naidu @   
Munaswamy Naidu had three brothers and of whom he was the    
eldest in their family after their late father and he acted as
family manager thereby and patta was granted for that 1/3rd
share on behalf of their joint family according to the claim in
favour of said Abbayi Naidu since family manager for the
benefit of himself and his three brothers and that the co-
brothers thereby got equal shares in the 1/3rd of 11.92 cents
in Survey No.5 comes to Ac.3.97 cents viz., Abbayi Naidu @ 
Munaswamy Naidu entitled to 1/4th out of said 3.97 cents for
the benefit of himself and his sons late Kuppa Naidu who left
behind two sons N.Bhaskara Naidu-defendant No.3 and  
N.Muniratnam Naidu-defendant No.4 and Abbayi Naidus  
another son N.Ellappa Naidu-defendant No.1, another son
N.A.Chengammma Naidu-defendant No.2 and another son     
Munaswamy Naidu-plaintiff.  It is to say the plaintiff,
defendants 1 to 4 of whom defendants 3 & 4 are sons of late
Kuppa Naidu, the brother of plaintiff, defendant 1 & 2, who
are sons of Abbayi Naidu got 1/4th out of Ac.3.97 cents supra
and Abbayi Naidus other three brothers each got 1/4th of
Ac.3.97 cents viz. Gurrappa Naidu (brother of Abbayi Naidu)
whose wife Nallakka @ Muniyamma, who are issue less and   
adopted defendant No.1, one of the sons of Abbayi Naidu, and
thereby, Nallakka and Ellappa Naidu together sold away their
1/4th share out of Ac.3.97 cents and Abbayi Naidus another
brother Subba Naidu so far as 1/4th share in Ac.3.97 cents
concerned also had no children and he adopted Abbayi Naidus 
another son N.A.Chengama Naidu-defendant No.2 and he   
performed his obsequies and he sold away, as such adopted 
son the 1/4th entitled share to Subba Naidu out of Ac.3.97
cents and coming to Abbayi Naidus another brother
Venkataswamy Naidu the other 1/4th entitled shareholder out
of Ac.3.97 cents.  Said Venkataswamy Naidu s wife was one 
Sayamma and defendant No.5-B.Doraswamy Naidu not even     
son and Sayamma and Doraswamy Naidu after the death of   
Venkataswamy Naidu sold away 1/4th share entitled supra. 
Defendant No.6 is one Kommini Jayamma, who acquired 3/4th   
share out of Ac.3.97 cents viz., that of Gurrappa Naidu, Subba
Naidu and Venkataswamy Naidu supra and said Jayamma in     
turn sold away the same to the defendants 7 to 10.
3.      In this factual background with the family geneology,
the sole plaintiff Munaswamy Naidu, one of the four sons of
Abbayi Naidu including defendants 1 and 2 who are given in
adoption to Abbayi Naidus other brother Gurrappa Naidu and
Subba Naidu as referred supra, in respect of five share holders
shown with the plaint of which all relates to Survey No.5 supra
with total extent of Ac.11.92 cents where a shareholder
shown of Ac.1.33 cents sought for declaration of right and
title in his favour and to restrain the defendants 1, 2 & 5 to 10
and their men from interfering with the plaintiffs right,
possession and enjoyment of the plaint A schedule property
by granting permanent prohibitory injunction and for costs
and other reliefs.
4.      The value of the property shown is Rs.13,500/- and paid
a Court fee of Rs.546/- under
Section 24 (b)
of the A.P. Court
Fees & Suits Valuation Act, 1956.  On half of said Rs.13,500/-
which comes to Rs.6,750/-, since the relief is for declaration
and injunction by claiming the plaintiff is in possession in
seeking the relief mainly against defendants 1, 2 & 5 to 10 and
the cause of action mentioned arisen in the months of
February, March and May of the year 1990, when notices 
issued and replies received from some of them and
subsequently from their alleged threatened interference
which he could resist.  It is claimed that the entire Ac.3.97
cents belongs to his father Abbayi Naidu and his fathers
brothers Gurrappa Naidu, Subba Naidu and Venkataswamy    
Naidu have no way concerned with it and as the defendants 1
and 2 were given in adoption respectively and among his other
brothers Ellappa Naidu, late Kuppa Naidu, represented by his
sons Bhaskara Naidu and Muniratnam Naidu there was a   
partition and the plaint B schedule property was not
partitioned in that partition in 1962, since kept joint and the
plaintiff and his brother late Kuppa Naidu and other brother
were enjoying each 1/3rd out of the plaint D schedule and
the defendants 3 & 4 have been separated covered by the
registered Partition Deed dated 07.04.1987 whereunder the
plaint A schedule falls to the share of plaintiff and the plaint
B and C schedule falls to the shares of defendants 3 and 4
and the plaintiff is working as Principal in the Government
Decree College at different places and was taking assistance
of others in cultivation and looking after the land and as the
defendants 7 to 10 are claiming rights in the plaint D
schedule property and trying to interfere with the plaintiffs
possession and enjoyment, he is constrained to file the suit
with other averments not much of germane.
5.      The written statement filed by the defendants 7 to 10
mainly in opposing the suit claim.  As the defendants 1 to 6
having been served remained ex parte, the written statement
context in nut shell of the defendants 7 to 10 was while
denying the plaint averments and reply reference to the
geneology and respective entitlements and claim as bona fide
purchasers from K.Jayamma supra and not entitled to any of
the reliefs by the plaintiff or other defendants, particularly
from paragraph No.25 to 28 for earlier paragraphs covered
above, contended of the Munsiff Court, Puttur, where the suit
filed by the plaintiff, has no pecuniary jurisdiction for the
plaint A schedule property is worth now more than
Rs.80,000/- and on that ground the suit is to be dismissed for
the value shown by the plaintiff is very low and for proper
Court fee not paid on proper value and the suit is filed
without prayer for possession is not maintainable and the
defendants and their predecessors in interest perfected title
to the property, which is described in the written statement
schedule, as purchaser by adverse possession also and the suit
claim is thereby barred by limitation and the suit is liable to
be dismissed thereto.
6.      The trial Court from the above context framed the
following issues?
1)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for declaration of his right
and title over the plaint schedule property as prayed for?
2)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for permanent injunction as
prayed for?
3)      To what relief?
After the said settlement of issues on 17.10.1995, the
defendants 7 to 10 filed I.A.No.830 of 1991 to frame the
additional issue in relation to the pecuniary jurisdiction of the
Court and to decide the same as a preliminary issue, that
petition was allowed partly on 08.07.1996 by framing the
additional issue as to Whether the Court has got pecuniary
jurisdiction to entertain the suit? in saying the issue relating
to the jurisdiction will be decided in the suit itself by
conducting full-fledged trial.  Thus, the trial Court did not
choose to decide as a preliminary issue pecuniary jurisdiction
aspect, but for taken up trial on all issues to decide all issues
and in the course of trail, the plaintiff came to the witness
box as PW1 and examined one N.Chengaiah, B.Venkatadri    
Naidu and N.Parasuramulu Naidu as PWs 2 to 4 and placed   
reliance upon the exhibits A1 to A15 viz., registered Partition
Deed dated 27.04.1987, office copy of notice issued by the
plaintiff, reply notice received from some of the defendants
among 1, 2, 5 to 10, cist receipts, certified copies of the
Settlement register and No.2 adangal and the Field
Measurement books extracts for survey nos.4 & 5.  On behalf
of the contesting defendants 7 to 10, DWs 1 & 2 as P.Rangaiah
Naidu-defendant No.8 and R.Doraswamy Naidu-defendant   
No.10 were came to the witness box and they placed reliance
upon the exhibits B1 to B11 viz., the statement of PW1 dated
01.07.1979, registered Sale Deeds dated 24.12.1979,
26.06.1980, agreement dated 05.02.1987, payment  
endorsements dated 29.05.1987 and 27.09.1987, registered 
Sale Deed dated 03.08.1989, registered Partition Deed dated
14.12.1930 and office copy of notice and reply notice.  The
trial Court taken up to decide all the issues viz., issues 1 to 3
and additional issue on pecuniary jurisdiction aspect.  It is
held on issues 1 and 2 of the plaintiff is not entitled for
declaration of title and consequential relief of injunction, and
so far as the additional issue on pecuniary jurisdiction is
concerned, it is observed that DW1 in his evidence stated that
the suit property costs of Rs.75,000/- per acre and Ex.B8 Sale
Deed dated 03.08.1989, which is prior to the date of suit,
refers the consideration of Rs.1,36,000/- and the plaintiff
valued the suit for the plaint A schedule property is
Rs.13,500/-.  In payment of Court fee on half of the market
value under
Section 24(b)
of the A.P. Court Fees & Suits
Valuation Act, 1956 even as per Ex.B8, the value of property is
Rs.47,500/- per acre and the plaintiff did not file any
document to prove the value of suit property and from perusal
of Ex.B8 Sale Deed shows the value mentioned by the plaintiff
is not correct and by the time the suit filed in the year 1990
the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Junior Civil Judge Court is
Rs.25,000/- and not beyond and the costs for Ac.1.33 cents is
more than Rs.50,000/- worth from Ex.B8 shows on average  
acreage value of Rs.47,500/- and thereby, the Court has no
pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the suit and in view of the
valuation of the property, the additional issue is held against
the plaintiff and ultimately dismissed the suit with costs in
answering issue No.3 of what result.
7.      The plaintiff aggrieved thereby maintained A.S.No.35 of
1997 before the learned Senior Civil Judge, Puttur, and the
learned Senior Civil Judge by judgment dated 07.08.2001
having framed six points for consideration, which are
extracted hereunder:
1)      Whether the plaintiffs fathers brothers have any right in the
plaint D-schedule mentioned properties?
2)      Whether the 1st defendant ceased to have any right in plaint D-
schedule property after adoption to Gurrappa Naidu?
3)      Whether the vendors under Exs.B2, B3, B4 and B8 have no right to 
alienate the property there under?
4)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for declaration of title and for
permanent injunction as prayed for?
5)      Whether the findings and conclusions arrived at by the lower
Court in the judgment under appeal are liable to be set aside?
6)      To what relief?
8.        In answering the points, it was concluded that the
plaintiffs fathers brothers have right in the paint D
schedule property, defendant No.1-N.Ellappa Naidu went in
adoption to Gurrappa Naidu, but not ceased to have his rights
in the plaint D schedule property.  The vendors under
exhibits B2 to B4 and B8 have right to alienate the property in
favour of the defendants 7 to 10, and the plaintiff is not
entitled for declaration of title and permanent injunction
against the respondents in respect of the plaint schedule
property.  On point No.5 as to correctness of the trial Courts
judgment are not considered, observed of the trial Court has
properly considered the oral and documentary evidence
placed on record in coming to correct conclusion on the issues
framed and in giving its finding as to the plaintiff failed to
establish his title over the plaint schedule property and
exclusive possession for any entitlement to the relief of
declaration and injunction and the findings arrived no way
requires interference and the appeal thereby dismissed in so
holding.
9.      The same is under attack in the Second Appeal with the
contentions raised in the grounds of appeal including with the
say of involving the substantial questions of law that the Court
below ought to have seen that the suit schedule property is
the self-acquired property of the father of appellant herein
and the brothers of the father of appellant have no right
therein, that the Court below ought to have seen that patta
was granted in the name of the father of appellant in the year
1958 under the
Estates Abolition Act
and the suit property
could not have been part of the Partition Deed-Ex.B9 dated
14.12.1930, that the Court below ought to have seen that
having held that Paimash mentioned in Ex.A10-Settlement 
adangal is no tallying with survey number of the schedule land
and erred in holding that the suit land was part of land
covered by Ex.B9-Partition Deed dated 14.12.1930, that the
Court below ought to have seen that the plaintiff and his
brother have partitioned their properties including the suit
land under the registered Partition Deed dated 27.04.1987 and
there is nothing to suspect the said document, that the Court
below erred in holding that under Ex.B1 the plaintiff admitted
the share of defendant and even if it is taken as admitted of
the only share of defendant No.1 and not otherwise, that the
Court below ought to have seen that the defendants 1 and 2
colluded with defendant No.6 and brought into existence
exhibits B2 to B8 and those are not binding on the plaintiff,
that the Court below went wrong in holding despite defendant
No.1 who went in adoption to Gurrappa Naidu since got share
as the properties are family properties with a share to
Gurrappa Naidu, that the Court below erred in holding that it
has no pecuniary jurisdiction to try the suit despite the value
mentioned in the plaint clearly speaks the pecuniary
jurisdiction and having if at all to so hold went wrong in
deciding the matter on merits on other issues, that too while
holding no jurisdiction to try the suit.
10.     As referred supra, the Second Appeal is admitted by
formulating the substantial questions of law as extracted
above.
11.
In fact, the Apex Court in
Foreshore Cooperative
Housing Society Limited v. Praveen D.Desai
(dead) through
legal representatives    observed the scope of
Order XIV Rule 2
CPC
and the Maharashtra State amendment to Section 9-A on   
the aspect of jurisdiction and power of the Court to decide its
own jurisdiction including with reference to
Sections 3
to
24
of the Limitation Act, particularly at paragraph Nos.35 to 38
by reproduction of
Order XIV Rule 2 CPC
that it confers power
upon the Court to pronounce judgment on all the issues.  But,
there is an exception to that general rule i.e., where issues
both of law and fact arise in the same suit and the Court is of
the opinion that the case or any part thereof may be disposed
of on the issue of law, it may try that issue first if that issue
relates to the jurisdiction of the Court or a bar to the suit
created by any law.  It is observed that the exercise of this
discretion is further limited to the contingency that the issue
to be so tried must relate to the jurisdiction of the Court or a
bar to the suit created by a law in force.  In fact,
Order XIV
Rule 2 CPC
is to be read with
Order XX Rule 5 CPC
.
The scope 
of
Order XX Rule 5 CPC
not came for consideration before the
two Judge Bench of the Apex Court in
Foreshore Cooperative 
Housing Society Limiteds
case (supra 1) muchless as to any
inconsistency between the two provisions and if so which one
to prevail.  For more clarity
Order XIV Rule 2 CPC
and
Order
XX Rule 5 CPC
are reproduced hereunder:
Order XX Rule 5 CPC
speaks that in suit in which issues have
been framed, the Court shall state its finding or decision, with the
reasons there for, upon each separate issue, unless the finding
upon any one or more of the issues is sufficient for the decision of
the suit.
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC
reads that:
2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues.- (1)
Notwithstanding that a case may be disposed of on a preliminary
issue, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2),
pronounce judgment on all issues.
(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit,
and the court is of opinion that the case or any part thereof may
be disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first
if that issue relates to ---
(a) the jurisdiction of the court, or
(b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being in
force, and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the
settlement of the other issues until after that issue has been
determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with the
decision on that issue.
12.     This Court in
S.Anjana Reddy v. Palvoi Ranga Reddy
referring to
Order XIV Rule 2 CPC
and
Order XX Rule 5 CPC
observed in paragraph No.14C as follows:
14C.    From its combined reading as also answered by this
Court in CCCA.No.128 of 2009 dated 02.12.2015 between
Smt.   
Maimoona Begum v. G.Sarat Babu
reported in 2016 (2) ALD 610,   
on the scope of Order XX Rule 5 read with
Order XIV Rule 2 CPC
particularly from Paras 7 & 8 of the judgment, a combined
reading of these provisions make it abundantly clear on question
of law regarding jurisdiction or other legal bar to a suit once
required to be decided and if was decided holding lack of
jurisdiction or for other legal bar to maintain the civil suit there
is no need to deal with other issues for practically the Court
therefrom becomes functus officio. In this regard there is no any
inconsistency between the two provisions. It is to say at the cost
of repetition that if the Court gives any finding on the
preliminary issue of lack of jurisdiction or other legal bar
inherently which goes to the root of the matter, Court cannot
decide the lis on merits and consequently functus officio.
13.
In fact, from the combined reading of the two
provisions, the observations of this Court in the
expression supra with reference to the expression of the
Apex Court in
Foreshore Cooperative Housing Society 
Limiteds
case (supra 1) it is clear that once the trial is
taken up and not confined to that issue letting evidence,
but allowed the evidence to be let in on all issues the Court
has to decide by giving finding on all issues.
From the
combined reading of the provisions also, before going
further it is also necessary to refer the expression of the
Apex Court in
State of Karnataka v. Registrar General,
High
Court of Karnataka  that the judicial decree requires
the judgment and orders to confine to the facts and legal
appreciation involved and to give finding on all the issues
involved therein, from the very wording that the suit in
which issues have been framed, from reading of
Order XX
Rule 5 CPC
the Court shall say its finding or decision with
reasons therefor upon each separate issue unless the finding
upon any one or more of the issues is sufficient, and by
referring to
Order XIV Rule 2 CPC
it also speaks from non-
obstante clause of notwithstanding that a case may be
disposed of on a preliminary issue, the Court shall, subject
to the provisions of sub-rule (2), pronounce judgment on all
issues and where issues both of fact and law arise in the
same suit, and the Court is of the opinion that the case or
any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law only
it may try that issue first if that issue relates to the
jurisdiction of the Court or a bar to the suit created by any
law for the time being in force, and for that purpose may, if
it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the other issues
and until after that issue has been determined, and may
deal with the suit in accordance with the decision on that
issue.
Thus, if at all the Court wants to deal with the
preliminary issue out of other issues formulated, it has to
decide that issue if at all by confining the trial only to that
issue without undertaking the trial on the other issues,
otherwise from the combined reading of the provisions,
particularly Order XIV Rule 2 sub-rule (1) CPC with the non-
obstante clause the Court shall take up trial on all issues
and give its findings on all issues as also mandated by Order
XX Rule 5 C.P.C.
14.     Here so far as the finding of the trial Court on
additional issue on the value of suit and payment of Court
fee and its stamp duty is concerned, the lower appellate
Court did not discuss any thing as referred supra in this
regard on point No.5 formulated by it for answering under
Order XL1 Rule 31 CPC
.
Section 6
CPC says save insofar as is 
otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein contained
shall operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the
amount or value of the subject matter of which exceeds the
pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.
15.     So far as the pecuniary limits is concerned, it is the
A.P. Civil Courts Act, 1972
that fixed by enhancement by
amendment from time-to-time to consider as to what is the
pecuniary jurisdiction of the Junior Civil Judge Court as on
the date of filing of the suit in the year 1990 to consider
therefrom.  In fact, the trial Court in its judgment
mentioned the pecuniary limit is Rs.25,000/- and not
beyond for the Junior Civil Judge as per the
A.P. Civil
Courts Act, 1972
provisions by then prevail as on date of the
suit.
Section 21
CPC reads as follows:
21. Objections to jurisdiction:- (1) No objection as to place
of suing shall be allowed by any appellate or revisional Court
unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at
the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues
are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there has
been a consequent failure of justice.
(2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with
reference to the pecuniary limits of its jurisdiction shall be
allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest
possible opportunity, and, in all cases where issues are settled,
at or before such settlement, and unless there has been a
consequent failure of justice.
(3)  No objection as to the competence of the executing
Court with reference to the local limits of its jurisdiction shall be
allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
objection was taken in the executing Court at the earliest
possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent
failure of justice.
16.
Section 21(2)
CPC which deals with pecuniary 
jurisdiction.  Here, no doubt in the written statement itself
an objection to the value of plaint was taken of the same as
under valued and had it been properly valued the Junior
Civil Judge has no pecuniary jurisdiction.  The valuation for
the purpose of Court fee to be arrived first and that is to be
adopted for the purpose of jurisdiction as held by the Full
Bench of this Court in
Kalla Yadagiri v. Kotha Bal Reddy
,
the same was quoted with approval in
Syed Nazinnunnisa 
v. Syed Azmathullah
observed of the value for the purpose
of Court fee must first be arrived for all purposes be
adopted as value for the purpose of jurisdiction with no
other alternative; in view of the Full Bench expression of
the Apex Court in
C.Venkata Swamy v. H.N.Shivana
(died) 
by legal representatives  observed that once the Court fee
paid by the plaintiff, the value arrived for the Court fee is
the value for jurisdiction.  So far as the Court fee is
concerned, it is between the Court and the plaintiff and not
between the plaintiff and defendant, though the defendant
can raise a plea and bring any material to assist the Court.
Further, as per
Section 11
of the A.P. Court Fees & Suits
Valuation Act, 1956, in every suit the Court shall before
ordering the plaint to be registered, decide on the
allegations contained in the plaint and the material
furnished by the plaintiff the proper Court fee payable
thereon.  The decision of the Court shall be no doubt
subject to review from time-to-time as and when occasion
requires, so to revise including for any inspecting Court
invoking
Section 16
of the A.P. Court Fees & Suits Valuation
Act, 1956 for the Inspecting Court to give directions to
guide for re-determination, if any, though mere check slip
of the Inspecting Court is not binding in such determination,
but for a rehearing of the plaintiff and application of the
judicial mind for re-determination, if any, leave about such
power even available to the appellate Court including with
reference to the
Sections 12
to
15
of the A.P. Court Fees &
Suits Valuation Act, 1956.
Sub-sections (2) & (4) of
Section
11
of the A.P. Court Fees & Suits Valuation Act, 1956 speaks
that a preliminary issue on sufficiency of Court fee for
pecuniary jurisdiction can be decided, however, once the
trial started and it encroaches upon another issue also
taken up decide as a preliminary issue, but for along with
other issues finally as held by this Court in Satyanarayana
v. Om Prakash  and P.Balaraju v. C.J. Yadav  among 
others.
As held by the Full Bench of this Court in
Sri
Maharaj Kumarika Subarna Rekha Mani Devi v   
Ramakrishna Deo
the Court further found any Court fee is
deposited or any valuation not properly made returned the
plaint by asking the plaintiff to pay the deficit Court fee,
and it is only when such direction is given and not complied
as contemplated by Order VII Rule 11 clauses 2 & 3
CPC
the 
Court can reject the plaint.
Thereby and also from the Full
Bench judgment of the Madras High Court in
Velagala 
Sriramareddi v. Karri Sriramareddi
, being minor by
certificated guardian, G.Bhima Rao  that was quoted with
approval in
G.C.Kumar v. Ashok Kumar
the same is not 
final but tentative and if at all in course of enquiry or trial
it finds any deficiency of Court fee, for so ordering to be
paid including while pronouncing judgment.
Once that is
the case though decree to be drawn up, it cannot be
allowed to be executed with endorsement until difference
Court fee is paid, the same is followed by this Court way
back in quoting with approval in Penmetcha Ananda Vijaya
Venkatrama Timma Jagapathi Raju v. Gudumogula    
Tatayya  with reference to
Section 11
of the A.P. Court
Fees & Suits Valuation Act, 1956 supra.  Once such is the
case and if at all the trial Court found on the additional
issue that the Court fee paid by the plaintiff is under
valued, it could have been directed the plaintiff including if
at all with reference to the value mentioned in the Sale
Deed of the year 1989 placed reliance by the defendants is
more with reference to it also in directing to pay the deficit
Court fee either by return of the plaint or otherwise or even
while pronouncing judgment with above endorsement  
required of unexecutability of decree without payment of
deficit Court fee.  It was not done by the trial Court.  The
trial Court should not have been dismissed the suit
technically saying it has no pecuniary jurisdiction by placing
reliance on one of the value of the document of the
property referred by the defendants without even
considering and without even affording opportunity in
relation thereto.  At best as referred supra it could have
been directed the plaintiff to pay the deficit Court fee and
if failed to pay, it should have been rejected the plaint and
otherwise while pronouncing the judgment would have been 
directed to pay the deficit Court fee and should not have
been dismissed the suit, that too it cannot arrive any
conclusion of law of pecuniary jurisdiction when the plaint
valued on its face shows it got pecuniary jurisdiction, and
once the Court fee is not revised by revising the value for
purpose of jurisdiction on pecuniary aspect, it cannot say
that it has no pecuniary jurisdiction much less to dismiss the
suit on that ground.  The dismissal of suit claim on the
ground of so-called pecuniary jurisdiction in answering the
additional issue by the trial Court is unsustainable so also in
without discussion by the lower appellate Court in
confirming the trial Courts judgment even point No.5
formulated in this regard to cover it also.
Having regard to the above and in the result, this
Second Appeal is allowed by setting aside the said findings
of the Courts below and remanded the matter to the trial
Court to give a finding as to the plaint is under valued and if
so to fix the value in directing to so value properly by
payment of deficit Court fee by return of plaint and it is on
such compliance, else to reject, if found it exceeds the
pecuniary jurisdiction, to return the plaint by fixing time
for presentation before the proper Court and the evidence
already recorded no way invalidated for any other Court
having pecuniary jurisdiction therefrom including if at all by
that other Court to proceed further with the matter and to
give its finding on own merits as expeditiously as possible
from the said evidence on record and after further hearing
on merits afresh.  No order as to costs.
Consequently, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any,
shall stand dismissed.
_________________________    
Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO, J    
03.07.2018