[Cites
16
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Alavala Nagi Reddy And 4 Others vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By ... on 5 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 59
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
T. Amarnath Goud
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD                   

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.663 OF 2015      

05-10-2018 


Alavala Nagi Reddy and 4 others Appellants/Accused.  

The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by     Public Prosecutor...Respondent
                                                                

Counsel for the Petitioner: Ms. B Vasantha Lakshmi
                            for Sir B. Krishna Mohan

Counsel for the Respondent: Public Prosecutor (AP)


<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred        :
1.   (2006) 2 SCC 240
2. (2008) 13 SCC 271 
3. AIR 2008 (SC) 610 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T. AMARNATH GOUD         

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.663 OF 2015      

JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)

      The present appeal is preferred against order and
judgment dated 29.06.2015 passed in Sessions Case   
No.5/D/12 by the Special Sessions Judge-cum-IV Additional 
District Judge, Guntur, whereby the learned Court held guilty
for the offences punishable under
Sections 395
and
397
IPC
against appellants/A-1 to A-5 and accordingly convicted
under
Section 235(2)
Cr.P.C.  Consequently A-1 to A-5 are
sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for life for the
offence under
Section 395
IPC and also sentenced to pay a
fine of Rs.25,000/- each, in default of payment of fine, to
suffer Simple Imprisonment for six months each.  Further,
the appellants/A-1 to A-5 are sentenced to undergo Rigorous
Imprisonment for a period of seven years each for the offence
under
Section 397
of IPC.  The sentences of Rigorous
Imprisonments imposed for the offences under
Sections 395
and
397
of IPC shall run concurrently.
2.  The case of the prosecution is that on 23.11.2011
morning Mogulluri Narasimha Rao-PW.1, a resident of 
Veldurthi came to broker office of V. Bhaskara Rao-PW.11 at
Macherla, kept his Hero Honda in front of said office and
went to Guntur by bus and collected a cheque for Rs.8 lakhs
drawn on ING Vysya Bank, Arundelpet, Guntur, from Sure  
Yellamanda-PW.7 towards purchase of cotton from the  
farmers. Thereafter, he en-cashed the said cheque in ING
Vysya Bank, Guntur and returned to Macherla at 8.00 P.M. 
along with cash of Rs.8 lakhs kept in a black colour bag.
Then he informed the same to Bhaskara Rao-PW.11 and left  
Macherla at 9.20 P.M. on his motor cycle to go to Veldurthi
village.  When he reached Mandadi village, two unknown
persons came and over took Narasimha Rao-PW.1.  He tried  
to escape from them and turned his vehicle back, but he
could not control the balance of his vehicle and fell down.
Thereafter, one person stabbed him with knife on abdomen
and asked for money and two other culprits came by another
motor cycle and all the four culprits asked Narasimha Rao-
PW.1 to give cash.  The culprit who stabbed PW.1 snatched 
the cash bag containing cash of Rs.8 lakhs and due to fear
PW.1 raised cries for help and started running towards
Mandadi village.  All the four culprits chased him up to some
distance and escaped from there.  Thereafter Mutyala
Brahmam, who was coming from Veldurthi side on his motor  
cycle noticed PW.1-Narasimha Rao and shifted him to 
Government Hospital, Macherla.  After first aid, the injured
was shifted to Global Hospital, Hyderabad for better
treatment.
3.  Thereafter, on the basis of statement given by PW.1,
at Government Hospital, Macherla, a case in Crime No.112 of
2011 under
Section 394
IPC was registered in Veldurthi
Police Station.  The Inspector of Police, Macherla, took up
investigation, inspected the scene of offence, prepared rough
sketch and scene observation report in the presence of
mediator.  Also took Photographs of scene of offence and
seized the Hero Passion Pro motor cycle of PW.1, Aashirvad 
100gms used chilli powder, blood stained earth, control earth
under the cover of observation report.  He also recorded the
statements of witnesses.  Later on 26.11.2011 at 2.00 P.M.
Inspector of Police, Macherla, arrested A-5 at Ring road
centre, Macherla, in the presence of mediators.  He recorded
his confession about commission of his offence and seized
cash of Rs.50,000/- and cell phone of Karbon company with
SIM card bearing No.9959585014 from the possession of A-5  
under a cover of mediatornama duly attested by PWs.5 and 6. 
Thereafter, on the basis of confession of A-5, he arrested A-1
to A-4 on the same day at 3.15 PM in a dilapidated stone
polish mill situated opposite to LCK Mini Cement Factory,
Sagar Road, Macherla.  Also recorded their confessional
statements and seized two un-registered motor cycles and 
also seized cash of Rs.2,50,000/- and cash of Rs.50,000/- to
be shared to A-5, black colour bag, PAN card belongs to PW.1,
Samsung company cell phone with SIM card No.998518833     
from the possession of A-1, cash of Rs.1,50,000/- , Nokia cell
phone with SIM card bearing No.9666337414 from the  
possession of A-2, cash of Rs.1,50,000/-, Nokia cell phone
with SIM card bearing No.9652782455 from the possession of 
A-3, cash of Rs.1,50,000/- Yxtel cell phone with SIM card
bearing No.9912883735 from the possession of A-4.  The 
Investigating officer also seized blood stained knife under a
cover of mediatornama duly attested by mediators at 5.15
P.M. on 26.11.2011 near the bushes situated on western side
of Mirchi crop lands of one Sunkara Venkata Ramaiah of
Mandadi village.  Later he altered the Section of law to 395
IPC
from 394
IPC
and sent A-1- to A-5 to judicial custody.
After completion of investigation, the Inspector of Police,
Macherla-PW.14 filed charge sheet before the concerned 
Magistrate.  After taking cognizance for the offences under
Section 395
IPC committed to the Court by the Judicial
Magistrate of I Class, Macherla under PRC No.2 of 2012 and
the same was registered as SC No.5/D/12 by the trial Court.
4.  On appearance of the appellants/accused before the
trial Court, charges under
Sections 395
and
397
of IPC were
framed against them and the said charges were read over and
explained to them in vernacular language, for which, all the
appellants pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
5.  To bring the guilt in home, the prosecution has
examined PW.1 to PW.14 and got marked Ex.P1 to Ex.P24     
and MO.1 to MO.11.  After closure of prosecution evidence,
the appellants were examined under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. for
which they denied the prosecution case and reported no
defence evidence and stated that due to political rivalry the
case is foisted against them.
6.  Learned trial Court after considering the prosecution
evidence, material on record and statement under
Section
313
Cr.P.C. all the appellants are convicted for the offences
mentioned above.  Hence, the present appeal.
7.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of appellants
submits that PW.1 is the complainant who himself has not
supported the case thus declared hostile.  In addition to
above, PWs.2 to 8 also declared as hostile. Thus none of the
prosecution witnesses have supported the prosecution case 
despite the learned trial Court has convicted the appellants in
the present case.  He further submits that PW.5 and PW.6 are
Village Revenue Officers and PW.8-Bank Manager of ING  
Vysya Bank, who are responsible Officers, also declared
hostile.  Therefore, the trial Court ought to have acquitted the
appellants from the charges framed against them.
8.  In addition to above, learned counsel for the
appellants submits that PW.9-I Additional Junior Civil Judge,
Gurazala, who conducted Test Identification Parade on
28.12.2011, whereas, the appellants were arrested on
26.11.2011 almost after one month before and PW.1 admitted 
that the appellants/A-1 to A-5 were shown prior to Test
Identification Parade.  Thus there is no evidentiary value of
the Test Identification Parade conducted by PW.9 in the
present case.  He further submits that since PW.1 has
identified the appellants but the fact remains that the
appellants were shown to PW.1 prior to Test Identification
Parade.
9.  Learned counsel for the appellants further argued
that PW.13-Doctor, who issued wound certificate to PW.1,
deposed that PW.1 admitted in Global hospital on 24.11.2011
with the ailment of hole in small intestine.  He removed a
piece of small intestine and joined in two ends.  In cross-
examination, he deposed that injury may be possible due to
falling on iron rod from the building upon PW.1.  Learned
counsel further submits that PW.1 might have received the
injury somewhere else however not caused by the appellants
herein.  Thus the appellants have falsely implicated in the
present case.  It is the duty of the prosecution to prove the
case beyond reasonable doubt against the appellants which 
they failed for the reason that all the witnesses i.e., PWs.1 to
8 declared hostile, despite that the learned trial Court has
convicted the appellants.  Thus learned counsel has prayed
that the present appeal deserves to be allowed by setting
aside the order and judgment passed by the trial Court.
10.  On the other hand learned Public Prosecutor
appearing on behalf of the State submits that though all the
witnesses turned hostile except Official witnesses however
PW.1 admitted his signature on Ex.P1 complaint and also 
claimed amount of Rs.8 lakhs recovered from the appellants.
Moreover PW.1 has identified the appellants/A-1 to A-5 in the
Test Identification Parade conducted by PW.9-I Additional
Junior Civil Judge.  He further submits that there is no delay
in conducting Test Identification Parade for the reason that as
stated by PW.13 that PW.1 had taken treatment nearly one  
month and thereafter Test Identification Parade was
conducted.  Thus there is no delay in conducting Test
Identification Parade.
11.  Learned Prosecutor further submits that the
learned trial Court after considering the prosecution
witnesses and material on record and after hearing the
counsel for the appellants has rightly convicted the
appellants.  In addition to above, all the appellants were
arrested very next day and amount of Rs.8 lakhs also
recovered from them which was claimed by PW.1 and handed   
over to him.   The appellants have not claimed that amount
recovered belongs to them.  Moreover, there is no explanation
on record from the appellants side that that amount which
was recovered from them belonged to them.
12.  PW.1 deposed in his evidence that he knew the
accused No.5.  He received Rs.8 lakhs from his Vendee 
towards supply of cotton on 23.11.2011 at ING Vysya Bank, 
Lakshmipuram, Guntur and thereafter he went to Macherla 
by RTC bus.  He got down the bus at Macherla and was going  
to Veldurthi village on his motor cycle.  On the way, when he
reached to Mandadi village, some unknown culprits sprinkled
chilli powder on his face and stabbed him with knife on his
stomach and thereby he fell down and the said unknown 
culprits snatched cash of Rs.8 lakhs from his possession and
skulled away with the said booty.  Five minutes after the said
incident, PW.2 who was going on that way saw PW.1 in  
pitiable condition and PW.1 asked PW.2 to drop him at
Government hospital, Macherla.  Accordingly, PW.2 admitted 
to PW.1 in Government Hospital, Macherla.  There, police
recorded the statement of PW.1 and PW.1 admitted his  
signature on the complaint copy which is marked as Ex.P1. 
He further stated that he stated the contents of Ex.P1 to the
police.
13.  PW.1 also deposed that two days after the said
incident police informed him that they found the culprits
along with the booty and he may recovered the cash from
Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Macherla.  Subsequently, the
police also conducted Test Identification Parade of the
accused and police shown A-1 to A-5 and disclosed their
identity prior to conducting of Test Identification Parade.  He
admitted that prior to conducting of Test Identification
Parade, the Magistrate, Macherla obtained his signature on
his statement that he can identify the accused.  The signature
portion of PW.1 on the said statement is marked as Ex.P2.
14.  It is pertinent to mention here that, at that stage,
the learned Public Prosecutor declared PW.1 as hostile and
sought permission to cross-examine him.  In his cross-
examination PW.1 denied that he stated the contents of
statement of Ex.P1 and Ex.P2 containing signature statement 
to Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Macherla and he is deposing
falsehood in order to help the accused.
15.  It is important to note that the trial Court observed
the contention of PW.1 while giving evidence and accordingly
the trial Court recorded its observation in its hand writing
after completion of evidence of PW.1 before taking signature
of PW.1 on his deposition. The said observation is as follows:
the court observed the witness and found that he is
frightening on seeing the accused, as the accused appearing
physically and mentally very strong.
16.  PW.2 who saw P.W.1 in pitiable condition with stab
injury deposed that about three years back one day in
between 9.30 to 10.00 P.M. while he was coming from 
Veldurthi to Macherla, he found PW.1 on the road near
Mandadi village in between Uppalapadu - Mandadi villages
with stab injury and thereby he took him to Government
Hospital, Macherla.   PW.2 further stated that he asked PW.1
as to what happened to him, for which, PW.1 replied that
some unknown culprits robbed Rs.8 lakhs from him by 
sprinkling chilli powder and stabbing.  As the said witness
also not stated real facts, as stated by him in his 161
Cr.P.C
.
statement, the prosecution declared PW.2 also as hostile
witness.
17.  The prosecution further examined PW.5-Village
Revenue Officer of Mandadi village, who acted as mediator for
observation of scene of offence and arrest of accused A-1 to
A-5 and recovery of stolen cash from their possession.  He
admitted his signature on scene observation report, arrest-
cum-seizure mahazars of A-1 to A-5 and seizure Mahazar of 
MO.10-knife under cover of Ex.P20 to Ex.P23, but he pleaded
ignorance of contents of said documents.  He further stated
that when police asked him to sign on those documents, 
simply he obliged to sign on those documents.  Signatures of
PW.5 on Ex.P20 to Ex.P23 are marked as Ex.P7 to Ex.P10    
respectively.
18.  The prosecution also examined PW.6-Village
Revenue Officer of Macherla village, who acted as another
mediator, for observation of scene of offence and arrest of A-1
to A-5 and recovery of stolen cash from their possession.   He
also admitted his signatures on scene observation report,
arrest-cum-seizure mahazar of A-1 to A-5 and seizure
mahazar of MO.10-knife under cover of Ex.P20 to Ex.P23, but 
pleaded ignorance of contents of said documents.  He also
stated the same fact as state by PW.5 that when police asked
him to sign on those documents, simply he obliged to sign on
those documents. Signatures of PW.6 on Ex.P20 to Ex.P23   
are marked as Ex.P11 to Ex.P14 respectively.
19.  It is pertinent to mention here that the learned trial
Court observed in the impugned order and judgment that
PWs.5 and 6, who are Government employees, being Village   
Revenue Officers, turned hostile in the case, very peculiarly.
Accordingly, the learned trial Court observed the conduct of
witnesses while giving evidence that they are frightening on
seeing the accused, who are in the Court dock, because
accused are seeing the witnesses with piercing eyes.  It is
further observed by the trial Court that even though PWs.5
and 6 are Public servants, they turned hostile, because of the
threat made by the accused by the visible representations
through their eyes from the Court dock.   Accordingly, the
trial Court opined that PWs.5 and 6, who are consisting
abundant family members, even though they are Government  
employees, got fear to their bodies or to their beloved with the
barbarous acts of the accused, due to which, they might have
turned hostile.
20.  The prosecution has examined PW.9 - I Additional
Junior Civil Judge, Gurazala.  He stated in his evidence that
on 28.12.2011, PW.1 appeared before him and he asked PW.1    
whether he can identify the accused persons.  Then PW.1 
stated that he can identify A-1 to A-4, and thereby, he
recorded the statement of PW.1.  On the even date, in the
noon hours, he visited Sub-Jail, Guruzala, and conducted
Test Identification Parade of A-1 to A-4 in Sub-Jail premises.
He instructed the Superintendent of Sub-Jail to make
arrangements for non-suspects in similar nature of A-1 to
A-4.  Then he mingled A-1 to A-4 in between 20 non-suspects
and asked PW.1 to identify A-1 to A-4.  A-1 stood in 9th place,
A-2 stood in 5th place, A-3 stood in 15th place and A-4 stood
in 22nd place in the line of 20 non-suspects and PW.1
successfully identified A-1 to A-4 by picking them out of 20
non- suspects.
21.  PW.9 further deposed that he sent PW.1 to
Superintendent room which is far away from the place of Test
Identification Parade and which is not visible from the
Identification Parade place.  Then he asked all the accused to
change their places, wearing apparel from non-suspects, as
per their wish and will, and to stand along with non-suspects.
Then he again asked PW.1 to identify A-1 to A-4.  At the
second time also, PW.1 successfully identified as A-1 stood in
21st place, A-2 stood in 14th place, A-3 stood in 9th place and
A-4 in 5th place by picking them out from the 20 non-
suspects.  Thereafter he recorded the statements of A-1 to A-4
separately and they all stated that they were falsely
implicated in the case.  He also obtained signatures and
thumb marks of 20 non-suspects along with A-1 to A-4.
22.  The prosecution has also examined PW.12-Sub
Inspector of Police, Veldurthi, who registered the case in
Crime No.112 of 2011 for the offence under
Section 394
IPC
and submitted original FIR-Ex.P16 to the Judicial Magistrate
of I Class, Macherla and copies of FIR to all superior officers.
He further deposed that subsequently he altered Section of
law from 394
IPC
to 395
IPC
as per the oral directions of his
superior officers and the said altered Memo is marked as
Ex.P17.
23.  The prosecution has examined PW.13, the
consultant surgeon working at Global Hospital, Hyderabad,
who deposed that he issued wound certificate-Ex.P18 to
PW.1.  According to Ex.P18, PW.1 admitted in Global  
Hospital, Hyderabad, on 24.11.2011 with the ailment of hole
in small intestine and he removed a piece of small intestine
and joined in two ends and the injury sustained by PW.1 is
grievous in nature. The witness denied the suggestions posed
by the defence that the width and length of the injury, which
is mentioned in Ex.P18 wound certificate is not true and
correct.
24.  The most important witness is PW.14-Inspector of
police, Macherla, who conducted investigation in this case.
After receipt of copy of FIR, he took up investigation in the
case, and thereafter, visited Government hospital, Macherla,
recorded the statement of PW.1 under
Section 161
Cr.P.C., 
and seized blood stained shirt of PW.1 i.e., MO.1 and secured
the presence of PWs.2 to 10.  Thereafter, he examined them
and recorded their statements under
Section 161
Cr.P.C.  He
also visited the scene of offence along with PW.5 and PW.6
drawn rough sketch under cover of Ex.P19 and photographed  
the scene of offence.  He also drafted scene observation report
under cover of Ex.P20 and seized red chilli powder i.e., MO.2
and controlled earth and blood stained earth i.e., MO.3.
Thereafter, he secured presence of LW.3, PW.3 and PW.4 and   
recorded their statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
25.  PW.14 further deposed that on receipt of credible
information on 26.11.2011 he proceeded to ring road centre,
Macherla, along with PWs.5 and 6 who are Village Revenue 
Officers and arrested A-5 and recovered amount of
Rs.50,000/- and one Karbon cell phone i.e., MO.11 from the
possession of A-5.  The said accused confessed the offence
and thereby he recorded the confessional statement under
cover of Ex.P21 in the presence of PWs.5 and 6.  He further
deposed that upon the confession statement of A-5, he
arrested A-1 to A-4 also on the same day at L.K. Cement
Factory, Macherla, in the presence of same mediators PWs.5  
and 6 and recovered amount of Rs.3 lakhs, black colour bag
i.e., MO.5 and Samsung cell phone i.e., MO.6  from the
possession of A-1.  He also seized cash of Rs.1,50,000/- and
Nokia cell phone - M.O.7 from the possession of A-2 and an
amount of Rs.50,000/- and Nokia cell phone - MO.8 from the
possession of A-3.  He further seized an amount of
Rs.1,50,000/- and Yextel cell phone  M.O.9 from the
possession of A-4.  He further deposed that A-1 to A-4
confessed the offence, and thereby, he recorded confessional
statements of A-1 to A-4 and marked as Ex.P22.  A-4 
confessed that they have hidden the knife, which was used to
stab PW.1 at 6/6 mile stone, near ZP High School, Mandadi 
Vilalge and he would show the said knife, if the police
personnel followed them.  Accordingly, PW.14 followed A-1 to
A5 along with PWs.5 and 6 mediators and A-4 shown the  
knife where he has hidden it.  Consequently, PW.14 seized
the knife i.e., MO.10 under cover of mahazar.  Thereupon, he
field a memo before Judicial Magistrate of I Class, Macherla,
altering the charge from
section 394
to
395
of IPC.
Subsequently, he sent the blood stained-earth, controlled
earth, knife and shirt of PW.1 to the chemical examiner.  He
got it conducted Test Identification Parade of
A-1 to A-4.  He also seized two motor cycles i.e, Hero Honda
Splendor, black colour Pulsar motor cycle from the
possession of A-1 and A-2, on which accused chased PW.1   
from Guntur to the scene of offence, under cover of Ex.P23.
He received RFSL report under cover of Ex.P24 and after
verifying the investigation, he filed charge sheet in the present
case.
26.  PW.14 in his cross-examination further stated that
there is no direct participation of A-5 in this case as per the
record and he stated that A-5 added A-1 to A-4 while
committing the crime.  He denied that the police disclosed the
identity of the accused to PW.1 prior to their arrest.  He
voluntarily stated that since PW.1 was detained in Global
Hospital, Hyderabad, due to grievous injury, which was
caused by accused, and as such, disclosing of accused to 
PW.1 does not arise.  He admitted that PW.1 got acquaintance 
with A-5 as he used to work in the broker office of PW.1, and
as such, he has not asked to conduct Test Identification
Parade of A-5 and sought for conducting of Test Identification
Parade of A-1 to A-4 only.  He also deposed that some delay
was caused in conducting Test Identification Parade of the
accused because PW.1 was severely injured and got admitted  
in Global Hospital, Hyderabad, and after discharging of PW.1
from the hospital, he got conducted Test Identification Parade
of A-1 to A-4.
27.  As per the prosecution case, the offence of dacoity
took place and A-1 to A-5 alleged to have committed the said
dacoity.  PW.1 supported the prosecution case only to the
extent that some unknown culprits robbed him by sprinkling
chilli powder in his eyes and by stabbing him, but he stated
that he cannot identify the accused, however, at the instant of
police, he gave evidence in the Court.  Admittedly in this case,
except PW.1 there is no other eye-witness to the alleged
robbery.  Thus the case was rest upon the circumstantial and
other material evidences only.
28.  Admittedly, PW.2 is not eye-witness to the said
incident. The evidence of PW.2 is relevant to the extent that
he saw PW.1 at about 9.30 to 10.00 P.M on his way at 
Mandadi Village with stab injuries and took him to the
Government Hospital, Macherla.  Hence in order to come to
the conclusion that the offence took place at that particular
time and place, and hence, the trial Court found that the
evidence of PW.2 is relevant.
29.  The question in controversy before the trial Court
was that whether PW.1 could identify the real culprits or not.
Accordingly, the trial Court perused 161
Cr.P.C
., statement of
PW.1 wherein he stated the physical features and identity
particulars of all the accused.  He further stated that he saw
the accused in the light of motor cycle and he would identify
the accused and when he was at brokers office, the office
clerk i.e., A-5 in anxious and disgusted manner moving in the
office by talking on phone.  Accordingly he suspected the role
of A-5 behind this crime.
30.  It is pertinent to mention here that the said
statement under
Section 161
Cr.P.C. of PW.1 recorded by the 
police at about 00.30 hours on 24.11.2011 i.e., immediately
after the said incident, thus it comes under the purview of
Section 6
of Indian Evidence Act i.e., doctrine of res gestate,
which reads as under:
Relevancy of facts farming part of same transaction:
Facts, which, though not in issue, are so connected with a
fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant,
whether they occurred at the same time and place or at different
times and places.
31.  Accordingly whatever was said or done by the
victim immediately after the incident will form part of same
transaction under
Section 6
of Indian Evidence Act.  Thus the
statement of PW.1 form part of same transaction and
connected to the fact in issue, and as such, it is relevant.
32.  PW.13-Doctor Varughese Mathal, in his evidence
stated that, PW.1 admitted in Global hospital, Hyderabad, on
24.11.2011 with a hole in small intestine and he removed
part of small intestine and joined in two ends.  The case of
prosecution is further strengthened by Ex.P18-wound
certificate, which discloses that it was issued to the Sub-
Inspector of Police, Veldurthi stating that one Narasimha Rao
Moguluri i.e., PW.1 was admitted in their hospital on
24.11.2011 under Dr Varughese Mathai, i.e., PW.13 with stab
injuries in abdomen caused at 9.20 P.M. on 23.11.2011.
Thereafter, he was discharged on 30.11.2011.  Thus the
evidence of PW.13 coupled with Ex.P18 is relevant to the fact
in issue of receiving stab injury by PW.1 in the hands of
unknown culprits at the relevant time of offence.
33.  PW.10-Sub Inspector of Police, who recorded the
statement of PW.1 at Government Hospital, mentioned above,  
and transmitted the same on the point of jurisdiction to
Veldurthi Police Station.  Evidence of PW.12, who registered
the case basing upon the statement of PW.1 goes in favour of
the prosecution in connecting chain of links which shows that
there is no delay in lodging FIR in the case.
34.  In addition to above, rough sketch of Ex.P19 has
established the case of prosecution that the incident was
happened in between crop fields at the outskirts of Mandadi
village, where the movement of public is doubtful at odd
hours i.e., 9.30  and 10.00 p.m. in the dark night.  But it is
appeared from Ex.P19 - scene observation report, which was
prepared immediately, that blood stained marks, chilli powder
packet etc., were present at the scene of offence.  Moreover,
PW.14 - Investigating Officer seized MOs.2 to 4 i.e., red chilli
powder packet, blood stained earth and controlled earth from
the scene of offence under cover of Ex.P20 scene observation
report in the presence of PWs.5 and 6, the mediators.
35.  The prosecution has also succeeded in all attempts
i.e., seizure of material objects from the possession of the
accused i.e., MO.10 knife under cover of Ex.P23 Mahazar.
Police have sent blood stained earth, controlled earth, blood
stained shirt of PW.1 and MO.10-knife to the Chemical
Examiner and received report-Ex.P14 which establishes the
case of prosecution that the blood stains on MO.1 i.e., shirt of
PW.1 and MO.10-knife and MO.3-blood stained controlled  
earth are one and the same and the RFSL report further
establishes that they have not found any blood stains on
uncontrolled earth.  So the evidence of chemical examiner
under cover of Ex.P24 proved the guilt of the accused in this
case.
36.  It is pertinent to mention here that PW.1 stated in
his statement recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C., that A-5 is
the root cause for the incident and accordingly at first
instance police arrested A-5 and upon confession statement
of A-5, police arrested A-1 to A-4 also and recovered the
stolen cash from their possession.
37.  It is not in dispute that PW.1 knew A-5, because he
worked in his office.  It is also not in dispute that before the
incident, A-5 did not know A-1 to A-4.  PW.1 stated the
identity particulars and physical features of A-1 to A-4 in his
161
Cr.P.C
. statement.  Moreover the prosecution collected
the call details of cell phone numbers of A-1 to A-5 which
reveals that A1 to A-5 contacted with each other prior to the
offence.  Thus it gives every possibility to commit the offence
by A-1 to A-5 conjointly against PW.1 at the dark night time
in between crop fields.
38.  It is also not in dispute that at the time of
conducting Test Identification Parade of the accused, PW.1
identified the accused A-1 to A-4 twice by picking them out of
20 non-suspects before the Judicial Magistrate of I Class,
Gurazala.
39.  It is established from the evidence of PWs.5 and 6,
who are Village Revenue Officers, though declared as hostile
that they made their signatures on Ex.P20-Scene Observation 
Report, Ex.P21 and Ex.P22 confession-cum-seizure mediator-  
namas of A-1 to A-5 and Ex.P23-seizure-Mahazarnama of   
property.  So to the extent of admitting signatures by PWs.5
and 6 on all the mediator-namas, become relevant in the
present case.
40.  It is not in dispute that the confession statement of
A-1 to A-5 under cover of Ex.P21 and Ex.P22 are hit by
Sections 25
and
26
of Indian Evidence Act, but the discovery
of material object i.e., MO.10 - knife upon the confession
statement of accused comes under
Section 27
of Indian 
Evidence Act.
41.  The relevant question before the trial Court was
that PW.1 who is the actual eye witness to the alleged
incident turned hostile and PWs.5 and 6 who are Village
Revenue Officers acted as mediators for arrest of all accused
A-1 to A-5 and seizure of robbed cash and other material
objects from the possession of accused also turned hostile.  In
that situation a case of Radhamohan Singh @ Lalsaheb  
and others Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh , is relevant,
whereby the Honble Supreme Court held as under:
It is well settled that the evidence of prosecution witnesses
cannot be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution chooses
to treat him as hostile and cross-examined him.  The evidence of
such witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the
record altogether but the same can be accepted to the extent of his
version found to be dependable on careful scrutiny thereof.
42.
In case of
Mahesh Vs. State of Maharashtra
, the
Honble Supreme Court held as under:
If PW.1, the maker of complaint has chosen not to
corroborate his earlier statement, made in the complaint and
recorded during the investigation, the conduct of such a witness for
not plausible and tenable reasons pointed out on record, will give
rise to doubt the testimony of the investigating officer, who had
sincerely and honesty conducted the entire investigation of the
case.  In these circumstances, we are of the view that PW.1 has
tried to conceal the material truth from the court for the sole
purpose of shielding and protecting the appellant for the reasons
best known to the witness and therefore, no doubt could be given
to the appellant for the unbelievable conduct of this witness to the
prosecution.
43.  It is trite that the evidence of hostile witnesses has
to be considered in the light of other witnesses on record.
Even though the witnesses PWs.1, 5 and 6 turned hostile,
however the learned trial Court has relied upon other material
recovered pursuant to their statements.
44.  Another issue before the trial Court was that on the
basis of confessional statement of A-5 only, the prosecution
has arrested A-1 to A-4, and even as per the evidence of
PW.1, victim also stated that only four persons have
committed the offence, then how the common intention to be
proved.  On this aspect, it is important to note that joint
liability is a concept used by the Courts to punish several
persons together.  The object is not to spare anybody who is
connected to the commission of offence.  When several persons 
are involved in the commission of an offence, the Court may
find it difficult to understand the act played by each of the
persons.  So if certain conditions are fulfilled Court punishes all
those persons jointly on that offence.
45.
In case of
Shaik China Brahmam Vs. State of
A.P
, wherein it was held that :
When criminal act is done with common intention, all of
them are liable in the same manner as principal offender.  The true
concept of the
Sec.34
is that, if two or more persons intentionally
do an act jointly, the position in law is just the same as if each of
them has done it individually by himself.
46.  As discussed above, the motive of the accused is to
rob the amount of Rs.8 lakhs from the PW.1.  The said motive
has been proved by the prosecution and the appellants have
failed to rebut the said aspect.  Admittedly, A-5, who is clerk
in the office of PW.1 and who had information about receiving
of cash by PW.1 at Guntur from his vendee towards purchase 
of cotton, passed on information, A-2 to A-4 who secured two
motor bikes and followed PW.1 from Guntur to Macherla. 
Thereafter, after receipt of phone call from A-5 that PW.1 had
cash of Rs.8 lakhs in his possession and left Macherla to
Veldurthi on his motor cycle, by securing chilli powder, knife
etc., A-1 to A-4 also followed him on the motor cycles and
when they reached near Mandadi Village outskirts at the crop
fields, they attacked PW.1 and robbed cash amount from him.
47.  By seizing the cell phones and motor cycles from
the possession of A-1 to A-5 under cover of Ex.P23 mahazar
and also collecting the call list of cell phone numbers of A-1 to
A-5, which were seized from their possession, collecting
mirchi powder from scene of offence, the prosecution has
successfully proved the preparation made by A-1 to A-5 to
commit this offence with a pre-mediation pre-plan.
48.  Moreover in Test Identification Parade, PW.1 has
identified A-1 to A-4 out of 20 non-suspects persons.  The
Magistrate recorded the statement of PW.1 i.e., Ex.P2 prior to
conducting Test Identification Parade who stated that he can
identify the culprits.  Accordingly PW.1 identified A-2 to A-4
successfully.
49.  The offence of dacoity is defined under
Section 391
of IPC, as follows:
Dacoity : When five or more persons conjointly commit or
attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of
persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery,
and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, 
amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or
aiding is said to commit dacoity.
50.  When death or grievous hurt caused while
committing dacoity then culprits will be punished under
Section 397
of IPC which runs as under:
Robbery or dacoity with attempt to cause death or
grievous hurt:
If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the
offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any
person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any
person, the offender shall be punished.
51.  The grievous stab injury found on PW.1 as per the
evidence of PW.13 Medical Officer coupled with Ex.P18 wound 
certificate.  In consonance of said injury, police recovered
MO.10-knife from the possession of the accused under 
seizure mahazar with confession statement of hiding the
knife.  To the extent of discovery of MO.10-knife, the said
confession is valid.  So, it is unequivocally established by
prosecution that the offenders used MO.10-knife, which is a
deadly weapon for committing such ghostly crime resulting
grievous stab injury to PW.1.  Though there is no direct
evidence about dacoity with stabbing, various circumstances
projected by the prosecution as discussed about complete the
chain of link and established the offence in all probability that
the act must have been done by the accused.  Moreover, the
circumstantial evidence lead by the prosecution is also of a
clinching nature.
52.  In view of the above discussion and in view of the
facts and circumstances of the case, we find no merit in the
arguments advanced by learned counsel for the appellants.
53.  Finding no merit in the instant appeal, we hereby
confirm the conviction and sentence awarded by the Trial
Court vide order and judgment dated 29.06.2015 in
S.C.No.5/D/2012.
54.  Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed.
      Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending, shall stand
closed.
_____________________________     
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J.
______________________________     
T. AMARNATH GOUD, J.
Date:05 -10-2018