[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Masana Srinivas S/O. M.Sattaiah, Aged ... vs The State Of Telangana, Rep.By Its ... on 13 June, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 180, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 41
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO         

WRIT PETITION No.19215 of 2018   

13.06.2018 

Masana Srinivas s/o. M.Sattaiah, Aged about 44 years,Working as Health Educator, State Health Education Bureau,O/o Director 

The State of Telangana, rep.by its Prl.Secretary to Govt.,Health, Medical & Family Welfare Department, Secretariat, Hyderaba

Counsel for the petitioner:  Sri V.Ravichandran

Counsel for the Respondents: Government Pleader for Services-I
                             (TG) for Govt.Pleader for Medical
                             Health & Family Welfare (TG) for
                             respondents.

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.  1991  Supp (2) SCC 659 
2. (1992) 1 SCC 306 
3. (1993) 4 SCC 357 
4. (1994) 6 SCC 98 
5. ((1995) 3 SCC 270
6. 2001 (5) SCC 508 
7. (2004) 11 SCC 402 
8. (2009) 8 SCC 337 
9. (2009) 11 SCC 678 
10. (2009) 15 SCC 178 
11. (2011) 12 SCC 137 

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO           

WRIT PETITION NO.19215 OF 2018     

ORDER:
Heard learned counsel for petitioner and learned
Government Pleader for respondents.
2.      Petitioner is presently working as Health Educator in State
Health Education Bureau.  While he was working in Ramayampet,   
Medak district, he was selected as Training Programme 
Coordinator by at Hyderabad. Accordingly, he was deputed to Dr.
MCH HRD Institute, initially, for a period of one year, vide
proceedings dated 26.03.2012.  In terms thereof, he joined on
01.04.2012.  This deputation was extended from time to time till
he was transferred as Health Educator. Petitioner joined as Health
Educator on 18.11.2016.  While so, in the recent transfers exercise
undertaken by the Government, petitioner was identified as an
employee, who is liable for transfer compulsorily by treating the
services rendered by him on deputation to Dr. MCH HRD Institute
along with the service rendered as Health Educator as service
rendered in Hyderabad.  Aggrieved thereby, this writ petition is
filed.
3.      According to learned counsel for petitioner, posting of
petitioner in Dr. MCH HRD Institute was on deputation.  This
institute is an independent institute and is no way concerned with
the Public Health & Family Welfare Department of the State.
Thus, said assignment cannot be computed towards service  
rendered in department to identify him as a person who has
completed five years of service and to be transferred.  According to
learned counsel, after notifying the transfer guidelines in
G.O.Ms.No.61 Finance (HRM.I) Department, dated 24.05.2018, the   
Finance Department issued clarifications vide Circular Memo
dated 02.06.2018. Clarification-5 is on deputation service. Learned
counsel would submit that according to clarification-5, it is clear
that only service rendered on deputation, where posts are under
the control of Head of Department alone be counted for the
purpose of qualifying service at the station and, therefore, service
rendered by petitioner in Dr. MCH HRD Institute cannot be
computed as qualifying service. According to learned counsel, this
institute is an independent institute and is not under the control of
Head of Department.
4.      There is plethora of precedents on transfer matters.  Some
leading decisions are :
i)      Shilpi Bose  vs. State of Bihar
[1991 Supp (2) SCC
659];
ii)     Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta
[(1992) 1 SCC
306];
iii)    Union of India and other vs. S.L.Abbas [ (1993) 4 SCC
357];
iv)     N.K.Singh vs. Union of India [ (1994) 6 SCC 98];
v)      State of Madhya Pradesh vs. S.S.Kourav
[ (1995) 3
SCC 270];
vi)     State Bank of India vs. Anjan Sanyal and others
[ 2001 (5) SCC 508];
vii)    State of Utter Pradesh  vs. Gobardhan Lal
[(2004) 11
SCC 402];
iv)     Airports Authority of India vs. Rajeev Ratan Pandey
(2009) 8 SCC 337];
viii)   Tushar D.Bhatt  vs. State of Gujarath and another
[(2009) 11 SCC 678];
ix)      Rajendra Singh and others Vs. State of Utter Pradesh
and others  [(2009) 15 SCC 178];
x)      Registrar of High Court of Judicature of Madras  vs.
R.Perachi [ (2011) 12 SCC 137 ];
5.      It is necessary to notice the view expressed by Supreme
Court in few of the above decisions to appreciate the contentions in
the writ petition.
6.      In S.L.Abbas, Supreme Court held as under:
6. An order of transfer is an incident of Government service.
Fundamental Rule 11 says that the whole time of a Government 
servant is at the disposal of the Government which pays him
and he may be employed in any manner required by proper  
authority. Fundamental Rule 15 says that the President may
transfer a Government servant from one post to another. That
the respondent is liable to transfer anywhere in India is not in
dispute. It is not the case of the respondent that the order of his
transfer is vitiated by mala fides on the part of the authority
making the order,  though the Tribunal does say so merely
because certain guidelines issued by the Central Government
are not followed, with which finding we shall deal later. The
respondent attributed mischief to his immediate superior who
had nothing to do with his transfer. All he says is that he should
not be transferred because his wife is working at Shillong, his
children are studying there and also because his health had
suffered a setback some time ago. He relies upon certain
executive instructions issued by the Government in that behalf.
Those instructions are in the nature of guidelines. They do not
have statutory force.
7. Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the
appropriate authority to decide. Unless the order of transfer is
vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of any statutory
provisions, the court cannot interfere with it. While ordering the
transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must keep in mind the
guidelines issued by the Government on the subject. Similarly if
a person makes any representation with respect to his transfer,
the appropriate authority must consider the same having regard
to the exigencies of administration. The guidelines say that as
far as possible, husband and wife must be posted at the same
place. The said guideline however does not confer upon the
Government employee a legally enforceable right.
8. The jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal is akin
to the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India in service matters. This is evident from a
perusal of
Article 323-A
of the Constitution. The constraints and
norms which the High Court observes while exercising the said
jurisdiction apply equally to the Tribunal created under Article
323-A. (We find it all the more surprising that the learned Single
Member who passed the impugned order is a former Judge of  
the High Court and is thus aware of the norms and constraints
of the writ jurisdiction.) The Administrative Tribunal is not an
appellate authority sitting in judgment over the orders of
transfer. It cannot substitute its own judgment for that of the
authority competent to transfer. In this case the Tribunal has
clearly exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering with the order of
transfer. The order of the Tribunal reads as if it were sitting in
appeal over the order of transfer made by the Senior
Administrative Officer (competent authority).
7.      In  Shilpi Bose, Supreme Court held as under:
3. .. If the competent authority issued transfer orders with a
view to accommodate a public servant to avoid hardship, the
same cannot and should not be interfered by the court merely
because the transfer orders were passed on the request of the
employees concerned. The respondents have continued to be  
posted at their respective places for the last several years, they
have no vested right to remain posted at one place. Since they
hold transferable posts they are liable to be transferred from one
place to the other. The transfer orders had been issued by the
competent authority which did not violate any mandatory rule,
therefore the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the
transfer orders.
4. In our opinion, the courts should not interfere with a transfer
order which is made in public interest and for administrative
reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any
mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide. A
government servant holding a transferable post has no vested
right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be
transferred from one place to the other. Transfer orders issued
by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal rights.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive
instructions or orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere
with the order instead affected party should approach the higher
authorities in the department. If the courts continue to interfere
with day-to-day transfer orders issued by the government and
its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the
administration which would not be conducive to public interest.
The High Court overlooked these aspects in interfering with the
transfer orders.
8.      In  Rajendra Singh, Supreme Court held as under:
14. We are pained to observe that the High Court seriously
erred in deciding as to whether Respondent 5 was a competent 
person to be posted at Ghaziabad IV as Sub-Registrar. The
exercise undertaken by the High Court did not fall within its
domain and was rather uncalled for. We are unable to approve
the direction issued to the State Government and the Inspector
General of Registration to transfer a competent officer at
Ghaziabad IV as Sub-Registrar after holding that Respondent 5
cannot be said to be an officer having a better conduct and
integrity in comparison to the petitioner justifying his posting at
Ghaziabad IV. The High Court entered into an arena which did
not belong to it and thereby committed serious error of law.
9.      In Airport Authority of India, employee challenged his
transfer as in violation of transfer policy.  According to him, inter-
regional transfer should not be made before the incumbent
completes at least five years tenure in that region.  Supreme Court
observed:
10. In the writ petition, the transfer order has been assailed by
the present Respondent 1 on the sole ground that it was
violative of transfer policy framed by the appellant. The High
Court, did not even find any contravention of transfer policy in
transferring Respondent 1 from Lucknow to Calicut. In a matter
of transfer of a government employee, scope of judicial review is
limited and the High Court would not interfere with an order of
transfer lightly, be it at interim stage or final hearing. This is so
because the courts do not substitute their own decision in the
matter of transfer.
10.     In Jagjit Singh Mehta, Supreme Court observed as under:
5. There can be no doubt that ordinarily and as far as
practicable the husband and wife who are both employed should 
be posted at the same station even if their employers be different.
The desirability of such a course is obvious. However, this does
not mean that their place of posting should invariably be one of
their choice, even though their preference may be taken into
account while making the decision in accordance with the
administrative needs. In the case of all-India services, the
hardship resulting from the two being posted at different stations
may be unavoidable at times particularly when they belong to
different services and one of them cannot be transferred to the
place of the other's posting. While choosing the career and a
particular service, the couple have to bear in mind this factor and
be prepared to face such a hardship if the administrative needs
and transfer policy do not permit the posting of both at one place
without sacrifice of the requirements of the administration and
needs of other employees. In such a case the couple have to make 
their choice at the threshold between career prospects and family
life. After giving preference to the career prospects by accepting
such a promotion or any appointment in an all-India service with
the incident of transfer to any place in India, subordinating the
need of the couple living together at one station, they cannot as of
right claim to be relieved of the ordinary incidents of all-India
service and avoid transfer to a different place on the ground that
the spouses thereby would be posted at different places. In
addition, in the present case, the respondent voluntarily gave an
undertaking that he was prepared to be posted at any place in
India and on that basis got promotion from the clerical cadre to
the officers' grade and thereafter he seeks to be relieved of that
necessary incident of all-India service on the ground that his wife
has to remain at Chandigarh. No doubt the guidelines require the
two spouses to be posted at one place as far as practicable, but
that does not enable any spouse to claim such a posting as of
right if the departmental authorities do not consider it feasible.
The only thing required is that the departmental authorities
should consider this aspect along with the exigencies of
administration and enable the two spouses to live together at one
station if it is possible without any detriment to the
administrative needs and the claim of other employees.
11.     It is clearly discernible from the precedent decisions that in
matters of transfer, scope of judicial review is limited, and High
Court should not interfere with an order of transfer lightly, unless
the transfer is vitiated either by mala fidies or on the ground of
infraction of any professed norm or principle;  only limited judicial
scrutiny can be undertaken either at the interim stage or final
stage; transfer is an incidence of service, implicit as an essential
condition of service; no employee has vested right to remain posted
at a place of his/her choice; at times, several imponderables
requiring formation of subjective opinion may be involved;  realistic
approach is to leave to the wisdom of hierarchical superiors; the
wheels of administration should be allowed to run smoothly;
Courts do not substitute their own decision in the matters of
transfer; there are no judicially manageable standards for
scrutinizing the transfers; Courts lack necessary expertise for
personnel management; in public interest, transfers involving
public services have to be  best left to the concerned authorities;
writ Court cannot sit as appellate forum to consider transfer
matters; guidelines do not have statutory force; guidelines do not
confer legally enforceable right; even if an order of transfer is
passed in violation of executive instructions or orders, Court
should not interfere; affected party should approach higher
authorities; Court should not interfere if transfer is made to
equivalent post without any adverse consequence on the service
prospects.
12.     Employees working in the government seek transfer from the
place of work on completion of certain period of service. Such
request for transfer can be for variety reasons, such as childrens
education, health, parental care, working spouse, attraction
towards a post, etc. For reasons best known to Government,
transfers were not made in the last 4 years. Thus, demand for
transfers is more vocal. Yielding to the pressure of employees,
government agreed to undertake the exercise of transfers. The
process was set in motion by issuing GO Ms. No. 61 finance 
department dated 25. 4. 2018. Government notified guidelines for
transfers.
13.     Transfer exercise involves posting in existing vacancies or
replacing existing incumbent. It requires identification of vacancies
and /or identification of employees who can be disturbed to
accommodate request transfers. It is not uncommon that request 
for transfers to few places can be more than the vacancies
available /vacancies that can be made available. Request for
transfers cannot be effectively processed unless incumbents are
disturbed. It therefore requires prioritisation of requests. There
must be some criteria to identify employers who can be disturbed.
Further, in mammoth government organisation leaving it to
individual competent authorities to process transfer claims may
have its own drawbacks. Thus, transfer exercise per force requires
formulation of guidelines /framing of rules dealing with all
categories and all claims to the extent possible. As noted above,
vide GO Ms. No. 61 government notified guidelines. To
accommodate the respective claims of employees seeking transfer 
for various reasons, certain yardsticks are fixed by the
Government.
14.     Salient features of these guidelines are:
(i)     Transfer should be effected between 25.5.2018 to
15.06.2018.
(ii)     A person can be transferred only if he has completed 2 years
of service in a station as on 31.5.2018. Two exceptions
are made to this condition:
1.      seeking transfer on spouse ground ;
2.      earlier employee was transferred and provisionally ordered to
serve in new districts in October 2016.
(iii)   Employee who has completed 5 years of service in a station
as on 31.5.2018 shall be compulsorily transferred.
However, employee retiring from service on/before
31.5.2019 is exempted from transfer even if he has
completed 5 years of service in a station.
(iv)     While effecting transfers CAP is imposed i.e., not more than
40% in a cadre can be transferred. Thus, even if there are
many employees who have completed more than 5 years    
as on 31.5.2018 or/and requests for transfers are made,
while considering such transfers the cadre controlling
authority should ensure not more than 40% in the cadre
are disturbed.
(v)     Guidelines prescribe priority in consideration of request for
transfer, such as spouse working in a station, date of
retirement, health of self or dependent, etc. However,
such priority is applicable only when more than one
employee opts for same post.
(vi)    Station means place of actual working i.e., city/ town/
village. Service in all cadres at a station will be counted.
(vii)   It is pertinent to note that if adequate personnel do not
opt for hardship area system of lottery should be followed.
(viii)  Transfers should be made by adopting counselling
procedure.
(ix)     These general guidelines are not mutatis/mutandis
applicable to certain departments and they are authorized
to frame additional guidelines/ amend/ formulate rules.
(x)     The G.O clarifies that the presidential Order should be
followed and existing instructions on posting of second
level and higher level gazetted officers to their native
districts.
15.     To accommodate request of individual employees, it is
necessary to identify the availability of vacancies and to assess the
tenure of employee working in a particular place and if it is found
that employee is working for long time in a particular place, it is
desirable to shift him/ her from the present place in order to
accommodate claims of other employees.  There is more demand   
for postings to Urban areas, more particularly to the city of
Hyderabad.  If persons continuation is allowed in a station for long
time, aspirations of other employees would be adversely affected.
There is a need to balance the request of employees. Thus, fixing
five years tenure has clear objective underlying the very transfer
policy. While identifying an employee for transfer to accommodate
request of another employee what is required to be seen is whether
that employee has worked for considerable period in a station. It is
immaterial, for a limited purpose of transfer, to see in what
capacity he worked in a station.
16.     While assessing the guidelines formulated for transfers,
keeping in mind the scope of judicial review on transfer guidelines,
the object it seeks to achieve must be seen. Twin objectives
discernible from transfer guidelines are, to accommodate the
request for transfer of employees to the extent possible and not to
retain an employee in a station for longer period. It also takes care
of smooth transition by fixing cap on maximum number of
employees who can be disturbed. It is also significant to note from
para-VII (e) of guidelines, the objective of transfer policy is to act as
a catalyst in capacity building by ensuring departmental
employees in getting variety of experience and becoming more fit to
hold higher responsibilities. Therefore, the tenure of an employee
in a place must be viewed not only with reference to the claim of
employee for retention, but also with reference to the claim of other
employees for posting at prime location, like Hyderabad and over
all objective of Government.  Thus, while identifying the tenure in a
station liberal construction to relevant clauses of guidelines is
necessary.  More so, when transfer is made to equal post and if
service conditions are not affected.  So long as a person was
working in a station for more than five years, in what capacity and
in what manner he was working is immaterial and the total
amount of service rendered in that station can be computed.
What is important is tenure in a Station.
17.     According to paragraph-II(b), if an employee completed five
years of service as on 31.05.2018 in a station, such employee is
liable for compulsory transfer.  As per paragraph-IV (b), Station
means place of actual working at city/ town/ village.  Petitioner
was working in Dr. MCR HRD institute from 01.04.2012.    After
his tenure in Dr. MCR HRD, petitioner was retained in Hyderabad.
Thus, as per paragraph-IV(b), he has been in the same station
since April 2012.  By counting this service, petitioner cannot be
retained in the present place of posting. The petitioner is identified
as an employee liable for compulsory transfer as he has been in
Hyderabad city for more than six years. The decision of the
competent authority cannot be faulted.
18.     It appears from the reading of Circular Memo, dated
02.06.2018, competent authority has sought certain clarifications.
One of the clarifications sought was, whether the period of
deputation of an employee (if it is in the same station) is to be
counted for qualifying service at the station.   In response to this
doubt expressed by the competent authorities, reply given was
yes.  It was further stated that the service rendered on deputation
where the posts are under the control of Head of Department shall
be counted as qualifying service at the station.  Though the doubt
expressed appears to be in broad terms while saying yes to such
clarification, further clarification was referring to a person working
on deputation under the control of Head of Department.
Furthermore, on a plain reading of guidelines in G.O.Ms.No.61,
guidelines do not make any distinction as to in what capacity an
employee was working in a station. Petitioner cannot seek to fall
back on the further clarification to say that he is not liable for
compulsory transfer and that he has rendered less than 2 years of
service by treating his posting in State Health Education Bureau
as independent posting.    Even otherwise, petitioner cannot seek
enforcement of clarification to claim retention.
19.     In the case on hand, petitioner is working in Hyderabad
station since April, 2012. He has no indefeasible right to claim that
he should not be disturbed from the present station.  He cannot
seek to take shelter on the ground that Dr.MCH HRD Institute is
an independent organization and his tenure in the said institute,
though in Hyderabad, cannot be computed for assessing the 
tenure  in Hyderabad.
20.     From the proposition of law as laid down in several
precedent decisions, it is manifest that the Court cannot go into
intricacies of the cadre management and posting of the employees;
there can be several imponderables requiring formation of a
subjective opinion and Court cannot go into those administrative
issues in exercise of power of judicial review.   In any service, there
can be competing claims/aspirations and the cadre controlling
authority is the best judge to accommodate competing claims and 
organize his cadres.  It is appropriate to note that no mala fides are
attributed against any officer.  By identifying petitioner as long
standing employee, his service conditions are not affected.
21.     Having regard to the parameters laid down by the Supreme
Court in the precedents referred to above, and in the facts of this
case, I do not see any illegality in identifying petitioner as person
who cannot be retained in the present place of posting warranting
interference by this Court.  Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
Pending miscellaneous petitions shall stand closed.
___________________________     
JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO      
Date:   13.06.2018