[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Reshavani @ Reshavena Ailaiah vs Macherla Chinna Narasaiah @ Narsinga ... on 27 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: 2018 AIR CC 2926 (HYD), 2018 (191) AIC (SOC) 29 (HYD), (2019) 1 CIVLJ 246, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 291, (2018) 4 CIVILCOURTC 411, (2019) 1 ICC 149
Author:
S.V. Bhatt
Bench:
S.V. Bhatt
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT     

C.R.P. No.1043 OF 2018  

27.04.2018 

Reshavani @ Reshavena Ailaiah .Petitioner  

Macherla Chinna Narasaiah @ Narsinga Rao and others..Respondents    

Counsel for Petitioner : Mr.Challa Srinivasa Reddy

Counsel for Respondents: Ms.Nimmagadda Revathi    

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V. BHATT     

C.R.P. No.1043 OF 2018  

ORDER:
Heard  Mr.Challa Srinivasa Reddy for revision petitioner and
Ms.Nimmagada Revathi for respondents.
The plaintiff in O.S. No.434 of 2010 in the Court of II Additional
Junior Civil Judge is the revision petitioner.  The revision petitioner
filed suit for perpetual injunction restraining the respondents herein
from interfering with revision petitioners possession and enjoyment
of plaint schedule property.  The respondents filed written statement
and are contesting the suit.  The suit is posted for trial and the
evidence on plaintiffs side is recorded.  The revision petitioner filed
I.A. No.793 of 2017 under Order XXIII Rule 1 Sub-Rule 3 of Civil
Procedure Code (for short
CPC
) praying for withdrawing the suit
with liberty to file a fresh suit.  The affidavit filed along with I.A.
No.793 of 2017 refers to an incident happened on 20th July,2010 i.e.
defendants trying to interfere with the possession and enjoyment of
revision petitioner and registration of Crime No.104 of 2010 in P.S.
Choppadandi.  The affidavit refers to respondents occupying the
suit land in the year 2011.  It is further averred with the changed
circumstances, the revision petitioner is compelled to seek the
comprehensive relief of declaration of title, together with recovery
of possession of plaint schedule property.  The plaint already filed
needs amendment and the efforts of the revision petitioner for
amendment were unsuccessful, hence, prefers to file separate suit
for declaration of title and recovery of possession. Therefore,
I.A.No.793 of 2017 was filed with a prayer to withdraw the suit by
granting liberty to file fresh suit.
The respondents object to granting liberty to file fresh suit, and
rely on dismissal of I.A. No.523 of 2017 filed by the revision petitioner
under
Order VI Rule 17 of CPC
. The examination of witnesses is over,
and no ground to grant permission to file a fresh suit is made out.
The respondents state that the revision petitioner can be permitted
to withdraw the suit but without leave to file fresh suit.
The Court below through the order impugned in the CRP
rejected the prayer to grant liberty to file fresh suit.  The Court below
referred to the requirements of Order XXIII Rule 1 Sub-Rule 3 clause
(b) and held that the liberty now sought for is  a deliberate attempt
of the plaintiff.  The Court below refers to the evidence of PWs 1 to 3
and that the revision petitioner has not mentioned the reasons for
filing fresh suit except the allegations as made in the plaint.   The
lack of diligence in pursuing the present suit led to procrastination of
the proceedings.  Therefore, it is found by the learned trial Judge
that no ground is made out for granting the liberty. Hence the
C.R.P. 
      Mr.Srinivasa Reddy contends that the trial Court committed a
serious illegality by refusing to grant liberty and the refusal is contrary
to the discretion conferred on a Court by Order XXIII Rule 1(3).
 According to him, the reason for seeking liberty to file fresh suit is
that the revision petitioner has no option except to suffer  the
alleged interference of respondents herein during the pendency of
the suit, instead of proceeding with the trial, for working out
comprehensive reliefs, liberty to file fresh suit was sought under order
XXIII Rule 1 (3).   The trial Court ought not to refer to evidence and
then refuse the liberty to file fresh suit.  According to him, the order if
allowed to remain, amounts to shutting out remedy or relief to a
litigant without adjudication by a Court of law. Once a suit for
declaration of title and recovery of possession is filed, all the issues
are comprehensively tried and no injustice is occasioned to
respondents.  He further contends that the only area the trial Court
could have exercised its discretion in favour of respondents is to
impose costs on the petitioner/plaintiff while granting liberty to
withdraw the suit.  He prays for setting aside the order and grant
liberty to plaintiff to file fresh suit.
Ms. Revathi, on the other hand, contends that the averments
in affidavit filed in I.A.No.793 of 2017 are sufficient to refuse the
liberty as the petitioner is very lax in prosecuting the suit inasmuch as
the petitioner refers to alleged dispossession in 2011.  After indulging
in luxury litigation for seven years, now application is filed for
withdrawing the suit and liberty to file fresh suit.  She further
contends that though a few aspects on the evidence are referred
to by the trial Court, the trial Court did not express a view on the
evidence but merely referred to the stage of the suit and declined
the liberty to file fresh suit.  She prays for dismissing the CRP.
I have perused the record and noted the rival submissions
made by the counsel appearing for the parties.  The point for
consideration in the above circumstances is whether the petitioner
is entitled for leave to file fresh suit for declaration of title and
recovery of possession under Order XXIII Rule 1 Sub-
Rule 3 of CPC
?
The revision petitioner filed the suit for perpetual injunction
assuming his prima facie title and possession, and seeking
protection of possession from the trial court by way of injunction
against respondents.  The petitioner avers in the affidavit that the
respondents in 2011 dispossessed the petitioner from the plaint
schedule property.  The steps taken by petitioner for amending the
plaint to include prayer for declaration of title and recovery of
possession were negatived.  This Court is not examining the reasons
for refusing the prayer for amendment, for the said order has
become final and any how not subject matter of revision.  Now the
affidavit refers to necessity to file suit for declaration of title and
recovery of possession.  For the reasons already noted, the prayer
to file fresh suit was rejected.  Sub-Rules 3 and 4 of Order XXIII Rule 1
read thus:
(3) Where the court is satisfied,
a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or
(b) that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject matter of a
suit or part of a claim,
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff
permission to withdraw from such suit or such part of the
claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the
subject matter of such suit or such part of the claim.
(4) Where the plaintiff,
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub-rule (1),
or
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the
permission referred to in sub-rule
(3),
he shall be liable for such costs as the court may award
and shall be precluded from instituting any fresh suit in
respect of such subject matter or such part of the claim.
Under Sub-Rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XXIII, the Court grants
liberty to withdraw the suit or part of the claim with liberty to institute
a fresh suit in respect of the subject matter of such suit or such part
of the claim, on being satisfied that the suit  fails for reason of some
formal defect or that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute  a fresh suit for the subject matter of a suit or part
of a claim. The consequence of withdrawing the suit without liberty
to file fresh suit is prescribed under Rule 1 Sub-Rule 4 viz. a party who
withdraws the suit without leave of Court is precluded under Rule
from instituting fresh suit in respect of such subject matter or such
part of the claim. The Court while examining the case for granting
liberty is satisfied that the formal defect fails the suit. The clause lays
emphasis on the words formal defect.
The words formal defect in the normal parlance connote
defects of various kinds not affecting the merits of the case.  Thus a
formal defect is a defect of form unrelated to the claim of plaintiff
on merits.  In other words, the expression formal defect means a
defect of form and not a defect on the merits of the case.
Under Clause (b), the court is satisfied that there are sufficient
grounds for allowing plaintiff to file fresh suit for the same subject
matter or a part of claim. The thrust under clause (b) is on the words
that the Court is satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for
instituting a fresh suit for the same subject matter.  The words
sufficient grounds have to be given sufficiently wide meaning but
not a restrictive meaning. What constitutes sufficient grounds has
been left to judicial discretion of the Court and whether the
grounds stated by the plaintiff merit acceptance as sufficient
grounds to permit plaintiff to file a fresh suit after removing the
defects in the pending suit.  Defect in the plaint constitutes sufficient
ground for allowing the plaintiff to withdraw the suit with liberty to
file fresh suit.  The expression sufficient grounds  is given wider
meaning, but not restricted  meaning, so that the right of  a party is
not prejudicially affected and legal remedy denied without
adjudication.
Therefore, the Court while examining whether the suit already
filed fails by reason of formal defect or that there are sufficient
grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the
subject matter of a suit or part of a claim, keeps the legal
consequences i.e. shall be precluded from instituting fresh suit under
Sub-Rule 4 and appropriate orders are passed.  Further as stated
above, Sub Rule 3 has two facets, namely, that the Court is required
to be satisfied that the suit pending before fails by reason of some
formal defect and the formal defect is understood and
appreciated by taking note of the subsequent events that
changed the frame of suit.  Secondly that fresh grounds are
available for allowing the plaintiff to institute fresh suit for the subject
matter or part of a claim.  The scheme of Sub-Rule 3 provides for
exit from the contest because of formal defects in the suit.  Hence,
the Court judiciously applies its discretion both while giving
permission to withdraw the suit with liberty to file fresh suit or refuse
liberty. The factors which may weigh with the Court to refuse
granting leave to file fresh suit, ought not to be comprehensively
stated but as illustration it can be stated that prejudice to
defendant or prosecution of vexatious claims etc. are a few
illustrations.  Hence, this Court keeps in view the fallout under Sub-
Rule 4 of
Order XXIII of CPC
, and exercises the discretion or
jurisdiction to grant or refuse to grant leave under Sub Rule 3.   In the
case on hand, this Court is of the view that the affidavit filed by the
petitioner herein discloses that the formal defect in the suit is
unworkable prayer and secondly sufficient grounds are shown
namely that the petitioner purchased plaint schedule from
respondents herein and there is necessity for seeking declaration of
title and the relief of recovery of possession.  After considering the
material on record and applying the discretion conferred on Court
by Sub-Rule 3, this Court is of the view that the order impugned in
the C.R.P. to the extent of not granting liberty warrants interference
and accordingly the order impugned in the C.R.P. is set aside and
liberty to file suit is granted.
The C.R.P. is ordered. No order as to costs.
_________________   
S.V.BHATT, J  
Date: 27.04.2018