[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1.Palugu Bal Reddy, Aged About 58 Years. ... vs 1.The Joint Collector, Medak District ... on 9 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 (NOC) 609 (HYD.)
Author:
Challa Kodanda Ram
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           

WRIT PETITION No. 14294 OF 2005    

 09-04-2018

1.Palugu Bal Reddy, Aged about 58 years. 2. Palugu Malla Reddy, Aged about 50 years. 3. Palugu Srinivas Reddy, Aged about 45  
 4. Palugu Narayan Reddy, Aged about 38 years. All are sons of Narsa Reddy, R/o.Kanukunta (V),  Jinnaram (M), Medak District.

1.The Joint Collector, Medak District at Sanga Reddy. 2. The Mandal Revenue Officer,  Jinnaram Mandal, Medak District.
3.T.Srinivas Reddy, S/o.Bal Reddy, Aged 40 years, Business,    R/o.6-6-89, Shivaji Nagar,    Sanga Reddy, Medak District.---R


Counsel for the petitioners: Sri E.Phani Kumar.

Counsel for the respondents     :  Government Pleader for Revenue (TG)
                                           Sri P.Venkat Reddy.
<GIST : 

>HEAD NOTE :   

?Cases referred :

1.2010 (1) ALD (3) DB


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           

WRIT PETITION No.14294 OF 2005    

ORDER:
This is a case where order of the Joint Collector, in allowing the
Revision filed by the 3rd respondent herein, is challenged.
The facts, in brief, as stated in the affidavit, are as follows:
The land admeasuring Ac.1-25 guntas in Survey No.798 situated at
Kanukunta Village, Jinnaram Mandal, Medak District was put to auction by
the Government for non-payment of land revenue by its original owners
i.e., Sri Abdul Razak and Narasimha Reddy. The father of the 3rd
respondent herein Sri T.Bal Reddy, came to purchase the said land,
paying the amount by way of challan in the year 1956 and, thereafter, on
30.01.1971, he executed sada bainama in favour of the petitioners father
Sri P.Narsa Reddy by receiving a sale consideration of Rs.700/-.
Subsequently, petitioners names were shown in the revenue records all
through and the ryot passbook was also issued in favour of their father.
While things stood thus, the 3rd respondent, claiming himself to be
the successor-in-interest of the property, based on a registered gift deed
vide document No.1550, dated 19.07.1990, when approached the 2nd   
respondent seeking mutation of his name, as pattadar in the revenue
records, such mutation was granted in his favour and a pattadar passbook
was also granted.
Aggrieved by the same, the petitioners filed a Revision before the
Revenue Divisional Officer, invoking Section 9 of the Andhra Pradesh
Rights in Land and Pattadar Passbooks Act, 1971 (for short, the Act).
The Revision came to be allowed, wherein it was recorded that the
petitioners were in possession of the property and the local enquiry
conducted in the village by M.R.I. also revealed that they purchased the
same through a sada bainama. The respondents herein have not filed any
document evidencing their right in spite of several opportunities given to
them.
Against the said order, the 3rd respondent filed a further Revision
before the Joint Collector, the 1st respondent herein, invoking Section 9 of
the Act. The said Revision was allowed by ignoring the claims of the
petitioners and based on the documents which are disputed, particularly
ekrar batainama and the agreement dated 30.01.1971 alleged to have 
been executed by P.Narsa Reddy, father of the petitioners, in favour of
Smt.Satyamma, mother of the 3rd respondent. Further, the 2nd respondent 
had relied on the certificate alleged to have been issued in favour of the
3rd respondent under Section 13-B of the Act on 14.12.1994.
Subsequently, when the petitioners approached the Mandal Revenue  
Officer, Jinnaram Mandal, Medak District, seeking copies of 13-B
certificate, invoking the provisions under the
Right to Information Act,
2005
, vide proceedings in letter No.C/1550/2001 dated 09.12.2005, he
issued the endorsement stating that, on verification of the old files in the
Office, there was no 13-B certificate and the file number quoted for
issuance of 13-B in favour of the 3rd respondent is not traceable. In those
circumstances, the Mandal Revenue Officer has expressed his inability to
provide certified copy of 13-B certificate issued vide Lr.No.A/2635/94,
dated 14.12.1994.  In those circumstances, the very proceedings of the 1st
respondent are illegal as the 1st respondent failed to take into
consideration the fact that the 2nd respondent, while mutating the name of
the 3rd respondent in the revenue records and issuing the pattadar
passbook, failed to issue notice to the petitioners in spite of the fact that
the petitioners names continued to reflect in the revenue records. Hence,
this Writ Petition on the ground that the impugned order suffers from
illegality .
The 3rd respondent filed his detailed counter contending that his
father Sri T.Bal Reddy is the auction purchaser, which fact is not in
dispute, and he being the son, came to inherit the said property by virtue
of the registered gift deed executed in his favour on 19.07.1990; based on
the registered gift deed, the 3rd respondent was recognized as successor-
in-interest of the property and the 2nd respondent has rightly recorded his
name as pattadar and the petitioners have no manner of right in the
property.
The 3rd respondent also made a reference in the counter-affidavit
with regard to ekrar batainama alleged to have been executed in between
the petitioners father and the mother of the 3rd respondent, on
30.01.1971, and one Memorandum of Understanding executed by the    
petitioners father in favour of the 3rd respondent on 30.12.1993 stating
that he used to cultivate the said land on lease for some years and
delivered possession of the said land to him; yet, another document i.e.,
fresh agreement dated 26.06.1995 entered into between the 1st petitioner
and 3rd respondent wherein the 1st petitioner agreed to give 4 quintals of
rice per annum to the 3rd respondent. Thus, the 1st respondent had rightly
taken into consideration all these documents and allowed the Revision
filed by the 3rd respondent, which is impugned in this Writ Petition.
The reply affidavit is also filed on behalf of the petitioners
contending that 13-B certificate can only be issued following
Section
5-A (4)
of the Act. That apart, 13-B certificate, produced by the 3rd
respondent, cannot be relied on, particularly in view of the endorsement of
the Mandal Revenue Officer with regard to his inability to provide a copy of
the same, issued vide proceedings dated 09.12.2005. It is also further
asserted that the 3rd respondent had filed O.S. No.138 of 1995 seeking
perpetual injunction against the petitioners and the same came to be
dismissed for non-prosecution. All this would show that the 3rd respondent
has no manner of right with respect to the land in issue and, in those
circumstances, prays for allowing of the Writ Petition by setting-aside the
impugned proceedings dated 06.05.2005 of the 1st respondent and to 
restore the orders of the Revenue Divisional Officer dated 20.04.2001.
The learned Assistant Government Pleader for Revenue
(Telangana) submits that though the petitioners have prayed for a writ of
mandamus, in fact, a writ of certiorari ought to have been sought, in as
much as the orders of the 1st and the 2nd respondents are under challenge,
which were passed in exercise of the statutory powers as an adjudicating
authority, and except for production of the records, they have nothing to
add and it is for this Court to examine the validity or otherwise of those
orders. The learned Assistant Government Pleader further submits that
strenuous efforts made to trace out the file relating to issuance of 13-B
certificate are not successful till date.
Extensive arguments were advanced by Sri E.Phani Kumar,
learned counsel for the petitioners, and Sri P.Venkat Reddy, learned
counsel for the 3rd respondent.
The arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners are to the
effect that, at no point of time, neither the 3rd respondents father nor the
3rd respondent made a claim for mutating their names in the revenue
records as pattadars, as, to their knowledge, the property was sold in
favour of the petitioners as far back as in 1971 through a sada bainama.
The learned counsel further submits that the Revision filed by the 3rd
respondent itself is not maintainable against the orders of the Revenue
Divisional Officer, which was, in fact, preferred against a Revision filed by
the petitioners and, hence, there cannot be a Revision against a Revision.
It is also his further submission that the petitioners continued to be in
possession and the fact that the suit filed by the 3rd respondent came to
be dismissed would also support the fact that the petitioners continued to
be in possession and, at any rate, the 3rd respondent had failed to issue
notice to the petitioners before mutating his name in the revenue records
and on that simple ground, the Writ Petition is liable to be allowed.
The learned counsel further strenuously submits that right from
1971 till date, the petitioners names continued to reflect in the pahanies
and, as a matter of fact, in the ryot passbook, which was issued prior to
1980, the petitioners names and their vendors names continued to reflect
in the respective columns and, in those circumstances, the order of the 1st
respondent setting-aside the order of the Revenue Divisional Officer is
liable to be declared as null and void. It is further contended by the
petitioner that akrar batainama produced by the 3rd respondent is not
admitted, as the same is a forged document and as such, the same 
cannot be relied on for the purpose of deciding the case.
On the other hand, Sri P.Venkat Reddy, learned counsel appearing
for the 3rd respondent, reiterates his arguments and supports the order of
the Joint Collector. The learned counsel would contend that ekrar
batainama was, in fact, produced before the Revenue Divisional Officer
and before the Joint Collector.  He would further contend that the Revenue
Divisional Officer, who had not taken note of the registered gift deed vide
document No.1550 dated 19.07.1990, executed in favour of the 3rd
respondent by his father, had chosen to ignore his clients claim by giving
preference to sada binama, which is impermissible in law. To support his
contention, the learned counsel placed reliance on a Division Bench
judgment of this Court in Ande Gangaiah and others Vs. M. Krishna
Reddy and others .
Having considered the respective submissions, at the outset, it may
be stated that discharge of functions by the respective authorities is totally
unsatisfactory in all respects. The record produced by the Revenue
Divisional Officer as well as the Joint Collector, by itself, does not throw
any light much less help, in any manner, to dispose of the case, on merits.
In the facts of the present case, notwithstanding the improper
maintenance of the record by the respondent authorities, this Court had to
resolve the controversy between the parties by taking efforts which could
have been avoided if proper procedure would have been followed by the
respective authorities. However, from the very material produced before
this Court and from the nature of the disputes raised, the undisputed facts
culled out are that:
1) The 3rd respondents father came to purchase the property in
open auction in the year 1956 and, for some reason or the other, his name
is not recorded in the revenue records, at any point of time.
2) For the first time in 1990, the 3rd respondent produced the
registered gift deed, executed in his favour by his father, and sought
mutation of his name as pattadar in the revenue records and for issuance
of pattadar passbook, which was, in fact, granted by the Mandal Revenue
Officer;
3) On 14.012.1984, 13-B Certificate was issued in favour of the 3rd
respondent by regularizing the purchase of the land by the 3rd
respondents father in the auction in 1959 in which the names of the
original land owners Sri Abdul Rajak and Sri Narasimha Reddy were
mentioned.
4) The claim of the petitioners is based on an un-registered sada
bainama, dated 30.01.1971;
5) The name of the petitioners and their father were recorded in the
occupation column i.e., column No.16 in the revenue records, and
continued to be shown in the occupation column all through;
6) The 3rd respondent does not deny the claim of the petitioners
that their names were recorded in the revenue records and to the extent of
the same being shown in the occupation column; and
7) The suit filed by the 3rd respondent in O.S. No.138 of 1995
seeking perpetual injunction was dismissed confirming the possession of
the petitioners in the land;
At the outset, it may be noted that, for some reason or the other,
the 3rd respondent came to be granted 13-B certificate in which the
transaction set out is the purchase of the land by the 3rd respondents
father in auction.  As the sale certificate was issued by the Sale Officer,
there was really no reason for regularizing the same under
Section 5A
of
the Act. It may be further noted that the 3rd respondent was granted
pattadar passbook in his favour and also his name was entered in the
revenue records as successor-in-interest of the property, on the basis of
the registered gift deed.  The claim of the 3rd respondent was, in other
words, came to be considered in terms of
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act and
not on the basis of 13-B certificate.
In those circumstances, granting of 13-B certificate in favour of the
3rd respondent is neither here nor there and it is of no consequence when
one considers that the 3rd respondent was also granted pattadar passbook
and his name was mutated as successor-in-interest of his late father T.Bal
Reddy, who was, admittedly, the purchaser of the property in public
auction. If at all the petitioners were aggrieved with respect to the mutation
of the name of 3rd respondent in the revenue records and grant of pattadar
passbook in his favour, they could have only invoked and preferred an
Appeal before the Revenue Divisional Officer. However, the Revenue
Divisional Officer disposed of the Revision alleged to have been filed by
the petitioners in terms of
Section 9
of the Act. It may be noted that, under
Section 9
of the Act, the Revenue Divisional Officer has no revisionary
power and the said power exclusively vests with the Collector or the Joint
Collector. Assuming that the petitioners had invoked
Section 5(3)
of the
Act, their claim would have been limited to the extent of their possession
not being disturbed on account of the fact that they continued to be in
possession of the property.
In the light of the admitted facts that the petitioners are in
possession and the entries in the revenue records with respect to their
possession not being altered, in any manner, they cannot have any
grievance so far as granting of succession rights in favour of the 3rd
respondent, as consideration of the 3rd respondents claim is based on the
gift deed, which is traceable to
Section 4
of the Act. If one treats the
exercise of the power of Revenue Divisional Officer is traceable to
Section
5(3)
of the Act, though the Revenue Divisional Officer mentioned it as
Section 9
of the Act, the 1st respondent Joint Collector is entitled to revise
the orders passed by the Revenue Divisional Officer in terms of
Section 9
of the Act. Consideration of the 3rd respondents claim before the Mandal
Revenue Officer/Revenue Divisional Officer would be in relation to their
exercise of the power under
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act and not the power
under
Section 5-A
of the Act. Even, in that view of the matter, filing a
Revision by the petitioners before the Revenue Divisional Officer, invoking
Section 5-B
of the Act, is misconceived.
Be that as it may, the Mandal Revenue Officer had considered the
rights of the 3rd respondent as traceable to
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act
and, based on the gift deed, without altering or disturbing the rights of the
petitioners with respect to their possession, had granted mutation and
pattadar passbook in their favour.  The Revenue Divisional Officer, though
had noted the fact of gift in favour of the 3rd respondent, chose to ignore
the same without any reason and reversed the order of the Mandal
Revenue Officer by giving preference to sada bainama dated 30.01.1971.
So far as the reliance on sada bainama, at the outset, it may be noted that
the petitioners, at no point of time, had sought to regularize the alleged
sada bainama by invoking
Section 5-A
of the Act.
This could not have been done by the Revenue Divisional Officer
vis--vis the claim of the petitioners based on the sada bainama and in
view of the claim of the 3rd respondent based on a registered gift deed and
the fact that his father was, admittedly, original owner of the land in
dispute, the preference ought to have been given to the registered gift
deed rather than sada bainama in considering the claims under
Section 4
of the Act.
The ratio laid down by the Division Bench referred to by the learned
counsel for the 3rd respondent is also to the same effect.  A reference can
be made to Para 8 of the judgment, which reads as follows:
8.     Having regard to nature of proceedings, regarding the
entries in the revenue records, the title as contemplated under the
laws plays a vital role and will have a pivotal bearing on the claims
and ultimate conclusion to be drawn.  As long as there is no
enforceable right, it is not open for the appellants either to justify
their claim or resist that of the others.  The title, as validly
conferred would be the factor to be weighed with and not mere
entries.  Even for any litigant, trying to raise a dispute, there
should be a sustainable right which can be carried with safely for
the purpose of revenue proceedings. As it is, mere agreement
would not confer any right as per the provisions of the
Transfer of
Property Act
, nor can wield any resistance to or against a title
under the registered transferred deeds, by or from the same
vendor or predecessor in title.  It cannot even be called a litigious
claim or right of whatsoever nature.
Further, recording of the petitioners names in the revenue records
is, admittedly, against column No.16 which is relatable to recording of
cultivation/the cultivators name.  The 3rd respondent is not disputing about
the factum of the petitioners being cultivators. The documents i.e., ekrar
batainama and the agreement dated 26.06.1995, on which the 3rd 
respondent relies, are to the effect of the 3rd respondent recognizing the
petitioners as possessors in the capacity of tenants.
Though an argument was sought to be advanced by Sri E. Phani
Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioners, stating that his clients have
perfected the right over the property, invoking the concept of adverse
possession, the same was rightly given up by the learned counsel for the
3rd respondent having regard to the futility of the same.
In these circumstances, leaving it open to the petitioners to work
out their remedies, if any, with respect to the title to the property,
particularly based on the alleged sada bainama, so far as the challenge to
the impugned proceedings is concerned, the Writ Petition fails and the
same is dismissed.  No order as to costs.
In consequence, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in this Writ
Petition, shall stand dismissed.
_________________________    
CHALLA KODANDA RAM, J       
Date: 09-04-2018.