[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
T.Laxmi vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 25 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 166
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
,
T.Sunil Chowdary
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM  AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.SUNIL CHOWDARY                      

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.599  of 2013    

25.08.2018 

T.Laxmi ... Appellant


The State of Andhra Pradesh.Respondent   

Counsel for the petitioner:  Mr.V.L.N.Prasad

Counsel for respondents :Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


? Cases cited:
        
1.      (1991) 1 SCC 286 = AIR 1990 SC 2140   
2.      AIR 1959 SC 1012  
3.      AIR 1958 Bom 225  
4.      (2008) 12 SCC 173 
5.      AIR 2013 SC 1940  
6.      (2012) 6 SCC 403 
7.      (2013) 12 SCC 50 
8.      (2015) 12 SCC 644 
9.      (2012) 6 SCC 403 
10.     (2007) 2 SCC 310 : (2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 582














THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM            
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE T.SUNIL CHOWDARY          

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.599  of 2013    

JUDGMENT:
(per Honble Sri Justice T.Sunil Chowdary)  

         This Criminal Appeal is filed under
Section 374(2)
of
Cr.P.C., challenging the judgment dated 28.02.2013 passed in
S.C.No.54 of 2012 on the file of the Court of the III Additional
District & Sessions Judge (FTC) Asifabad, wherein and whereby 
the appellant herein was found guilty of the offence punishable
under
Section 302
of IPC, convicted and sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for life and also to pay fine of Rs.500/- in
default, to suffer imprisonment for one month.
2.      The case of the prosecution, in a nutshell, is that on
18.09.2011 Tekam MarakkaP.W.1 lodged a complaint (Ex.P.1)    
before the Station House Officer, Neelwai Police Station, basing on
which, the Sub-Inspector of Police registered a case in Cr.No.29 of
2011 under
Section 302
IPC and issued FIR - Ex.P.11.
3.      During the course of investigation, it is revealed that the
accusedTekam Laxmi is the wife of the deceasedTekam Anjaiah   
and they are residents of Rajaram village.  About 6 years back they
both fell in love and eloped from the village.  They lived together
happily at Mancherial for some period.  When the accused
conceived pregnancy, the deceased started suspecting her fidelity
and dropped her at her parents house.  After six months, the
accused gave birth to a female child. Thereafter, at the intervention
of elders, the deceased took the accused to the village and they
lived happily for some time.  Again the deceased started harassing
the accused physically and mentally saying that she is his
concubine but not wife.  The accused, vexed with the unbearable
harassment meted out by the deceased, was waiting for an 
opportunity to liquidate the deceased.
4.      While the things stood thus, on 17.09.2011 morning, the
deceased and the accused together went to the nearby forest to
fetch firewood.  By afternoon they brought two bundles of firewood
to the house and at about 3.00 PM the deceased alone went to the
forest to fetch the remaining firewood but did not turn-up.  Then
the mother of the deceasedP.W.1 along with her second son-P.W.2  
and some other villagers went into the forest and found the dead
body of the deceased with axe inflicted injuries on his body.
5.      The Investigating OfficerP.W.10 visited the scene of offence
and prepared rough sketchEx.P.12, seized MO3chappals from   
the scene of offence and got the scene of offence photographed vide
Exs.P.2 to P.5.  He conducted inquest over the dead body of the
deceased and prepared inquest panchanamaEx.P.13 in the   
presence of P.W.9 and other mediators. Thereafter, P.W.10 sent the
dead body to Government Hospital, Chennur, where Dr.K.Venu  
P.W.8 conducted Postmortem over the dead body of the deceased   
and issued Ex.P.9Postmortem report. On 21.09.2011 P.W.5   
handed over the accused to P.W.10 stating that she admitted the
commission of offence before him.  The accused narrated the entire
incident to P.W.10.  The accused told him that she will show the
axe and saree. Ex.P.7 is the confessional statement of the accused,
in pursuance of which, PW.10 recovered M.O.1axe and M.O.2   
saree under the cover of panchanamaEx.P.8.  P.W.10 arrested the 
accused and sent her to judicial custody. After completion of the
investigation, P.W.10 laid the charge sheet against the accused for
the offence under
Section 302
of IPC before the learned Judicial
Magistrate of First Class, Chennur.
6.      The learned Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Chennur
numbered the charge sheet as PRC No.51 of 2011. After 
appearance of the accused, the learned Magistrate supplied copies
of all documents to the accused as required under
section 207
Cr.P.C., and committed the case to the District & Sessions
Division, Adilabad as contemplated under
Section 209
Cr.P.C as
the offence under
Section 302
IPC is exclusively triable by a Court
of Session.
7.      The learned Principal District & Sessions Judge, Adilabad
took cognizance of the offence under
Section 302
of IPC, numbered
it as S.C.No.54 of 2012 and made it over to the Court of the III
Additional District & Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Asifabad
for disposal in accordance with law. The learned III Additional
District & Sessions Judge, after hearing both sides, framed charge
against the accused for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of IPC, read over and explained to her in Telugu. The accused
denied the charge and claimed to be tried.
8.      In order to bring home the guilt of the appellantaccused,
before the trial Court, on behalf of the prosecution, P.Ws.1 to 10
were examined and Exs.P.1 to P.13 and M.Os.1 to 8 were marked.   
After completion of the prosecution side evidence, the accused was
examined under
Section 313
Cr.P.C., explaining the incriminating
material deposed against her by the prosecution witnesses, which
the accused denied. On behalf of the defence, no oral or
documentary evidence was adduced.
9.      Basing on the oral, documentary evidence and other material
available on record, the trial Court arrived at a conclusion that the
appellant was guilty for the offence punishable under
section 302
IPC, convicted and sentenced her as stated supra.  Hence, the
accused preferred the present appeal.
10.     Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned
Public Prosecutor for the State.
11.     The point that arises for consideration in this appeal is:
Whether the prosecution proved the guilt of the accused for
the offence punishable under
Section 302
I.P.C., beyond
reasonable doubt?
12.     As per the prosecution version, P.W.1 lodged Ex.P1-original
complaint with the Station House Officer, Neelwai Police Station.
As seen from the testimony of P.W.10-the Inspector of Police, on
18.09.2011, at about 9 a.m., P.W.1 came to the Police Station and
lodged Ex.P1-complaint.  Based on Ex.P1-complaint, the Sub- 
Inspector of Police registered a case in Crime No.29 of 2011 under
Section 302
I.P.C., and issued First Information Report-Ex.P11.
From the cross-examination of P.Ws.1 and 10, nothing was elicited
to shake their testimony so far as lodging of the complaint and
registration of the case are concerned. The offence took place on
17.09.2011.  The record reveals that P.W.1 and others went to the
forest and found the dead body of the deceased during night time.
The next day morning i.e., on 18.09.2011, at about 9.00 a.m.,
P.W.1 lodged the complaint.  It is not possible for any one to
approach Police Station during the night time, more particularly in
an Agency Area.  Even otherwise, there is no delay in lodging the
complaint.
13.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we
are of the considered view that P.W.1 set the criminal law in
motion.
14.     The next question that falls for consideration is:
Whether the death of the accused is homicide or not?
15.     As per the testimony of P.Ws.1 to 4, they found the dead
body of the deceased in the forest.  Their testimony further reveals
that they found axe injuries on the body of the deceased.  As per
the testimony of P.W.9, on 18.09.2011, P.W.10the Inspector of
Police conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased.
Ex.P10 is the inquest panchanama.  As seen from the testimony of 
P.W.10, he conducted inquest over the dead body of the deceased 
on 18.09.2011 in the presence of P.W.9 and other mediators.
P.W.9 opined that the deceased died of axe injuries. The testimony
of P.W.10 further reveals that he sent the dead body for autopsy.
As seen from the testimony of P.W.8-Dr.K.Venu, he conducted  
autopsy over the dead body of the deceased on 18.09.2011 and 
found as many as eight external injuries and three internal injuries
on various parts of the body of the deceased.  After completion of
autopsy, P.W.8 issued Ex.P9-postmortem report opining that the 
deceased died of the axe injuries sustained to the vital organs of
the body. In the cross-examination of P.W.8, nothing was elicited
to shake his testimony so far as the nature of the injuries and
cause of the death of the deceased are concerned.  By examining
P.Ws.1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10 and marking Exs.P9 and P10, the
prosecution clearly established that the death of the deceased is
homicide.
16.     As per the prosecution version, the offence took place in the
forest. As seen from the testimony of P.W.10, he prepared Ex.P12-
rouch sketch of scene of offence. A perusal of Ex.P12 clearly
reveals that the scene of offence is the forest area.  The testimony
of P.Ws.1 to 4 also reveals that the offence occurred in the forest
area. By examining P.Ws.1 to 4 and 10 and marking Ex.P.12, the  
prosecution clearly established that the offence took place in the
forest area.
17.     The next question that falls for consideration is:
Whether the accused intentionally and willingly killed
the deceased?
18.     Admittedly, P.Ws.1 to 4 are not the eye witnesses to the
incident.  The entire case is based on circumstantial evidence.
In
Kishore Chand vs State Of Himachal Pradesh
, the Honble Supreme  
Court held at paragraph No.4 as under:
4.      The question, therefore, is whether the prosecution
proved guilt of the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt.
In a case of circumstantial evidence, all the circumstances
from which the conclusion of the guilt is to be drawn
should be fully and cogently established. All the facts so
established should be consistent only with the hypothesis
of the guilt of the accused. The proved circumstances
should be of a conclusive nature and definite tendency,
unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused. They
should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one
proposed to be proved. The circumstances must be 
satisfactorily established and the proved circumstances
must bring home the offences to the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt. It is not necessary that each
circumstance by itself be conclusive but cumulatively must
form unbroken chain of events leading to the proof of the
guilt of the accused. If those circumstances or some of them
can be explained by any of the reasonable hypothesis then
the accused must have the benefit of that hypothesis.
19.     Let us consider the facts of the case on hand in the light of
the above legal principle.
20.     P.W.1 is the mother, P.W.2 is the brother and P.W.4 is close
relative of the deceased. As per the prosecution version, P.Ws.1 to
4 had last seen the accused in the company of the deceased.  As 
per the testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2, on 17.09.2011 morning, the
accused and the deceased went to the forest to fetch firewood.  On
the same day at 3.00 p.m., they came to the house with two
bundles of firewood and again they went to the forest at 3.00 p.m.,
to fetch the remaining firewood.  As per the testimony of P.W.3, he
has seen the accused and the deceased while proceeding to the 
forest at about 3.00 p.m. In the cross-examination, P.W.3, in
unequivocal terms, deposed that on the date of the incident, he
went to some other village for distribution of Upadhi Pension.  In
the cross-examination, P.W.3 deposed that he has not seen the 
deceased and the accused while proceeding to the forest from the
house at about 3.00 p.m., for the second time.  As per the
testimony of P.W.4, while attending to the work in the field, he saw
the accused was proceeding to the house from the forest along with
an axe.  In the cross-examination, P.W.4 categorically deposed that
he cannot show his land to the Police. It is needless to say that the
Court shall consider the chief-examination of a witness along with
his cross-examination in order to ascertain the veracity of his
testimony.
21.     We have carefully perused the cross-examination of P.W.10.
When the learned counsel for the defence questioned P.W.10 with 
regard to the exact location of the land of P.W.4, the trial Court
rejected the same.  When the Court itself rejected that question, it
may not be possible for the defence to establish that P.W.4 does
not have land near the scene of offence. We are unable to
understand as to why the trial Court has rejected such a vital
question. The very purpose of the cross-examination of the
Investigating Officer is to elicit truth or to substantiate the stand of
the defence, eventually to improbablise the prosecution version.
The possibility of P.W.4 having seen the accused proceeding to the
house from forest along with the axe on the date of the incident is
somewhat improbable and unbelievable, in view of failure on the
part of the prosecution to prove that the land of P.W.4 is situated
near to the scene of offence.  The testimony of P.Ws.3, 4 and 10
does not inspire the confidence of the Court. The possibility of
planting P.Ws.3 and 4 cannot be ruled out completely.  If the trial
Court had taken a little care and caution while considering the
testimony of these witnesses, the finding would be otherwise.
Appreciation of evidence does not mean accepting the chief-
examination of the prosecution witnesses by totally ignoring their
cross-examination. The trial Court has not considered the
testimony of these witnesses in the light of settled legal principles.
The testimony of P.Ws.3 and 4 is no way helpful to the
prosecution.
22.     Before considering the testimony of the other witnesses, we
are placing reliance on the following decisions:
In
Tahsildar Singh vs State of U.P.
, the Honble Supreme
Court in paragraph 23 held as under:
23. The conflict of judicial opinion on this question is
reflected in the decisions of different High Courts in this
country. One of the views is tersely put by Burn, J. in In Re
Ponnuswami Chetty, (1933) ILR 56 Mad 475, at p.476:
Whether it is considered as a question of logic or
language, omission and contradiction can never be
identical. If a proposition is stated, any contradictory
proposition must be a statement of some kind, whether
positive or negative. To contradict means to speak against
or in one word to gainsay. It is absurd to say that you can
contradict by keeping silence. Silence may be full of
significance, but it is not diction, and therefore it cannot
be contradiction.
Considering the provisions of
Section 145
of the Evidence
Act, the learned Judge observed thus at p.477:
It would be in my opinion sheer misuse of words to say
that you are contradicting a witness by the writing, when
what you really want to do is to contradict him by pointing
out omissions from the writing. I find myself in complete
agreement with the learned Sessions Judge of Ferozepore 
who observed that a witness cannot be confronted with the
unwritten record of an unmade statement.
The learned Judge gives an illustration of a case of
apparent omission which really is a contradiction i.e. a case
where a witness stated under
Section 162
of the Code that
he saw three persons beating a man and later stated in
court that four persons were beating the same man. This
illustration indicates the trend of the Judges mind that he
was prepared to treat an omission of that kind as part of
the statement by necessary implication. A Division Bench of
the Madras High Court followed this judgment in In Re
Guruva Vannan, (1944) ILR Mad 897. In that judgment,
Mockett, J., made the following observation at p. 901:
    I respectfully agree with the judgment of Burn, J. in
Ponnuswamy Chetty v. Emperor, (1933) ILR 56 Mad 475 in   
which the learned Judge held that a statement under
Section 162
of the Code of Criminal Procedure cannot be
filed in order to show that a witness is making statements
in the witness box which he did not make to the police and
that bare omission cannot be a contradiction. The learned
Judge points out that, whilst a base omission can never be
a contradiction, a so-called omission in a statement may
sometimes amount to a contradiction, for example, when to
the police three persons are stated to have been the
criminals and later at the trial four are mentioned.
The Allahabad High Court in
Ram Bali v. State
, AIR 1952
All 289, expressed the principle with its underlying reasons
thus at p. 294:
Witness after witness was cross-examined about
certain statements made by him in the deposition but not to
be found in his statement under
Section 162
CrPC. A
statement recorded by the police under
Section 162
can be
used for one purpose and one purpose only and that of
contradicting the witness. Therefore if there is no
contradiction between his evidence in court and his
recorded statement in the diary, the latter cannot be used
at all. If a witness deposes in court that a certain fact
existed but had stated under
Section 162
either that that
fact had not existed or that the reverse and irreconcilable
fact had existed it is a case of conflict between the
deposition in the court and the statement under
Section
162
and the latter can be used to contradict the former. But
if he had not stated under
Section 162
anything about the
fact there is no conflict and the statement cannot be used to
contradict him. In some cases an omission in the statement
under
Section 162
may amount to contradiction of the
deposition in court; they are the cases where what is
actually stated is irreconcilable with what is omitted and
impliedly negatives its existence.
At a later stage of the judgment, the learned Judges laid
down the following two tests to ascertain whether a
particular omission amounts to contradiction: (i) an
omission is not a contradiction unless what is actually
stated contradicts what is omitted to be said; and (ii) the
test to find out whether an omission is contradiction or not
is to see whether one can point to any sentence or assertion
which is irreconcilable with the deposition in the court. The
said observations are in accord with that of the Madras
High Court in In Re Guruva Vannan. The Patna High Court 
in Badri Chaudhry v. King Emperor, AIR 1926 Pat 20,
expressed a similar view. At p. 22, Macpherson, J.
analysing
Section 162
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
after its amendment in 1923, observed:
The first proviso to
Section 162(1)
makes an exception
in favour of the accused but it is an exception most
jealously circumscribed under the proviso itself. Any part
of such statement which has been reduced to writing may
in certain limited circumstances be used to contradict the
witness who made it. The limitations are strict: (1) Only the
statement of a prosecution witness can be used; and (2)
only if it has been reduced to writing; (3) only a part of the
statement recorded can be used; (4) such part must be duly
proved; (5) it must be a contradiction of the evidence of the
witness in court; (6) it must be used as provided in
Section
145
of the Evidence Act, that is, it can only be used after
the attention of the witness has been drawn to it or to those
parts of it which it is intended to use for the purpose of
contradiction, and there are others. Such a statement
which does not contradict the testimony of the witness
cannot be proved in any circumstances and it is not
permissible to use the recorded statement as a whole to
show that the witness did not say something to the
investigating officer.
In Sakhawat v. Crown, (1937) ILR Nag. 277, much to the
same effect was stated at p. 284:
The section (
Section 162
) provides that such
statements can be used only for the purpose of
contradiction. Contradiction means the setting up of one
statement against another and not the setting up of a
statement against nothing at all. An illustration would
make the point clear. If a witness in court says I saw A
running away he may be contradicted under
Section 162
by his statement to the police I did not see A running
away. But by proving an omission what the learned counsel
contradicts is not the statement I saw A running away but
the statement I stated to the police that I saw A running
away. As
Section 162
does not allow the witness to depose
I stated to the police that I saw A running away it follows
that there can be no basis for eliciting the omission. Our
argument is further fortified by the use of the words any
part of such statement  may be used to contradict. It is
not said that whole statement may be used. But in order to
prove an omission the whole statement has to be so used,
as has been done in the present case.
The contrary view is expressed in the following proposition:
An omission may amount to contradiction if the matter
omitted was one which the witness would have been 
expected to mention and the Sub-Inspector to make note of
in the ordinary course. Every detail is expected to be noted.
This proposition, if we may say so, couched in wide
phraseology enables the trial Judge to put into the mouth of
a witness things which he did not state at an earlier stage
and did not intend to say, on purely hypothetical
considerations. The same idea in a slightly different
language was expressed by Bhargava and Sahai, J.J. in
Rudder v. State
, AIR 1957 All 239, at p.240:
    There are, however, certain omissions which amount to
contradictions and have been treated as such by this Court
as well as other courts in this country. Those are omissions
relating to facts which arc expected to be included in the
statement before the police by a person who is giving a
narrative of what he saw, on the ground that they relate to
important features of the incident about which the
deposition is made.
A similar view was expressed in Mohinder Singh v. Emperor,
AIR 1932 Lah 103, Yusuf Mia v. Emperor, AIR 1938 Pat 579, 
and State of M.P.v. Banshilal Beharz, AIR 1958 M.P. 13.
Reliance is placed by the learned counsel for the appellants
on a statement of law found in Wigmore on Evidence Vol. III,
3rd Edn., at p. 725. In discussing under the head what
amounts to a self-contradiction, the learned author tersely
describes a self-contradiction in the following terms:
   it is not a mere difference of statement that suffices;
nor yet is an absolute oppositeness essential; it is an
inconsistency that is required.
The learned author further states, at p. 733:
A failure to assert a fact, when it would have been natural
to assert it, amounts in effect to an assertion of the non-
existence of the fact.
The said statement is no doubt instructive, but it
cannot be pressed into service to interpret the provisions of
Section 162
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In America,
there is no provision similar to
Section 162
of the Code. It is
not, therefore, permissible, or even possible, to interpret the
provisions of a particular Act, having regard to stray
observations in a textbook made in a different context.
In
Sayyed Husan Sayad Husen v The State
, the Bombay   
High Court held in paragraph No.13 as under:
13.       That being so, unless the police officer who had
taken down the witness' statement during investigation is
examined and unless he says in his evidence that the
witness had not made a particular statement in his police
statement, it would be wholly irregular and unfair to the
witness to attempt to establish contradictions or omissions
in the manner above-stated as between his evidence and
the police statement. The correct way and the proper way of
proving a contradiction or omission is to ask a Sub-
Inspector about it in his evidence as to whether a certain
statement was made before him by a witness. If such a
procedure is not adopted, as it invariably ought to be, then,
in any event, unless the record shows, by a Judge making a
note about it, that the witness' police statement was read
out to him and his attention was drawn to the non-
existence of a certain statement therein, it could not be said
that there was proof that in fact the statement concerned
was not made by the witness.
In
Ashok Kumar Chaudhary vs State of Bihar
, the Honble
Supreme Court in paragraph No.8 held as under:
8.      Insofar as the question of creditworthiness of the
evidence of relatives of the victim is concerned, it is well
settled that though the Court has to scrutinize such
evidence with greater care and caution but such evidence
cannot be discarded on the sole ground of their interest in
the prosecution. The relationship per se does not affect the
credibility of a witness. Merely because a witness happens
to be a relative of the victim of the crime, he/she cannot be
characterized as an "interested" witness. It is trite that the
term "interested" postulates that the person concerned has
some direct or indirect interest in seeing that the accused is
somehow or the other convicted either because he had 
some animus with the accused or for some other oblique 
motive.
In
Kanhaiya Lal vs. State of Rajasthan
, the Honble
Supreme Court in paragraphs Nos.18, 19 and 20 held as under:
18.
In
Hari Obula Reddy and others Vs. The State of
Andhra Pradesh
, (1981) 3 SCC 675, a three-Judges Bench  
has opined that it cannot be laid down as an invariable rule
that interested evidence can never form the basis of
conviction unless corroborated to a material extent in
material particulars by independent evidence.  All that is
necessary is that the evidence of the interested witnesses
should be subjected to careful scrutiny and accepted with
caution.  If on such scrutiny, the interested testimony is
found to be intrinsically reliable or inherently probable, it
may, by itself, be sufficient, in the circumstances of the
particular case, to base a conviction thereon.
19.
In
Kartik Malhar Vs. State of Bihar
, (1996) 1 SCC
614, this Court has stated that a close relative who is a
natural witness cannot be regarded as an interested
witness, for the term interested postulates that the
witness must have some interest in having the accused,
somehow or the other, convicted for some animus or for
some other reason.
20.     In the case at hand, the witnesses have lost their
father, husband and a relative.  There is no earthly reason
to categorise them as interest witnesses who would nurture
an animus to see that the accused persons are convicted,
though they are not involved in the crime.  On the contrary,
they would like that the real culprits are prosecuted and
convicted.  That is the normal phenomena of human nature
and that is the expected human conduct and we do not 
perceive that these witnesses harboured any ill motive
against the accused persons, but have deposed as 
witnesses to the brutal incident. We may proceed to add, as
stated earlier, that this Court shall be careful and cautious
while scanning their testimony and we proceed to do so.
23.     The prosecution witnesses may depose some new facts for  
the first time before the Court, which were not stated by them to
the Investigating Officer at the time of recording their statements
under
Section 161
of Cr.P.C. There are several modes for
impeaching the credibility of a prosecution witness. Proving
contradictions is one of the modes to impeach the credibility of a
witness.  If a witness has deposed in the chief examination a
certain fact, which he had not stated before the Investigating
Officer in his statement, it is called omission. If the said omission
is a minor or trivial one, it is not a contradiction and the Court
need not take into consideration such an omission to discard
prosecution version. A material omission which goes to the root of
the prosecution case is called a contradiction.  Court has to
consider those omissions, which amount to contradictions, in view
of the
ratio
laid down in
Tahsildar Singh and Sayyed Husan Sayad
Husen (2nd and 3rd supra).
24.     It is an admitted fact that P.W.1 is the mother and P.W.2 is
the brother of the deceased.  Simply because P.Ws.1 and 2 are 
blood-relatives of the deceased, their testimony cannot be
discarded in toto. In case of interested witnesses, the Court has to
scrutinise their testimony meticulously so as to eliminate
exaggerations or embellishments. The possibility of interested
witnesses implicating the accused cannot be completely ruled out.
P.W.1 is the author of Ex.P1-complaint.
25.     We have carefully scanned Ex.P1-complaint and the 
statements of P.Ws.1 and 2 recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
There is no mention in Ex.P1 that on 17.09.2011, at about 3.00
p.m., the accused and the deceased went to the forest for fetching
firewood. As per the testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2, on 17.09.2011, at
about 3.00 p.m., the accused and the deceased went to the forest
for fetching firewood. In the chief-examination, P.Ws.1 and 2
deposed that they had last seen the deceased in the company of 
the accused.  The fact remains that on 17.09.2011, the deceased
did not return to the house.  The testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2 reveals
that they found the dead body of the deceased in the forest area. In
the cross-examination, P.Ws.1 and 2 deposed that they have not 
stated to P.W.10 that they had seen the deceased in the company 
of the accused. P.W.10-the Inspector of Police, in his cross-
examination, categorically admitted that P.Ws.1 and 2 did not
state in their statements that they had seen the accused in the
company of the deceased on 17.09.2011 at about 3.00 p.m. It is
needless to say that the F.I.R. is not an encyclopaedia to include
all the minute details.  At the same time, the de facto complainant
has to mention material facts in the F.I.R. The accused
accompanying the deceased on the date of the inciden is a material
fact or not, is a crucial question that has to be addressed by this
Court.
26.     Admittedly, P.Ws.1 and 2, at the time of recording of their
statements, did not state that they have seen the accused in the
company of the deceased on the date of the incident. Non-stating of
this fact by P.Ws.1 and 2 to P.W.10, during the course of
investigation, is an omission. The Court has to consider whether
this omission amounts to contradiction or not. If any omission
goes to the very root of the prosecution case, then the Court can
consider such an omission as a contradiction.  P.Ws.1 and 2
having seen the accused in the company of the deceased, is a
material fact. Undoubtedly, non-mentioning of such a fact by
P.W.1 in Ex.P.1-complaint and P.Ws.1 and 2 in their statements 
recorded by P.W.10 goes to the very root of the prosecutions case;
therefore, such an omission amounts to a contradiction.
27.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and
also the principles enunciated in the decisions 3 and 4 cited supra,
it is not safe to place reliance on the testimony of the P.Ws.1 and
2. To put it in a different way, the testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2 do not
inspire the confidence of the Court. The trial Court has not
properly considered all of the above aspects and simply believed
the testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2.
28.     The other circumstance on which the prosecution placed
reliance is that the accused made an extra judicial confession in
the presence of P.W.5.  Before considering the evidence on record
on this aspect, it is apposite to refer to the following case-law:
In
Sahadevan v. State of T.N.
, the Honble apex Court held at
paragraph No.16 as follows:
16. Upon a proper analysis of the above referred judgments
of this Court, it will be appropriate to state the principles
which would make an extra-judicial confession an
admissible piece of evidence capable of forming the basis of
conviction of an accused. These precepts would guide the
judicial mind while dealing with the veracity of cases where
the prosecution heavily relies upon an extra-judicial
confession alleged to have been made by the accused:
(i) The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by
itself. It has to be examined by the court with greater care
and caution.
(ii) It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful.
(iii) It should inspire confidence.
(iv) An extra-judicial confession attains greater
credibility and evidentiary value if it is supported by a chain
of cogent circumstances and is further corroborated by
other prosecution evidence.
(v) For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of
conviction, it should not suffer from any material
discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.
(vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any
other fact and in accordance with law.
The same principles were reiterated in
Tejinder Singh @ Kaka
v State of Punjab
.
In
Vijay Shankar v. State of Haryana
, the Honble apex Court
after reiterating the principles
laid down in
Sahadevan v State of
T.N.
, held at paragraph No.19, as follows:
19. Extra-judicial confession is a weak piece of evidence and
the courts are to view it with greater care and caution. For
an extra-judicial confession to form the basis of conviction,
it should not suffer from any material discrepancies and
inherent improbabilities. In the case on hand, extra-judicial
confession allegedly made to PW 12 does not inspire
confidence and cannot form the basis for the conviction.
29.     According to P.W.5, he is a coolie by profession and he
knows the deceased and the accused.  As seen from the testimony  
of P.W.5, three days after the incident, the accused came to his
house and confessed that she killed her husband for not marrying
her.  As per the testimony of P.W.10-the Investigating Officer,
P.W.5 handed over the accused to him. P.W.5 has not reduced the  
alleged extra judicial confession of the accused into writing. In the
cross examination, P.W.5 categorically admitted that the accused
was in the police station for a period of three days prior to
approaching him.  This itself indicates that the accused was in
police custody for a period of three days.  Under such
circumstances, P.W.5 handing over the accused to P.W.10   
Investigating Officer is only a make-believe story.  Normally, an
accused may approach the person in whom he reposes confidence   
and make extra judicial confession in order to escape from the
clutches of law.  There is no relation between P.W.5 and the
accused. In such circumstances, the possibility of making extra
judicial confession by the accused before P.W.5 is unnatural and
improbable. The trial Court has not properly considered the
trustworthiness of the testimony of P.W.5 and believed the same in
a mechanical manner.  Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case and also the principle enunciated in
Sahadevan, Tejinder Singh @ Kaka and Vijay Shankar  (6th to 8th 
cited supra), we have no hesitation to hold that the prosecution
failed to prove that the accused made an extra judicial confession
before P.W.5.
30.     The other strong circumstance on which the prosecution
relied on is the recovery of M.Os.1 to 3 in pursuance of the
information given by the accused.
In
Amitsingh Bhikamsingh Thakur v. State of Maharashtra
,
the Honble apex Court held at paragraph Nos.18 to 20 as follows:
18. At one time it was held that the expression fact
discovered in the section is restricted to a physical or
material fact which can be perceived by the senses, and
that it does not include a mental fact, now it is fairly settled
that the expression fact discovered includes not only the
physical object produced, but also the place from which it is
produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this, as
noted in Pulukuri Kotayya case [(1946-47) 74 IA 65 : AIR
1947 PC 67 : 48 Cri LJ 533] and in
Udai Bhan v. State of
U.P.
[AIR 1962 SC 1116 : (1962) 2 Cri LJ 251]
19. The various requirements of the section can be
summed up as follows:
(1) The fact of which evidence is sought to be given
must be relevant to the issue. It must be borne in mind
that the provision has nothing to do with question of
relevancy. The relevancy of the fact discovered must be
established according to the prescriptions relating to
relevancy of other evidence connecting it with the crime
in order to make the fact discovered admissible.
    (2) The fact must have been discovered.
(3) The discovery must have been in consequence of
some information received from the accused and not by
the accused's own act.
(4) The person giving the information must be
accused of any offence.
(5) He must be in the custody of a police officer.
    (6) The discovery of a fact in consequence of
information received from an accused in custody must be
deposed to.
(7) Thereupon only that portion of the information
which relates distinctly or strictly to the fact discovered
can be proved. The rest is inadmissible.
20. As observed in Pulukuri Kotayya case [(1946-47) 74
IA 65 : AIR 1947 PC 67 : 48 Cri LJ 533, it can seldom
happen that information leading to the discovery of a fact
forms the foundation of the prosecution case. It is one link
in the chain of proof and the other links must be forged in
manner allowed by law.
To similar effect was the view
expressed in
K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P.
[AIR 
1962 SC 1788 : (1963) 1 Cri LJ 8]
31.     As per the testimony of P.W.7, the accused told them that
she will show M.Os.1 to 3 if they follow her.  As per the testimony
of P.W.7, P.W.10 seized M.O.Nos.1 to 3 under Ex.P8-cover of 
panchanama.  The trial Court considered Ex.P7-confessional
statement of the accused as if it falls within the ambit of
Section
27
of the Evidence Act. It is needless to say that any information
given by the accused, which leads to discovery of a fact will alone
fall within the ambit of
Section 27
of the Act.  The word any fact
as deployed in
Section 27
of the Act encompasses in it, discovery of
incriminating material connected to the commission of the offence.
A confessional statement made by the accused before the Police 
Officer is not admissible under law in view of
Sections 25
and
26
of
the Act.
Section 27
of the Act is an exception to
Sections 25
and
26
of the Act.
32.     Let us consider whether Ex.P7 satisfies the basic ingredients
of
Section 27
of the Act. We have carefully perused Ex.P7.  The
trial Court marked the entire confessional statement of the
accused.  Ex.P7 is nothing but a confessional statement of the
accused.  In the appendix of evidence also, it is mentioned that
Ex.P7 is the confessional statement of the accused.  Once the
Court comes to a conclusion that Ex.P.7 is a confessional
statement of the accused made before the Police Officer, the same
is not admissible under law. Suffice it to say, while marking a
document, the trial Court has to keep in mind the relevant portion
of such document.  Had the trial Court marked the relevant
portion in Ex.P.7, legality of the same would be otherwise. The trial
Court, without properly considering the scope of
Sections 25
to
27
of the Evidence Act, placed reliance on Ex.P7, which is not
admissible under law.  Moreover, the possibility of planting M.O.1
cannot be ruled out completely. Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case and also the principle enunciated in
Amitsingh Bhikamsingh Thakur (10th cited supra), we are of the
considered view that the prosecution miserably failed to prove
recovery of M.O.Nos.1 to 3 in pursuance of the information given
by the accused.
33.     In the light of the foregoing discussion, we have no hesitation
to hold that the prosecution failed to prove the following aspects:
(1)     motive for the offence;
(2)     the deceased was last seen in the company of the accused; 
(3)     extra judicial confession of the accused; and
(4)     recovery of M.Os.1 to 3 in pursuance of the information given by
the accused.
34.     The trial Court, without properly appreciating the testimony
of the prosecution witnesses, erroneously arrived at a conclusion
that the prosecution proved the guilt of the accused for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
I.P.C. If the judgment of the trial
Court is allowed to stand, it would certainly amount to miscarriage
of justice. In the light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the
considered view that the prosecution failed to prove the guilt of the
accused for the offence punishable under Section 302 I.P.C.
35.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we
have no hesitation to hold that the accused is found not guilty of
the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC and accordingly, she
is acquitted of the said offence.
36.     In the result, the appeal is allowed and the conviction and
sentence imposed on the appellant-accused for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC vide judgment, dated
28.02.2013, in Sessions Case No.54 of 2012 on the file of the
Court of III Additional Sessions Judge (FTC), Asifabad, are set
aside.  The Superintendent, Central Prison, Warangal is hereby
directed to release the appellant-accused forthwith, if she is not
required in any other case.  The bail bonds of the accused shall
stand cancelled. M.O.Nos.1 to 8 shall be destroyed after expiry of
the appeal time.        The fine amount, if any, paid by the accused
shall be refunded to her, after appeal time is over.  Miscellaneous
petitions, if any, pending in this appeal shall stand closed.
___________________________________      
JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM         
________________________________     
JUSTICE T.SUNIL CHOWDARY       
Dated: 25.08.2018