[Cites
7
, Cited by
17
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
A.Rama Mohan Reddy & Others vs A. Vijaya Kumar & Another on 28 September, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 HYDERABAD 80, AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 54
Author:
Challa Kodanda Ram
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
The Honble Sri Justice CHALLA KODANDA RAM      

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 1624 OF 2018     

28.09.2018 

A.Rama Mohan Reddy & others Petitioners    

A. Vijaya Kumar & anotherRespondents    


Counsel for the petitioners: Sri P. Narahari Babu

Counsel for the respondents: Sri A. Hanumanth Reddy 


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases cited:
1. AIR 1981 P H 157 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM            

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 1624 OF 2018     

O R D E R :
This Revision is directed against the order dated 24.01.2018,
whereby and whereunder the learned Senior Civil Judge at
Penukonda allowed I.A. No. 17 of 2018 in O.S. No. 38 of 2007,
taken out by the respondents  plaintiffs to recall P.W.5 for further
examination to prove Ex.A10.
Petitioners herein are the defendants against whom the
respondents  plaintiffs filed the above said suit seeking
declaration of their right over the suit property.  During the course
of examination, when Ex.A10  permanent Khararu Dasthaveju  
was confronted to D.W.1, he denied the signature thereon. The
case of the respondents is that P.W.5 is one of the attestors of
Ex.A10, but he was not confronted with the said document due to
oversight, at the time of his examination. Hence, it became
necessary to recall P.W.5.  The trial Court, on finding that Ex.A10
was not confronted to P.W.5 by the respondents-plaintiffs, due to
oversight, opined that filing of the aforesaid I.A. cannot be said to
be malice and hence, allowed the same by the order under
Revision.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the
evidence of the respective parties was closed and at the stage of
arguments, the respondents  plaintiffs filed the present I.A. under
Order 18 Rule 17 of the Code which is impermissible in law.
Learned counsel for the respondents vehemently opposes the
Revision.  Placing reliance on the judgment of Punjab & Haryana
High Court in O.Prakash v. Sarupa , learned counsel submits
that the Court has ample power to recall the witness.  According to
her, for the mistake on the part of the counsel, the respondents 
plaintiffs cause cannot be put to jeopardy.  The learned counsel
further submits that as per the provisions of
Section 47
of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, it is absolutely necessary to prove a
document.  In support of her contentions, the learned counsel also
places reliance on the judgment of this Court in A.S. No. 294 of
1930 (Suryanarayana v.  Achamma).
It is to be borne in mind that the Civil Procedure Code
prescribes the method and manner of conducting trial of the cases
and in particular, the order of production of witnesses and leading
of evidence.  Though there is a provision for examinationinchief,
cross-examination and thereafter, re-examination, the provision
contained under
Order 18 Rule 17 CPC
is an exception to allow
recalling of witness for cross-examination.
Order 18 Rule 17 reads as under:
Court may recall and examine witness:- The Court may at
any stage of a suit recall any witness who has been examined and
may (subject to the law of evidence for the time being in force) put
such questions to him as the  Court thinks fit.
If one examines Order 18 Rule 17, one would find that the
discretion of the Court to recall a witness, who was examined
earlier and put such questions to him as the Court deems fit, is
limited; in the sense, firstly, if the Court seeks any clarification,
such power is to be exercised, which means that the same is not
available to the parties to the proceedings; secondly, recall of a
witness for re-examination is subject to the Law of Evidence for the
time being in force.  So far as the examination of witnesses under
the
Indian Evidence Act
is concerned, it may be noted, the same is
governed by the provisions of
Section 135
,
136
,
137
and
138
thereof.
Admittedly, the suit is at the stage of arguments. The reason
stated in the affidavit filed in support of the present Application by
plaintiff No.2 was that Ex.A10 was executed by the defendants in
the presence of his father and other witnesses and one of the
attestors is P.W.5, but he was not  confronted with the said
document by mistake and oversight. It was further stated that
since D.W.1 had denied execution of the same and appending his 
signature thereon, in his cross-examination, it had become
necessary to recall P.W.5, as it is an extremely important piece of
evidence supporting the claim of the plaintiffs. It is only by
inadvertence, P.W.5 was not confronted with the document and as 
such, it had become necessary for the plaintiffs to seek recall of
P.W.5 for the limited purpose, as stated above.
The case of the petitioners in the I.A., as can be seen from
the above, is that, Ex.A10 document is of great importance to
prove their case.  The fact that Ex.A10 and its contents are
required to be proved is evident from the pleadings and
submissions of the respondents-plaintiffs.  In other words, in the
assessment and judgment of the respondents, there is a gap in the
evidence with respect to Ex.A10 which requires to be bridged.
In this factual backdrop, the question which requires to be
considered is Is it permissible for a Court to recall a plaintiffs
witness, on an Application, that too, at the stage of arguments, to
fillin a gap in the evidence and whether the provisions of
Order 18
Rule 17 CPC
permits such exercise.
As noticed supra, Order 18 Rule 17 is hedged with a
condition that recall of a witness is permissible subject to the
provisions of the
Indian Evidence Act
. The method and manner,
the sequence of examination of a witness i.e., examination-in-chief,
cross-examination and re-examination is governed by
Sections
135
,
136
,
137
and
138
of the said Act.  It may be noted that Law of
Evidence is a substantive one and
the CPC
being a procedural law,
the same is required to be in conformity with the substantive law.
Order 18 Rule 17 makes it clear that recalling of a witness is
circumscribed by the provisions of the
Evidence Act
. It may also be
noted that the
Evidence Act
, by itself, does not use the word
recalling of a witness except for re-examination. In other words,
recalling of a witness, as provided under Order 18 Rule 17 is
required to be understood as recalling of a witness for re-
examination which should be in conformity with the provisions of
the
Evidence Act
.
In those circumstances, the recalling of witness at the
instance of the plaintiffs, that too, after completion of the evidence
of the defendants and when the matter is listed for arguments, to
fill-up a gap, being impermissible, the order under Revision,
allowing recall of a witness suffers from irregularity.
The Civil Revision Petition is hence, allowed, setting aside
the order dated 24.01.2018 in I.A. No. 17 of 2018 in O.S. No. 38 of
2007 on the file of the Court of the Senior Civil Judge at
Penukonda.  No costs.
Consequently, the miscellaneous Applications, if any stand
closed.
___________________________     
CHALLA KODANDA RAM, J       
28th September 2018