[Cites
9
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Depot Manager,Apsrtc, Ongole ... vs K V Subba Rao S/O Narasimham 54 Years Ex ... on 7 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 HYD 233, (2018) 3 CURLR 662, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 629, (2019) 160 FACLR 504, (2019) 2 LAB LN 189, (2019) 3 SERVLR 592
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO         

WRIT PETITION NO. 26718 of 2018   

07.08.2018 

The Depot Manager,APSRTC, Ongole Depot, Prakasam district  Petitioner    

K V Subba Rao S/o Narasimham 54 years Ex Conductor APSRTC Ongole Depot R/o 58-10-10 Santhapet, OngolePrakasam district and a         

Counsel for the petitioner: Mr P Durga Prasad
                                        
Counsel for the Respondent No.1:   --
Counsel for the Respondent No.2 : Govt  Pleader for Labour (AP)       

<Gist :

>Head Note: 


? Cases referred:

AIR 1955 SC 423  
(2015) 15 SCC 602 
(2006) 4 SCC 322 
(1986) 4 SCC 566 
(2014) 4 SCC 108 


The Court made the following:


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P. NAVEEN RAO          
WRIT PETITION NO.26718 OF 2018     
ORAL ORDER:
In this writ petition the Andhra Pradesh State Road
Transport Corporation (for short Corporation) is challenging the
award passed by the Labour Court, Guntur in I.D.No.4 of 2009
dated 3.6.2013. By the said award the Labour Court held the
punishment of removal from service as illegal and issued
consequential directions.
2.      The facts that can be culled out from the averments
made in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition are that
first respondent-workman was served with charge sheet dated
9.8.2006 alleging that while he was conducting bus service on
27.7.2006 there was shortage of tickets and certain other
illegalities were noticed.  Charge sheet contains three charges.  The
sum and substance of the allegation is that he failed to maintain
record properly and correct tickets in the hand tray, shown less
issue of ? 3/- denomination tickets, though sold the tickets and
misappropriated amount of ? 70/- and re-issued certain tickets
which were already issued. The disciplinary action resulted in
imposing punishment of removal from service vide proceedings
dated 5.4.2007, affirmed by Appellate and Revisional authorities.
Aggrieved thereby, petitioner raised Industrial Dispute under
Section 2 (A) (2)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short,
Act, 1947).  The Labour Court by its award dated 3.6.2013 partly
allowed the claim, set aside the order of removal and directed to
reinstate the first respondent with continuity of service and all
other attendant benefits but without back wages.
3.        Heard Sri Durga Prasad, learned standing counsel for
petitioner Corporation.
4.      Learned standing counsel for petitioner corporation
sought to contend that the Labour Court erred in not appreciating
the contentions urged on behalf the petitioner and without
assigning reasons passed award and award is liable to be set aside
on the sole ground that it is bereft of reasons in support of the
decision.
5.      Before appreciating this contention, having regard to
the fact that the award was passed on 3.6.2013, learned counsel
for petitioner was asked to satisfy the reasons for delay in
instituting the writ petition.  Learned counsel for petitioner would
fairly submit that no reasons are assigned in the affidavit filed in
support of the writ petition.   The first respondent has instituted
Execution Petition before the Labour Court and persisting for
compliance of the award and at that stage the writ petition is filed.
He would submit that as award is ex-facie vitiated, the Court may
condone the delay and entertain the writ petition.
6.      As fairly submitted by the learned standing counsel
appearing for petitioner Corporation, there is no whisper in the
affidavit filed in support of the writ petition on various steps taken
by the petitioner corporation after the award was received by them,
but contentions are raised on merits.
7.      In exercise of power of judicial review, writ Court can
test the validity of a decision of the statutory authority within the
well laid down parameters of judicial review. The remedy under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India is an extraordinary remedy
and equitable. Grant of relief to an aggrieved person is
discretionary in the hands of writ Court. Though there is no fetters
imposed on writ Court to entertain the writ petition, ordinarily writ
Court do not entertain the writ petitions on stale matters; more so,
where rights accrued to opposite party and entertaining a writ
petition after long lapse of time would have adverse consequences
on such person. In a given case, writ Court may ignore the
inordinate delay in instituting the writ petition, provided it has
wider ramification or cause public mischief requiring court
interference and laying down law or when the order is ex-facie
unsustainable warranting exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction by
the writ Court. However, the minimum that is expected from the
petitioner seeking to litigate before this court by invoking extra-
ordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India,
when the delay is long, is to explain steps taken by it after the
Award copy was received or whether any mischief was played by 
officials concerned keeping it in dark about the award passed by
the Labour Court and allowed it to lie over till the notice in
Execution Petition is received.
8.
In
Sangram Singh v. Election Tribunal
, Supreme
Court delineated scope of exercise of power of judicial review under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. Supreme Court held:
"14. That, however, is not to say that the jurisdiction will be
exercised whenever there is an error of law. The High Courts do not,
and should not, act as courts of appeal under
Article 226.
Their
powers are purely discretionary and though no limits can be placed
upon that discretion it must be exercised along recognised lines and
not arbitrarily; and one of the limitations imposed by the Courts
on themselves is that they will not exercise jurisdiction in this
class of case unless substantial injustice has ensued, or is
likely to ensue. They will not allow themselves to be turned into
courts of appeal or revision to set right mere errors of law which do
not occasion injustice in a broad and general sense, for, though no
legislature can impose limitations on these constitutional powers it
is a sound exercise of discretion to bear in mind the policy of
the legislature to have disputes about these special rights
decided as speedily as may be. Therefore, writ petitions should
not be lightly entertained in this class of case."
(emphasis supplied)
9.   Though there is no time limit prescribed for institution of
a Writ Petition by invoking
Article 226
of the Constitution of India,
it must be within a reasonable time. Merely because no time limit
is prescribed a person can not knock the doors of this Court
whenever he feels convenient for him. What is a reasonable time
within which a person can avail the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of
this Court depends on facts of a given case.
10.1.
In
State of Jammu and Kashmir v. R.K. Zalpuri and
others
, the very issue of delay in instituting the writ petition after
long lapse of time was considered. It was a case of dismissal and
challenge was on the ground of violation of procedural safeguards
incorporated into the Jammu & Kashmir Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules. Disciplinary action
resulted in imposing punishment of dismissal from service by order
dated 6.9.1999. This was challenged by filing writ petition in the
High Court on 18.2.2006. The delay was of 7 years, Supreme Court 
held that the delay and laches were not satisfactorily explained
and, therefore, writ petition was not maintainable.
10.2. The State Government raised objection on
maintainability of writ petition on the ground of delay and laches.
Without accepting this plea, punishment was set aside holding that
Rule 34 of the Classification, Control and Appeal Rules was not
complied. Even in appeal the Division Bench has not considered
objection on delay in filing writ petition. Hence, appeal before
Supreme Court.
10.3.   Supreme Court reviewed the precedent decisions and
held:
"20. Having stated thus, it is useful to refer to a passage from
City
and Industrial Development Corpn. v. Dosu Aardeshir Bhiwandiwala
[City
and
Industrial Development Corpn. v. Dosu Aardeshir
Bhiwandiwala, MANU/SC/8250/2008
: (2009) 1 SCC 168], wherein    
this Court while dwelling upon jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
Constitution, has expressed thus: (SCC p. 175, para 30)
"30. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Article 226
is
duty-bound to consider whether:
(a) adjudication of writ petition involves any complex and disputed
questions of facts and whether they can be satisfactorily resolved;
(b) the petition reveals all material facts;
(c) the petitioner has any alternative or effective remedy for the
resolution of the dispute;
(d) person invoking the jurisdiction is guilty of unexplained
delay and laches;
(e) ex facie barred by any laws of limitation;
(f) grant of relief is against public policy or barred by any valid law;
and host of other factors."                            (emphasis supplied)
11.
In this regard reference to a passage from
Karnataka
Power Corpn. Ltd. v. K. Thangappan
would be apposite:
"6. Delay or laches is one of the factors which is to be borne in
mind by the High Court when they exercise their discretionary
powers under
Article 226
of the Constitution. In an appropriate
case the High Court may refuse to invoke its extraordinary
powers if there is such negligence or omission on the part of
the applicant to assert his right as taken in conjunction with
the lapse of time and other circumstances, causes prejudice to
the opposite party."
(emphasis supplied)
12.     After so stating the Court by referring to the authority
in
State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal
restated the principle
articulated in earlier pronouncements to the following effect:
"9.... the High Court in exercise of its discretion does not
ordinarily assist the tardy and the indolent or the acquiescent
and the lethargic. If there is inordinate delay on the part of the
petitioner and such delay is not satisfactorily explained, the
High Court may decline to intervene and grant relief in exercise
of its writ jurisdiction. It was stated that this rule is premised on a
number of factors. The High Court does not ordinarily permit a
belated resort to the extraordinary remedy because it is likely to
cause confusion and public inconvenience and bring, in its train new
injustices, and if writ jurisdiction is exercised after unreasonable
delay, it may have the effect of inflicting not only hardship and
inconvenience but also injustice on third parties. It was pointed out
that when writ jurisdiction is invoked, unexplained delay coupled
with the creation of third-party rights in the meantime is an
important factor which also weighs with the High Court in deciding
whether or not to exercise such jurisdiction."
(emphasis supplied)
13.
In
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board v. T.T. Murali Babu
, it is ruled thus:
"16. Thus, the doctrine of delay and laches should not be lightly
brushed aside. A writ court is required to weigh the explanation
offered and the acceptability of the same. The court should bear in
mind that it is exercising an extraordinary and equitable
jurisdiction. As a constitutional court it has a duty to protect
the rights of the citizens but simultaneously it is to keep itself
alive to the primary principle that when an aggrieved person,
without adequate reason, approaches the court at his own
leisure or pleasure, the court would be under legal obligation
to scrutinise whether the lis at a belated stage should be
entertained or not. Be it noted, delay comes in the way of
equity. In certain circumstances delay and laches may not be fatal
but in most circumstances inordinate delay would only invite
disaster for the litigant who knocks at the doors of the court. Delay
reflects inactivity and inaction on the part of a litigant--a litigant who
has forgotten the basic norms, namely, 'procrastination is the
greatest thief of time' and second, law does not permit one to sleep
and rise like a phoenix. Delay does bring in hazard and causes
injury to the lis."                                        (emphasis supplied)
14.     Supreme
Court further held
,
"26. In the case at hand, the employee was dismissed from service in
the year 1999, but he chose not to avail any departmental remedy.
He woke up from his slumber to knock at the doors of the High
Court after a lapse of five years. The staleness of the claim
remained stale and it could not have been allowed to rise like a
phoenix by the writ court."            (emphasis supplied)
15.   The claim of petitioner is stale. Petitioner was in deep
slumber for 5 years and woke up only when EP was pressed. There  
is no whisper of steps taken and cause for delay. As held by
Supreme Court in
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and  
Sewerage Board v. Murali Babu
(supra): 'law does not permit one
to sleep and rise like a phoenix. Delay does bring in hazard and
causes injury to the lis'.  Thus, granting relief to petitioner is not
just and equitable in a petition filed after 5 years. Having regard to
inordinate delay of 5 years the Court declines to exercise
discretionary and equitable jurisdiction.
16.     However, the Court has also considered the
submissions of learned standing counsel for petitioner Corporation
on the merits of the award to test whether Court can relax the
rigors of delay in invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction.
17.     It was the forcible contention of learned standing
counsel that the award is bereft of reasons; except narrating the
respective contentions, no reasons are assigned in support of the
decision and after extracting precedent decisions straight-away
conclusions are recorded by the Labour Court and therefore the
award is vitiated on that ground.
18.     I see no merit in the said contention.  On going
through the award, it is seen that the Labour Court has recorded
the charges leveled against the petitioner; the procedure followed
thereon; recorded the contentions urged by the first respondent-
workman and the contentions urged on behalf of petitioner
Corporation in their counter affidavit and then the Labour Court
proceeded to formulate the following points for its consideration:
1.      Whether, the punishment of removal of the petitioner
from the service is justified?
2.      If not, to what relief, the petitioner is entitled?
19.     Under Point No.1, the Labour Court went on to discuss
the evidence brought on record and the contentions of Law Officer
of the petitioner Corporation and the contentions of learned
counsel for first respondent and then proceeded to discuss about
the charges and the evidence.
20.     It is useful to extract relevant portions of the award,
which reads as under:
A perusal of Charge Memo Ex.M4 shows that the checking officials
have mentioned the irregularities committed by the petitioner with
regard to Charge No.1 only.  But subsequently, the first respondent
framed charges 2 and 3.
In Ex.M5 check sheet also, there was no mention with regard to
Charges 2 and 3 by the checking officials.
Ex M20 is Domestic Inquiry Statement of Sri L.K.Murthy, TTI who
conducted check on the petitioner.  He confined his statement with
regard to Charge No.1 only.  The said witness has not stated any
thing with regard to charges 2 and 3.  Except, this witness, either
the Inquiry Officer or the respondents have not produced any
witnesses in support of the charges 2 and 3.  Even the first
respondent who framed charges 2 and 3 has also not examined  
during the course of inquiry.  However, without examining any
witnesses in support of charges 2 and 3, the Inquiry Officer held that
the charges 2 and 3 were also proved against the petitioner.
21.     It is, therefore, seen from the above extracted
paragraphs that the Labour Court observed that statement of
Mr L.K.Murthy confines to charge no.1 only and that he has not
stated anything with regard to charge nos. 2 and 3.  The Labour
Court further held
that except said witness, the Enquiry Officer or
the respondents have not produced any witnesses in support of
charges 2 and 3.  The Labour Court further observed that  even
without examining the witnesses in support of charges 2 and 3 the
Enquiry Officer held the charges as proved.  Labour Court went on
to discuss the contentions of learned counsel for petitioner
therein/workman and decisions relied upon by him and then went
on to add that the said decisions of the Honble Supreme Court
would aptly apply to the case.  It is thus seen that the Labour
Court has not directly jumped to the conclusion after recording the
respective submissions, as sought to be contended but applied its
mind, assessed the evidence on record and then recorded its
findings and held that punishment of removal is shockingly
disproportionate to the gravity of the first charge and held that the
facts of the case require the Labour Court exercise discretion
vested under
Section 11-A
of the Act, 1947 and accordingly
answered the first point.  Thus, it is not a case of non-application
of mind or mechanical disposal. Its a reasoned order.
22.     Since the findings recorded by the Labour Court are
on merits, the jurisdiction of this Court to interfere on the award
passed by the Labour Court in exercise of power of judicial review
is very limited.  The Court can entertain a writ petition only if there
is perversity in the decision of the Labour Court or ex facie
violation of principles of natural justice or award is bereft of
reasons but writ Court cannot act as appellate authority,
re-appreciate the evidence on record and come to conclusion
different from the conclusion arrived at by the Labour Court.
Further, writ court do not interfere in the discretion exercised by
the Labour Court vested in it by
Section 11-A
of the Act, 1947
unless perversity in the reason to exercise is palpable.
23.     Having regard to these parameters and fact that the
Labour Court has assessed the evidence on record and has 
recorded its findings in support of the decision rendered, no case is
made out even on merits.
24.     Thus, writ petition is liable to be dismissed and it is
accordingly dismissed. Pending miscellaneous petitions shall stand
closed.
___________________________     
JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO      
Date: 07.08.2018