[Cites
5
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
M.C.Mehta vs Union Of India on 15 December, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 SC 568
Author:
Madan B. Lokur
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
Madan B. Lokur
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                                     I.A. NOS. 93010 AND 93007/2017

                                                                  IN

                                               WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 4677 OF 1985

                         M.C. Mehta                                            ...   Petitioner

                                                                 Versus

                         Union of India & Ors.                                ...    Respondents


                         IN RE: VISHVJYOTI OVERSEAS (P) LTD. & ORS. ..Applicants


                                                            JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1.      Invaders have pillaged Delhi for hundreds of years, but for the last

                         couple of decades it is being ravaged by its own citizens and officials

                         governing the capital city – we refer to unauthorized constructions and

                         misuse of residential premises for industrial and other commercial

                         purposes. This Court has focussed on these illegal activities in several

                         decisions and has issued directions from time to time to try and bring
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
some sanity to urban living but to little or no effect. The applications
Date: 2017.12.15
14:33:20 IST
Reason:
before us, the chronology of events and the historical developments
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                         Page 1 of 24
leading up to these applications has given cause to reflect and decide on

some of these issues keeping our constitutional obligations in mind.

Decision of 7th May, 2004
2.      Way back in the 1990s it was brought to the notice of this Court

that a variety of illegal activities were being carried on in the capital city

of Delhi with reference to industries established in residential or non-

conforming areas as well as misuse of residential premises for other

commercial purposes. On an application having been moved, this Court

realized that those in authority and power were not at all keen to take

steps to remove hazardous and noxious industries and heavy and large

industries out of Delhi, prohibit or prevent the continuing illegalities or

even otherwise stop the misuse of residential premises for a commercial

purpose. Since the attitude of the powers that be raised an issue of mis-

governance or non-governance affecting the well-being of the citizens of

Delhi, this Court felt that it could no longer be a mute spectator to the

whims and fancies of those in power and authority. It was also felt that it

would be necessary to direct those in authority and power to implement

the law for the sake of the citizens of Delhi. This Court faced a situation

where there was little or no support to the rule of law by the concerned

officials and today the citizens of Delhi are faced with and are witnessing,

among other issues, outrageous levels of pollution in Delhi entirely due to
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                          Page 2 of 24
the lack of concern for the rule of law – the citizens of Delhi are paying a

           heavy price with hopelessly polluted air to breathe and consequent

           damage to their lungs, respiratory problems and possible damage to the

           brain of infants and children.
3.      M.C. Mehta, an environmental activist, had already moved this

           Court with an application to find a remedy for the air pollution in Delhi in

           a pending writ petition. Although he sought several reliefs, this Court first

           concentrated on use of residential areas for industrial purposes and later,

           the misuse of residential premises for other commercial activities. For the

           present, we are concerned with the misuse of residential premises for

           other commercial activities. These issues first arose when preliminary

           orders were passed by this Court on his application on 30th September,

           2002 and 19th August, 2003. Thereafter, this Court addressed the issue of

           residential areas being used for industrial purposes by a judgment and

           order dated 7th May, 2004 in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India.1
4.      A reading of the judgment and order dated 7th May, 2004 makes it

           apparent that this Court expected all those concerned with governance of

           Delhi to adhere to the rule of law and ensure its implementation.

           Unfortunately, this Court was anguished by events that demonstrated that

           the trust reposed was belied in terms of action for implementation of the

           law and that industrial activity continued in areas despite the Master Plan
1
(2004) 6 SCC 588
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                          Page 3 of 24
for Delhi, meaning thereby that impermissible industrial activity

continued in residential areas in Delhi.
5.      This Court also noted that no dispute was raised by the

Government of India or the Delhi Government or by any statutory

authority that unauthorised and illegal industrial activity had commenced

and continued in Delhi in blatant breach of the provisions of the Master

Plan and no action, or ineffective action, had been taken by the concerned

authorities. Rather than put their respective houses in order, it was noted

that a blame game had begun with the responsibility of taking action

being shifted with each authority blaming one another - be it the

Government of India or the Delhi Government or the statutory

authorities. Tragically, the situation continues even today and those who

are suffering are the citizens of Delhi, the sufferance being not only

confined to breathing hazardous and noxious air but also the health of

thousands of people including children and infants residing in Delhi. In

other words, the consequences of the failure to implement the rule of law

in Delhi were having a generational impact, which cannot be anything but

disastrous.
6.      This Court noted that according to the Delhi Government it is not

the function of the State Government to implement the Master Plan.

According to the Government of India it is not the implementing agency
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                       Page 4 of 24
and this Court noted that the Government of India had taken a somersault

           in this regard. According to other statutory authorities in Delhi, they too

           avoided shouldering any responsibility for inaction. Each of these

           authorities of the State was shifting their stands, as convenient, without

           any regard for statutory provisions and in blatant breach of the rule of

           law. This Court darkly hinted that in all this there was connivance with

           industry for extraneous considerations.
7.       Accordingly, this Court felt it appropriate to appoint a Monitoring

           Committee to oversee and ensure compliance with the directions given by

           this Court in its decision of 7th May, 2004 with regard to industrial

           activity in residential or non-conforming areas in Delhi.

           Decision of 16th February, 2006
8.
In a subsequent decision dated 16th February, 2006 in
M.C. Mehta

           v. Union of India2
this Court again noted flagrant violations of various

           laws including municipal laws, the Master Plan and other plans besides

           environmental laws that had been engaging the attention of this Court for

           several years. It was noted that several orders were passed from time to

           time only to secure implementation of the laws and to protect the

           fundamental rights of citizens since it was the constitutional duty of this

           Court.
2
(2006) 3 SCC 399
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                         Page 5 of 24
9.      This Court also considered an extremely pertinent issue: what

would happen when those entrusted by law to protect the rights of the

citizens are themselves violators and/or abettors of the violations? The

difficult task faced in such a situation was noted where, as a part of its

constitutional duty, this Court is required to preserve the rule of law so

that people may not lose faith in it and also point out violations of the rule

of law by those who are supposed to implement the law. It was observed

that the issue is not one of an absence of law but of its implementation.
10.     Having passed orders on 7th May, 2004 relating to unauthorized

industrial activity in Delhi and being compelled to set up a Monitoring

Committee, this Court focused its attention on yet another problem facing

the citizens of Delhi, namely, that of misuse of residential premises for

commercial purposes. In the decision dated 16th February, 2006 in M.C.

Mehta, this Court noted in paragraph 53 of the Report that it cannot

remain a mute spectator when violations of the law affect the

environment and the healthy living of those who abide by the law. It was

stated, and the pain and anguish of this Court is quite apparent:
“Despite its difficulty, this Court cannot remain a mute spectator
                when the violations also affect the environment and healthy
                living of law-abiders. The enormity of the problem which, to a
                great extent, is the doing of the authorities themselves, does
                not mean that a beginning should not be made to set things
                right. If the entire misuser cannot be stopped at one point of time
                because of its extensive nature, then it has to be stopped in a
                phased manner, beginning with major violators. There has to be
                a will to do it. We have hereinbefore noted in brief the orders
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 6 of 24
made in the last so many years but it seems the same has had no
                effect on the authorities. The things cannot be permitted to go on
                in this manner forever. On one hand, various laws are enacted,
                master plans are prepared by expert planners, provision is made
                in the plans also to tackle the problem of existing unauthorised
                constructions and misusers and, on the other hand, such illegal
                activities go on unabated openly under the gaze of everyone,
                without having any respect and regard for law and other citizens.”
                [Emphasis supplied by us].
11.     This Court observed that if the laws are not enforced and orders of

the Courts to implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be total

lawlessness. In the decision rendered on 16th February, 2006 this Court

noted, quite explicitly and not in a veiled manner, that blatant misuse of

properties in Delhi for commercial purposes on such a large-scale could

not take place without the connivance of the officers and that it was

therefore necessary to take action to check corruption, nepotism and total

apathy towards the rights of citizens – and we may add, chaos and

disaster. This Court noted that there must be some accountability not only

of those violating the law but also of those errant officers who turn a

blind eye to the misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes.

It was observed in paragraph 61 of the Report as follows:
“Despite passing of the laws and repeated orders of the [Delhi]
                High Court and this Court, the enforcement of the laws and the
                implementations of the orders are utterly lacking. If the laws
                are not enforced and the orders of the courts to enforce and
                implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be total
                lawlessness. It is, therefore, necessary to also identify and take
                appropriate action against officers responsible for this state of
                affairs. Such blatant misuse of properties at large-scale cannot
                take place without connivance of the officers concerned. It is
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 7 of 24
also a source of corruption. Therefore, action is also
                necessary to check corruption, nepotism and total apathy
                towards the rights of the citizens. Those who own the
                properties that are misused have also implied responsibility
                towards the hardship, inconvenience, suffering caused to the
                residents of the locality and injuries to third parties. It is,
                therefore, not only the question of stopping the misuser but also
                making the owners at default accountable for the injuries caused
                to others. Similar would also be the accountability of errant
                officers as well since, prima facie, such large-scale misuser, in
                violation of laws, cannot take place without the active
                connivance of the officers. It would be for the officers to show
                what effective steps were taken to stop the misuser.” [Emphasis
                supplied by us].
12.     In view of the above, this Court directed the Delhi Municipal

Corporation (for short the MCD) to give wide publicity in leading

newspapers of the requirement that those misusing their residential

premises for commercial purposes should cease the misuse on their own.

It was also directed that 30 days after the issuance of the public notices,

and if the misuse is not stopped, the process of sealing the premises

would start. The period of 30 days expired on or about 29th March, 2006.
13.     Unfortunately, issuance of the public notices had no impact either

on those violating the law or on those expected to implement the rule of

law. Perhaps, as observed by this Court, the reason was connivance,

corruption, nepotism and total apathy towards the rights of the citizens of

Delhi - who are today facing the brunt of the decades of illegalities

having been committed.
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                             Page 8 of 24
Decision of 24th March, 2006
14.     Faced with this situation, in its decision of 24th March, 2006 in
3
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
this Court observed that the MCD had

           issued appropriate notices but, to oversee the implementation of the law

           regarding residential premises used for commercial (non-industrial)

           purposes, it would be appropriate to seal offending premises. Therefore,

           rather than leave any discretion to the officers of the MCD (for obvious

           reasons) a Monitoring Committee was appointed consisting of Mr K.J.

           Rao, Former Advisor to the Election Commissioner, Mr Bhure Lal,

           Chairman, EPCA and Major General (Retd.) Som Jhingan. All necessary

           facilities to the members of the Monitoring Committee were directed to

           be provided by the MCD including facility of transport, secretarial

           services, honorarium etc.
15.     As a part of its mandate, the Monitoring Committee was to begin

           the process of sealing with effect from 29th March, 2006. Some of those

           who were misusing the premises requested for reasonable time to make

           alternative arrangements. This Court directed that they should cease the

           misuse on or before 30th April, 2006 while giving an undertaking to this

           Court that misuse would be stopped. Some others were given time till 30th

           June, 2006 subject to their filing an affidavit stating that the misuse

           would be stopped on or before 30th June, 2006 and no further extension
3
(2006) 3 SCC 429
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                       Page 9 of 24
would be sought. They were also required to give an undertaking to the

effect that if the misuse was not stopped by 30th June, 2006 they would be

subject to perjury and contempt of Court. To ensure compliance of the

orders of sealing, it was made clear that the sealing process would

continue notwithstanding any order passed by any Court and the Delhi

Police was directed to extend full support for carrying out the sealing

activity.
Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006
and interim stay
16.     To get over the orders passed by this Court, which were apparently

uncomfortable to the powers that be, the Delhi Development Authority

(DDA) modified the Master Plan for Delhi on 28th March, 2006 insofar as

the chapter on mixed land use is concerned. Soon thereafter, perhaps by a

coincidence, the Government of India moved I.A. 1931 in this Court

praying that the local bodies in Delhi be directed to complete the exercise

of identification of mixed use of roads/streets in residential areas within a

period of six months. As a result of this application and with a view to

grant relief, on a temporary basis, in respect of some areas, this Court

permitted the Government of India, on 28th April, 2006 to place detailed

facts before the Monitoring Committee. The necessary facts were placed

by the Government of India before the Monitoring Committee, who heard

all concerned including the Government of India and submitted a report
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                         Page 10 of 24
on 4th May, 2006. When the application filed by the Government of India

came up for consideration before this Court along with the report of the

Monitoring Committee on 11th May, 2006 the Government of India

withdrew its application.
17.     Why this turnaround? A Bill was pending or perhaps introduced in

Parliament which mandated, inter alia, a moratorium on all adverse

action in respect of unauthorized development, notwithstanding any

judgment, decree or order of any Court, by providing for a status quo

with effect from 1st January, 2006. The Bill was intended to be a

temporary measure for one year but has since been re-enacted in some

form or another and is now operative till 31st December, 2017.
Section 3
of the Bill (as finally enacted) provided as above and it reads as follows:
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant law or
                any rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, the Central
                Government shall within a period of one year of the coming into
                effect of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms,
                policy guidelines and feasible strategies to deal with the problem
                of unauthorised development with regard to the under-mentioned
                categories, namely:-
(a)    mixed land use not conforming to the Master Plan;
(b)    construction beyond sanctioned plans; and
                       (c)    encroachment by slum and Jhuggi-Jhompri
                       dwellers and hawkers and street vendors,
so that the development of Delhi takes place in a sustainable and
                planned manner.
(2)    Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) and
                notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court,
                status quo as on the 1st day of January, 2006 shall be maintained
                in respect of the categories of unauthorised development
                mentioned in sub-section (1).
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 11 of 24
(3)    All notices issued by any local authority for initiating
                action against the categories of unauthorised development
                referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been
                suspended and no punitive action shall be taken during the said
                period of one year.
(4)    Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act,
                the Central Government may, at any time before the expiry of
                one year, withdraw the exemption by notification in the Official
                Gazette in respect of one or more of the categories of
                unauthorised development mentioned in sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3), as the case may be.
„Unauthorized development‟ was defined in
Section 2(1)(i)
of the Bill (as

finally enacted) in the following words:
(i)     “unauthorised development” means use of land or use of
                building or construction of building carried out in contravention
                of the sanctioned plans or without obtaining the sanction of plans,
                or in contravention of the land use as permitted under the Master
                Plan or Zonal Plan or layout plan, as the case may be, and
                includes encroachment.
18.     On 12th May, 2006 the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Bill, 2006

was passed by the Lok Sabha and it was passed on 15th May, 2006 by the

Rajya Sabha. The Bill received the assent of the President on 19th May,

2006 and was notified on the same day. The statute is hereafter referred to

as the Act.
19.     The very next day, on 20th May, 2006 the Government of India

issued a notification placing a moratorium in respect of all notices issued

by the local authorities and directing them to give effect to the provisions
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 12 of 24
of the Act instead, which virtually restored the status quo ante. The

following was notified:
(1)    The premises sealed by any local authority in pursuance of
                a judgment, order or decree of any court after the 1st day of
                January, 2006 shall be eligible to be restored, for a period of one
                year, with effect from the 19th day of May, 2006 to the position
                as was obtaining as on the 1st day of January, 2006.
                (2)    All commercial establishments which are required to cease
                carrying out commercial activities at their premises by the 30th
                day of June, 2006 may continue such activities, as they were
                being carried out on the 1st day of January, 2006 for a period of
                one year, with effect from the 19th day of May, 2006.
20.     However, by the time the Act was enacted and the notification of

20th May, 2006 issued, quite shockingly 40,814 affidavits had been

received by the Monitoring Committee. In these affidavits, it was stated

that the misuse would be stopped by 30th June, 2006. In addition, 5006

commercial establishments had been sealed by that time. This gives an

indication of the magnitude of misuse of residential premises for

commercial purposes in Delhi.
21.     Feeling aggrieved by the statutory protection given to violators and

breakers of the law, quite a few public spirited persons challenged the

provisions of the Act as being unconstitutional. A challenge was also

made to the notification dated 20th May, 2006. Among the petitioners was

Mr. P.K. Dave a former Lt. Governor of Delhi. A request was made by

the petitioners for a stay of the operation of the Act and the notification

dated 20th May, 2006. The request for interim orders was considered by
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 13 of 24
this Court in
Delhi Pradesh Citizens Council v. Union of India4
on 10th

           August, 2006. On that date this Court did not accept the plea for a

           complete stay of the impugned legislation but it stayed the two directions

           mentioned above as contained in the notification dated 20 th May, 2006.

           This Court was of opinion that these directions amount to overruling the

           orders and directions issued by this Court and action taken as a

           consequence of the orders and directions. This Court clarified that the

           order of stay would mean that the 5006 sealed premises (if de-sealed)

           would have to be re-sealed. It also meant that the undertakings given to

           cease the misuse by 30th June, 2006 would revive. However, considering

           the events that had taken place as well as the report of the Monitoring

           Committee, time to stop misuse and comply with the undertaking given in

           respect of 40,814 commercial establishments was extended till 15 th

           September, 2006.
Decision of 29th September, 2006
22.     As is quite evident, the authorities had commenced a cat and

           mouse game with this Court perhaps to protect the vested interests of

           those having little or no respect for the rule of law. As a part of the game,

           the DDA had earlier issued public notices on 21st July, 2006 for

           amendment of the Master Plan inviting objections to the proposed

           modifications. Soon thereafter public hearings were conducted and on 5 th
4
(2006) 6 SCC 305
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                          Page 14 of 24
September, 2006 the DDA recommended an amendment of the Master

           Plan. The Master Plan was accordingly amended and on 7th September,

           2006 and 15th September 2006 about 2002 patches/streets were notified

           for mixed use.
23.     The question that then arose for consideration of this Court was

           whether the stay granted on 10th August, 2006 ought to be modified and

           whether the notification dated 7th September, 2006 ought to be stayed.

           This Court considered this question in its decision of 29 th September,

           2006 in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India5
and noted that the authorities

           were now exercising judicial functions - and virtually overruling orders of

           the Supreme Court of India. Accordingly, a partial stay was granted and it

           was held in paragraph 20 of the Report:
“There cannot be any doubt that the legislature would lack
                          competence to extend the time granted by this Court in the
                          purported exercise of law-making power. That would be
                          virtually exercising judicial functions. Such functions do not
                          vest in the legislature. In fact, those who gave undertakings are
                          already in breach of the undertakings by not stopping misuser by
                          30-6-2006. The dignity and authority of the Court has to be
                          protected not for any individual but for maintenance of the
                          rule of law. The fact that those who gave undertakings may have
                          been misled in view of the subsequent development can only be a
                          mitigating factor while considering the action to be taken for
                          breach of the undertakings. Further, there are no equities in
                          favour of those who gave undertakings to this Court and obtained
                          the benefit of time, otherwise their premises could have been
                          sealed on 29-3-2006 or soon thereafter. The nature of trade
                          conducted by most of them who gave undertakings has been
                          noted above. There is serious challenge to the validity of the Act
                          and the notification. Pending determination thereof, such persons
5
(2006) 7 SCC 456
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 15 of 24
cannot be allowed to claim any benefit of the notification.”
                [Emphasis supplied by us].
It may be mentioned en passant that in addition to Mr. P.K. Dave,

a former Lt. Governor of Delhi, Mr. Omesh Sehgal a former Chief

Secretary of Delhi was also a petitioner before this Court and he

described the hearings given by the DDA as a farce since a decision had

already been taken to amend the Master Plan even before inviting

objections. This is recorded in paragraph 14 of the Report.
24.     In the above background this Court passed the following directions

on 29th September, 2006:
(i) Re: Premises relating to which undertakings were given
        The commercial activities by those who gave undertakings deserve to be
        stopped forthwith. Having regard, however, to the plea of forthcoming
        major festivals, we permit those who gave undertakings to stop misuser
        on or before 31-10-2006.
(ii) xxx xxx xxx
(iii) Re: Other premises for which protection is extended by the
        Notification dated 7-9-2006
        Regarding the remaining premises which may be covered by the
        Notification dated 7-9-2006 read with 15-9-2006 we direct that the said
        premises may not be sealed pending decision of these petitions on
        undertakings being filed before the Monitoring Committee on or before
        10-11-2006 that misuser shall be stopped as per the directions of this
        Court if the Act is invalidated and/or the Notification is quashed. ........
(iv) Re: Premises for which protection is not extended by the
        Notification dated 7-9-2006
        In respect of the remaining premises not covered by the Notifications
        dated 7-9-2006 and 15-9-2006, the sealing process will continue in
        terms of the order dated 16-2-2006 and 10-8-2006.......”
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                               Page 16 of 24
25.      In addition to the above, so that the cat and mouse game does not

escalate, this Court restrained the respondents (Government of India and

other authorities) from issuing any other notification for conversion of

residential premises to commercial use, except with the leave of this

Court.
I.A. Nos. 93007 and 93010
26.      In this background, we are required to consider I.A. No. 93007 and

93010 filed by the applicants (Vishvjyoti Overseas (P) Ltd., Gitanjali

Overseas (P) Ltd., Sumangal Promoters (P) Ltd. and Lakshya

Construction (P) Ltd.). They had leased out their property that is 5

Sikandra Road, New Delhi to Infinity Knowledge Systems by a lease

deed dated 27th December, 2006. Although the subject property was in a

residential area, the lease was for commercial purposes thereby indicating

the impunity with which orders passed by this Court were flouted by

those who wanted to do so and the nature of protection enjoyed by them.
27.      In any event, when violation of the orders of this Court came to the

knowledge of the Monitoring Committee, the subject property was sealed

on 12th October, 2007. Apparently feeling aggrieved by the sealing of the

subject property, Infinity Knowledge Systems moved I.A. Nos. 2195-96

(where it is also described as Infinity Business School) in this Court for

de-sealing it. On a report having been received from the Monitoring
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                         Page 17 of 24
Committee (Report No. 46 dated 12th November, 2007) this Court passed

           an order on 13th November, 2007 permitting Infinity Knowledge Systems

           to continue in the subject property till 30 th June, 2008 subject to deposit

           of conversion charges for the years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 or from the

           date of occupation of the subject property whichever is later as penalty

           for misuse. Infinity Knowledge Systems was also required to file an

           undertaking that it would deposit the required charges.
28.     On 15th November, 2007 an undertaking was filed by the Managing

           Director of Infinity Knowledge Systems and on 11th December, 2007

           Infinity Knowledge Systems was permitted to use the premises till 30 th

           June, 2008 subject to payment of conversion charges. There is no dispute

           that conversion charges were paid by Infinity Knowledge Systems and

           the subject property was de-sealed on 14th January, 2008. Thereafter in

           view of the undertaking to stop misuse of the subject property, it was re-

           sealed on 1st July, 2008 and we are told that Infinity Knowledge Systems

           has vacated the subject property. Since then the subject property is said to

           be lying sealed.
Decision of 30th April, 2013
29.     On 30th April, 2013 this Court passed a significant judgment and

           order in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India.6 This
decision related to the
6
(2013) 16 SCC 336
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                         Page 18 of 24
challenge to the Act and subsequent legislations extending the provisions

           of the Act. A few directions were issued but two of them need particular

           mention: (i) All the writ petitions challenging the
Delhi Laws (Special

           Provisions) Act, 2006
(and subsequent legislations virtually extending the

           provisions of the Act) and I.As. connected therewith were transferred to

           the Delhi High Court with a request to hear the matters at an early date,

           preferably within one year from the date of receipt of the entire records

           and papers.
(ii) The order passed by this Court on 3 rd January, 2012 in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India7
to the following effect would continue:
“Till the matter is heard by the Court, the Monitoring Committee
                          shall not order further sealing of the premises which are under its
                          scrutiny. We also direct that no construction, temporary or
                          permanent, shall be made on the premises which have been the
                          subject-matter of scrutiny of the Monitoring Committee and no
                          order shall be passed by the Government or any authority
                          regularising such construction or sanction the change of user.”
30.     With the above orders, this Court disposed of all the pending writ

           petitions on the challenge to the
Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act,

           2006
and subsequent legislations on the same subject.
31.     With regard to the sealing orders passed at the instance of the

           Monitoring Committee, it was directed, inter alia, that: (i) I.As filed in

           this Court for de-sealing the premises will be treated as statutory appeals

           and will stand transferred to the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal
7
(2012) 11 SCC 759
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                              Page 19 of 24
for disposal. (ii) Where I.As or statutory appeals have not been filed, this

Court granted 30 days time to file an appeal before the appropriate

statutory Appellate Tribunal for disposal.
32.      Pursuant to the judgment and order dated 30th April, 2013 the

subject applications have been filed for permission to appeal to the

appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal against the sealing order. The

applications were filed on or about 15th September, 2017 which is well

beyond the 30 days grace period granted by this Court.
33.      It was submitted by learned counsel for the applicants that this

Court has passed several orders permitting the institution of delayed

appeals subject to payment of Rs.1,00,000/- towards costs. Therefore, the

applicants may also be permitted to file an appeal which should be heard

by the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal on merits. The applicants

say that they have already deposited Rs.1,00,000/- in the Registry of this

Court.
34.      It seems to us that the applicants are keen to utilise the premises in

question for residential purposes, as stated in their application. There is

no apparent intention to utilise the premises in question for commercial

purposes or for any purpose not permitted by law. That being the

position, it would hardly serve any purpose if the applicants are required

to formally file an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal which is
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                           Page 20 of 24
apparently already dealing with a very large number of appeals. It would,

therefore, be in the fitness of things to de-seal the premises in question for

residential purposes subject to certain conditions.

Directions
35.     In our opinion, as far as Infinity Knowledge Systems is concerned

the following conditions would meet the ends of justice and also provide

a safeguard against possible misuse of residential premises for

commercial (non-industrial) purposes:
(1)     The applicants will file an affidavit before the Monitoring
                Committee stating that they will use the premises in question
                only for residential purposes and for no other purpose
                whatsoever. The applicants will identify the persons for whose
                residential use the premises in question are sought to be de-
sealed.    Any change will be notified to the Monitoring
                Committee.
(2)     The affidavit filed by the applicants will state the name,
                address and other particulars of the person who will be
                responsible for any misuse of the premises in question, that is, for
                use of the premises in question for any purpose other than
                residential.
(3)    The person identified as the person responsible in terms of
                condition No.2 above will also file an affidavit clearly stating
                therein that he or she will ensure that the premises in question are
                used only for residential purposes and that in the event the
                premises in question are used for any purpose other than
                residential, the deponent would be liable for contempt of this
                Court.
(4)    The applicants will file with the Monitoring Committee
                proof of payment of conversion charges to the statutory authority.
                (5)   The affidavits will be filed before the Monitoring
                Committee who may impose such other further conditions as may
                be appropriate.
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                               Page 21 of 24
36.     In the event the Monitoring Committee is satisfied that the

premises in question ought to be de-sealed, it may require the concerned

statutory authority to de-seal the premises in question. If the Monitoring

Committee is not satisfied that the premises in question ought to be de-

sealed, the applicants will be at liberty to approach this Court for

appropriate orders. We make it clear that in view of Report No. 46 dated

12th November, 2007 this Order will not be applicable to all other

commercial activities that have been sealed in the premises in question.
37.     We make it clear that henceforth it will not be necessary for any

person whose residential premises have been sealed for misuse for any

commercial (other than industrial) purposes at the instance of the

Monitoring Committee to file an appeal before the appropriate statutory

Appellate Tribunal. Instead, that person can directly approach the

Monitoring Committee for relief after depositing an amount of Rs.

1,00,000/- with the Monitoring Committee which will keep an account of

the amounts received by it. Any person who has already filed an appeal

before the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal but would prefer

approaching the Monitoring Committee may withdraw the appeal and

approach the Monitoring Committee for relief on the above terms and

conditions and on deposit of Rs. 1,00,000/- as costs with the Monitoring

Committee, provided that the premises were sealed at the instance of the
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                       Page 22 of 24
Monitoring Committee. Any challenge to the decision of the Monitoring

Committee will lie to this Court only. We are constrained and compelled

to make this order given the history of the case and the more than serious

observations of this Court of an apparent nexus between some entities

and the observations regarding corruption and nepotism.
38.     We make it clear that this order will inure to the benefit of only

those who are using residential premises for commercial purposes (non-

industrial) or for any other non-residential purpose and whose premises

were sealed at the instance of the Monitoring Committee. This order will

not at all inure for the benefit of anybody using residential premises for

any industrial activity of any sort or nature whatsoever.
39.     With regard to the writ petitions that have been transferred to the

Delhi High Court which challenge the Act and subsequent legislations,

we find from a perusal of the website of the Delhi High Court that these

petitions have not yet been heard, for one reason or another. We do not

find any fault with the Delhi High Court. The intention of this Court in

transferring the writ petitions to the Delhi High Court was for their

expeditious disposal preferably within one year. Almost four years have

gone by in this exercise but without any decision. Therefore, given the

gravity of the situation as revealed from the Reports of the Monitoring

Committee, we think it appropriate that this Court ought to hear the writ
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                        Page 23 of 24
petitions on an expeditious basis and, accordingly, withdraw the writ

petitions that were transferred to the Delhi High Court to this Court. The

Registry will place these writ petitions on receipt from the Delhi High

Court for directions on 12th January, 2018.
40.     The decisions rendered by this Court
,
referred to above
, indicate

that Mr. Ranjit Kumar, Senior Advocate was assisting this Court as

Amicus Curiae. It appears that he was discharged. In our opinion, in

view of the changed circumstances, it is again necessary to request Mr.

Ranjit Kumar to continue to assist us in the matter. Accordingly we do so.
41.     The Monitoring Committee has done yeoman service to the

citizens of Delhi and has prepared a very large number of reports. We

request the Monitoring Committee to set up a website and place all these

reports, duly indexed, on the website so that they are available to the

citizens of Delhi.
………………………J
                                                   (Madan B. Lokur)



                                                   ……………………..J
                                                    (Deepak Gupta)
New Delhi;
December 15, 2017
W.P. (C) No.4677 of 1985                                      Page 24 of 24