[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S S.S.Production vs Tr.Pavithran Prasanth on 1 October, 2024
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1


2024 INSC 1059
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NOS. 13981-13985 OF 2024
                                       [@ DIARY NO.52267 OF 2023]


                   M/S S. S. PRODUCTION AND ANR.                           …PETITIONERS
                   P1: M/S S. S. PRODUCTION
                   P2: TR. S. SUBBIAH


                                                   VERSUS


                   TR. PAVITHRAN PRASANTH                                 …RESPONDENT


                                           J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Delay condoned.
2.        The present petition assails the common Final Judgment and

                   Order dated 15.06.2023 in Crl. R. C. Nos.394-396, 403 & 406 of 2020

                   (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Order’) passed by the High

                   Court of Judicature at Madras (hereinafter referred to as the ‘High
Signature Not Verified
Court’), whereby the five Criminal Revision cases filed by the petitioners
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.03.19
17:49:11 IST
Reason:
were dismissed and the conviction and sentence, as awarded by
2
separate Judgments and Orders dated 31.10.2017 passed by the

Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court III), Saidapet, Chennai

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Trial Court’) in C.C. Nos.137-141 of 2016

and confirmed by separate Judgments and Orders dated 31.10.2019

passed by the VII Additional Sessions Judge, City Civil Court, Chennai

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘First Appellate Court’) in Crl. A. Nos.380-

384 of 2017, were upheld.
BRIEF FACTS:
3.     The sole respondent is the complainant. The petitioner no.2 is the

proprietor of petitioner no.1 and both are arrayed as accused. It was

alleged that the petitioner no.2 was in the business of Cinema Production

and for his urgent business needs, he had approached the complainant

and borrowed a total sum of Rs.41,28,000/- (Rupees Forty-One Lakhs

Twenty-Eight Thousand) in five instalments as a hand loan on

29.08.2015 and promised to repay the same on demand with interest at

the rate of 2% per month. Separate Promissory Notes dated 29.08.2015

were executed for each of the instalments in favour of the complainant.
4.    In order to discharge the liability of Rs.42,08,000/- (Rupees Forty-
Two Lakhs Eight Thousand), a total of five cheques were issued by the

accused, which on being presented by the complainant, were returned

with the endorsement ‘funds insufficient’. Statutory Notice was issued by
3
the complainant pursuant to which he lodged five complaints in respect

      of the five dishonoured cheques against the petitioners. The Trial Court

      convicted the accused under
Section 1381
of the Negotiable Instruments

      Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’) and sentenced them to six

      months of Simple Imprisonment and to pay the cheque amounts as

      compensation, in each of the complaints. This order of conviction and

      sentence has been upheld by the First Appellate Court and thereafter by

      the High Court vide the Impugned Order.
5.        The details of the five cases are tabulated hereinunder:
Date of                                            29.08.2015
              Loan
              Loan                   Rs.41,28,000 with interest @ 2% per mensem
            Amount
            Cheque                                             29.09.2015
              Date
           Drawn On             South Indian Bank, Gandhipuram, Coimbatore Branch
           Cheques               500834     500830 500831       500832    500833
               No.
            Cheque                 1.28                     10.2 each x 4 cheques = 40.8
           Amounts
             [In Rs.
1
‘138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.—Where any cheque drawn
by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another
person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned
by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account is
insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an
agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall,
without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless—
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is
drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the
payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty
days of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or as the
case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “debt or other liability” means a legally enforceable debt or
other liability.’
4
(Lakhs)]
    Total                            Rs.42,08,000
  Cheque                         (inclusive of interest)
  Amount
    Date        29.09.2015                   15.10.2015
  Cheque
 presented
    Date       29.09.2015                    16.10.2015
  Cheque
  returned
 Returned                         ‘Funds Insufficient’
     with
Endorseme
      nt
   Date of     07.10.2015                    12.11.2015
    Legal
   Notice
Date Postal     19.11.2015   24.11.2                 26.11.2015
Cover                      015
returned
   Postal                              ‘Unclaimed’
   Cover
returned as
 Complaint         137         138        139            140      141
CC ___/2016
 Crl. A. No.       380         381        382            383      384
  ___/2017


SUBMISSIONS BY THE PETITIONERS:
6.    Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the cheque(s)

must be proved to have been issued for a legally enforceable debt, but in

the present cases, the complainant has not produced any statement of

accounts and/or Income Tax Returns showing that the complainant lent

money to the accused and the accused did not repay the said money.
5
Hence, the complainant failed to prove that the cheques were issued for

a legally enforceable debt.
7.     It was contended that the complainant claims that he lent cash of

Rs.41,28,000/- (Rupees Forty-One Lakhs Twenty Eight Thousand) to the

accused with rate of interest of 2% per month. However, the matter of

fact is that the said money was given to the accused in the course of

producing a film jointly by the complainant and the accused and since

the film failed, the cheques and receipts given by the accused were

misused by the complainant. Further, the complainant failed to establish

that the amount given by the complainant is a loan and not for any other

purpose by placing the statement of accounts and/or Income Tax

Returns. Hence, the complaint would not attract
Section 138
of the Act

as the accused has rebutted the presumption under
Sections 118
and
139
of the Act by probable defence. This defence has been established

by cross-examining PW1/the General Power of Attorney-holder of the

complainant. Accordingly, the accused had shifted the burden on the

complainant. Hence, the statutory presumption under
Section 139
of the

Act would not continue and it was for the complainant to discharge the

onus by bringing on record evidence/material to show that the amount(s)

given is/are for a legally enforceable debt. Moreover, the complainant

failed to assail the defence of the accused. On these grounds, learned
6
counsel for the petitioners urged the Court to issue notice and thereafter,

admit and allow the appeals.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
8.     From the order impugned, it is clear that though the contention of

the petitioners was that the said amounts were given for producing a film

and were not by way of return of any loan taken, which may have been a

probable defence for the petitioners in the case, but rightly, the High

Court has taken the view that evidence had to be adduced on this point

which has not been done by the petitioners. Pausing here, the Court

would only comment that the reasoning of the High Court as well as the

First Appellate Court and Trial Court on this issue is sound. Just by

taking a counter-stand to raise a probable defence would not shift the

onus on the complainant in such a case for the plea of defence has to be

buttressed by evidence, either oral or documentary, which in the present

cases, has not been done. Moreover, even if it is presumed that the

complainant had not proved the source of the money given to the

petitioners by way of loan by producing statement of accounts and/or

Income Tax Returns, the same ipso facto, would not negate such claim

for the reason that the cheques having being issued and signed by the

petitioners has not been denied, and no evidence has been led to show

that the respondent lacked capacity to provide the amount(s) in question.
7
In this regard, we may make profitable reference to the decision in
Tedhi

Singh v Narayan Dass Mahant
, (2022) 6 SCC 735:
‘10. The trial court and the first appellate court have noted
       that in the case under
Section 138
of the NI Act the
       complainant need not show in the first instance that he
       had the capacity. The proceedings under
Section 138
of
       the NI Act is not a civil suit. At the time, when the
       complainant gives his evidence, unless a case is set up in
       the reply notice to the statutory notice sent, that the
       complainant did not have the wherewithal, it cannot be
       expected of the complainant to initially lead evidence to
       show that he had the financial capacity. To that extent, the
       courts in our view were right in holding on those lines.
       However, the accused has the right to demonstrate that
       the complainant in a particular case did not have the
       capacity and therefore, the case of the accused is
       acceptable which he can do by producing independent
       materials, namely, by examining his witnesses and
       producing documents. It is also open to him to establish
       the very same aspect by pointing to the materials
       produced by the complainant himself. He can further,
       more importantly, achieve this result through the cross-
       examination of the witnesses of the complainant.
       Ultimately, it becomes the duty of the courts to consider
       carefully and appreciate the totality of the evidence and
       then come to a conclusion whether in the given case, the
       accused has shown that the case of the complainant is in
       peril for the reason that the accused has established a
       probable defence.’
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
9.     The High Court has also rightly noted that the petitioners have not

denied receipt of the sum of Rs.41,28,000/- (Rupees Forty-One Lakhs

Twenty-Eight Thousand) but have taken the defence that it was given in

the course of jointly producing a film with the complainant. Even then, the

liability has to be discharged by the person(s) concerned and that would
8
be a legally enforceable debt repayable, under the purview of
Section

138
of the Act.
10.    Moreover, as per the defence proffered by the petitioners

themselves, the money was given to the accused in the course of

producing a film jointly by the complainant. The accused urge that since

the film failed, the cheques and receipts given by the accused were

misused by the complainant. Thus, arguendo, if the same is correct, and

the accused and respondent-complainant were indeed jointly producing

a film, no reason/occasion to issue the cheques and receipts to the

complainant is forthcoming, inasmuch as, if the amount(s) were by way

of investments in a film being jointly produced, the need per se to issue

cheques, including interest would not have arisen at all. This crucial

aspect has not been explained by the petitioners at all.
11.    Further, the High Court has also rightly observed that even

assuming the petitioners and the complainant engaged together in film

production and were in the course of jointly producing a film, the fact that

the transaction occurred as a joint investment has not been

substantiated by the petitioners before the Courts. In this background,

the onus to first prove as to how the amount that is said to have been

given by the complainant to the petitioners could have been given, would

not be fatal as receipt of the amount(s) has not been denied, much less
9
disputed by the petitioners. In this regard, specifically, a suggestion given

to the GPA-holder of the complainant i.e., PW1 that the complainant and

petitioners were engaged in film production has been emphatically

denied by PW1.
12.    We also find no error in the High Court opining that in the

backdrop of emphatic denial by PW1 with regard to any joint

deal/venture with the petitioners in film production and acceptance and

non-rebuttal of receipt of Rs.41,28,000/- (Rupees Forty-One Lakhs

Twenty-Eight Thousand), the onus would not shift on the complainant

and would remain on the petitioners to prove that such receipt of money

was not with regard to repayment of an amount legally due to the

complainant. In fact, the accused have not been able to dislodge the

statutory presumption under
Section 139
of the Act.
In this context, in a

decision of recent vintage,
Rajesh Jain v Ajay Singh
, (2023) 10 SCC

148, the Court stated:
‘33.
The NI Act
provides for two presumptions :
Section
       118
and
Section 139
.
Section 118
of the Act inter alia
       directs that it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
       proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or
       drawn for consideration.
Section 139
of the Act stipulates
       that “unless the contrary is proved, it shall be presumed,
       that the holder of the cheque received the cheque, for the
       discharge of, whole or part of any debt or liability”. It will
       be seen that the “presumed fact” directly relates to one of
       the crucial ingredients necessary to sustain a conviction
       under
Section 138
. [The rules discussed hereinbelow are
       common to both the presumptions under
Section 139
and
10
Section 118
and are hence, not repeated—reference to
one can be taken as reference to another]
34.
Section 139
of the NI Act, which takes the form of a
“shall presume” clause is illustrative of a presumption of
law. Because
Section 139
requires that the Court “shall
presume” the fact stated therein, it is obligatory on the
Court to raise this presumption in every case where the
factual basis for the raising of the presumption had been
established. But this does not preclude the person against
whom the presumption is drawn from rebutting it and
proving the contrary as is clear from the use of the phrase
“unless the contrary is proved”.
35. The Court will necessarily presume that the cheque
had been issued towards discharge of a legally
enforceable debt/liability in two circumstances. Firstly,
when the drawer of the cheque admits issuance/execution
of the cheque and secondly, in the event where the
complainant proves that cheque was issued/executed in
his favour by the drawer. The circumstances set out
above form the fact(s) which bring about the activation of
the presumptive clause. [Bharat Barrel & Drum Mfg.
Co. v. Amin Chand Payrelal [Bharat Barrel & Drum Mfg.
Co. v. Amin Chand Payrelal, (1999) 3 SCC 35]]
36. Recently, this Court has gone to the extent of holding
that presumption takes effect even in a situation where
the accused contends that a blank cheque leaf was
voluntarily signed and handed over by him to the
complainant.        [
Bir     Singh v. Mukesh      Kumar [Bir
Singh
v. Mukesh Kumar, (2019) 4 SCC 197: (2019) 2 SCC
(Civ) 309: (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 40]]. Therefore, mere
admission of the drawer's signature, without admitting the
execution of the entire contents in the cheque, is now
sufficient to trigger the presumption.
37. As soon as the complainant discharges the burden to
prove that the instrument, say a cheque, was issued by
the accused for discharge of debt, the presumptive device
under
Section 139
of the Act helps shifting the burden on
the accused. The effect of the presumption, in that sense,
is to transfer the evidential burden on the accused of
proving that the cheque was not received by the Bank
towards the discharge of any liability. Until this evidential
burden is discharged by the accused, the presumed fact
will have to be taken to be true, without expecting the
complainant to do anything further.
11
xxx
39. The standard of proof to discharge this evidential
burden is not as heavy as that usually seen in situations
where the prosecution is required to prove the guilt of an
accused. The accused is not expected to prove the non-
existence of the presumed fact beyond reasonable doubt.
The accused must meet the standard of “preponderance
of probabilities”, similar to a defendant in a civil
proceeding. [
Rangappa v. Sri Mohan [Rangappa
v. Sri
Mohan, (2010) 11 SCC 441: (2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 477:
(2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 184: AIR 2010 SC 1898]]
40. In order to rebut the presumption and prove to the
contrary, it is open to the accused to raise a probable
defence wherein the existence of a legally enforceable
debt or liability can be contested. The words “until the
contrary is proved” occurring in
Section 139
do not mean
that the accused must necessarily prove the negative that
the instrument is not issued in discharge of any
debt/liability but the accused has the option to ask the
Court to consider the non-existence of debt/liability so
probable that a prudent man ought, under the
circumstances of the case, to act upon the supposition
that          debt/liability      did         not       exist.
[
Basalingappa v. Mudibasappa [Basalingappa
v. Mudibas
appa, (2019) 5 SCC 418: (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 571: AIR
2019 SC 1983]; see also
Kumar Exports v. Sharma
Carpets [Kumar Exports
v. Sharma Carpets, (2009) 2
SCC 513: (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 629: (2009) 1 SCC (Cri)
823] ]
41. In other words, the accused is left with two options.
The first option—of proving that the debt/liability does not
exist—is to lead defence evidence and conclusively
establish with certainty that the cheque was not issued in
discharge of a debt/liability. The second option is to prove
the non-existence of debt/liability by a preponderance of
probabilities by referring to the particular circumstances of
the case. The preponderance of probability in favour of
the accused's case may be even fifty-one to forty-nine
and arising out of the entire circumstances of the case,
which includes: the complainant's version in the original
complaint, the case in the legal/demand notice,
complainant's case at the trial, as also the plea of the
accused in the reply notice, his
Section 313
CrPC
statement or at the trial as to the circumstances under
12
which the promissory note/cheque was executed. All of
them can raise a preponderance of probabilities justifying
a finding that there was “no debt/liability”. [
Kumar
Exports v. Sharma Carpets [Kumar Exports
v. Sharma
Carpets, (2009) 2 SCC 513: (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 629:
(2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 823]]
42. The nature of evidence required to shift the evidential
burden need not necessarily be direct evidence i.e. oral or
documentary evidence or admissions made by the
opposite party; it may comprise circumstantial evidence or
presumption of law or fact.
43. The accused may adduce direct evidence to prove
that the instrument was not issued in discharge of a
debt/liability and, if he adduces acceptable evidence, the
burden again shifts to the complainant. At the same time,
the accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence
and, if the circumstances so relied upon are compelling,
the burden may likewise shift to the complainant. It is
open for him to also rely upon presumptions of fact, for
instance those mentioned in
Section 114
and other
sections of the
Evidence Act
. The burden of proof may
shift by presumptions of law or fact. In Kundan Lal
case [Kundan Lal Rallaram v. Custodian (Evacuee
Property), 1961 SCC OnLine SC 10: AIR 1961 SC 1316]
when the creditor had failed to produce his account
books, this Court raised a presumption of fact under
Section 114
, that the evidence, if produced would have
shown the non-existence of consideration. Though, in that
case, this Court was dealing with the presumptive clause
in
Section 118
NI Act, since the nature of the presumptive
clauses in
Sections 118
and
139
is the same, the analogy
can be extended and applied in the context of
Section 139
as well.
44. Therefore, in fine, it can be said that once the accused
adduces evidence to the satisfaction of the Court that on a
preponderance of probabilities there exists no debt/liability
in the manner pleaded in the complaint or the demand
notice or the affidavit-evidence, the burden shifts to the
complainant and the presumption “disappears” and does
not haunt the accused any longer. The onus having now
shifted to the complainant, he will be obliged to prove the
existence of a debt/liability as a matter of fact and his
failure to prove would result in dismissal of his complaint
case. Thereafter, the presumption under
Section 139
does
13
not again come to the complainant's rescue. Once both
      parties have adduced evidence, the Court has to consider
      the same and the burden of proof loses all its importance.
      [
Basalingappa v. Mudibasappa [Basalingappa
v. Mudibas
      appa, (2019) 5 SCC 418: (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 571: AIR
      2019      SC     1983];    see      also,
Rangappa v. Sri
      Mohan [Rangappa
v. Sri Mohan, (2010) 11 SCC 441:
(2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 477: (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 184: AIR
      2010 SC 1898]]’
                                           (emphasis supplied)
13.   For reasons aforesaid, we do not find any ground to interfere in

the order impugned and accordingly, the petition(s) shall stand

dismissed. We refuse special leave, being cognizant of
Rafiq v State of

Uttar Pradesh
, (1980) 4 SCC 262:
‘3. Concurrent findings of fact ordinarily acquire a
      deterrent sanctity and tentative finality when challenged in
      this Court and we rarely invoke the special jurisdiction
      under
Article 136
of the Constitution which is meant
      mainly to correct manifest injustice or errors of law of
      great moment. …’
                                               (emphasis supplied)
14.   However, before parting, the Court would clarify that though there

are separate judgments and orders of the Trial Court, in each case, six

months’ simple imprisonment and direction to pay the cheque amount as

the compensation has been awarded; the orders being of the same date

between the same parties and in connection with the same transaction of

the same nature, albeit in different tranches, the sentences of

imprisonment awarded shall run concurrently. Further, in case of failure

of the petitioners to pay the compensation amount within six months from
14
today, the same shall be recovered from them as a public debt under the

relevant law, and it shall be paid to the complainant/respondent by the

competent authority post-recovery.
In directing the sentences to run

concurrently, we have exercised judicial discretion [reference to ‘judicial

discretion’ herein is to be understood as per
Gudikanti Narasimhulu v

Public Prosecutor, High
Court of Andhra Pradesh, (1978) 1 SCC 240]

guided by the principles governing the field, which are noted infra:
I.    Mohd. Akhtar Hussain v Assistant Collector of Customs

      (Prevention
), (1988) 4 SCC 183 [2-Judge Bench]

       ‘10. The basic rule of thumb over the years has been the
       so-called single transaction rule for concurrent sentences.
       If a given transaction constitutes two offences under two
       enactments generally, it is wrong to have consecutive
       sentences. It is proper and legitimate to have concurrent
       sentences.
But this rule has no application if the
       transaction relating to offences is not the same or the
       facts constituting the two offences are quite different.’
                                               (emphasis supplied)


II.   V K Bansal v State of Haryana, (2013) 7 SCC 211 [2-Judge

      Bench]

       ‘18. Applying the principle of single transaction referred to
       above to the above fact situations we are of the view that
       each one of the loan transactions/financial arrangements
       was a separate and distinct transaction between the
       complainant on the one hand and the borrowing
       company/appellant on the other. If different cheques
       which are subsequently dishonoured on presentation, are
       issued by the borrowing company acting through the
15
appellant, the same could be said to be arising out of a
       single loan transaction so as to justify a direction for
       concurrent running of the sentences awarded in relation to
       dishonour of cheques relevant to each such transaction.
       That being so, the substantive sentence awarded to the
       appellant in each case relevant to the transactions with
       each company referred to above ought to run
       concurrently. We, however, see no reason to extend that
       concession to transactions in which the borrowing
       company is different no matter the appellant before us is
       the promoter/Director of the said other companies also.
       Similarly, we see no reason to direct running of the
       sentence concurrently in the case filed by State Bank of
       Patiala against M/s Sabhyata Plastics and M/s Rahul
       Plastics which transaction is also independent of any loan
       or financial assistance between the State Financial
       Corporation and the borrowing companies. We make it
       clear that the direction regarding concurrent running of
       sentence shall be limited to the substantive sentence only.
       The sentence which the appellant has been directed to
       undergo in default of payment of fine/compensation shall
       not be affected by this direction. We do so because the
       provisions of
Section 427
CrPC do not, in our opinion,
       permit a direction for the concurrent running of the
       substantive sentences with sentences awarded in default
       of payment of fine/compensation.’
                                              (emphasis supplied)


III.
O M Cherian v State of Kerala
, (2015) 2 SCC 501 [3-Judge

       Bench]

       ‘18.
While referring the matter to a larger Bench, the
       Bench observed that in
Mohd. Akhtar Hussain
case [
Mohd. Akhtar Hussain v. Collector of Customs
,
       (1988) 4 SCC 183: 1988 SCC (Cri) 921],
Section 31
CrPC
       was not noticed by this Court.
It is to be pointed out that
       in
Mohd.     Akhtar     Hussain
case [
Mohd.     Akhtar
       Hussain v. Collector of Customs
, (1988) 4 SCC 183: 1988
       SCC (Cri) 921] and Manoj case [(2014) 2 SCC 153:
(2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 763], the appellants who were
       convicted for different counts of offences arose out of a
       single transaction, favouring the exercise of discretion to
16
the benefit of the accused that the sentences shall run
concurrently. Those decisions are not cases arising out of
conviction at one trial of two or more offences and
therefore, reference to
Section 31
CrPC in those cases
was not necessitated.
19. As pointed out earlier,
Section 31
CrPC deals with
quantum of punishment which may be legally passed
when there is (a) one trial; and (b) the accused is
convicted of two or more offences. The ambit of
Section
31
is wide, covering not only a single transaction
constituting two or more offences but also offences arising
out of two or more transactions.
In the two judgments
in
Mohd.         Akhtar        Hussain [Mohd.            Akhtar
Hussain v. Collector of Customs
, (1988) 4 SCC 183: 1988
SCC (Cri) 921] and Manoj [(2014) 2 SCC 153: (2014) 1
SCC (Cri) 763], the issue that fell for consideration was
the imposition of sentence for two or more offences
arising out of the single transaction. It is in that context, in
those cases, this Court held that the sentences shall run
concurrently.
20. Under
Section 31
CrPC it is left to the full discretion of
the court to order the sentences to run concurrently in
case of conviction for two or more offences. It is difficult to
lay down any straitjacket approach in the matter of
exercise of such discretion by the courts. By and large,
trial courts and appellate courts have invoked and
exercised their discretion to issue directions for concurrent
running of sentences, favouring the benefit to be given to
the accused. Whether a direction for concurrent running of
sentences ought to be issued in a given case would
depend upon the nature of the offence or offences
committed and the facts and circumstances of the case.
The discretion has to be exercised along the judicial lines
and not mechanically.
21. Accordingly, we answer the reference by holding that
Section 31
CrPC leaves full discretion with the court to
order sentences for two or more offences at one trial to
run concurrently, having regard to the nature of offences
and attendant aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
We do not find any reason to hold that normal rule is to
order the sentence to be consecutive and exception is to
make the sentences concurrent. Of course, if the court
does not order the sentence to be concurrent, one
sentence may run after the other, in such order as the
17
court may direct. We also do not find any conflict in the
           earlier judgment in
Mohd. Akhtar Hussain [Mohd. Akhtar
           Hussain v. Collector of Customs
, (1988) 4 SCC 183: 1988
           SCC (Cri) 921] and
Section 31
CrPC.’
                                                (emphasis supplied)
15.     Exemption from surrendering granted earlier vide Order dated

   03.05.2024 in favour of petitioner no.2 will cease to operate.           The

   petitioner no. 2 is hereby directed to surrender within three weeks from

   the date of communication of this Judgment to serve the remaining period

   of sentence.    Registry shall intimate the petitioners and their AOR

   forthwith.
16.     Pending IA(s), if any, stand closed.
………………….....................J.
                                                    [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                              ……………………...................J.
                                              [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
1st OCTOBER, 2024