[Cites
9
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Koduri Krishnarao vs State Of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad on 6 July, 1961
Equivalent citations: AIR1962AP249, AIR 1962 ANDHRA PRADESH 249
JUDGMENT

 

     Krishna Rao, J.
(1) This  is  a plaintiff's appeal from the decree of the Court  of the Subordinate Judge,  Eluru  dismissing his suit to  recover  a  sum  of Rs.1,92,192-8-0  as  damages  from the State of  Andhra  Pradesh.  The plaintiff  was the lessee for the period from 1-7-47 to 31-3-52 of  the rights  of working the Rajahmundry-Dowlaishwara steamer  'Dorothy'  and with  country  boats and of running a steam boat service in  the river Godavari  above the anticut with the Government-owned steamer  'Helen".  He purchased the lease right at a publicauction held on 20-6-1947  by the Divisional Engineer (Highways) Kakinada in pursuance of  the sale notification  Ex.  B-1 and entered into an agreement Ex. B-2  with  the Government  of  the composite State of Madras for the payment  of  an annual rental of Rs. 22,500/-. He brought the suit claiming damages  on the ground that the Government had failed to comply with the terms  and conditions of the lease. The first head of his claim was for Rs.5500/-, in  reimbursement of the cost of repairs carried out by him  to  the steamer 'Dorothy'. His case is that the Government had to hand over  to him  to the steamer 'Dorothy'and 'Helen'in good working order and  that it  failed to do so. He  effected the necessary repairs to  the steamer 'Doorthy'  under  the directions  of  the Asst.  Engineer,  Highways, Rajahmundry  at  a cost of Rs. 5500/-. But the other  steamer  'Helen' required too heavy an investment for being put in working condition.
The second head of his claim was for Rs. 1,01,750/ being  the loss incurred  by  him  on account of the Government not  handing  over  the steamers  'Dorothy' and 'Helen' in good working order. This amount  was made up of 3 items, namely Rs. 71,250/-, 10,000/  and  20,500/-.  He averred  in the plaint that the steamer 'Dorothy' even  after  carrying out  the repairs aforesaid was not in a safe working order  during  the flood  seasons, that the Highways department were unable to obtain  the necessary permits for the requisitequantity of coal, that for want  of coal,  that for want of coal even the steamer 'Dorothy' could  be used only once a week, that he was therefore obliged to hire three launches on a rent of Rs. 15,000 per annum and also a punt to maintain the ferry service and that during the cycloneof 1949 the steamer  Dorothy  sank and  it was not salvaged by the Government. He claimed Rs.  71,250  for the hire of  the three launches for the period of 4  year  9  months, Rs.10,000  for the hire of the punt for five years, and Rs. 20,500  for the salaries and maintenance of the crew of Dorothy and Helen from 1-7-1947 to 30-11-1949 and from 1-7-1947 to 31-3-1952 respectively.
The third head of his claim related to his complaint of the violation of his monopoly rights, by the Executive Engineer, issuing license for the plying of six launches between Rajahmundry and the Central  Delta.  He estimated the consequent loss in his income at Rs.7500/  per  year and claimed a sum of Rs. 35,625/-. The fourth head of his claim for Rs.  20,000/ representing the loss in his income by the Government allowing public traffic over  the Godavari anticut in  the summer  months  of 1950, 1951  and 1952. He claimed half of the estimated fees realised  by the Government, for permitting the vehicles to pass over the anticut, on   the ground  that  he was  deprived  of  his  income for   their transhipment. The fifth head of the claim was for Rs.20,000/ being the interest  on the aforesaid amounts from 1-4-1952 till 31-3-1955    the date of  the plaint,  but this need not detain us further as  it  has been given upin the appeal.
(2)     The defendant contended in the written statement that the lease was  of  the ferry service and not of the two steamers  there was  no condition that the steamers should be given in good working order, that as  a matter of fact they were handed over to the plaintiff in  working order,  and that under the terms of thelease agreement  Ex. B-2,  the renter  had  to effect all the necessary repairs to both  the steamers were found unfit to ply in the river. There was no obligation  on  the defendant  to  arrange for the supply of coal. It was a term  in  the agreement  that  the plaintiff shall not claim  compensation  on  any account   See clause 36 of Ex. B-2. There was no infringement  of  the plaintiff's  ferry right by the licensing of boats to carry  passengers and  goods from Rajahmundry and Dowlaishwaram to the various places in the Central Delta. The Godavari anticut is beyond the ferry limits  and the plaintiff was not prejudicied by allowing vehicles to pass over the anticut.  The defendant also disputed the correctness of  the amounts claimed  and pleaded that the claim for the damages was also barred  by limitation.
(3)  The learned Subordinate Judge held on a constuction of Exs. B-1and B-2 that it was not one of the conditions of the lease that the  steamers had to be handed over to the plaintiff in good working order and on the other hand, under the terms of the lease, the leassee had to effect the necessary repairs to the steamers during the lease period at his own cost.  In these circumstances, although as a matter of fact the steamers were not in running condition when they were handed over in running condition when they were handed over by the Highways department to the plaintiff, that fact did not entitle the painiff to claim the cost of repairing them. The plaintiff had failed to prove his further case that the Assistant Engineer of the department assured him that the cost of repairs would be paid by the Goverment.  Owing to the absence of vouchers or corroborative evidence and the plaintiff's non-production of his account-books, it was not possible to hold that  Rs.5,500/- claim was the correct cost of repairs.  For these reasons, the learned Subordinate Judge negatived the plaintiff's  claim to recovere the Rs. 5500/-.
With regard to the next head of the plaintiff's claim, the learned Subordinate Judge held that as it was not the duty of the Highways Department to effect necessary repairs to the steamers and as the supply of coal was stopped by the Director of Controlled Commodities only owing to the plaintiff's failure to submit monthly returns, the plaintiff was not entitled to ask for compensation for having hired private launches and the Government punt to run the ferry.  The plaintiff had deliberately suppressed his accounts and the evidence on his own side showed that the costs of coal required for daily consumption by both the steamers was Rs. 100/- at the time.  The result of the evidence was that the plaintiff had miserably failed to establish the loss, illegally caused by his resorting to the alternative method of running the ferry.    He had also failed to establish the alleged payment to the crew of the two steamers.  For these reasons, he was not entitled to Rs. 1,01,750/-  claimed by him.  As to the alleged infringement of his monopoly rights,  there was no evidence that the issue of permits to the six private launches caused any prejudice to his rights under the lease or a loss in his income. There was a similar lacuna in the evidence with regard to the fourth head of his claim.  Further the Godavari anicut was found by the learned Subordinate Judge to be not within the ferry limits.  In the result, the learned Subordinate Judge negatived the entire claim of the plaintiff and dismissed the suit.
(4)     At the threshold of his argument before us, Sri B. V. Ramanarusu, the learned counsel for the appellant put forward the plea that he was handicapped by the Government with holding material evidence. In support of this complaint, he referred to his notice dated 25-9-1956 issued  to the defendant under O. XII, R. 8 to produce 16 items of documents.  The defendant  replied on 22-10-1956 producing some documents  and  stating that  some others were not available with the Highways  Department.  In regard  to 5 of the documents, it was stated that they were unpulished reports  of one Government Officer to another and were inadmissible in evidence. However, the plaintiff did not pursue the matter further  and the trail  commenced on 22-10-1956 itself. It is now contended  by  the learned  counsel  that prima facie the aforementioned 5 items  are not privileged under
Section 123
of the Evidence Act, and that such of  the documents  as were not available with the Highways Department ought  to have been  produced  by the defendant after obtaining  them  from  the department  with  which they were lodged. It is urged  that  there was default on the part of the defendant in respect of all these documents and  that there was default on the part of the defendant in respect  of all  these documents and that the trail Court ought to have struck  out the defenceunder O. XI, R. 21.
We see no substance in these submissions. A plain reading  of O.  XI,  R.21 shows  that the Court could  have invoked  the penal provisions  of  that  rule only if there had been an  order  to  answer interrogatories  or for discovery or for imspection of documents  under Rules 11, 22, and 18 of O. XI. The plaintiff did not apply under any  of the provisions  of O. XI at all. He merely gave a  notice to  produce under O. XII, R. 8. If there was default on the part of the defendant, the plaintiff's notice enabled him to adducese condary evidence of  the contents  of the document under
Section 65
, clause(a) of the
Evidence Act
.  It is  not even suggested that the plaintiff sought  to let in secondary  evidence of these documents and that such evidence was shut out. It follows that nothing turns on the partial non-compliance on the part  of the defendant with the plaintiff's notice under O. XII, R. 8 dated 25-9-1956.
(5)      We observe in this connection that the plaintiff appears to  have had no grievance at the trail that the defendant with held any documents, except as to the punt register in respect of which we find a sentence in his deposition,'I issued notice for the production of  punt register'.   The learned trail judge finds that the plaintiff deliberately supported his own accounts and failed to exhibit  relevant material  from P.W. 2's accounts. The plaintiff's lame explanation  was that his own accounts were in the possession of his manager; but he did not  take out  summons to the manager to produce his accounts.  The situation is similar to that in the Apear Collieries v. Radha  Gobinda, ; and there  is no justification for  drawing any adverse inference against the defendant.
(6)       We shall now deal with the several sums claimed by the plaintiff seriatim.  With regard to the proof of expenditure for repairs  to  the two steamers, the learned counsel strongly relied on Exs.A-12 and A-25.  Ex.A-12  is the plaintiff's letter dated 23-10-1947 to  the Divisional Engineer,  Kakinanda and he has mentioned in paragraph 2 thereof  that the repairs cost him Rs. 5500/ Ex. A-25 is his letter dated  29-8-1948 to  the Assistant Engineer, Rajahmundary submitting a statement of  the amounts spent and five vouchers for Rs. 5500/-. It is in the evidence of  the Divisional  Engineer (D.W. 2) that the steamers  were not  in running  condition when they were handed over to the plaintiff  at  the commencement of the lease and that he approved of an estimate prepared by his subordinates for repairs costing between prepared by his that he approved of an estimate prepared by  his subordinates for repairs costing between Rs. 6000/ and Rs. 7000/-. We are therefore inclined to accept  the plaintiff's evidence that the effected the repairs  costing him  Rs.5500/-. The main question for consideration are:  (1) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to reimbursement of the cost of repairs  and (2) Whether the claim is barred by time.
(7)       On the first point, the contention of the learned counsel is  that the obligation of the Government to hand over the steamers in good working order was in implied term under the contract  between  the parties. We are inclined to agree with his contention. Admittedly under Exs. B-1 and B-2, the plaintiff had to ply both these steamers from the very  commencement of the lease a few days after the auction was held.  Clause 21  of Ex. B-1 which was incorporated by clause 37 of  Ex. B-2 into  the contract specially provided that the rented  should  ply  the steamer  Dorothy  between the ferry limits from the 10th June to 30th november every year. It would have been impossible for the plaintiff to perform  this obligation unless the steamer was handed over to  him  in working  order.  The clauses in the contract that  the lessee should effect repairs at his own cost during the lease period obviously  refer to  subsequent  repairs after the steamers were taken over  in  working order by the lessee.
(8) Under the law, apart from the terms imported by mercantile usage, the Court may imply terms, which are necessary in order to  repair  an intrinsic failure of the expression in the contract, in  other  words, which will implement the presumed intention and give business  efficacy to the contract. As observed in Cheshire and Fifoot's Law of  Contracts (1945 Edition at page102),  
       "  The document which the parties have prepared may leave no doubt  as to the general ambit of their obligations; but they may have committed, through  inadvertance or clumsy draftsmanship, to cover  as  incidental contingency,  and  this omission, unless remedied may  frustrate their design."
This  principle was asserted by the English Court of Appeal  in  the Moorcock,  (1889)  14  P. D.64, and applied by  the Privy  Council  in Kleinert  v. Abosso Gold Mining C0., (1913) 58 Sol.Jo.45. The doctrine may  be invoked only if an obligation clearly intented as  such  would fail  to  take effect unless some oversight is  remedied.  The minimum necessary to save the contract from being wrecked will be supplied. The implied  term  may  not contradict or vary the express  terms  of  the agreement.  Applying  these principles, in our opinion,  there was  an implied  term in the contract that the lessor had to supply vessels  in working  order although the repair during the lease period were,  under the express terms, to be effected by the lessee. The learned Government Pleader  relied  on the last sentence in Ex. B-14  dated  25-6-1957,  a letter  of  the Divisional Engineer (D. W. 2)  to  the Superintending Engineer in which it was stated that the term of the lease was extended from  9 months to 4 years 9 months and the lessee would repair the two steamers at his own cost. This unilateral statement to which the lessee was not a party cannot be taken at its face value.
(9)       In support of his connection as to the implied term, Sri  B. V.   Rama  Narasu  has cited a number of decision which lay down  that  when goods  are hired, there is an implied term that they are as  reasonably fit and suitable for the purpose for which they are hired as reasonable care and  skill can make them. Sutton v. Temple, (1843) 152  ER  1108;   Jones  v.page, (1867) 15 LT 619; Vogan   and Co. v. Oulton,  (1899) 81 LT 435; Reed v. Dean, 1949-1 KB 188;
Isufally Hassanally v.  Ibrahim Dajibhai
, AIR 1921 Bom 191 (1). We do not consider it necessary to make more than a passing mention of these cases, because we are of  opinion that  the contract in the present cases, was not one of hiring the two steamers.  The lease was to run the ferry and the steam  boat  service, and the steamers were to be plied for the convenience and safety of the passengers particularly at the time of floods in the rivers. There are various  clauses in the contract under which the lessee had to  provide the public with alternative means of transport when one or  both  the steamers  were unserviceable;  but  the lessee was  not  entitled  to abatement  of rent. Under clause 33 of Ex. B-2 'if he fails to run  the steamer regularly for a period of 20 days in the aggregate between  the period 15th June, to 30th November, save on the ground of break-down of the machinery' the contract could be terminated. If one of the objects of the contract was to hire out the steamers, it would be inconsistent with the stipulation of a penalty for failing to run them at the usual period of the floods in the river. We would prefer to rest our decision as  to  the existence of an implied term that the steamers  should  be handed over in working order. On the fact that the lessee was under the obligation  to ply the steamers regularly almost immediately after  the steamers  were handed  over  to  him,  this  obligation  itself  being conceived in the public interest.
(10)      Turning  to  the question  of  limitation,  the  claim   for reimbursement  is  governed  by
Art. 115
of the
Limitation  Act
which provides  for  a period of 3 years from the date when the contract  is broken.  There was  no continuing wrong as held by  the lower  Court, because as  soon  as the repairs were effected  by  the plaintiff  on account of the default by the defendant, there was a completed cause of action for reimbursement. Ex. A-12 shows that the repairs were effected by 23-10-1947. The suit was instituted only on 31-3-1955 and the claim was therefore barred by time.
(11)      As regards the second head of the claim in the plaint, Sri B.  V.  Rama  Narusu  does  not dispute the correctness of  the trail  Court's finding  that the defendant did not undertake to secure the supply  of coal  for  running  the steamers and that  the plaintiff  himself  was responsible for the stopping of the supply. He now rests the claim  on the sole ground that the steamers and that the plaintiff  himself  was responsible for the stopping of the supply. He now rests the claim  on the sole ground that the steamers required major  repairs  which  are property  to  be effected by the owner and not  by  the lessee.   The argument is that the inadequacy and the ultimate stopping of the supply of  coal were immaterial because the steamers could not be run  anyhow for  want  of  major repairs and that the plaintiff  probably  did  not submit the monthly statement to the Director of Controlled Commodities, because the coal  was  of no use to run the steamers.  But  this  is pratically  a  reversal  of the stand taken by  the plaintiff  in  his correspondence with the defendant and even during the trail.   In  his letter Ex. A-5 dated 30-7-1947 to the Director of industries asking for the supply of coal, the plaintiff represented that the steamer  traffic was  held up due to want of coal and heavy floods in the river and  not that it was due to the steamers being in disrepair.  In his letter  Ex.  A-12 dated 23-10-1947 to the Divisional Engineer, the plaintiff claimed to have effected repairs to the steamers, and said.
"  As a result of the formation of sand shoals in the river  and  the inability  to  secure coal in spite of best  efforts,  it  has  become practically  impossible to run the steamers.........  For want of  coal the streamers  were run  by fuel............ and as  such  I  had  to maintain  and  use extra hired launches costing Rs.  3000/-........   I therefore request you to take charge of the two steamers".
Further the evidence shows that long after the plaintiff hired  the launches in October, 1947, the steamers needed only repair which could have been and ought to have been effected by plaintiff  in  accordance with  the conditions of the contract.  In Ex. A-21 dated  28-4-1948  a copy of the letter of the junior Superintendent of P. W.  Workshops  at Dowlaishwaram,  he reported that only temporary repairs were necessary to keep the steamers going on for another 6 months and that they  could be carried out by the plaintiff himself and that he would supervise the repairs.   As  we have already  mentioned,  under  the contract  the plaintiff  himself had to carry out the necessarry repairs  during  the lease period and it is not compensated for the loss arising  from  his default  in  this  respect,  for that would be allowing  him  to  take advantage of his own wrong.
Apart  from  this, on a consideration of the evidence, we have no hesitation  in  agreeing  with the lower Court's  conclusion  that  the plaintiff  hired the launches and punts not because  the steamers  with coal. As his primary obligation under the contract was to maintain  the service by  running  the steamers, he seems to have made a  show  of attempting  to obtain coal and keeping the steamers in repair.   As  he has  not  produced  his accounts, it is not possible to  say  that  he really  incurred loss and if so its extent.  Similarly with  regard  to the payments  of the salaries to the crew of the two steamers  he has produced  only the oral evidence of the Sarang (P. W. 4) of one of  the steamers whom the learned Subordinate Judge found to bean  interesrted witness.   The plaintiff did not produce the acquittance book in  which P. W. 4 admittedly used to sign.  Further, although clause 12 of Ex. B-2  provided that he had to engage the crew, nothing prevented him  from disbanding  them with the approval of Government when he ceased to  use the steamers  and had recourse to the launches and the punt  instead.  For  all these reasons, we agree with the lower Court in rejecting  the plaintiff's claim to recover the Rs. 1,01,750/-.
(12)      We shall now deal with the remaining heads of the plaintiff's claim,  namely, reimbursement of the loss of Rs. 35,625/  alleged  to have been incurred by him by reason of the Government allowing  private launches to ply within the ferry limits and of the loss of Rs. 20,000/-alleged  to  have been incurred by him by  the Government  allowing traffic on the Godavari anticut during the summer months of  1950  to 1952.  The plaintiff's case in that the right to transport  passengers, goods, carriages, carts animals etc.  in the entire strech of the water of the river Godavari within the ferry limits specified in Exs. B-1 and B-2 of Rajahmundry, Dowlaishwaram, Bobbarlanka, Kovvur and  vijjeswaram is his exclusive monopoly.  Soon after he took the lease, the Executive Engineer  of  Dowlaishwaram  issued  licences for  the plying  of  six launches  between Rajahmundry and the Central Delta instead of  between Boobbarlanka and the Central Delta.
The plaintiff complains that this monopoly rights between Rajahmundry and  Boobbarlanka  were there by violated and that he sustained  a  loss which  is  estimated  by  him at  Rs.7,500/  per  year.   Further,  in February,  1950  the Government allowed  vehicles,  including  lorries loaded with goods, to pass over the Godavari anticut and realised  more than  Rs. 40,000 as fees.  The plaintiff complains that he was  there by deprived  of his income from transporting the goods from either side of the river to the other and asks for half the amount of the fees realised by the Government by  way of compensation. The defence of the Government is that the plaintiff's ferry  right  was  only to carry passengers  etc. between  the limits specified  in Exs. B-1 and B-2. The licensing of boats from  Rajamundry and  Dowlaishwaram to places which were beyond the ferry limits and  in the Central  Delta did not infringe his right or prejudice him.   The Godavari  anticut  was beyond the ferry limits and  the Government  is entitled  to  levy fees for allowing vehicles over  the anticut.   The plaintiff could not question this right and has no cause for complaint.
(13)       A combined reading of Exs. B-1 and B-2 shows that the lease to the plaintiff was of ferry rights between Rajahmundry and  Bobbarlanka, between  Rajahmundry  and  Kovvur,  between  Bobbarlanka  and   between Bobbarlanka  and  vijjeswaram.   The limits of these ferries  and  the prohibition  are as  on  either  side of the river  were specified  in appendix A to each of Exs. B-1 and B-2, consistently with what had been previously  notified by the  Government in 1942.  In paragraph 3 of  his letter  Ex. A-12 dated 23-10-1947 to the Divisional Engineer  Highways, Kakinda,  the plaintiff had complained against the licences granted  to private launches for service from Rajahmundry to Amalapuram, Gannavaram and Kukteswaram via Bobbarlanka and asked for the reimbursement of  the loss  cause to  him.   The letter Ex. A-16  dated  21-11-1947  of  the Executive Engineer,  Dowlaishwaram in this connection  shows  that  he permitted  six  launches to ply in the canals from Bobbarlanka  to  the Central  Delta. With regards to the quantum of the loss, there is  only the plaintiff's  own  oral evidence that on  account  of  the private launches there was a reduction of 300 passengers per day in the number of passengers carried in his launches resulting in a loss of about  Rs.  28/ to Rs. 30/ daily and that the Government realised Rs. 40,000/ Rs. 50,000/ per year by permitting vehicular traffic over the Godavari anticut.   D.W. 1, the Assistant Engineer corroborated that the annual toll charges over the anticut amounted to Rs. 50,000/-.
(14)     The question for cosideration is whether the nature of  the ferry right, which was acquired by the plaintiff under Exs. B-1 or B-2, gave him the monopoly right set up by him.  There was no clause either in Ex. B-1 or B-2 that other launches should not bel icensed to ply  or that  traffic should not be allowed to cross over the anicut.   It  is therefore clear that there is no express grant of the right  claimed.  The contention of Sri B. v. Ramanarasu is that the right can be spelled out  from  clause 13 of Ex. B-1 and from the very nature of  what  is mentioned  as 'ferry rights' in Ex. B-2. Clause 13 of Ex. B-1 reads  as follows :
"The public who violate section 9 of the Canal and Public Ferries Act which  forbids within the limits fixed for the ferry, the transport  of passengers, goods, carriages, cards, palanquins are animals , etc.,  in any  boats or crafts except such as are maintained or licensed  at  the ferry are liable for the prosecution."
This  merely  shows  that the ferry in question  is  a  public ferry subject  to the provision of the Madras Canals and Public Ferries  Act (II of 1890).  It has to be noticed that there is no general  provision in  that  Act, similar to
Section 16
of the Bengal  Ferries  Act  which enjoins that no rival ferry can berun within a distance of two miles from  the limits of the publicferry in question.  Under Sec. 9 of  the Madras  Act transport by unauthorised persons is prohibited within  the limits  defined  in  the notification under
S. 8
.  But  admittedly  the private launches  here were authorised by the grant of  licences.   We asked the learned counsel whether he had any case that hewas prevented from  levying tolls at the landing places of the ferry leased  to  him.  He replied that he had no such cases and that the only case put forward by  him  is  that the ferry rights, as understood in  law,  which  were granted  to  him under the lease, carried a monopoly  right  which  was infringed.
(15)  The learned counsel relied on the English law under which  all anicut  ferries are treated as monopolies. But even under  the English Law, the ambit of the monopoly right is not an exclusive right to carry passengers and goods across the stream by any means whatever, but  only an  exclusive right to carry them across by means of boats  or  vessels and  substantially  in the line of the ferry, Hopkins v.  Great  Northen Rly. Co. (1877) 2 QBD 224 at pp.231 to 234.
It was thus held in
Rameswar Singh  v.  Secretary of State
for India, ILR 34 Cal 470 that  the mere construction  of a railway bridge across a river, where by the profits of the ferry are reduced, does not entitle the owner to claim  damages.  On  the same reasoning it follow that by allowing  traffic over  the Godavari  anicut,  there could not been no infringement  of  the ferry rights  leased to the plaintiff and that he is not entitled to  damages on  that account.
In the case of Hamerton v. Dysart (Earl), 1916-1  AC 57,  the respondents  claimed an ancient ferry across  the Thames  at Twickenham  and complained against the appelants having set up a  feery and carried people across the river about a quarter of a mile away from the termini of the ancient ferry.  The appelant alleged that they  were entitled   to   do  this  because their  ferry  served   a   different neighbourhood,  and  was  in respect of a  totally  new  and  different traffic created by the opening of the Marble Hill Park.  The House of Lords  allowed  the appeal because the evidence regarded  as  a  whole, showed that the appellants' ferry was not a disturbance of the ancient ferry.  Referring to the rights of the ferrymen, viscount Haldane said at page76:
"He is  entitled to a monopoly of his line of ferry, and  he has  a cause of action against any one who carries either in that line or  in another  line of  ferry so near as to make it an  alternative way  of carrying between substantially the same points.........."
"  Is  the new  ferry  in substance and in  the main  a  means  of abstracting  the traffic of the old ferry, or does it carry a  new  and different  kind  of traffic, for which the convenience of  the public requires a fresh provision?"
With regard to the limits to be placed on the right of the ferrymen his Lordship observed at page77:
"But every such monopoly ought to be strictly construed.  Just as it does not preclude the setting up of a bridge to serve new though adjacent traffic, because such an interference with what the convenience of the public required under the new conditions is held not to have been within its purview, so if there is a sufficiently large and defined  class, containing a substantial number of people who would naturally cross the river at points and with objects different from those which obtained with the class of people who frequented the old ferry, the former class would be outside the monopoly".   With regard to the question of what constitutes new and different traffic, Lord Sumner said aat page 107--
"What  it  comes to, I think is this.  The principle is  to  inquire whether  the new trafficis de facto part of the burden and  obligation of the old ferry. If it is not, the owner of the old ferry has no right in it.  He cannot impose himself on the new public as a burthen for  his private profit.  This is what, I take it, is meant by saying that, 'the publlic convenience requires a new passage' or reasonably  demands new facilities.  On the other hand, a public that is part of the burthen of the old ferry is not new traffic, though as it grows, it may compel the ferryman to adapt his ferry to take a larger business."
In  that case it was held that traffic created by the opening of  the public park  was  new traffic, which the old  ferry  had  enjoyed  not because it belonged to it naturally, but because there was no other way across until the new ferry was made, and that the diversions of  it by the new ferry was not a disturbance of the old ferry.
(16)   In  Tripp v. Frank, (1792) 2 R.R. 495, the plaintiff  was  the lessee of a ferry across the river Humber between Kingston  upon  Hull and  Barton.  The defendant took passengers by boat from Kingston  upon Hull  to  Barrow two miles lower down upon the opposite coast  of  the riverr  Humber.   It  was held that there was no  infringement  of  the plaintiff's exclusive ferry right.  The principle  established was  that if there bean exclusive ferry from A to B it does not prevent  persons from going by another boat from A directly to C, though it lienear  to B,  if it be not done fraudulently and is not a pretence for  avoiding the regular  ferry.   This is a direct authority  in  support  of  the defendant's  contention  that by allowing other launches  to  ply  from Rajahmundry  and  Dowlaishwaram  to places in the Central  Delta,  the plaintiff's right was not violated Similarly in 1877-2 QBD 224, it  was held  that the owner of a ferry cannot maintain an action for  loss  of traffic, caused by a new highway by bridge or ferry which has been made to  provide for new traffic.  There can be doubt on  these authorities that  even if the expression 'ferry rights' used in Ex. B-2 meant  what is  understood  in English Law, the plaintiff is disentitled  to  claim damages.
(17)     The learned counsel has been unable to persuade us  from  a perusal  of  the plan Ex. B-3 that the Godavari anicut  is  within  the plaintiff's ferry limits.  We see no reasons to reject the evidence of D.  Ws .1 and 2 or to differ from the finding of the lower Court  that the Godavari  anicut is outside the ferry limits.  The plaintiff  has failed  also  to adduce the best evidence such as his own  accounts  to show  that be incurred loss on account and on account of  allowing  the launches and of allowing the traffic in the Godavari anicutu.   However in  the view we have taken that the plaintiff has no  right  to  claim damages, it is unnecessary to discuss these question at length.
(18)  The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
(19)  Appeal dismissed.