[Cites
16
, Cited by
21
]
Supreme Court of India
Sri Siddhi Vinayaka Coconut & Co. & Ors. ... vs State Of Andhra Pradesh & Ors on 2 May, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 1111, 1974 SCR (1) 440, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 1111, 1974 4 SCC 835, 1974 TAX. L. R. 2081, 34 STC 103, 1975 (1) SCR 440, 1974 SCC (TAX) 319
Author:
A. Alagiriswami
Bench:
A. Alagiriswami
,
A.N.  Ray
,
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
P.K. Goswami
,
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
PETITIONER:
SRI SIDDHI VINAYAKA COCONUT & CO. & ORS.  ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/05/1974

BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
GOSWAMI, P.K.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 1111		  1974 SCR  (1) 440
 1974 SCC  (4) 835


ACT:
Andhra	Pradesh General Sales Tax Act
as amended by Act	 XII
of  1971--
Sections  7
and
8
item 5 A to Third  Schedule	 and
entries	   relating   to   "watery   coconuts"	 in    Third
Schedule--"Watery coconuts" and dried  "coconuts"--Provision
for  refund  of	 tax  paid--Provisions	whether	  contravene
sections 14
and
15
of Central Sales Tax Act.



HEADNOTE:
The  First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales	 Tax
Act
contains goods in respect of which a single point  sales
tax  only  is  leviable under
sec.  5(2)  (a)
.	 The  Second
Schedule  contains goods in respect of which a single  point
purchase tax only is leviable under
sec. 5(2)(b)
.  The Third
Schedule  contains  declared  goods in respect	of  which  a
single	point tax only is leviable under see. 6. The  Fourth
Schedule  contains goods exempted from tax under
sec. 8
.  By
an  amendment  made  in	 1961, there  was  only	 one  entry,
',Coconuts'  in the Third Schedule and the  Fourth  Schedule
contained  'tender  coconuts  which  are  useful  only	 for
drinking  purposes'  which  were  exempted  from  tax.	 The
explanation  to the Third Schedule containing definition  of
the   expression   "coconuts"  was   replaced	by   another
explanation by the
Amending Act
XVI of 1963.  The result was
that  the  Coconuts  were divided  only	 into  two  classes,
"coconuts"  as	defined in the explanation and	the  'tender
coconuts".   After  the amendment of  1963  certain  dealers
questioned  their liability to tax on the purchases made  by
them  of watery coconuts.  The challenge was upheld  by	 the
Andhra	Pradesh	 High Court in Sri Krishna Coconut  Co.,  v.
Comml.	Tax Officer (16.  STC 511).  Thereafter, by
Amending
Act
18	 of 1966 the explanation in the Third  Schedule	 was
replaced  by another explanation.  At the same time item  10
"watery coconuts" was included in the Second Schedule and to
this   there  was  added  an  explanation   containing	 the
definition of the expression "watery coconuts".	 The  result
was  that  for the first time "coconuts" were  divided	into
three	classes,  tender  coconuts,  watery   coconuts	 and
coconuts.
After this the question arose whether "watery coconuts"	 are
oilseeds  and as such declared goods within the	 meaning  of
that  term in item 6 of
section 14
of the Central Sales	 Tax
Act and the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Tagoob Mohammed  v.
Comml.	Tax Officer (28 STC 110) held that "watery coconuts"
were  oilseeds.	 It was thereafter that the  Andhra  Pradesh
Legislature passed
Amending Act
XII of 1971 which came	into
force on 17-4-1971.  By this Act item 10 in Second  Schedule
relating  to "watery coconuts" and the	explanation  thereto
were  omitted  and this amendment was given effect  to	from
1-8-1963.   Item  5  of the Third Schedule  was	 amended  as
"coconuts  of  all  varieties"	and  a	new  item  5-A	 @as
introduced.   The  proviso to item 5-A inter  alia  provided
that, where during the periods (1-8-1963 to 31-3-1965,	1-4-
1965  to 22-12-1966 and 23-12-1966 and 16-4-1971),  any	 tax
has been levied and collected in respect of watery  coconuts
and where tax has also been levied and collected in  respect
of  coconuts formed out of such watery coconuts, the tax  so
levied	and  collected in respect of  such  watery  coconuts
shall  alone be refunded.  Explanation 1 to  Third  Schedule
was omitted.
The Act
also introduced two new
sections 7
and
8
.
Section 7
seeks retrospectively to validate	 assessments
and collections of tax on past transactions from August 1963
to   April  1971.
Section  8
provides  for  revision	  of
assessments.   The  definition of oilseeds in item  (vi)  to
sec.  14
of the Central Sales Tax Act, after  Amendment	 Act
LXI  of	 1972  which came into force  on  1-4-1973  read  as
follows : "(vi) Oilseeds. that is to say,-(8) Coconut  (i.e.
copra excluding tender coconuts (Cocos nucifera)".  The writ
petitions  filed  before the High Court	 of  Andhra  Pradesh
challenging the validity of the new item 5-A and
sections  7
and
8
and also the entries relating to watery	coconuts  in
the Third Schedule to the Principal Act on the
441
ground	that  these provisions offend
ss. 14
and
15
of	 the
Central Sales Tax Act, were dismissed by the division  Bench
of the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
Rejecting the civil appeals and the petitions under
Article
32
of the Constitution.
HELD : Act XII of 1971 deals with the period between  August
1963  to April 1971 and validates taxes already	 levied	 and
collected.  therefore. the proviso to entry 5-A of  Schedule
III  which provides for refund does not really	suffer	from
the  defect  pointed  out by the Supreme  Court	 in  Bhawani
Cotton Mills case (20 STC 290) that a provision for taxation
which  would not be justifiable cannot be upheld  merely  on
the ground that it provides also for a refund.	The  various
periods	 mentioned  in item 5-A are there  because  of	his-
torical	  reasons  and	they  are  only	  reproductions	  of
provisions of earlier law. [446E]
Decision in Rattan Lal & Co. v. Assessing Authority (25	 STC
136) held to apply to the facts of the present case and	 not
the decision in Bhawani Cotton Mills case.
There  is no possibility of "watery coconuts" suffering	 tax
after  they  became  dried coconuts, if	 they  have  already
suffered  tax as "watery ;Coconuts".  Rule 45 of the  Andhra
Pradesh	 General  Sales Tax Rules enabling  the	 dealers  in
watery	coconuts  or  in dry coconuts to  include  in  their
return	only  goods which are liable to tax  and  not  those
which	have  already  suffered	 tax,  provides	  sufficient
safeguards for this purpose. [447E-F]
The same commodity at different stages Could be treated	 and
taxed as commercially different articles. [447G]
A.Hajee Abdul Shakoor &, Co. v. State of Madras [1964]	8
SCR 217, Jagannath v. Union of India, [1962] 2 SCR 118, East
India  Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh [1963]  1	 SCR
404 and Venkatraman v. Madras [1970] 1 SCR 615 referred to-
Commercially speaking, "watery coconuts" and dried  coconuts
are two distinct commodities.  Watery coconuts are put to  a
variety	 of uses e.g., for cooking purposes,  for  religious
and social functions whereas dried coconuts are used  mainly
for extracting oil. [447F-G]
The  Amending Act
XII of 1971 also does not contravene
sec.
15
of	the  Central Sales Tax Act because  under  the	Act.
though	watery	coconuts  and  dried  coconuts	are  treated
separately  there  is a provision for refund when  the	same
watery	coconuts,  which have suffered the  tax	 become	 dry
coconuts latter. [448B]
			 ARGUMENTS
For petitioners and appellants
Entry  5-A in Sch.  III introduced in the Act by Act  12  of
1971  contravenes
sec. 15
read with
sec. 14
of	the  Central
Sales  Tax Act in as much as it subjects coconuts which	 are
declared  goods to taxation at two stages; namely.  once  at
the  stage  of	watery coconuts and again at  the  stage  of
'dried	coconuts'.  The mere possibility of double  taxation
would  render a taxing provision contravene sec. 15  of	 the
Central	 Act  : Bhawani Cotton Mills Case (20  S.T.C.  290).
But the provision for refund in the impugned Act 12 of	1971
cannot cure the defect.	 Secondly, the provision for  refund
is entirely illusory in character and ineffective by  reason
(a)  of	 inherent difficulty in the situation,	in  that  no
dealer	can identify that in a given case "watery  coconuts"
or  "coconuts" is sold by him or by a subsequent  dealer  as
"dried	coconuts",  (b) in that no dealer can  have  in	 his
possession  material necessary for such identification;	 and
(e) Rule 45 of the A.P. General Sales Tax Rules cannot	help
the dealer to trace the career of the "watery coconuts"	 and
ascertain  whether it was sold as "dry coconuts" and if	 so,
by whom and when.  It is not open to the State to divide the
genus  i.e. "coconut", which is an oil seed, into  different
varieties  and	tax  each  variety at  a  single  stage	 and
circumvent  the	 restrictions placed under sec.	 15  of	 the
Central Act.
442
For  the Respondent : It can hardly be argued  that  because
the State law imposes a tax on one type of oilseed it cannot
tax  any other kind of oil-seed.  The State Legislature	 has
taken  not,.,  of tile realities of the	 trade	in  coconuts
while  classifying them into three categories viz.   "tender
coconuts". and "dried coconuts" Commodities belonging to  on
genus  have been treated is separate and  distinct  entities
for purposes of taxation and the courts have recognised such
distinction in several cases : [1962] '2' S.C.R. 118; [1963]
1  S.C.R.  404; [1970] 1 S.C.R. 615; [9641]  8	S.C.R.	217;
A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 1034 and 24 S.T.C. 430.
The  scheme  of	 the impugned Act is  to  tax  both  "watery
coconuts"   and	 "dried	 coconuts"  when   they	  constitute
different   commodities,  but  when  they   constitute	 one
commodity as in cases where "dried coconuts" are formed	 Out
of " waterly coconuts", which have already been Subjected to
tax, to tax only "dried coconuts" and refund the tax  levied
on  "watery coconuts".	The impugned Act makes the stage  at
which tax is to be levied amply clear and Rule 45 enables  a
dealer	to ascertain whether the goods had already  suffered
tax at all earlier stage.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  Writ Petitions Nos. 1424 & 1612 of
1973.
Petitions under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India	 for
enforcement of fundamental rights.
S.   V. Gupte (in W.P. No. 1424/73) only, A. Subba Rao and
G.   Narayana Rao, for the petitioners/appellants).
B. Basi and P. P. Rao, for the respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ALAGIRISWAMI, J. The question for decision in these cases is
about  the liability to sales tax under the
Andhra  Pradesh
General	 Sales	Tax  Act
of  "Watery  coconuts".
The	 Act
contains four schedules.  The First Schedule contains  goods
in  respect  of	 which	a single point	sales  tax  only  is
leviable  under
section  5(2)	(a)
.   The  Second  Schedule
contains  goods in respect of which a single point  purchase
tax  only  is leviable under
section 5 (2) (b)
.	  The  Third
Schedule  contains  declared  goods in respect	of  which  a
single	point  tax  only is leviable under
section  6
.	 The
Fourth	Schedule  contains  goods exempted  from  tax  under
section 8
. By an amendment made in 1961, there was till 1963
only  one entry, 'coconuts', in the Third Schedule  and	 the
Fourth Schedule contained 'tender coconuts which are  useful
only  for drinking purposes' which were exempted  from	tax.
An explanation to the Third Schedule read as follows :
"The  expression "coconuts" in  this  Schedule
	      means  fresh  or	dried  coconut	shelled	  or
	      unshelled	  including  copra,  but   excluding
	      tender coconuts."
By  Amending Act
XVI of 1963 this	 explanation
	      was  replaced  by another	 explanation,  which
	      read
	      "The  expression "coconuts" in  this  Schedule
	      means  dried  coconuts, shelled  or  unshelled
	      including	  copra,.   but	  excluding   tender
	      coconuts,"
Thus coconuts were divided only into two classes, "coconuts"
as defined in the explanation and "tender coconuts".
443
After the amendment of 1963 certain dealers questioned their
liability  to  tax on the purchases made by them  of  watery
coconuts.   That  challenge was upheld by a  learned  Single
Judge  of  the	Andhra Pradesh High  Court  in	Sri  Krishna
Coconut Co. v. Comml.  Tax Officer (16 STC 511) The  learned
Judge's	 reasoning  was that a fully grown  coconut  with  a
well-developed	kernel	which contains water  could  not  be
called either a tender or a dried coconut, and that this was
the  well-known	 variety  of  coconuts	used  for   culinary
purposes  and  on auspicious occasions and as  part  of	 the
offerings  in temples.	He drew particular support  for	 his
conclusion  from the omission of the word "fresh"  from	 the
new explanation in the Third Schedule.
Thereafter,  by
Amending Act
18 of 1966 the  explanation  in
the Third Schedule was replaced by another explanation which
read :
"The  expression	"coconuts" in item  5  means
	      dried coconuts, shelled or unshelled including
	      copra,  but does not include  watery  coconuts
	      falling  under item 10 of the Second  Schedule
	      and  tender coconuts failing under item  9  of
	      the Fourth Schedule."
At the same time item 10 "watery coconuts" was
	      included	in the Second Schedule and  to	this
	      there was an explanation added which read
	      "The  expression "watery coconuts" in item  10
	      includes	all  coconuts  other  than  coconuts
	      falling under item 5 of the Third Schedule and
	      tender  coconuts falling under item 9  of	 the
	      Fourth Schedule."
Thus  for	 the  first  time  "coconuts"	were
	      divided  into three classes, tender  coconuts,
	      watery coconuts and coconuts.
After this the question arose whether  "watery
	      coconuts"	 are oilseeds and as  such  declared
	      goods within the meaning of that term in	item
	      6	 of
section 14
of the Central Sales Tax	 Act
	      and  the Andhra Pradesh High Court  in  Tagoob
	      Mohammad	v. Comml.  Tax Officer (28 STC	110)
	      held that "watery coconuts" were oilseeds.  It
	      was   thereafter	that  the   Andhra   Pradesh
	      Legislature  passed
Amending Act
XII  of	1971
	      which  came into force on 17-4-1971.  By	that
	      Act  item	 10 in Second Schedule	relating  to
	      "watery coconuts" and the explanation  thereto
	      were  omitted  and this  amendment  was  given
	      effect to from 1-8-1963.	Item 5 of the  Third
	      Schedule	was  amended as "  coconuts  of	 all
	      varieties"  and a new item 5-A was  introduced
	      which reads as follows :
"5-A. (i) At the point of last purchase in the
	      State Watery    during  the period  commencing
	      on  the 1st Coconuts August, 1963	 and  ending
	      with the 31st March, 1965.
(ii)At the point of first sale in the  State
	      2	 paise in  during the period  commencing  on
	      the 1st  the rupee
444
April, 1965 and ending with the 22nd December,
	      1966.
(iii)At  the point of first purchase  in	the
	      State during the period commencing on the 23rd
	      December	1966,  and  ending  with  the
	      date  immediately	 before	 the  date  of	 the
	      commencement  of	the Andhra  Pradesh  General
	      Sales  Tax (Amendment) Act, 1971 :3  paise  in
	      the rupee
	      Provided	that  where  during  the   aforesaid
	      periods, any tax has been levied and collected
	      in  respect of watery coconuts and  where	 tax
	      has also been levied and collected in  respect
	      of   coconuts  formed  out  of   such   watery
	      coconuts,	 the tax so levied and collected  in
	      respect of such watery coconuts shall alone be
	      refunded."
Explanation 1 to Third Schedule which  related
			    to a definition of "coconut" was also
 omitted.
The Act
also introduced two new sections,	 ss.
7 and 8 which read as follows
	      "7.  Validation of assessments etc.
	       (1)Notwithstanding    anything	 in    any
	      judgment,	 decree	 or order of  any  Court  or
	      other  authority to the contrary, and  subject
	      to   the	 provisions  of	  section   8,	 any
	      assessment,  reassessment, levy or  collection
	      of  any  tax made or purporting to  have	been
	      made,  any  action or thing taken or  done  in
	      relation	to  such  assessment,  reassessment,
	      levy or collection under the provisions of the
	      principal Act before the commencement of	this
	      Act,  shall  be  deemed to  be  as  valid	 and
	      effective	  as   if   such   assessment,	 re-
assessment,  levy or collection or  action  or
	      thing  had been made, taken or done under	 the
	      principal	 Act  as  amended by  this  Act	 and
	      accordingly-
(a)all acts, proceedings or things done  or
	      taken  by	 the  State  Government	 or  by	 any
	      officer  of  the State Government	 or  by	 any
	      other   authority	 in  connection	  with	 the
	      assessment,  reassessment, levy or  collection
	      of  such	tax,  ,,hall for  all  purposes,  be
	      deemed to be and to have always been, done  or
	      taken in accordance with law;
(b)no  suit or other proceedings	shall  be
	      maintained or continued in any court or before
	      any authority for the refund of any such	tax;
	      and
(c)no  court  shall enforce  an  decree  or
	      order directing the refund of any such tax.
	      (2)It  is hereby declared that  nothing  in
	      sub-section   (1)	  shall	 be   construed	  as
	      preventing any person
445
(a)from questioning in accordance with  the
	      provisions of the principal Act, as amended by
	      this  Act, any assessment, reassessment,	levy
	      or  collection  of  tax referred	to  in	sub-
	      section (1); or
(b)from claiming refund of any tax paid  by
	      him  in excess of the amount due from  him  by
	      way of tax under the principal Act as  amended
	      by this Act :
Provided that every application for any relief
	      under  this sub-section shall be made  by	 the
	      person  concerned to the	assessing  authority
	      within  a period of one year from the date  of
	      the commencement of this Act and the assessing
	      authority may, after making such inquiry as he
	      deems  necessary and after giving	 the  person
	      concerned an opportunity of being heard,	pass
	      such order as he deems fit."
"8.  Revision of assessment on coconuts
	      (1)Notwithstanding    anything	in    any
	      judgment,	 decree	 or order of  any  court  or
	      other authority to the contrary, the assessing
	      authority may assess or reassess the amount of
	      tax  payable  by the dealer  on  his  turnover
	      relating	to coconuts of all varieties  during
	      the period commencing on the 1st August,	1963
	      and  ending with the date	 immediately  before
	      the  date of the commencement of this Act,  in
	      accordance   with	  the  provisions   of	 the
	      principal Act, as amended by this Act.
	      (2)Notwithstanding the expiration of any of
	      the  periods  specified in
section 14
of	 the
	      principal	 Act, an assessment or	reassessment
	      under  sub-section  (1) may be made  within  a
	      period   of   one	 year  from  the   date	  of
	      commencement of this Act."
Another  statutory provision which  should  be
	      noticed is
section 14
of the Central Sales Tax
	      Act  with regard to what are  called  declared
	      goods.   Item (vi) therein originally read  as
	      follows
(vi)oil-seeds,   that  is	 to   say,   seeds
	      yielding	non-volatile  oils  used  for  human
	      consumption,   or	 in  industry,	or  in	 the
	      manufacture of varnishes, soaps and the  like,
	      or  in  lubrication  and	volatile  oils	used
	      chiefly in medicines, perfumes, cosmetics	 and
	      the like";
By Amendment Act LXI of 1972, which came	into
	      effect on 1-4-73 it was amended as follows :
"(vi) Oilseeds, that is to say,
	      (8)   Coconut  (i.e.  copra  excluding  tender
	      coconuts (cocos nucifera);"
446
After  the  amendments made by Act XII of 1971 a  number  of
writ   petitions  were	filed  before  the  High  Court	  of
Judicature,  Andhra Pradesh.  They were all dismissed  by  a
Division Bench consisting of.
the learned Chief Justice and Justice Lakshmaiah.  The civil
appeals are by some of the petitioners therein and the	writ
petitions are filed by certain other dealers direct to	this
Court under
Art. 32
of the Constitution,
It  is	unnecessary to consider whether the  Andhra  Pradesh
High Court was right in its decision that watery coconut  is
an  oilseed for the reasons given by them, especially  after
the amendment made by the Central Act which seems to proceed
on  the	 basis that only copra is an oilseed as	 the  Andhra
Pradesh	 Act  proceeds on the basis that watery	 coconut  is
also an oilseed.  That amendment applies only to the  period
after 1 April 1973 and these appeals and petitions relate to
the  period before 17 April 1971.  Mr. Basi Reddy  appearing
for  the State of Andhra Pradesh does not seek	to  question
this finding either.  Undoubtedly, it is the watery  coconut
that in due course becomesdry  coconut	or  copra.   Mr.
Basi Reddy does not even seek to arguethat the same watery
coconut	 after having suffered tax should also be  taxed  as
dry coconut.
The  first point to be noticed about the 1971  amendment  is
that in one of its aspects it deals with the period  between
August 1963 to April 1971 and validates taxes already levied
and  collected.	  There fore, the proviso to  entry  5-A  of
Schedule  III  which  provides for refund  does	 not  really
suffer from the defect pointed _out by this Court in Bhawani
Cotton Mills case (20 STC 290) that a provision for taxation
which  would not be justifiable cannot be upheld  merely  on
the ground that it provides also for a refund.	The  various
periods	  mentioned  in	 item  5-A  are	 there	because	  of
historical  reasons  and  they	are  only  reproductions  of
provisions  of	earlier law.  The decision  in	the  Bhawani
Cotton	Mills  case on which the petitioners  relied  cannot
apply	in  this  case	because	 in  the  Act  there   under
consideration there was no provision indicating the stage at
which  the  tax was to be levied.  The very  same  levy	 was
upheld	in Rattan Lal & Co. v. Assessing Authority  (25	 STC
136)  after the Act was amended by specifying the  stage  as
the  last  purchase or sale of declared goods  by  a  dealer
liable to pay the tax and making the stage quite clear,	 and
by  giving  the	 dealer	 an  option  not  to  include  other
transactions  in  his returns and thus saving him  from	 the
liability  to pay the tax till he was the dealer  liable  to
pay the tax.  This Court then pointed out that the     information
whether	 his  was  the, last purchase  or  sale	 was  always
possessed  by  a dealer and by providing that  he  need	 not
include inhis  turnover any transaction except when  he
was  the  last dealer, the position was made clear.   It  is
this  decision that will be applicable to the facts of	this
case.
In this connection we may point out that the provisions  of
Rule  45 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax  Rules	 are
similar.
447
It  provides  that every dealer has to maintain a  true	 and
correct	 account  showing the value of the  goods  produced,
manufactured,  bought  and  sold  by  him,  the	 names	 and
addresses  of  the persons from whom goods  were  purchased,
supported  by a bill or delivery note issued by the  seller.
Every dealer carrying on business in the goods specified  in
the  First, Second and Third Schedules whose total  turnover
exceeds	 Rs.  10,000 a year and every  other,  dealer  whose
turnover  exceeds  Rs. 20,000 a year shall issue a  bill  or
cash memorandum in respect of every sale involving an amount
of Rs. 5 or more.  Every such bill or cash memorandum  shall
be duly signed and dated and a counterfoil shall be kept  by
the dealer.  The bills or cash memoranda issued by a  dealer
shall be serially numbered for each year and in each of	 the
bills or cash memoranda issued the dealer shall specify	 the
full  name  and	 style of his business, the  number  of	 his
registration certificate, the particulars of goods sold	 and
the  price thereof and in the case of sales to a dealer	 the
full  name  and address and the number of  the	registration
certificate  of the purchaser.	The bill or  cash  memoranda
issued	in  the case of sales of goods liable  to  a  single
point  tax shall contain the following certificate . .	.  .
"Certified that in respect of the turnover of the goods men-
tioned	in item(s) of this bill the tax has been paid  or/is
payable	 by  me or is payable by Sri/M/s. . .  .  being	 the
dealer who has purchased them from me." These make it  amply
clear  that there can be no question of either a  dealer  in
watery coconuts or in dry coconuts having to pay a tax	over
again  hereafter.   They can include in	 their	return	only
goods  which  are liable to tax and need not  include  those
which have already suffered tax.
Another aspect of the 1971 Act that as a result of it  there
are two entries, 5 and 5A in Schedule III, namely  'coconuts
of  all	 varieties'  and  'watery  coconuts'  there  is	  no
possibility  of 'watery coconuts, suffering tax	 after	they
become dried coconuts, if they have already suffered tax  as
'watery	 coconuts'.  Rule 45 provides sufficient  safeguards
for this purpose.
We  also accept the contention put forward on behalf of	 the
State  of Andhra Pradesh that 'watery coconuts'	 and  'dried
coconuts'   are	  two  distinct	  commodities	commercially
speaking.   Watery  coconuts ,ire put to a variety  of	uses
e.g.   for  cooking  purposes,	for  religious	and   social
functions  whereas  dried  coconuts  are  used	mainly	 for
extracting  oil.  This Court has in a number of	 cases	held
that the same commodity at different stages could be treated
and  taxed as commercially different articles.	In A.  Hajee
Abdul Shakoor & Co. v.State of Madras (1964 8 SCR 217)	this
Court  held that "hides and skins in the untanned  condition
are  undoubtedly different as articles of  merchandise	than
tanned hides and skins" and pointed out that "the fact	that
certain articles are mentioned under the 'same heading in  a
statute	 or  the constitution, does not mean that  they	 all
constitute  one	 commodity."  We  may  also  refer  to	 the
decisions  in
Jagannath v. Union of India
(1962 2  SCR	118)
where  tobacco in the whole leaf and tobacco in	 the  broken
leaf were treated as two different
448
commodities,
East  India  Tobacco Co. v.  State  of  Andhra
Pradesh
(1963 1 SCR 404) where Virginia tobacco and  country
tobacco	 were  treated	as two	different  commodities,	 and
Venkataraman  v. Madras
(1970 1 SCR 615) where cane  jaggery
and palm jaggery were treated as two different commodities.
We  do	not  think that the Act can be	said  to  contravene
section	 15
of the Central Sales Tax Act.
Under  the	 Act
though	watery	coconuts  and  dried  coconuts	are  treated
separately  there  is a provision for refund when  the	same
watery	coconuts,  which  have	suffered  tax,	become	 dry
,coconut later.	 It is for this contingency that, as we have
pointed	 out earlier, provision for refund is made.  In	 any
case  in the future no difficulty would arise as we  pointed
out earlier.
In  the	 result	 all  the writ	petitions  and	appeals	 are
dismissed.  The appellants and writ petitioners will pay the
costs- of the State of Andhra Pradesh, one set.
V.M.K.		     Petitions & appeals dismissed.
449