[Cites
3
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Mirza Nausherwan Khan & Anr vs The Collector (Land Acquisition), ... on 26 September, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 2247, 1975 SCR (2) 184, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 2247, 1975 (1) SCC 238 1975 2 SCR 184, 1975 2 SCR 184, 1975 2 SCR 184 1975 (1) SCC 238, 1975 (1) SCC 238
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
Hans Raj Khanna
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
PETITIONER:
MIRZA NAUSHERWAN KHAN & ANR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE COLLECTOR (LAND ACQUISITION), HYDERABAD

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/09/1974

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 2247		  1975 SCR  (2) 184
 1975 SCC  (1) 238
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1977 SC 580	 (5)
 R	    1988 SC 943	 (6)


ACT:
Hyderabad   Land   Acquisition	Act  (9	 of   1309   Fasli)-
Compensation for large area of land and buildings  acquired-
Principles.



HEADNOTE:
The  State  Government	acquired  a  large  area  with	some
buildings thereon in the city of Hyderabad, belonging to the
appellant  and the Collector awarded compensation under	 the
Hyderabad  Land Acquisition Act.  The compensation was	made
up of sums awarded for buildings, for standing trees, for  a
belt of land 50 ft. deep adjoining the road at a  particular
rate,  and  for	 the remaining area at a  lesser  rate.	  On
reference,  the City Civil Court increased the value of	 the
buildings on the basis of by a multiple of 25 times the rent
fetched.   On  appeal, the High Court further  enhanced	 the
value of the buildings by using a multiple of 27 instead  of
25, in fixing the compensation for the buildings.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended (1) that there was
a  potential  value  of the land which was  not	 taken	into
account	 by the High Court; (2) that the land and  buildings
should	have been taken together; and that the	land  should
not  have been sub-divided on the principle of belting;	 and
(3)  that  the multiple for capitalisation of the  value  of
buildings should have been 33-1/3 and not 27.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD  : There is no substantial question of law	 of  general
importance meriting consideration by this Court. [185H]
(1)The potential value of the land was taken into  account
by  the High Court.  On a consideration of the	totality  of
factors,  the  physical	 feature of  the  terrain,  and	 the
evidence  placed on record, the High Court was justified  in
holding	 that  the appellant had not substantiated  the	 big
potential  value claimed by him on the basis of	 any  unique
features of the land. [186 D-F]
(2)The	higher value for a strip of 50 feet adjoining  the
land  was  given by the courts below on	 the  principles  of
belting.  This Principle was adopted at the instance of	 the
appellant  himself and such an approach had operated to	 his
benefit and not detriment.  The Court had also taken note of
the  fact  that	 the value of a tiny plot is  not  a  proper
measure when a large area is acquired. [187 A-C]
Mohini;	 Mohan v. Province of Bengal A.I.R. 1951  Cal.	246;
Kunjukrishna V. State A.I.R. 1953 T.C 177; refer-red to.
(3)The	rate of interest allowed on government	securities
at the relevant time (1957) ranged between 3-3/4% and 4% and
the High Court, when accepting the multiple of 27,  accepted
3-3/4%.	 There is no warrant for the appellant's  contention
that  the interest on government bonds at the relevant	time
was only 3%. [187 D-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  2025  of
1968.
Appeal	 from  the  judgment  and  decree  dated  the	18th
October,1967  of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in C.  C.  C.
Appeal No. 46 of 1963.
R.   V. Pillai and P. M. Pillai, for the appellant
185
P. Ram Reddy and P. P. Rao, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-This appeal, by certificate, arises out  of
land  acquisition  proceedings	under  the  Hyderabad	Land
Acquisition   Act   (Hyderabad	Act  IX	  of   1309   Fasli)
(hereinafter called the Act, for short) which  substantially
resembles  the	provisions of the Central  Land	 Acquisition
Act.
The Government of Andhra Pradesh acquired a large open	area
with  some buildings thereon by Notification, dated  January
3,  1957  with a view to construct  Income-tax	add  Central
Excise	Offices	 at  Hyderabad.	 The contest  before  us  is
confined  to the quantum of compensation and, although	Shri
Vasudeva Pillai, counsel for the appellants' has pressed his
points	with persistence, we are unable to disturb the	High
Court's award.
The land, vast in extent, had a building with a plinth	area
of  3,300 sq. yds.  The area in which the acquired  plot  is
situate	 is  perhaps an important one in  the  City.   After
getting	 expert	 valuation  made of  the  buildings  by	 the
Central	 Public	 Works Department engineers,  the  Collector
awarded a sum of Rs. 41,674/- for the buildings, Rs. 1,440/-
for the standing trees and a sum of Rs. 30,630/for a belt of
land  50  ft.  deep  at Rs. 15/- per  square  yard  and	 Rs.
99,435/-  for  the remaining area of 13,258 sq.	 yds.	The,
total figure together with statutory solarium granted by the
Collector was Rs. 1,99,155.85. This figure fell far short of
the ambitious claim of the appellant and, when the case came
before	the  City Civil Court on a reference, there  was  an
enhancement   of   compensation.    Although   the   learned
Additional Chief Judge held that the area was a little	less
than had been determined by the Collector, the market  value
of the building was increased nearly four fold on the  basis
of  a multiple of 25 times the rent fetched.  On  the  other
items also some changes were made and, consequentially,	 the
total  amount was raised to Rs. 3,31,092/-.   The  appellant
arrived	 in  the High Court asking for more (and  the  State
also appears to have appealed, but its appeal was  dismissed
and we are not therefore concerned with it).
Some  measure of good fortune attended the appeal since	 the
High Court altered the multiple from 25 to 27 in fixing	 the
compensation for the building.	Otherwise, it  substantially
affirmed the findings of the trial Court, except that to the
advantage  of the appellant it restored the  area  acquired.
The net result was the appellant obtained a total sum of Rs.
3,52,326.65 as compensation.
It is thus clear that from the Collector to the Civil  Court
and  on, to the High Court. there has been an escalation  in
the  amount  of compensation and, hopefully, the  owner	 has
reached	 this  Court with his appeal,  under  a	 certificate
which  he  secured under
Art. 133(1)(a)
before	 the  recent
amendment.  We mention this because we are unable to discern
any  substantial  question of law of general  importance  in
counsel's   submissions	 or  the  points  outlined  in	 the
memorandum of appeal which merits the consideration of	this
Court.
186
Merely	because the claim is large the judgment need not  be
long  :and,  although  the appellant tried  to	spread	the,
canvas	 wide,	 we   regard   the   points   deserving	  of
consideration-as  falling  within  a  narrow  compass.	 The
burden	of  the song has been that Hyderabad has,  for	his-
torical	 reasons,  become  a great city and  that  the	land
acquired has precious potential value which has not  entered
the  judicial computation at the lesser levels. (By  way  of
aside  one, may say that society economic development  of  a
City-  may  enhance  the  value of  space  without  any	 the
littlest contribution by its owner and it is, in one  sense,
unfair	that  society should pay to an individual  a  higher
price  not  because he has-earned it but  because  of  other
developmental factors.	Of course, we are concerned with the
Land  Acquisition  Act
as it is and this  thought  therefore
need not be pursued).  Counsel has also urged that the	land
and the building taken together had a personality of its own
and  therefore a special value, missed by the courts  below,
should	be ascribed and the methodology of breaking  up	 the
totality  into	buildings  and	lands  separately  and	sub-
dividing  the  land into two portions on the  principle	 of.
belting was all wrong.	It was also urged before us that the
multiple  of 27 for purposes of capitalisation,	 adopted  by
the  High Court, was inadequate and that the owner  was	 en-
titled to capitalisation by multiplication 33-1/2 times.
We  find  that the High Court has carefully  considered	 ill
available  points, indeed stretching them in favour  of	 the
appellant,  where  that	 was warranted by  the	facts.	 The
potential value of the land was quite within the keen of the
Judge who heard the appeal and weighed with the Court in the
assessment  made.   However, the High Court  noted  that  no
evidence whatever was placed on record in substantiation  of
any big potential value based on the unique features of	 the
land.	On the other hand, the totality of factors was	duly
considered by the High Court when it observed :
"Having regard to the physical features of the
	      property,	  its  situation  in  an   important
	      locality and the price paid for a small extent
	      of  level	 ground acquired for  the  Telephone
	      Exchange which is at a distance of about	half
	      a	 mile  from the property acquired,  we	hold
	      that  the	 compensation awarded by  the  Court
	      below at Rs. 20/- per square yard for the 2042
	      square yards constituting the 50 wide belt and
	      at  Rs. 10/- per square yard for the  rest  is
	      fair and reasonable."
We see no error in this evaluation.
It  is true that the Court has adopted a higher value for  a
strip  50  feet	 wide  adjoining  the  road,  based  on	 the
principle  of belting.	There is no doubt that when we	deal
with value of an extensive plot of land in a City the  strip
that adjoins an important road will have a higher value than
what  is in the rear. for obvious reasons of potential	user
or commercial exploitation.  While no general principle	 can
be laid down in these matters, local circumstances guide the
Courts.
The ruling in
Mohini Mohan v. Province of Bengal
(1)
and the principle,
(1) A. I. R. 1951 Cal. 246.
187
with  its limitations, set out in Kunjukrishna	v.  State(1)
are  sufficient	 to  bring  out	 our  point.   Indeed,	 the
objection  to divide the plot for purposes  of	differential
valuation  has not been taken at the proper level.   On	 the
contrary, it has been adopted originally at the instance  of
the  appellant	himself,  before the Collector	and  we	 are
satisfied that such an approach has operated to his  benefit
and  not detriment.  The Court has taken note of  the  well-
established distinction between the value of a tiny plot  as
being  no  measure  when  a large  area	 is  acquired.	 The
terrain,  in  this case, appears to have  been	uneven	with
difference  in levels to the extent of 27 feet and  boulders
here  and there making building operations expensive in	 the
initial preparation of the site. We conclude by saying	that
practically  every  relevant  factor placed  on	 record	 has
received fair consideration before the High Court.
The  next  question  is whether	 the  multiple	adopted	 for
capitalisation has been prejudicially low, Exhibit A-7,	 the
notification  produced by the appellant, itself	 shows	that
around	the middle of 1957 the rate of interest	 allowed  on
Government Securities at the relevant time ranged between 31
and 4%.	 The Curt accepted 3-3/4 % as interest on  giltedged
securities instead of 4%, thus giving Some advantage to	 the
appellant  and there is no warrant for the  contention	that
the  interest  on Government bonds was 3%  at  the  relevant
time.  The appellant apparently has sought to misread  Ex.A-
7. We are satisfied with the valuation of the rented portion
of the house adopted by the High Court is correct.
Shri Pillai argued in vain for an augmentation of the  value
on the potential user of the plot for a Cinema House.	This
story has been factually disbelieved by the Courts below and
we cannot reopen the matter.  We must also remember that the
Court below has been indulgent enough to adopt a multiple of
27 despite the fact that the buildings acquired are over  30
years  old.  Nor does it come with grace from the  appellant
to  contend against the belting method since he himself	 had
asked for its application before the Collector and the trial
Court.
We  are thus satisfied that there is no law, no fact,  which
comes  to  the	rescue	of the	appellant  and	his  appeal,
virtually  against  concurrent findings of  fact,  therefore
deserves to be, and is hereby, dismissed with costs.
V.P.S.
(1) A. I. R. 1953 P.C. 177
Appeal dismissed.
188