[Cites
5
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurdit Singh Aulakh (Deceased) Through ... vs The State Of Punjab & Others on 16 August, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 2058, 1975 SCR (1) 737, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 2058, 1974 2 SCC 592, 1974 2 SERVLR 766, 1975 (1) SCR 737
Author:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
Bench:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
A.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
GURDIT SINGH AULAKH (DECEASED) THROUGH L.R.S

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/08/1974

BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
RAY, A.N. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 2058		  1975 SCR  (1) 737
 1974 SCC  (2) 592


ACT:
Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925
Sec. 12(1)
and (5)--Constitution of
Tribunal--Removal of member--Consequent dissolution and	 re-
contitution--Validity  of notification Held,  the  statutory
requirement and practical expediency justified the action.



HEADNOTE:
By  an	order dated September 10, 1965, A was  removed	from
Membership  of	the  Sikh  Gurdwaras  Tribunal	and  K	 was
appointed  to the vacancy so created.  On October 18,  1966,
the  order  of removal was quashed by the High	Court.	 The
ensuing.special	 leave petition was rejected by this  Court.
By  two separate notifications dated October 22,  1966,	 the
Tribunal was respectively dissolved and reconstituted with K
as a member.  A, who challenged by a writ petition the noti-
fication  of dissolution, died on July 18, 1969.  His  legal
representatives	 confined  their  claim	 to  the  emoluments
alleged	 to  be due to him.  The High  Court  dismissed	 the
petition.   On	appeal, by certificate, to this	 Court,	 the
appellants  contended that the notification  dissolving	 the
Tribunal  was  issued  for a collateral purpose	 ,Ind  by  a
person who had no authority to do.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD : (i) Under
Sec. 12(5)
of the Act, it was not competent
for the Government to remove a member once appointed  except
on the grounds specified therein and the fact that the	High
Court declared that the removal of A from the membership  of
the Tribunal was bad would not have warranted the removal of
K from, the membership of the Tribunal under that provision.
S. 12(5)
provides for all, cases of removal of a member once
appointed  and since the removal of K would not,  have	been
justified  on any of the grounds mentioned in that  section,
the  State  Government could not have removed him  from	 the
membership  and,  therefore,  an  impossible  situation	 was
created	 which	justified the dissolution  of  the  Tribunal
under
S. 12(1)
.	 From the fact that the judgment of the High
Court  declared	 that the removal of A was bad	in  law,  it
would  not follow that the appointment of K in	the  vacancy
created	 by  the  removal of A was  void.   K's	 appointment
remained  unchallenged.	 He was functioning as a  member  of
the Tribunal and was participating in the decision of cases.
The provisions of
s. 12(1)
made it essential that on removal
of  A, there should be an appointment to the vacancy as	 the
business  of  the Tribunal could not have  been	 carried  on
without filling the vacancy created by the removal.  On	 the
ground of practical expediency also the appointment of K was
not  void  or  nonest in the eye  of  law.   Therefore,	 the
dissolution  of	 the  Tribunal' was  not  for  a  collateral
purpose.	 [739A-740A]
(ii)  The  notification	 dissolving  the  Tribunal  did	 not
abolish	 any public office of the description  specified  in
sub-rule (1)(xxii) of R. 28 of the Rules of Business of	 the
Government of Punjab, 1953.  The Tribunal was not abolished.
It  was only re-constituted.  Abolition means  "to  destroy,
extinguish,  abrogate or annihilate".  The  Secretary,	Home
Department was competent to issue the notification.
			   [74OH-741A],



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  2062  of
1970.
Appeal	from  the judgment and order dated the	23rd  April,
1970,  of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Civil Writ	 No.
2788 of 1966.
R.K. Garg, S.C. Agarwal, S.S. Bhatnagar and A.K. Gupta,	 for
the appellants.
O.P. Sharma for respondents nos. 1-4.
738
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
MATHEW J. The Governor of Punjab constituted the Sikh  Gurd-
waras  Tribunal	 with effect from.  April 1,  1962  and	 one
Gurdit Singh Aulakh ('Aulakh' for short) was appointed as  a
member of the Tribunal.	 He was removed from the  membership
by an order dated September 10, 1965 and one Shri S.S. Kahla
('Kahla' for short) was appointed to the vacancy so created.
Aulakh	challenged  the validity of his removal	 in  a	writ
petition  filed	 before	 the High  Court  of  Punjab.	That
petition was ultimately allowed in letters patent appeal and
the  order  removing  Aulakh  from  the	 membership  of	 the
Tribunal  was  quashed.	 That was on October 18,  1966.	  An
application  for leave to appeal to this Court	against	 the
decision of the Letters Patent Bench was rejected.  So	also
an  application	 before	 this Court  for  special  leave  to
appeal.	 Therefore, a notification was issued on October 26,
1966 ,stating :
"In  exercise of the powers conferred by	sub-
	      section	(1)  of
section  12
of  the	Sikh
	      Gurdwaras Act, 1925, the President of India is
	      pleased	to  direct  the	  dissolution	with
	      immediate	 effect of the Tribunal	 constituted
	      vide  the Punjab Government  Notification	 No.
	      432-UP dated the 26 April, 1962".
This  notification  was	 challenged  by	 Aulakh	 in  a	writ
petition.   Aulakh died on July 18, 1969 and the  appellants
were impleaded as his legal .representatives.  They confined
their claim to the emoluments alleged to be due to the	writ
petitioner  from  September 11, 1965, till the date  of	 his
death.	 The  High  Court dismissed the	 petition  and	this
appeal, 'by certificate, is from this decision.
Mr.  Garg, appearing for the appellants, submitted that	 the
notification  dissolving  the  Tribunal	 was  issued  for  a
collateral purpose, viz., ,-to circumvent the effect of	 the
decision  of  the  High Court quashing	the  order  removing
Aulakh	from the membership of the Tribunal and,  therefore,
the  dissolution  was bad.  In support of  this	 contention,
,,counsel  relied  upon	 the  note  written  by	 the  Deputy
Advocate  General ,after the writ petition filed  by  Aulakh
was allowed.  In that note he said :
"If  Mr.	Aulakh is to be considered to  be  a
	      member  of the Tribunal then the very  working
	      of  the Tribunal will become impossible.	 Now
	      there are 4 members instead of 3	contemplated
	      by law'
He,  therefore, recommended the dissolution of the  Tribunal
by  a notification issued under
S. 12(1)
of the Act and	 its
re-constitution on the same day by another notification.
Counsel contended that when the High Court allowed the	writ
petition filed by Aulakh on the ground that his removal	 was
bad  in	 law,  there  was  no  legal  vacancy  to  which  an
appointment  could  have been made and for that	 reason	 the
appointment  of Kahla as a member of the Tribunal  was	void
and,  therefore,  the Government should have  ,-allowed	 the
Tribunal to function with Aulakh as its member in place
739
of  Kahla  and thereby given effect to the judgment  of	 the
High  Court  instead of circumventing it by  dissolving	 the
Tribunal under
S. 12(1)
.
On  the	 other hand, counsel for the State of  Punjab  urged
that under
s.12(5)
of the Act, it was not competent for	 the
Government  to remove a member once appointed except on	 the
grounds	 specified therein and the fact that the High  Court
declared  that the removal of Aulakh from the membership  of
the Tribunal was bad would not have warranted the removal of
Kahla  from  the  membership  of  the  Tribunal	 under	that
provision.   To	 put it differently, the contention  of	 the
counsel	 for the state of Punjab was that
S. 12(5)
provides
for  all cases of removal of a member of the  Tribunal	once
appointed and since the removal of Kahla would not have been
justified  on any of the grounds mentioned in that  section,
the  State  Government could not have removed him  from	 the
membership  and,  therefore,  an  impossible  situation	 was
created	 which	justified the dissolution  of  the  Tribunal
under
s. 12(1)
of the Act.
We think that the contention urged on behalf of the State of
Punjab must prevail.  From the fact that the judgment of the
High  Court declared that the removal of Aulakh was  bad  in
law,  it would not follow that the appointment of  Kahla  in
the  vacancy  created  by the removal of  Aulakh  was  void.
Assuming that the appointment was void, it was void only  as
against	 Aulakh.  There is nothing strange in the notion  of
the  appointment being void as against Aulakh only, for,  it
was  his  rights that were effected by	the  appointment  of
Kahla  and as Aulakh did not challenge the validity  of	 the
appointment,  the  appointment	became valid,  even  on	 the
assumption that it was originally void.	 The appointment  of
Kahla,	however	 void in the eyes of a	court  will  prevail
unless	Aulakh challenged it successfully.  Unless  the	 law
upheld	the  challenge,	 Aulakh	 must  accept  whatever	 the
Government  had done as valid and effectual.  The fact	that
Aulakh	successfully challenged the order removing him	from
the   membership  as  against  the  Government	is   of	  no
consequence  as Kahla was not bound by that  decision.	 The
validity  of his appointment was not challenged in the	writ
petition filed by Aulakh; Kahla was not even made a party to
that  writ petition.  His appointment,	therefore,  remained
unchallenged.  That apart, he was functioning as a member of
the Tribunal and was Participating in the decision of cases.
Section 12(1)
of the Act provides or the constitution of one
or  more  Tribunals  by the State  Government  for  deciding
claims	made in accordance with the provisions of  the	Act.
The  Tribunal so constituted should consist of	a  President
and  two  other members appointed by the  State	 Government.
Therefore,  it was essential that on the removal of  Aulakh.
there  should  be  an  appointment to  the  vacancy  as	 the
business  of  the Tribunal could not have  been	 carried  on
without	 filling  the vacancy created by the  removal.	 We,
therefore,  find  it difficult to hold on the  ground  of  a
practical expediency also that the appointment of Kahla as a
member	of the Tribunal was void and, therefore, non est  in
the eye of law.	 Kahla having been appointed as a member  of
the Tribunal, he could have been
740
removed only in accordance with the provisions of
s.  12(5)
.
That section provides :-
"The  local  Government  may  by	notification
	      remove  any member of a Tribunal,	 other	than
	      the President--
(i)  If  he refused to act or becomes  in	 the
	      opinion  of the local Government incapable  of
	      acting, or unfit to act, as a member or
(ii) If he has absented himself from more than
	      three consecutive meetings of the Tribunal, or
(iii) If he is an undischarged insolvent".
The  High  Court  has considered the  question	whether	 the
subsection  was	 in  force  on the  relevant  date  and	 its
conclusion   was   that	 it  continued	to   be	  operatives
notwithstanding the purported repeal.  The provisions of the
sub-section did not contemplate a removal in the contingency
created by the facts of the case and so the State Government
had  no	 power	to remove him under  the  sub-section.	 The
Tribunal  could	 not have functioned with both	of  them  as
members	 in  the teeth of the provisions of
S.	12(2)
.	 The
grounds	 for dissolution of the Tribunal are not  enumerated
in the Act.  We, therefore, agree with the view of the	High
Court  that  the dissolution of the Tribunal was not  for  a
collateral purpose.
The  other contention raised by Mr. Garg to the validity  of
the  notification  dissolving  the  Tribunal  was  that	 the
notification  was issued by S. K. Chhiber,  Secretary,	Home
Department, and not by the Governor.
At the relevant time, Punjab was under the President's	Rule
and  according	to Mr. Garg, the only  person  competent  to
issue  the  notification in question was the  Governor.	  In
support	 of this contention, he relied upon  the  Governor's
Secretariat  Order dated July 6, 1966, which  allocated	 the
business  of the Government among various functionaries.  in
paragraph  C  of that Order, it was provided that  the	Sec-
retaries  to  the Government would dispose of  the  business
relating to their respective Departments except cases which,
under  the  Rules of the Government of	Punjab,	 1953,	were
required  to  be submitted to the Governor, the	 Council  of
Ministers  or  the Chief Minister, and as  the	business  in
question  should have been submitted to the  Chief  Minister
before	issuing orders, the Governor alone was competent  to
sanction  the issue of the notification.  Counsel relied  on
Rule 28, sub-rule (1) (xxii) of the Rules of Business  which
reads :
"28.(1)  The following classes of cases  shall
	      be submitted to the Chief Minister before	 the
	      issue of orders :
(xxii) Propsals for the creation, for a period
	      exveeding	 six  months  or  abolition  of	 any
	      public  office,  the maximum  remuneration  of
	      which is between Rs. 800 and Rs. 2,000/-"
We  do	not  think  that  the  notification  dissolving	 the
Tribunal  abolished  any public office	of  the	 description
specified in the sub-rule.
741
The Tribunal was not abolished.	 It was only  reconstituted.
There  was  no abolition of any	 public	 office.   Abolition
means,	"to  destroy, extinguish, abrogate  or	annihilate".
We, therefore overrule tile contention of the counsel.
The result is that the appeal has to be dismissed and we  do
so with costs.
S.B.W.			       Appeal dismissed
742