[Cites
5
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Krishna Lal Dutta vs The State Of West Bengal on 21 February, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 955, 1974 SCR (3) 449, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 955, 1974 3 SCC 783, 1974 SCC(CRI) 259, 1975 MADLJ(CRI) 236, 1974 3 SCR 449, 1975 (1) SCJ 302, (1974) 4 SCC 783
Author:
M. Hameedullah Beg
Bench:
M. Hameedullah Beg
,
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
PETITIONER:
KRISHNA LAL DUTTA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/02/1974

BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1974 AIR  955		  1974 SCR  (3) 449
 1974 SCC  (3) 783


ACT:
Preventive   detention--Matters	 taken	into   account	 for
ordering detention--Duty to communicate to detenu to  enable
him to explain.



HEADNOTE:
The order detaining the petitioner under the
Maintenance  of
Internal Security Act, 1971
, mentioned the sole ground	that
on  the	 night of October 11, 1972, the petitioner  and	 his
associates committed theft of some tea chests from a running
goods  train  and that they fled, when	challenged,  leaving
behind	three chests of a tea at the P. O. In  his  petition
issue  of a writ of habeas corpus the  petitioner  contended
that it was impossible to commit theft from a running  train
as described.  In the counter affidavit, it was stated	that
what  was meant by running train was a train which had	come
to  a  stop due to some traffic restriction.   It  was	also
stated	that  the petitioner Was a notorious  wagon  breaker
operating near the Railway Station, but this allegation	 was
never  communicated  to	 the petitioner.   Even	 the  record
relating  to  the  detention  nowhere  referred	 1  to	 the
petitioner as a 'notorious wagon breaker'. In the record the
incident of 11th October was mentioned, a description of the
modus  operandi of a gang of thieves operating on  passenger
trains	was  given,  and  it was  also	mentioned  that	 the
activities of that gang commenced after the incident of 11th
October.   There  was however no indication as	to  how	 any
information whatsoever came to the District Magistrate,	 who
passed	the order of detention, from any  source  whatsoever
that the Petitioner was a member of that gang.
Allowing the petition,
HELD  :	 The  Court is not concerned with  the	adequacy  or
sufficiency of a ground of detention.  In the present  case,
there  is clear nexus between the sole ground for  detention
given  and  the maintenance of the  essential  supplies	 and
services.  but	the ground is vague in so far as it  is	 not
apparent  what is meant by the words "the P.O." The  grounds
given  could  not  enable  the	petitioner  to	 effectively
exercise his constitutional right of making a representation
against	 his detention. )Further. matters which	 were  never
communicated to the petitioner have been taken into  account
while  ordering the detention.	Presuming that whatever	 was
in the record operated against the petitioner he should have
been  given  fuller information of the	allegations  against
him.   No explanation has been given as to why that was	 not
done. [452 D-G]
[Those	exercising  drastic powers of  preventive  detention
should	at least take care to ascertain whether a  detention
is being ordered In a manner and on materials which disclose
that  it is really necessary to order a detention with	view
to  preventing	the person to be detained from acting  in  a
manner	prejudicial  to	 the objects  for  which  preventive
detention may be lawfully ordered. [452 C-D]
Prabhu	Dayal Deorah v. District Magistrate, Kamrup &  Ors.,
A.T.R. 1974 S.C. 183, followed.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petition NO. 845 of 1973.
Under Art 32 of the Constitution for the issue of a writ  in
the nature of habeas corpus.
S.   N. Jain, for the petitioner.
P. K. Chakravartyand G. S. Chatterjee, for the respondent..
450
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
BEG,  J. The petitioner, a citizen of India,  has      filed
this	  habeas corpus	 petition  challenging	   order  of
his   detention,   dated 24-11-1172 passed under
Section  5
clause	(a) of Maintenance of Internal Security.  Act,	1971
(hereinafter referred to is 'the Act')
It  appear  that  the petitioner was  actually	arrested  on
20-11-1972 and that the	 detention    order    was    passed
subsequently  on  24-11-1972, and, on that  very  date,	 the
petitioner  was	 served with the  document  containing	sole
ground of detention given is follows
	       "1. That on 11-10-72 at about 01.55 hrs., you
	      along  with your associates, being armed	with
	      bombs and other weapons, victimised wagon	 No.
	      NR  17393	 Ex Bro to KPD attached	 to  running
	      goods train in EC 249 DN near the Booster Sub-
	      station of Dum Dum Jn.  R/S when	the  train
	      slowed   down  for  traffic  restriction	 and
	      committed	 theft	in respect  of	tea  chests.
	      Train guard RPF party challenged you and	your
	      associates  when you hurled bombs towards	 the
	      RPF party.  RPF RK Sitaram Rai fired one round
	      in  self defence when you and your  associates
	      fled  away leaving behind three chests of	 tea
	      at the P.O.
	      Your action caused disruption of train service
	      for a considerable time and affected  supplies
	      and services,
	      You have thus acted in a manner prejudicial to
	      the  maintenance	of  supplies  and   services
	      essential to the community".
After giving what is marked as ground number 1
	      only, implying thereby that there was no other
	      ground of detention, the document proceeds:
"You  are hereby informed that you may make  a
	      representation to the State Government against
	      the    detention	 order	 and	that	such
	      representation  shall  be	 addressed  to	 the
	      Assistant Secretary Home (Special) Department,
	      Government   of  West  Bengal  and   forwarded
	      through  the  Superintendent of  the  Jail  in
	      which  you  have	been detained  as  early  as
	      possible.	 Under
Section 10
of the Maintenance
	      of  Internal  Security Act, 1971	(Act  26  of
	      1971.)  your  case  shall	 be  placed   before
	      Advisory	Board  within thirty days  from	 the
	      date of your detention under the order.
	      You are also informed that under
Section 11
of
	      the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971
	      (Act 26 of 1971)	   the Advisory Board. shall
	      if you desire to be so heard,  hear   you	  in
	      person, and, 'if you desire to be so heard  by
	      the   Advisory Board, you shall intimate	such
	      desire  in  your representation to  the  State
	      Government".
An  annexure to the affidavit filed by a Special  Secretary
in  the, Home Department of the Government of  West  Bengal,
who was
451
the   District	Magistrate  concerned  when   the   impugned
detention' order: was made against the petitioner,is a	copy
of the	  petitioner's	 representation	 addressed  to	 the
Government In the representation as Well 'as in the petition
before:	 us,  the petitioner asserts  that  the	 allegations
against	 him  'are absolutely untrue In his  application  to
this  Court  he	 states	 that  it  is  "palpably  false	 and
impracticable"	to  allege  that the  petitioner  with	some
associate committed theft of some tea chests from a running,
wagon and that he fled When challenged, leaving behind three
chests	of  tea	 "at the P.O.". Be that as  it	may,  it  is
difficult  to understand what is meant by "the P.O." In	 his
representation	 to  the  Government,  the  petitioner	 had
submitted that there was no evidence that he was  identified
by anybody as a participator in the incident.
In   the	affidavit  in  opposition   to	 the
	      petition,	 the  official	concerned,  who	 had
	      passed the detention order, stated :
"The  running  goods train as  stated  therein
	      actually means a goods train which bad come to
	      'a  stop	due to traffic restriction  and	 not
	      actually	a  running  one	 as  sought  to	  be
	      suggested by the petitioner".
The affidavit also contained the statement
	      "It   appears  from  the	records	  that	 the
	      petitioner   is  a  notorious  wagon   breaker
	      operating	  near	Dum  Dum  Junction   Railway
	      Station".
Learned	 Counsel appearing for the State of West Bengal	 was
asked  to explain how the petitioner could possibly make  an
effective  representation  against his	detention  when	 the
District Magistrate had a stationary train in mind which  he
actually described as "a running goods train" in the grounds
of  detention, when it was not indicated what was  meant  by
"the P.O.", and when the allegation that the petitioner	 was
a  "notorious wagon breaker operating near Dum Dum  Junction
Railway Station" was never communicated to him although	 it,
apparently, formed one of the grounds on which the detention
was  ordered.	In reply, learned Counsel for the  State  of
West  Bengal stated that he had the whole record before	 him
on which the detention was ordered and be placed that record
before us. We were unable to find any mention in this record
that the petitioner was "a notorious wagon breaker".  On the
other  'hand,  we found	 a description there of	 the   modus
operandi of a gang of thieves operating on passenger  trains
which  used  to deprive the passengers of their	 trunks	 and
other  goods while one, of the members of the gang sat	near
the  passengers with a newspaper spread out in front of	 him
which would, read out loudly to distract their attention and
used  also  to obstruct their view.  It is  mentioned  there
that  the  activities  of  this	 gang  commenced  after	 the
incident  of 11-10-1972. it is also mentioned there  that  a
number of incriminating articles were recovered from members
of  this gang of thieves including the petitioner  and	that
prosecutions were pending against them.
452
It  is true that the incident which occured at about 2	a.m.
co  11-10-1972,	 forming the ground of	detention,  is	also
mentioned  in the record but, there is no indication  as  to
how   any  information	whatsoever  came  to  the   District
Magistrate  from any source whatsoever that the	 petitioner-
was  a member of the gang which was concerned with  such  an
incident,Presumably,  this was the whole record	 as  learned
Counsel	 for  the  State  informed  us.	 ;  This  makes	 the
petitioner's  assertion, that be, was not only, arrested  on
20-10-1972  for	 reasons  not disclosed to  him,  but,	when
sufficient   evidence could not be found against him by	 the
local  officials,  a, detention order was made on  a  ground
covered by the Act. which  could be conveniently trotted out
at-the	time  seem plausible.  Deprivation  of	a  citizen's
personal  liberty  is  a  serious  matter  Those  exercising
drastic powers of preventive detention, which are  entrusted
to them for protecting valuable social and public interests,
should	at least take care to ascertain whether a  detention
is  being  ordered  in	a manner  and  on  materials  'Which
disclose that it is really " necessary" to order a detention
with  a	 view to preventing the person to be  detained	from
acting	in any manner prejudicial to the objects  for  which
preventive  detention  may  be lawfully	 ordered.   If	they
misuse	these powers, by acting unreasonably,  capriciously,
arbitrarily,  or in a malafide manner, public confidence  in
them  is shaken.  We are unable to say whether the  District
Magistrate acted unreasonably in making the detention order.
But, presuming that, whatever was in the record operated, as
learned	  Counsel  for	the  State  asserted,  against	 the
petitioner, he should have been given fuller information  of
allegations  against him.  It is not explained why this	 was
not done.
We are not concerned here with the adequacy or	 sufficiency
of a ground of detention.  There, is clearly a nexus between
tile sole ground for detention given and the maintenance  of
essential supplies ;and services.  But, as indicated  above,
we have found that matters which were never communicated  to
the  petitioner also appear to have been taken into  account
while  ordering	 the detention of the  petitioner.   Further
more the sole ground of detention is vague in ,so far as  it
is  not	 apparent  what is meant by the	 words	'-the  P.O."
Recently,  it was held by this
Court.in Probhu Dayal  Deorah
Vs. District Magistrate, Kamrup & Ors.
,(1) that vagueness of
a single  ground  could	 vitiate  a  detention	order.	 The
groundsgiven  could  not,  in  our.  opinion  enable  the
petitioner to effectively exercise his constitutional  right
of making a representation against his detention.
The  result is that we allow this petition and declare:	 the
detention  of petitioner, to be illegal. We order  that	 the
petitioner be released forthwith.
V.P.S.
Petition allowed.
(1) A.T.R. 1974 S.C. 183.
453