[Cites
8
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagwan Dass Sehgal vs State Of Haryana And Ors. Etc. Etc on 5 November, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 2355, 1975 SCR (2) 580, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 2355
Author:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
A. Alagiriswami
PETITIONER:
BHAGWAN DASS SEHGAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA AND ORS.  ETC.	 ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/11/1974

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 2355		  1975 SCR  (2) 580


ACT:
Constitution  of  India 1950,
Article 14
and  191-Office  of
Chairman  of Improvement Trust, if office of  profit-Removal
of disqualification-If amounts to discrimination.



HEADNOTE:
In  the	 contest  for election to  the	Haryana	 Legislative
Assembly one of the respondents, who was the Chairman of the
Ambala	Improvement  Trust..  was  declared  elected.	 The
appellant challenged the election on the grounds that :	 (i)
the  respondent's  nomination was improperly  and  illegally
accepted  because he was holding an office of  profit  under
the  State Government, and (ii)
S. 2(i)
of the Punjab  State
Legislature  (Prevention  and Disqualification)	 Act,  1952,
introduced  by the Haryana Amending Act 25 of 1969,  enacted
by  the	 Haryana  State Legislature under
Art.	191
of	 the
Constitution  which  purported	to take the  office  of	 the
Chairman  of an Improvement Trust out of the purview  of  an
office of profit, was invalid as it offended
Art. 14
of	 the
Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court,
HELD:(1) The office of the Chairman of an Improvement  Trust
constituted  under  the
Punjab Town Improvement	 Act
is  an
office	of profit, but
s. 2(i)
provided that such  a  person
does not incur the disqualification for being chosen as	 and
for  being  a  member  of  the	Haryana	 State	 Legislative
Assembly. [581H-582B]
(2)(a)
Article 191(1)(a)
of the Constitution gives  a	wide
power to the State Legislature to declare by law what office
or  offices  of profit held under the government  shall	 not
disqualify the holder thereof from being chosen or for being
a  member of the state Legislature.  Classification is	thus
left primarily to legislative discretion and when this power
is exercised reasonably in a manner which does not drain out
the  article  of  its  real  content  the  court  will	 not
interfere. [582H-583B]
(b)There is no discrimination between the chairman of  the
trust  and  the members of the trust.  In the  case  of	 the
members	 of the trust the disqualification on the ground  of
their  holding the office of profit had been removed  by  s.
2(e) of the 1952-Act.
(c)Further,  the  status and  responsibilities	and  other
conditions  of the office of the Chairman of an	 Improvement
Trust differ from those of the members of the trust or other
statutory bodies, and therefore, the mere fact that for	 the
purpose	 of removing the disqualification the Chairmen	have
been  put  in cl. (i) as a class se rate from  that  of	 the
members	 of the Trust and other statutory bodies in cl.	 (e)
of  s. 2 does not offend the guarantee of  equal  treatment.
[582G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1188  of
1973.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment & Order dated	 the
11th  October,	1972 of the Punjab & Haryana High  Court  in
C.W. No. 2490 of 1970 and Civil Appeal No. 1 of 1973.
From  the Judgment & Order dated the 30th October,  1972  of
the Punjab Haryana High Court in Election Petition No. 19 of
1972.
D.V.  Patel,  S.  S.  Khanduja and S.  K.  Jain	 for  the
appellant (In both the appeals)
581
V.M.   Tarkunde,  V. C. Mahajan and R.	N.  Sachthey  for
respondent No. 1 (In CA No. 1188/73.
Uma Datta for respondents Nos. 2 (In CA.  No. 1188/73.)	 and
respondent No. 1 (In C.A. No. 1 of 1973).
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
SARKARIA   J.-The   common   question	that   arises	 for
determination  in  these appeals is Whether  Clause  (i)  in
Section	 2
of the Punjab State Legislature  (Prevention  of
Disqualification)  _Act 7 of 1952 ,(hereinafter referred  to
as the Disqualification 'Act) inserted by Haryana  Amendment
Act  25 of 1969 suffers from the vice of discrimination	 and
as  such,  is an invalid piece of legislation ?	 Both  these
appeals will therefore be disposed of by this judgment.
The   appellant	 and  respondents,  as	 rival	 candidates,
contested the election to Haryana Legislative Assembly	from
Ambala	Cantonment  Constituency in March  1972.   Hans	 Raj
Suri,  Respondent  was	declared  elected.   The  appellant,
Bhagwan Dass Sehgal challenged this Respondent's election on
the  ground that his nomination papers had  been  improperly
and illegally accepted.	 It was alleged that on the material
dates,	the  respondent	 being	a  Chairman  of	 the  Ambala
Improvement Trust was holding an office of profit under	 the
Government of the State, and as such, was disqualified	from
contesting  the election.  It was further pleaded  that	 cl.
(i)  of s.2 of the Disqualification Act 1952 (added  by	 the
Haryana	 Amendment Act 25 of 1969) which purported  to	take
the  office of the Chairman of an Improvement Trust  out  of
the  purview  of  an 'office of profit' was  invalid  as  it
offended
Article 14
of the Constitution.
The  validity  of the aforesaid c (i)  was  also  challenged
separately, under
Article 226
of the Constitution in a	writ
petition on the same grounds.
The learned single-Judge before whom the writ petition first
came up for hearing, got it referred to a Division Bench  of
the  High  Court,  which dismissed the	writ  petition.	  In
consequence,  the  election petition, also,  was  dismissed.
Hence these appeals.
A few facts may now be set out:
It is not disputed that at the date of filing the nomination
papers	and  also  on  the  date'  of'their  scrutiny,	 the
respondent  was Chairman of the Ambala,	 Improvement  Trust.
He was appointed by the State Government under s. 4 and 5 of
the  Improvement Act by a notification dated May  21,  1970.
As  Chairman he was receiving a salary of Rs.  1,000/-	P.M.
plus  Dearness	and Conveyance Allowances.  It is  also	 not
disputed  that the power of appointment and removal  of	 the
Chairman of the Trust vests in the State Government and	 his
remuneration is paid out of the public revenues.  In  short,
the  office  of the Chairman has all the  attributes  of  an
"office	 of  profit'.  But for the impugned  provision,	 the
respondent would have been disqualified from contesting	 the
election.
582
By  virtue  of. the powers conferred by
Article 191
of	 the
Constitution,  the Legislature of Haryana State enacted	 the
Amendment  Act 25 of 1969, whereby it inserted the  impugned
cl.  (i) in the original s. 2 of the  Disqualification	Act.
The  effect of this amendment is that a person	holding	 the
office	of the Chairman of an Improvement Trust	 constituted
under  the
Punjab Town Improvement Act
or the office of	 the
Chairman   of	the  State  Agricultural   Marketing   Board
constituted  under  s.3 of the
Punjab  Agricultural  Produce
Markets	 Act, 1961
, does not incur the disqualification	 for
being chosen as, and for being a member of the Haryana State
Legislative Assembly.
Mr. D. V. Patel, learned Counsel for the appellant  contends
that the impugned provision is discriminatory inasmuch as it
enables the Chairman of the Trust to contest an election  to
the State Assembly by removing his disqualification but does
not  accord the same treatment to the members of  the  Trust
appointed  under s. 4(i) (c) of the Improvement Act.  It  is
further urged that the impugned provision has created an un-
reasonable   classification  between  the  members  of	 the
statutory bodies falling under clause (e), and a Chairman of
the  Improvement Trust falling under clause (i) of s.  2  of
the Disqualification Act.
To us, these contentions appear to be devoid of merit.
In the case of members of the Trust appointed under S.	4(i)
(c)  of	 the Improvement Act, the  disqualification  on	 the
ground	of their holding the office of profit,	had  already
been  removed by clause (e) of S. 2 of the  Disqualification
Act, 1952, which runs thus :
"A member of any statutory body or  authority,
	      or  a  member of an Committee or	other  body,
	      appointed	  or  constituted  by	the   Punjab
	      Government,  and	who is not in receipt  of  a
	      salary  but  who is paid only  travelling	 and
	      daily allowance during the performance of	 his
	      duties."
It  is therefore not correct to say that the members of	 the
Trust  have  been  discriminated against in  the  matter  of
removing the disqualification.
It   is	  noteworthy   that   the   status,   administrative
responsibilities  and  other conditions which  go  with	 the
office of the Chairman of the Improvement Trust are not	 the
same as those of the members of the Trust or other statutory
bodies.	  The mere fact therefore, that for the	 purpose  of
removing the disqualification, the Chairmen of the  Improve-
ment Trusts have been put in clause (ii) as a class separate
from  that of the members of the Trust and  other  statutory
bodies in clause (e) of
s.2
does not offend the guarantee of
equal treatment enshrined in
Article 14
of the Constitution.
It  must  be  remembered  that
Article	191(1)	(a)
of	 the
Constitution gives a wide power to the State Legislature  to
declare by law what ,office or offices of profit held  under
the Government shall not disqualify the holder thereof	from
being chosen or for being a member of the State Legislature.
Classification of such offices for the purpose
583
of   removing  the  disqualification  has  thus	 been	left
primarily  to  legislative discretion.	It follows  that  so
long  as  this exemptive power is exercised  reasonably	 and
with due restraint and in a manner which does not drain	 out
Article	 191 ( 1 ) (a)
of its real content or disregard	 any
constitutional	guarantee  or mandate, the  Court  will	 not
interfere.   Nothing  of  this kind has	 been  done  by	 the
impugned  provisions which would justify the  invocation  of
the  extraordinary powers of the Court under
Article 226
of
the Constitution.
No other point has been argued before us.
In the result the appeals fail and are hereby dismissed with
cost shearing fee limited to one set.
Appeals dismmissed.
V.P.S.
584