[Cites
11
, Cited by
80
]
Supreme Court of India
Charan Singh And Anr vs Darshan Singh And Ors on 17 December, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 371, 1975 SCR (3) 48, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 371, 1975 (1) SCC 298, 1975 3 SCR 48, 77 PUN LR 262, 1975 2 SCJ 164
Author:
N.L. Untwalia
Bench:
N.L. Untwalia
,
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
P.N. Bhagwati
PETITIONER:
CHARAN SINGH AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DARSHAN SINGH AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/12/1974

BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
BENCH:
UNTWALIA, N.L.
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
BHAGWATI, P.N.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR  371		  1975 SCR  (3)	 48
 1975 SCC  (1) 298
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1991 SC 221	 (9)


ACT:
Section	 92
of	 C.P.C.-Consent	 of  Advocate  General	 for
instituting  a suit-Whether allegations in the plaint to  be
seen  for  determining	whether the suit is  of	 the  nature
mentioned  in section 92-Whether substance of the nature  of
the  suit  to be taken	into  consideration-Whether  reliefs
mentioned in
section 92
should be present in the plaint.
Suit  filed in a representative capacity whether  abates  on
the death of one of the plaintiffs.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondents  field a suit against appellant No.  1	 for
permanent  injunction restraining him from interfering	with
the Guru Garanth Saheb, for religious recitals in the Darbar
Saheb  as well as restraining him from interfering with	 the
rights	of reciting the Guru Garanth Sahib and	holding	 and
joining	 the  religious congregations and  Satsang  in	the
Gurudwara.   The  villagers dedicated certain  land  to	 the
Granth Saheb in the year 1897.	Several persons succeeded as
the  trustees,	the  appellant being the  last	one  at	 the
relevant time.	The grievance made in the suit was that	 the
appellant was committing a breach of trust by not using	 the
Dera  in  general  and Darbar Saheb in	particular  for	 the
purposes for which the same was dedicated.  The Trial  Court
held  that the suit was not maintainable in the	 absence  of
the  consent of the Advocate General as required by
section
92
of the Civil Procedure Code.  The First Appellate  Court
affirmed the decision of the Trial Court.  The Single  Judge
of  the	 High Court in Regular Second Appeal  dismissed	 the
plaintiff's  appeal on the ground that the suit was  hit  by
section	 92
of the Civil Procedure Code.  On grant of  leave
under  clause  10 of the Letters Patent. Bench	allowed	 the
appeal and remitted back the case to the Trial Court holding
that the suit was not barred by
section 92
of the Code.
On  appeal  by Special Leave it was  contended	before	this
Court that (1) The judgment of the High Court in relation to
section	 92
of the Code is erroneous in law.  The  suit	 was
barred	under  the said provision of the Code;	(2)  On	 the
death  of  one	of  the	 plaintiffs  appellants	 during	 the
pendency of the second appeal in the High Court the whole of
the appeal abated and ought to have been dismissed as such.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD  :	 Since the suit has been filed in  a  representative
capacity  on the death of one of the plaintiffs it  did	 not
abate.	The decision in Raja Anand Rao followed. [53C]
HELD FURTHER : The plaint alleges breach of duty on the part
of  the	 trustee  and the plaintiffs seek  the	court's	 aid
against	 the  trustee  for  forcing  him  to  discharge	 his
obligations  by due performance of his duties.	The  present
suit  was a suit for a decree under
section 92
of  the	Code
and   since  it	 was  not  filed  in  conformity  with	 the
requirements   of   that  provision  of	 law  it   was	 not
maintainable.	It is well settled that the  maintainability
of  the suit under
section 92
of the Code depends  upon	 the
allegations  in	 the plaint and does not fall  for  decision
with  reference to the averments in the	 written  statement.
The plaintiffs in their plaint did not in terms ask for	 the
one or the other reliefs mentioned in
section 92(1)
.   They,
however,  alleged  acts of breach of  trust,  mismanagement,
undue  interference,  with the right of the  public  in	 the
worship of Granth Saheb.  They wanted a decree of the  court
against the appellants to force him to carry out the objects
of the trust and to perform his duties as a trustee. [57A-B]
			 ARGUMENTS
For  the  Appellants  : On reading  the	 entire	 plaint	 the
reliefs	 claimed are covered by
s. 92(1)(a)
to (h)
Code  of
Civil Procedure
.
(i)The plaint clearly shows that the property involved	is
trust  property	 and  that the trust is a  public  trust  or
charitable and religious nature.
49
(ii)The	 plaint also shows that the aim was for benefit	 of
the public.
(iii)  Reliefs claimed fall within Sub-Clause (e)-The  place
where Guru Granth Sahib was placed was called "Darbar Sahib"
where it was to be recited and where Sat Sang and Amrit	 Pan
Ceremony  were	to be held.  The reach alleged is  that	 the
appellant  is not using the "Darbar Sahib,, for the  purpose
for  which  it	'was dedicated and  further  says  that	 the
villagers  have a right to recite and worship  Granth  Sahib
installed  in  the  Dera  in general  and  Darbar  Sahib  in
particular and that the appellant has stopped the  villagers
from doing so.	Relief claimed is that the Defendants should
be  restrained	from  interfering with	the  maintaining  of
Granth	Sahib for religious recitations in the Darbar  Sahib
in the Dharamsala or Dera.
Therefore, the respondents required directions of the  court
to  demarcate the exact location of Darbar Sahib within	 the
Dera  Jaimal Singh where Granth Sahib is to be	located	 and
worshipped etc.
Such a suit relates to the administration of the said  trust
and falls within subclause (e) of
s. 92(1)
.
Further the directions required involve framing of a  scheme
for  time  for	worshipping  the Granth	 Sahib	or  for	 its
recitation and for holding Sat Sang and Amrit Pan  Ceremony.
Therefore, the suit falls within
s. 92(1)(g)
.
In  any	 case  the suit	 falls	within	Sub-clause  (h).-The
defendants  contention is that the scope of
s.	92(1)(a)
to
(h)  should  involve administration of the  Trust  Property.
Sub-Clause  (a) to (g) describe some of	 the  administrative
problems  arising in a particular case as all such  problems
could  not be easily stated in a statutory  provision.	 Any
suit filed to establish existence of a trust or to establish
title  of  the	trust to a piece of property  would  not  be
covered by any sub-clause of
s. 92
.
The plaintiffs did not contest that the suit was not covered
by  clause (h) before the First Appeal Court, and also	vide
Judgment  of the High Court.  In substance the complaint  is
that the appellant contrary to purpose of the Trust is	pre-
venting	 the  villagers etc, from worshipping  and  reciting
Granth	Sahib  in the Darbar Sahib and	is  preventing	them
access	there to hold Sat Sang and other ceremonies.   These
breaches  are obviously in the course of the  administration
of  the Trust. and must be held to be covered by  sub-clause
(h).
Some of the plaintiffs have died during the pendency of	 the
Second	 Appeal	  in  the  High	 Court	 and   their   legal
representatives were not brought on the record.	  Therefore,
the  appeal had abated against them.  Defendants had  argued
that  the  appeal  had	abated in toto	but  this  plea	 was
rejected  by the Single Judge.	The defendant-, filed  cross
objection  against this decision before the  Letters  Patent
Bench but the same were dismissed without discussion.
If it be held that the suit was filed for public benefit  in
a  representative  capacity then this point is	conceded  to
have no force.	However, if it be held that the suit was  to
enforce individual rights then the appeal had abated in toto
as  otherwise there will be conflicting decisions whether  a
suit is covered by
s. 92
or not.
Under s. 5 of the Punjab Common Lands (Regulation) Act 18 of
1961  all Shamlat Lands vest in the village Panchayat.	 The
land  in dispute is Shamlat land, therefore, the  plaintiffs
or villagers could not file a suit relating to this  Shamlat
land.  Plaintiffs case is that under
s. 2(g) (ix)
this	land
is used as a place of worship and, therefore, is not covered
by  this  Act.	 The defendants case  is  that	the  present
institution is not a place of worship as Radha Swamis do not
carry on worship at all at any place.
For the respondents : The substance of the plaint is (1) (a)
that  the  defendant is not using the Dera  in	general	 and
Darbar	Sahib  in particular for the purpose for  which	 the
same  are  dedicated. (b) that the  defendant  alleges	that
"maintenance  of the Guru Granth Sahib and Darbar Sahib	 and
access	of the people to Dera and Darbar Sahib"	 depends  on
his sweet will and discretion. (c) that the defendant has  a
right not to allow any person to enter Dera and recite
-L379Sup CI/75
50
Granth	Sahib.	(d)  that the plaintiffs  have	a  right  to
worship	 in Dera and Dar bar Sahib and recite Granth  Sahib.
(e)  that the plaintiffs have a right to set that  Dharmsala
Dera and Gurdwara is used for the purpose and fulfilment  of
which  the same is established. (2) In the plaint  thus	 the
existence  of  a trust and its denial by the  defendant	 not
only by not using it for the purpose of dedication but	also
openly	asserting a hostile right that it is his sweet	will
to  permit  even access to the Dera are alleged.   Thus	 the
allegation  in substance and form is that the  existence  of
trust  and reciting Granth Sahib is denied by defendant	 and
he   places   obstruction  to  the  free   access   of	 the
beneficiaries of trust.
(3)The	relief claimed is for injunction to  restrain  the
defendant  from interfering with maintenance of Guru  Granth
Sahib  in Darbar Sahib and from reciting the same; which  it
is submitted is not covered by any of the sub clauses of  s.
92(1)
C.P.C
. and therefore
s. 92
C.P.C. is not attracted.
(4)That since the said relief could not be covered by  any
other  sub-clause  an attempt was made by the  appellant  to
bring the relief under sub-clause (h) of
s. 92(i)
which read
as under
"granting such further or other relief as the nature of	 the
case may require."
This clause as held by Privy Council in 1928 PC. 16 must  be
read not in isolation from but ejusdem generis to the  other
clauses of the sub-section.  It is intended to cover up such
other reliefs that may be necessary in order to	 effectively
grant  any one of the reliefs mentioned therein the  earlier
clauses	 something ancillary or akin to them or some  relief
which follows as a necessary corallary flowing therefrom.
It cannot be construed to mean some such relief which in its
nature	and substance something wholly different  from	them
and not covered by any of the earlier sub clause (a) to (g).
It  if were so then it would cover all the  various  reliefs
that  can  conceivably	be claimed in a suit  based  on	 the
allegation  of	breach	of trust.  That	 could	not  be	 the
intention  of  the legislature otherwise  nothing  would  be
easier for the legislature to say that for the grant of	 any
relief	based  on  the allegations of breach  of  trust	 the
sanction of advocate General would be a precondition for the
institution of such a suit.
The  intention	appears to be clear that in suits  based  on
allegations   of  breaches  of trust  of  charitable   and
religious  nature  where some. what may	 be  termed  drastic
reliefs	 as contemplated in sub-clause (a) to (g) of  s.  92
(1)
C.P.C
.  are prayed then in only such  cases  would	 the
sanction be needed.
Thus suits for declaration of trust are out side the purview
of
s. 92
, so also sents for declaration and possession.	  On
principle  there  is no difference in relief  of  injunction
from that of declaration.  In fact relief of injunction	 has
been held to be not covered among the relief contemplated in
sub-clauses (a) to (h).
5.A distinction was sought to be made between suits where
allegations  of	 total denial by defendant of  existence  of
trust  are  made in a plaint from suits	 where	breaches  by
defendant  of  trust or duties only are alleged and  it	 was
suggested  that for the former suits no sanction needed	 and
for the latter sanction was necessary.
The said contention is not enable; firstly the denial of the
existence  of trust is also a breach of trust. and  secondly
nothing would be easier to circumvent the said condition  by
alleging denial by the defendant of the trust in the  plaint
and thereafter seeking reliefs which admittedly fall  within
sub  clauses (a) to (g) of
s. 92(1)
.  To put  it  conversely
and can it be suggested that where the allegations are	that
defendant  is  denying the trust but relief  prayed  for  is
removing the trustee which is clearly covered by sub  clause
(a), no sanction would be needed.
It  is submitted that the emphasis in
section 92
C.P.C.  is
not  on	 the  manner in which breach  of  trust	 is  alleged
whether	 it  is	 by denial of existence of  trust  or  which
admitting  the	existence of trust or  while  admitting	 the
existence of trust the defendant does not perform his duties
but  the  emphasis is on the reliefs sough for	purposes  of
sanction.
51
6.It  is  further  submitted that  though  allegation  in
plaint	are primarily to be looked at for this	purpose	 but
where  parties have led evidence reference to the same	have
also been made to find out the real nature of the suit. (see
1974 Vol. 2, S.C.C. Part X 695).
In  the present case defendant in his written statement	 has
denied the existence of trust for reciting Granth Sahib.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 505 of 1974.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment & Order dated	 the
13th  December, 1973 of the Punjab & Haryana High  Court  in
L.P.A. No. 573 of 1971.
Bishan	Narain,	 M. C. Bhandare, Nandtal  Balkrishan  Lulla,
Nishat	Singh Garewal and K. J. Johan of J. B. Dadachanji  &
Co., for the Appellants.
B. P. Maheshwari and Suresh Sethi for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
UNTAWALIA,  J.-The  plaintiffs respondents, in	this  appeal
filed by the defendants appellants by special leave of	this
Court  from the decision of the High Court of Judicature  of
Punjab	and  Haryana  instituted a suit	 in  the  year	1963
against	 appellant  no.	 1 alone (for the  sake	 of  brevity
described  as  the appellant hereinafter in  this  judgment)
praying for a decree for permanent injunction against him to
restrain  him 'from interfering with the maintaining of	 the
Guru Granth Sahib for religious recitals in the Darbar Sahib
in  the Dharmsala also known as Dharmsala Dera	Baba  Jaimal
Singh  situated	 in  village Balsarai  Tehsil  and  District
Amritsar  as also restraining him from interfering with	 the
plaintiffs and other satsang is rights of reciting the	Guru
Granth	 Sahib	and  holding  and  joining   the   religious
congregations  and Satsang in the above	 mentioned  Gurdwara
Baba Jaimal Singh."
About 70 years prior to the institution of the suit one Sant
Baba  Jaimal  Singh used to reside  and	 practise  spiritual
sadhana	 at the place aforesaid.  The residents	 of  village
Balsarai  held	him  in great respect because  of  his	high
spiritual   achievements  and  noble  living.	He   got   a
Dharamsala  built  which came to be known  as  Gurdwara	 and
according  to the case of the plaintiffs Guru  Granth  Sahib
was   also  installed  there.	The  villagers	gifted	 and
dedicated  11  kanals,	16 marlas of  land  out	 of  village
Shamilat  to  the Granth Sahib in the  year  1897.   Several
persons	 succeeded  as the Manager/Trustee or  Head  of	 the
Institution  so	 established one after the other  after	 the
demise	of  Sant Baba Jaimal Singh the appellant  being	 the
last one at the relevant time.	The plaintiffs who filed the
suit in a representative capacity on behalf of the  devotees
of  the	 Gurdwara  in  the  first  instance  had  wanted  to
institute  the	suit  after obtaining  the  consent  of	 the
Advocate-General of Punjab in accordance with
section 92
of
the  Civil  Procedure Code-hereinafter referred	 to  as	 the
Code.	But  they  failed  to  obtain  the  consent  of	 the
Advocate-General.   Later on the plaintiffs  instituted	 the
suit endeavouring to frame it in such a manner so as to take
it  out	 of  the  ambit of
section  92
of  the	 Code.	 The
grievance  of the plaintiffs in the suit has been  that	 the
appellant Was committing a breach of trust by
52
not  using  the,  Dera	in  general  and  Darbar  Sahib	  in
particular for the purpose for which the same was dedicated.
He had started denying the rights of the people to the	Dera
and  Darbar  Sahib  and Guru  Granth  Sahib  asserting	that
allowing  them	to  do so depend, upon his  sweet  will	 and
discretion.   The  plaintiffs,	claiming  a  right  in	 the
institution  for the Granth Sahib made a grievance that	 the
appellant  was	interfering  with their right  and  was	 not
discharging his duties as he ought to do in accordance	with
the  objects of the religious institution in  question.	  In
substance  the	relief claimed against the appellant  is  to
prevent	 him from committing any breach of the trust and  to
direct him to perform his duties as a Manager or Trustee  of
the religious institution to carry out its objects.
Several	 pleas were raised by the appellant in	his  written
statement  to resist the suit.	Many of them were by way  of
preliminary  objections to the maintainability of the  suit.
Tirlok	Singh, appellant no. 2 and two others were added  as
defendants 2 to 4 in the suit at their instance.  'The Court
of the Subordinate Judge, Second Class at Amritsar framed as
many  as  7 preliminary issues and decided most of  them  in
favour	of the plaintiffs.  But the issue as to whether	 the
suit  was  competent in the absence of the  consent  of	 the
Advocate-General  under
section 92
of the Code	was  decided
against	 the  plaintiffs.  So the suit was  dismissed.	 The
fact that the institution was a Public Trust of a  religious
nature and that the suit had been filed by the plaintiffs in
a representative capacity are no longer in dispute.  One  of
the  pleas  taken  by the appellant was that  the  suit	 was
barred	in  view of the provisions of law contained  in	 the
Punjab	Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961
,  Punjab
Act  No.  18  of 1961.	But this plea was  rejected  by	 the
'Trial	Court.	 From the dismissal of the  suit  plaintiffs
went  up in appeal.  The first Appellate Court affirmed	 the
decision  of  the Trial Court.	They went up  in  a  regular
second appeal before the High Court.  A learned Judge of the
High  Court  dismissed the plaintiffs appeal on	 the  ground
that  their suit was hit by section 92 of the Code.  One  of
the  plaintiffs	 and  two of  the  added  defendants  namely
defendants  3 and 4 died during the pendency of	 the  second
appeal in the High Court.  Their heirs were not substituted.
The  appellant's plea that the appeal had abated as a  whole
was not accepted by the learned single Judge.  He also	held
against him on the point of the suit being allegedly  barred
under Punjab Act 18 of 1961.  On grant of leave under clause
10  of the Letters Patent the case was taken further  before
the  Letters Patent Bench.  The learned Judges	constituting
the  Bench have allowed the Letters Patent appeal,  remitted
back  the case to the Trial Court holding in favour  of	 the
respondents that the suit is not barred under section 92  of
the Code.  The surviving two defendants have come up to this
Court.
Mr. Bishan Narain, learned counsel for the appellant,  urged
the following points in support of the appeal :
(1)   The	 judgment  of  the  High  Court	  in
	      relation	 to  section  92  of  the  Code	  is
	      erroneous	 in law.  The suit was barred  under
	      the said provision of the Code.
53
(2)   The	 plaintiffs had no locus  standi  to
	      institute	 the  suit  as the  property  of  the
	      institution  vested  in  the  Panchayat  under
	      Punjab Act 18 of 1961.
(3)   On	the death of one of  the  plaintiffs
	      appellants  during the pendency of the  second
	      appeal  in  the High Court the  whole  of	 the
	      appeal abated and ought to have been dismissed
	      as such.
The last two points may be shortly disposed of as they	have
to  be	stated	merely to be rejected.	Point  no.  (2)	 was
eventually   given  up	as  it	was  completely	 devoid	  of
substance. since the suit had been filed in a representative
capacity,  it  is  clear that on the death of  one,  of	 the
plaintiffs  it did not abate.  In Raja Anand Rao  v.  Ramdas
Daduram and others(1) it has been said Lord Dunadin at	page
16  "There was also a point that the person  who  originally
raised	the suit and got the sanction having died  the	suit
could  not go on, but there does not seem any force in	that
point  either,	it being a suit which is not  prosecuted  by
individuals for their own interests, but as  representatives
of  the general public.	 It is plain that the second  appeal
did  not  lose	its competency on the death of	one  of	 the
plaintiffs  appellants.	  The  only  point  which   requires
discussion  and determination in this appeal is whether	 the
suit filed by the plaintiffs was barred under Subsection (2)
of section 92 of the Code.
It  is well-settled that a suit of the nature  envisaged  by
section 92(1) of the Code to obtain a decree for any one  or
more of the reliefs enumerated in clauses (a) to (h) of the
Code has to be filed by the Advocate-General or two or	more
persons having an interest in the Trust with the consent  in
writing	 of the Advocate-General.  Subsection  (2)  provides
that  save  under  certain  circumstances.........  no	suit
claiming  any  of the reliefs specified in  sub-section	 (1)
shall  be  instituted  in respect of any such  trust  as  is
therein referred to except in conformity with the Provisions
of  that  sub-section." Out of the 3  conditions  which	 are
necessary to be fulfilled for the application of section 92,
two are indisputably present in this case viz. (1) the	suit
relates to a Public Charitable or Religious Trust; (2) it is
founded	 on  an	 allegation of a breach	 of  trust  and	 the
direction of the Court is required for administration of the
trust.	The debate and dispute between the parties  centered
round  the  requirement	 of  the  fulfilment  of  the  third
condition namely whether the reliefs claimed are those which
are mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 92 of the  Code.
A  suit	 may be instituted under section 92(1) to  obtain  a
decree-
(a)   "removing any trustee;
(b)   appointing a new trustee;
(c)   vesting any property in a trustee;
	      (cc)directing a trustee who has been removed
	      or a person who has ceased to be a trustee, to
	      deliver  possession of any trust	property  in
	      his  possession to the person entitled to	 the
	      possession of such property;
(1)  48 I.A.R 12.
54
.lm15
(d)  directing.accounts and inquiries-,
(e)  declaring-what  proportion of the trust-property or  of
the  interest therein shall be allocated to  any  particular
object of the trust;
authorizing  the whole or any part of the trust-property  to
be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged;
(g)  settling a scheme; or
(h)  granting such further or other relief as the nature  of
the case may require."
The  High Court in the Letters Patent appeal has  taken	 the
view  that the relief sought for in the suit does  not	fall
under  any  of the clauses (a) to (h) of section 92  of	 the
Code.	Learned counsel for the appellant has assailed	this
view  and submitted that the relief sought for	falls  under
clause (e) or (g) or in any event under clause (h).  In	 our
judgment  the  relief  sought  for in  this  case  does	 not
strictly  or squarely fall within clause (e) or (g)  but  is
very  much  akin  to  either and hence	is  covered  by	 the
residuary clause (h).
Lord Sinha delivering the judgment of the Judicial Committee
of  the Privy Council in Abdur Rahim and others v. Syed	 Abu
Mahomed Barkat Ali Shah and others(1) rejected the  argument
that  the words "such further or other relief as the  nature
of  the	 case may require" occurring in clause (h)  must  be
taken,	not in connection with the previous clauses  (a)  to
(g)  but  in connection with the nature of  the	 suit.	 The
argument  was that any relief other than (a) to (g)  in	 the
case  of  an alleged breach of an  express  or	constructive
trust  as  may	be  required in	 the  circumstances  of	 any
particular case was covered by clause (h).  It was  repelled
on the ground that the words "further or other relief"	must
on  general  principles	 of construction be  taken  to	mean
relief of the same nature as clause (a) to (g) , It would be
noticed	 that  the  word used after clause  (g)	 and  before
clause	(h) is "or".  It may mean "and" in the	context,  or
remain	"or' in the disjunctive sense in a given  case.	  If
any  further relief is asked for in addition to any  of	 the
reliefs mentioned in clauses (a) to (g) as the nature of the
case may require, then the word "or" would mean "and".	 But
if  the relief for is other relief which is not by way of  a
consequential  or additional reliefs in terms of clause	 (a)
to (g), then the word "or" will mean "or".  The other relief
however,  cannot be of a nature which is not akin to  or  of
the  same nature as any of the reliefs mentioned in  clauses
(a)  to (g).  According to the plaintiffs' case one  of	 the
objects	 of  the religious trust was the worship  of  Granth
Sahib  and its recital in congregations of the	public.	  In
the  suit  a  decree declaring what  portion  of  the  trust
property  should  be allocated to the said object  could  be
asked  for under clause (e).  The plaintiffs could also	 ask
for  the  settling  of a scheme under  clause  (g)  alleging
mismanagement  of  the religious trust on the  part  of	 the
trustees.  In the settlement of the scheme could be included
the  worship  and recital of Granth Sahib the  holy  Granth.
The plaintiffs in their plaint did not
(1)  A.I.R. 1928 Privy Council, 16: 55 Indian Appeals 96.
55
in  terms. ask for the one or the. other.   They.,  however,
alleged	 acts  of  breach  of  trust,  mismanagement,  undue
interference with the right of the public in the worship  of
Granth Sahib.  They wanted a decree of the Court against the
appellant to force him to carry out the objects of the trust
and to perform his duties as a Trustee.	 Reading the  plaint
as  a whole it is not a suit where the plaintiffs  wanted  a
declaration of their right in the, religious institution  in
respect	 of the Granth Sahib.  But it was a suit where	they
wanted	enforcement of due performance of the duties of	 the
trustee in relation to a particular object of the trust.  It
is  well-settled that the maintainability of the suit  under
section	 92 of the Code depends upon the allegations in	 the
plaint and does not fall for decision with reference to	 the
averments in the written statement.
In
Mahant Pragdasji Guru Bhagwandasji v. Patel Ishwarlalbhai
Narsibhai  and others
(1) it was pointed out at page  517  by
Mukherjea, J, as he then was, speaking for the Court "A suit
under  section	92,  Civil Procedure Code, is a	 suit  of  a
special	 nature which presupposes the existence of a  public
trust of a religious or charitable character.  Such suit can
proceed	 only  on the allegation that there is a  breach  of
such  trust or that directions from the court are  necessary
for the administration thereof, and it must pray for one  or
other of the reliefs that are specifically mentioned in	 the
section.   It  is only when these conditions  are  fulfilled
that  the suit has got to be brought in conformity with	 the
provision  of  section	92, Civil Procedure  Code.
As	 was
observed  by  the  Privy Council in
Abdur  Rahim  V.  Barkat
Ali
(2),	 a  suit  for a declaration  that  certain  property
appertains  to a religious trust may lie under	the  general
law but is outside the scope of section 92, Civil  Procedure
Code."	In  a  very recent  decision,  this  Court  speaking
through	 one  of  us  (Mathew,	J)  in	the  case  of  Swami
Paramatma.
nand
Saraswati and another v. Ramji Tripathi	 and
another
(3)  has reiterated the same view in paragraph 10  at
page  699  wherein  it	has  been  further  added  "It	 is,
therefore,  clear that if the allegation of breach of  trust
is not substantiated or that the plaintiff had not made	 out
a   case  for  any  direction  by  the	court	for   proper
administration	of the trust, the very foundation of a	suit
under  the  section would fail; and, even if all  the  other
ingredients  of a suit under section 92 are made out, if  it
is clear that the plaintiffs are not suing to vindicate	 the
right  of the public but are seeking a declaration of  their
individual or personal rights or the individual or  personal
rights	of  any	 other person or persons in  whom  they	 are
interested,  then  the suit would be outside  the  scope  of
Section 92."
Mr.  B. P. Maheshwari, learned counsel for  the	 respondents
placed	strong	reliance upon a decision of the	 Patna	High
Court  in  Ganpat Pujari v. Kanaiyalal	Marwari(4)  and	 the
decision of this Court in Harendra Nath Bhattacharya &	ors.
v. Kalimaram Das-dead by
(1) [1952] S.C.R.513. (2) (1928) 55 Indian Appeals, 96.
(3) [1974] 11 S.C.C. 695.  (4) A.I.R. 1933 Patna. 246.
(5)[1972] 2 S.C.R. 492.
56
Lrs.(5) In the Patna case the first relief asked for in	 the
suit  was  for an adjudication of the property in  the	suit
belonging  to  the general public and for a  declaration  of
their right to that effect.  The Thakurbari in question	 was
claimed	 to be a public property to which the  entire  Hindu
community  was	entitled  to go	 and  worship.	 The  appeal
arising	 out of the suit came up before Wort and Fazal	Ali,
JJ as they then were.  There was a difference of opinion  as
to  the application of section 92 of the Code between  them,
the  latter taking the view that section 92 of the Code	 was
not a bar.  On reference to the third learned Judge, Kulwant
Sahay,	J. agreeing with the view of Fazal Ali, J held	that
the  relief claimed in the suit was not covered	 by  clauses
(a) to (h) of section 92.  The facts of the instant case are
different and the Letters Patent Appeal Bench of the  Punjab
High  Court committed an error in applying the ratio of	 the
Patna case to the facts of the present case.
In the case of
Harendra  Nath Bhattacharya & Ors. v. Kalimram Das  Dead  by
L.Rs.
(supra),	 Grover, J delivering the judgment  of	this
Court referred to the analysis made by the High Court as  to
the reliefs claimed in the plaint of that suit.	 In the main
there  were 4 reliefs as enumerated at pages 498 and 499  of
the  report.  Reliefs (1) (2) and (4 ) were clearly  outside
the  scope of section 92 of the Code.  Learned	counsel	 for
the  respondents submitted that relief no. 3 which was	very
much akin to the relief in the present suit was also held to
be a relief not covered by any of the clauses of sub-section
(1)  of	 section  92  of  the  Code.   In  our	opinion	 the
contention  is not sound and cannot be accepted.  The  third
relief
in  that case
as analysed by the Court	was  in	 the
following terms
	      "(3)" For a declaration that the plaintiffs as
	      Bhakats of the Satrawas  entitled to  possess
	      their own Basti and paddy landsand   that
	      they  had a right to access to the use of	 the
	      Satra for various religious purposes."
There  were two parts of the said relief-one  a	 declaration
that the plaintiffs as Bhakats of the Satra were entitled to
possess	 their own Basti and paddy lands and the other	that
they  had  a  right to access to the use of  the  Satra	 for
various	 religious purposes.  Such a relief could  not	come
under  clause (h) because it was mainly concerned  with	 the
establishment  of the rights of the plaintiffs in the  lands
as  well as in the religious institution.  In the plaint  of
the instant case the relief claimed is not primarily for the
establishment  of the right of the public to  the  religious
institution.   It recites the facts as to the right  without
mentioning any appreciable dispute concerning it, mainly
57
alleges	 breach of duty on the part of the trustee, and	 the
plaintiffs  seek  the court's aid against  the	trustee	 for
forcing him to discharge his obligations by due	 performance
of  his duties.	 In our judgment therefore the Courts  below
were  right in taking the view that the present suit  was  a
suit for a decree under section 92 of the Code and since  it
was not filed in conformity with the requirement of the Code
and   since  it	 was  not  filed  in  conformity  with	 the
requirement  of	 the  said  provision  of  law	it  was	 not
maintainable.  The contrary view taken by the Division Bench
of  the	 High  Court in the Letters  Patent  Appeal  is	 not
correct.
In the result the appeal succeeds, the judgment of the	High
Court  dated  the 13th December, 1973 in L.P.A. No.  573  of
1971  is set aside.  In the circumstances, we make no  order
as to costs in this appeal.
P.H.P.		 Appeal allowed.
58