[Cites
6
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajit Kumar Kaviraj vs The Distt. Magistrate, Birbhum And Anr on 6 September, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 1917, 1975 SCR (2) 21, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 1917, 1975 3 SCC 264, 1974 SCC(CRI) 872, 1975 (1) SCR 21
Author:
P.K. Goswami
Bench:
P.K. Goswami
,
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
PETITIONER:
AJIT KUMAR KAVIRAJ

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE DISTT.  MAGISTRATE, BIRBHUM AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/09/1974

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
REDDY, P. JAGANMOHAN

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 1917		  1975 SCR  (2)	 21
 1975 SCC  (3) 264


ACT:
Preventive  Detention-Duty  of detaining authority  to	give
unambiguous  grounds  to  detenu-Procedural  safeguards	  of
liberty-Duty to observe.



HEADNOTE:
The petitioner was detained under
s. 3
of the Maintenance of
Internal  Security Act, 1971.  'The grounds communicated  to
him were, (1) that on 28-1-1973 at about 4.30 p.m., he. as a
direct	purchasing  agent of the Food Corporation  of  India
sold  out  4 quintals of paddy from the stock  held  in	 the
account	 of the Food Corporation of India to  three  persons
and  by	 such clandestine deal hindered the  procurement  of
paddy  and  thereby  acted in a manner	prejudicial  to	 the
maintenance  of	 supplies  and	services  essential  to	 the
community; and (2) that on the same day at about 10.30	p.m.
a  stock  of  about 12 quintals of paddy was  found  in	 his
godown and that he failed to justify the possession and that
by such surreptitious business as a direct purchasing  agent
he impeded the progress of procurement of 'paddy and thereby
acted  in a manner resupplies and services essential to	 the
community.
In a petition under
Art. 32
, challenging the detention,
HELD  :	 (1) There was clear violation of
Art. 22(5)
as  no
adequate opportunity had been afforded to the petitioner  to
make a proper representation, because, the grounds are vague
and  uncertain	and it is not reasonably  possible  for	 the
detenu to make an effective representation against the order
of detention. [22F-G]
With  reference to the first ground it is not clear  whether
the  three persons mentioned in the ground  were  authorised
purchasers or not.  The ground described the transaction  as
a clandestine deal, but it is not shown how the	 transaction
can be so described without any particulars to justify	such
an  observation.   Similarly, no  definite  particulars	 are
disclosed  even to prima facie justify the observation	that
the  finding  of paddy in his possession  was  surreptitious
business. [23C-E]
(2)  The  petitioner submitted a long representation to	 the
Government.   But it could not be said that on that  account
that  he  fully	 understood the import	of  the	 allegations
mentioned  in  the grounds.  The validity  of  the  impugned
order  cannot be decided in the light of the  representation
made   by   the	 petitioner.   He  might  have	 given	 the
representation	because an F.I.R. was filed against him	 for
prosecuting him under
s. 7
of the Essential Commodities Act,
1955,  referring  to the second ground of detention  and  he
might  have  come to know the details in the course  of	 the
prosecution.   In  a  case of  preventive  detention  it  is
absolutely necessary to communicate the grounds of detention
to  the	 detenu	 in clear and ambiguous	 terms	giving	such
particulars  as	 will  facilitate  making  of  an  effective
representation	 that  the  order  is  unfounded.    It	  is
exceedingly  important,	 in the interest of liberty  of	 the
citizen	 that the minimum requirements of law  are  strictly
comPlied  with and the detaining authority applies its	mind
in  a  proper  manner  at the time  of	passing	 the  order.
[22G.23C, F]
(3)  The order of the High Court dismissing the petition  of
the petitioner under
s. 491
, Criminal Procedure Code,  1898,
would  not operate at res Judicata in an application  before
this Court under Art. 32.. [23G]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petition No. 1880 of 1973.
Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India.
H.   C. Mittar, for the petitioner.
22
P.   K.	 Chatterjee, G. S. Chatterjee and Sukumar Basu,	 for
the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
GOSWAMI,  J.-By	 this application under
Article	 32
of	 the
Constitution  for  a writ of habeas  corpus  the  petitioner
challenges the validity of the order of detention passed  by
the  District Magistrate, Birbhum, on March 21, 1973,  under
section 3
of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act,	1971
(Act  No. 26 of 1971).	The order of detention is passed  on
the  ground that the petitioner has been acting in a  manner
prejudicial  to	 the maintenance of  supplies  and  services
essential   to	the  community.	  The  impugned	  order	  is
specifically  founded  on two grounds  communicated  to	 the
petitioner.  These are as follows:-
(1)   "On 28-1-73 at about 4.30 P.M. you as  a
	      Direct   Purchasing   Agent   of	 the	Food
	      Corporation  of India sold out 4	quintals  of
	      paddy  from the stock held in the	 account  of
	      the F.C.I. to Sk.	 Subhan, Sk.  Rakib and	 Sk.
Ambur of Sahapur, P. S. Khoyrasole and by such
	      clandestine  deal	 in paddy you  hindered	 the
	      procurement  of paddy and thereby acted  in  a
	      manner  prejudicial  to  the  maintenance	  of
	      supplies	 and  services	essential   to	 the
	      community".
"On 28-1-73 at about 10.30 P.M. a stock of  12
	      qunt, 15 kg. of paddy was found in your godown
	      but  you failed to show any record or  account
	      book to justify the stock in your godown.	  By
	      such   surreptitious  business  as  a   Direct
	      Purchasing  Agent you impeded the progress  of
	      procurement of paddy by the F.C.I. and thereby
	      acted   in   a  manner  prejudicial   to	 the
	      maintenance of supplies and services essential
	      to the community.
Mr.  H.	 C.  Mittal,  learned  counsel	for  the  petitioner
appearing as amicus curiae, has made several submissions but
it  is sufficient to confine our decision to  one  principal
ground, namely, that the grounds are so vague and  uncertain
that it is not reasonably possible for the detenu to make an
effective  representation  against the order  of  detention.
Mr.  Chatterjee,  appearing on behalf of the State  of	West
Bengal,	 seeks to support the order on the ground  that	 the
detenu	fully  understood  the	import	of  the	 allegations
mentioned  in the grounds of detention and submitted a	long
representation	 to  the  Government  which  was,   however,
rejected.   It is well settled that in a case of  preventive
detention  under  the  Act it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
communicate the grounds of detention to the detenu in  clear
and  unambiguous  terms giving as much particulars  as	will
facilitate making of an effective representation in order to
satisfy the detaining authority that the order is  unfounded
or invalid.
Before	we proceed further we may note that  the  petitioner
was  arrested  by the police on January 28,  1973,  and	 was
produced before
23
the Magistrate for prosecution under
section 7 (1) (a)	(ii)
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 Act No. X of 1955 for
violation  of  condition  of West  Bengal  Rice,  and  Paddy
Movement  Order 1968.  The first information report of	that
case  being Khoyrasole P. S. No. 10 dated January 29,  1973,
discloses  that	 the petitioner "indulged in  selling  Govt.
paddy  from the D.P. Agent godown at a higher rate than	 the
scheduled".   It  also refers therein to the  second  ground
mentioned  in the grounds of detention.	 It  is,  therefore,
not  surprising that the petitioner would have made  a	long
representation	to  the Government against  his	 arrest	 and
seizure	 of  paddy  and all  other  allegations	 which	were
certainly  known to him in the course of the Court  prosecu-
tion.	We  are,  therefore, not prepared to  put  the	cart
before	the horse in order to determine the validity of	 the
impugned  order in the light of the representation  made  by
the petitioner in this case.
We  have carefully pursued the grounds of detention and	 are
constrained  to	 hold  that these are  vague  and  uncertain
grounds which did not enable the detenu to make an effective
representation	against	 the order.  With reference  to	 the
first  ground  it  is not at all  clear	 whether  the  three
persons mentioned in the ground who purchased 4 quintals  of
paddy  were authorised purchasers or not.  The first  ground
describes the transaction as a "clandestine deal"; but it is
not  'at all clear how the transaction can be  so  described
without	  any  particulars  to	justify	  the	observation.
Similarly how the finding of 12 quintals and 15 kilograms of
paddy can be described as a "surreptitious business" without
disclosing  any	 definite particulars to  even	prima  facie
justify such an observation.  We are, therefore, clearly  of
opinion	 that  in this case the petitioner did	not  have  a
reasonable  opportunity to make an effective  representation
against	  the  impugned	 order	of  detention.	 There	 is,
therefore,   clear  violation  of
Article  22(5)
of	 the
Constitution  of India as no adequate opportunity  has	been
afforded to the petitioner to make a proper  representation.
In  a  case  of	 preventive  detention	it  is	 exceedingly
important in the interest of liberty of the citizen that the
minimum requirements of law which are laid down are strictly
complied  with and the detaining authority applies its	mind
in a proper manner at the time of passing the order.
It  is also submitted by the learned counsel for, the  State
of West Bengal that the Division Bench of the Calcutta	High
Court  had rejected the petitioner's application for a	writ
of habeas corpus under
section 491
, Criminal Procedure Code.
It  is, however, well known that such an order of  the	High
Court  does  not operate as res judicata in  an	 application
before this Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution.
In  the, result the petition is allowed.  The rule  is	made
absolute.   The petitioner shall be released from  detention
forthwith.
V.P.S.
Petition allowed.
24