[Cites
3
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Dilip Kumar Gon vs Durga Prasad Singh on 4 November, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 2343, 1975 SCR (2) 570, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 2343, 1975 (1) SCC 401 1975 2 SCR 570, 1975 2 SCR 570, 1975 2 SCR 570 1975 (1) SCC 401, 1975 (1) SCC 401
Author:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
A. Alagiriswami
PETITIONER:
DILIP KUMAR GON

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DURGA PRASAD SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/11/1974

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 2343		  1975 SCR  (2) 570
 1975 SCC  (1) 401


ACT:
Election-Contest  from	a general Constituency	to  seat  in
State Legislative Assembly-Omission to strike off 'Scheduled
Caste/Tribe' and to fill in candidate's caste in  nomination
paper-If defective justifying rejection of nomination paper.



HEADNOTE:
In relation to an election to the State Legislative Assembly
from  a general constituency, one candidate had not  in	 the
nomination paper (a) filled his specific caste in the  blank
meant  for  that  purpose, and (b) he had,  left  the  words
'Scheduled Caste' unscored.  The Returning Officer  rejected
his  nomination	 paper	on the ground that  his	 failure  to
delete the words 'Scheduled Caste' meant that he belonged to
the  scheduled caste which was not true,  and  consequently,
the  nomination	 paper	was not	 filled	 up  properly.	 The
respondent  was declared elected.  The High  Court,  holding
that  the candidate, whose nomination paper was rejected  by
the   Returning	 Officer.  had	not  properly	filled	 his
nomination  paper,  upheld the rejection and  dismissed	 the
election petition challenging the respondent's election.
Allowing the appeal to this Court.
HELD  : (1) The seat for which the candidates contested	 was
not a reserved seat.  There is no statutory provision in the
Representation	of the People Act, 1951
, or elsewhere  which
enjoins	 a candidate who is contesting the election  for  a.
general seat, and not for a reserved seat, to specify in his
declaration his caste or tribe. [571G]
(2)The Returning Officer admitted in his evidence that	at
the  time  of the scrutiny of the nomination papers  he	 was
aware	that  the  candidate,  whose  nomination  paper	  he
rejected,  was not a member of the scheduled caste and	that
he had deposited Rs. 501- as security.	Therefore, the omis-
sion to strike off scheduled caste/tribe in the form did not
amount	to  a defect in the eye of law, much less was  it  a
defect of a substantial character, warranting the  rejection
of the nomination paper. [571H]
Amolak	Chand  v.  Raghuveer  singh  [1968]  3,	 S.C.R.	 246
followed.,



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 602 of 1973.
From  the Judgment's Order dated the 6th February,  1973  of
the Patna High Court in Election Petition No. 6 of 1972.
R.K. Garg, S C. Agarwala, S. S. Bhatnagar and V. J. Francis,
for the appellant.
D. Goburdhan, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
SARKARIA,  J. Durga Prasad Singh, respondent herein,  Khatir
Ali  and Abdul Hamid, filed their nomination  papers  before
the  Returning ,Officer for contesting the election  to	 the
Bihar	Legislative  Assembly  from   147-Jamtara   Assembly
Constituency  (General).   The	date for  :scrutiny  of	 the
nomination  papers  was	 February  9,  1972-  The  Returning
Officer	 rejected the nomination papers of Khatir,  Ali	 and
Abdul  Hamid  ignoring the objections that  were  raised  on
their behalf.  Durga Prasad Singh was declared duly elected.
571
The  appellant,	 an elector of the  Constituency,  filed  an
Election  Petition challenging the election of Durga  Prasad
Singh inter alia on the ground that the nomination papers of
Abdul Hamid and Khatir All had been improperly rejected.   A
learned	 single	 Judge	of the High  Court,  who  tried	 the
Petition  decided that issue against the petitioner, and  in
consequence, dismissed the Petition.  Hence this appeal.
Before us, Mr. R. K. Garg, learned Counsel for the Appellant
has.  confined	his  arguments	to  the	 rejection  of	 the
nomination paper of Abdul Hamid, only.	It is submitted that
the  defect  on the basis of' which  the  Returning  Officer
rejected Abdul Hamid's nomination papers, was not a 'defect'
in the eye of law.  At any rate, proceeds. the argument,  it
was  not  a defect of a substantial  character	which  could
justify rejection of the nomination papers.
There is merit in this contention.
What  happened	was  that  in  the  column  of	the  printed
nomination  form,  meant  for making a	declaration  of	 the
candidates'  of the Scheduled Caste/Tribe contesting  for  a
Reserved.  Seat, Abdul Hamid had not (a) filled his specific
caste  in the bank 'Meant for that purpose and further,	 (b)
he  had	 in that column, left the  words  'Scheduled  Caste'
unscored.   The	 Returning Officer rejected  the  nomination
papers	on the ground that the failure of the  candidate  to
delete the words 'Scheduled Caste' means that "he belongs to
Scheduled  Caste which is not true" said consequently,	"the
nomination papers are not filled up properly".
The  learned Judge of the High Court upheld this  rejection,
holding that "the candidate's filling of these entries	were
on  the face of it, not proper and did not comply  with	 the
requirements  of law on this subject" and further that	this
defect	was not "trivial or technical" but of a	 substantial
character.
In  our	 opinion,  in the circumstances	 of  the  case,	 the
rejection  of  the  nomination papers  of  Abdul  Hamid	 was
manifestly erroneous.  The High Court's view that in scoring
out  only the word 'Jan-Jati' (Tribe) and leaving  the	word
'Jati'	(caste)	 untouched in the aforesaid  column  of	 the
nomination form, Abdul Hamid had failed "to comply .With the
requirement  of	 the law on the subject" was  entirely	mis-
conceived.    It  overlooked  the  fact	 that  the   Jamtara
Constituency was a 'General' Constituency, and the seat	 for
which the candidates wanted to contest the election was	 not
a Reserved seat.
Section 33(2)
of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, or any other statutory provision does	 not
enjoin upon a candidate who is contesting the election for a
General Seat, and not for a Reserved seat, to specify in his
declaration  his  caste or tribe.   Further,  the  Returning
Officer	 appearing as R. W. 2, had clearly admitted that  at
the  time of the scrutiny of the nomination papers,  he	 was
aware  that  Abdul Hamid was not a member of  the  Scheduled
Caste and that he had deposited Rs. 250/- as security.	 The
omission to strike off the column in the printed  nomination
form  relating to Scheduled Caste/Tribe did not amount to  a
defect	in  the eye of law, much less was it a defect  of  a
substantial   character,   warranting	rejection   of	 the
nomination paper.
572
In
Amolak Chand v. Raghuveer Singh
,(1) the nomination papers
of two candidates contesting for a General Constituency were
rejected  on a similar ground.	Holding that  the  rejection
was improper, Ramaswami J. speaking for the Court stated the
law on the point thus:
"The printed form 2A is meant both for General
	      and  Reserved Constituencies but while  it  is
	      obligatory  for  candidates  in  the  reserved
	      constituency  to	make a	declaration  in	 the
	      proper  column  that  he	is  a  member  of  a
	      particular  caste or tribe, there is  no	such
	      rule  with  regard  to  General  Constituency.
Section 33(2)
of the Act imposes an obligation
	      on the candidate in the reserved	constituency
	      to  make a declaration in the  proper  column,
	      but there is no such direction in the  statute
	      with  regard to the General Constituency.	  In
	      our  opinion, the mention of the caste of	 the
	      candidate	 in the nomination form was a  clear
	      superfluity  because it was not necessary	 for
	      the  candidate to fill in the column  when  he
	      was contesting in a General Constituency. ."
In the light of what has been said above, we would,  reverse
the  finding of the High Court and hold that the  nomination
papers	of  Abdul  Hamid were  improperly  rejected  by	 the
Returning Officer.
In  the	 result, we would on this short ground,	 allow	this
appeal and the Election Petition and declare the election of
Durga  Prasad  Singh,  Respondent herein to  be	 void.	 The
appellant shall have his costs
throughout.
V. P. S.
(1) [1968] 3 S.C.R. 246.
Appeal allowed.
573