[Cites
9
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
G. S. Gill And Ors vs The State Of Punjab & Ors on 30 July, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 1898, 1975 SCR (1) 586, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 1898, 1975 3 SCC 73, 1974 LAB. I. C. 1277, 1974 CURLJ 704, 1974 2 SERVLR 543, 1974 2 LABLJ 368, 29 FACLR 202
Author:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
Bench:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
A.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
G.   S. GILL AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/07/1974

BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
RAY, A.N. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 1898		  1975 SCR  (1) 586
 1975 SCC  (3)	73


ACT:
Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 rr. 4	 and
9--Members  of State Civil Service appointed to cadre  posts
and equivalent posts and then reverted--Procedure under
Art.
311
, it should be followed.



HEADNOTE:
Fundamental  Rule 9(19) provides that a	 government  servant
officiates  in	a  post when he performs  its  duties  while
another	 holds	a  lien on it, and  also  that	the  Central
Government may appoint a government servant to officiate  in
a  post on which another does not hold a lien.	The  proviso
to  r.	4 (2) of the Indian Administrative  Service  (Cadre)
Rules,	1954, provides that the State Government  may  under
certain conditions and for a certain period, add to a  State
or  joint  cadre one or more posts carrying duties  of	like
nature to cadre posts; and r. 9 of the Indian Administrative
Service	 (Cadre)  Rules	 provides that	subject	 to  certain
conditions the State Government may fill temporarily a cadre
post in a State by a person who is not a cadre officer.
Some   of  the	appellants  were  appointed  by	 the   State
Government  to	cadre  posts in	 the  Indian  Administrative
Service and others were appointed to senior duty posts which
were  declared	as equivalent to cadre posts in	 the  Indian
Administrative Service.	 All of them were reverted to  their
substantive   posts  in	 the  State  Civil  Service.	They
challenged the reversion on the ground that it was  punitive
and  that  the	procedure under
Art. 311
should  have	been
followed.  The High Court overruled the contention.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court,
HELD  : (1) Unless a person has a right to a post, an  order
of  reversion from that post cannot amount to  dismissal  or
removal within the meaning of
Art. 331
and, a person gets  a
right  to a post only when he is substantively appointed  to
it.   Therefore, if the appointments of the appellants	were
officiating  appointments of either type mentioned in F.  R.
9(19), the revision to State Civil Service would not attract
Art. 311.
[588 G-589 A]
Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India [1958] S. C. R. 828,
The  State of Bombay, v. F. A. Abraham [1962] Supp. 2 S.  C.
R.  92,	 at  97,  Divisional  Personnel	 Officer,   Southern
Railway, v. S. Raghavandrachar, [1966] 3 S. C. R. 106, Union
of  India and Another v. Gajendra Singh etc. [1972] 3 S.  C.
R. 660 and Union of India v. AT.  L. Capoor and Ors.  A.  1.
R. 1974 S. C. 87, 103 followed.
(2)Since  the appointees to the Cadre posts in the  Indian
Administrative	Service	 were appointed under r.  9  of	 the
Indian	  Administrative   Service   (Cadre)   Rules,	 the
appointments could not have been made in any capacity  other
than in an officiating capacity. [587 H-588 A]
(3)As regards the other appellants also though tile  order
of appointment does not indicate that the appointments	were
in  officiating capacity, the fact that they retained  their
lien  in their posts in the State Civil Services shows	that
they  were  not appointed substantively to the	senior	duty
posts but only in an officiating capacity. [588B-C, D-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1098 1970.
Appeal	from the Judgment and Order dated 9th January,	1968
of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Writ No.	2301
of 1966.
R.K.  Garg,  S. C. Agarawal, S. S.  Bhatnagar and  V.  J.
Francis, for the appellants.
587
F.   S. Nariman, Addl.	Sol.  Gen. for Union of India, P. P.
Rao,
V.   C.	 Mahajan,  B.  N. Sachthey and	Girish	Chandra	 for
respondent nos. 2 and 3.
N. S. Bindra S. K. Mehta and 0. P. Sharma for respondent No.
1
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
MATHEW.	 J.-The appellants filed a petition before the	High
Court	of  Punjab  under
Articles  226
and
227
of	 the
Constitution for quashing the orders passed by the State  of
Punjab	reverting  them from the posts held by	them  in  an
officiating  capacity  in the cadre and	 ex-cadre  posts  of
senior	scale  of  Indian Administrative  Service  to  their
substantive posts in the State Civil Service from which they
were promoted.
The  appellants	 contended before the High  Court  that	 the
orders	of  reversion  were  punitive  in  character   and,,
therefore,  attracted the provisions of
Article 311
of	 the
Constitution  and  since  they	were  given  no	  reasonable
opportunity  to	 make  their  representations  against	 the
reversion,  the	 orders were bad, and  prayed  for  quashing
them.  The High Court overruled the contention and dismissed
the petition.  This appeal, by certificate, is against	that
order.
The  case  of the appellants in the writ petition  was	that
their names were included in the Select List prepared  under
Regulation   4	 of  the   Indian   Administrative   Service
(Appointment  by Promotion) Regulations,  1955	(hereinafter
referred  to  as the 'Promotion Regulations) and  that	they
thereby acquired right to be appointed to the cadre and	 ex-
cadre  posts  in  the  Indian  Administrative  Service.	  In
paragraphs 11 and 13 of the writ petition, they said that in
the  State  of Punjab there were two types of posts  in	 the
Senior	Duty  Scale,  namely,  (i)  Cadre  posts  which	 are
specified  in  the  Schedule to	 the  Indian  Administrative
Service	 (Cadre) Rules, 1954 and, (ii) ex-cadre posts;	that
the ex-cadre posts were created by the State Government from
time  to  time	according to exigencies of  service  and  in
matters	 of pay, promotion and other benefits, the  ex-cadre
posts were declared equivalent to a cadre post and that they
were appointed to senior duty posts and ex-cadre in 1963 and
1964.
The creation of ex-cadre posts by State Government can	only
be  in	terms  of the second proviso to Rule 4	(2)  of	 the
Indian	Administrative	Service (Cadre) Rules,	1954.	That
proviso reads as follows:
'Provided  further that the State Government  concerned	 may
add  for  a  period  not exceeding one	year  and  with	 the
approval of the Central Government for a further period	 not
exceeding  two years, to a State or Joint Cadre one or	more
posts  carrying duties or responsibilities of a like  nature
to cadre posts."
Even  if  it  be assumed that  the  State  Government  could
appoint any person to these ex-cadre posts, the	 appointment
must  necessarily  be  temporary  appointment.	 So  far  as
appellants  1, 3 and 5 are concerned, there can be no  doubt
that   since  the  appointments	 were  made  by	 the   State
Government to cadre posts in the Indian Administrative
588
Service, the appointments could not have	been
	      in  any capacity other than in an	 officiating
	      capacity	under Rule 9 of the Indian  Adminis-
	      trative  Service (Cadre) Rules.  Mr. Garg	 for
	      the appellants contended that-appellants 2,  4
	      and  6  to 12 were appointed  to	senior	duty
	      posts  which  were declared as  equivalent  to
	      cadre  posts  in	the  Indian   Administrative
	      Service  and as the orders of appointment	 did
	      not  indicate ...that they were  appointed  in
	      any  officiating capacity, the  appointment.,,
	      must be deemed to be substantive in character.
	      No  doubt, the orders of appointment of  these
	      appellants do not say that they were appointed
	      in  an officiating capacity; and in  paragraph
	      15  of the writ petition, they said that	they
	      were  appointed to various senior	 duty  posts
	      not in an officiating capacity.  This averment
	      was denied by the Government of India.  In the
	      affidavit in reply, the appellants stated that
	      it  was  wrong to equate	regular	 officiating
	      appointments    with   stop-gap	 or    local
	      arrangements.   They said that officiation  is
	      of   two	 kinds,	 one,	officiation   of   a
	      subordinate service official against a post in
	      a	 superior  service in a	 stop-gap  or  local
	      arrangement when the regular incumbent of	 the
	      post   is,  say,	on  leave  and	the   other,
	      officiation   of	 a   regular   recruit	  on
	      appointment  to service in which he is  to  be
	      confirmed	 and made substantive  permanent  in
	      due  course on availability of  a	 substantive
	      vacancy and that "the officiating appointments
	      of  the appellants in the senior scale of	 the
1.  A.  S.  was  of  the	second	type".	 The
	      appellants also said that they retained  their
	      lien in their posts in the State Civil Service
	      which  would make it clear that they were	 not
	      appointed	 substantively	to the	senior	duty
	      posts,  but only in an  officiating  capacity.
The  judgment of the High Court also  proceeds
	      on  the  basis  that  these  appellants	were
	      appointed in an officiating capacity to senior
	      duty posts.  These appellants had no case that
	      they  were  substantively	 appointed  to	 any
	      posts.
There   can  be  two  types   of	 officiating
	      appointments.	Fundamental    Rule    9(19)
	      provides:
"9(19)   Officiate.   A	Government   servant
	      officiates  in  a post when  he  performs	 the
	      duties of a post on which another person holds
	      a	 lien.	 The Central Government may,  if  it
	      thinks  fit, appoint a Government	 servant  to
	      officiate in a vacant 'post on which no  other
	      Government servant holds a lien".
If    the	  appointments	 were	 officiating
	      appointments, whether of the type mentioned in
	      the  first portion of the meaning of the	word
	      ,officiate'  in  F.R. 9(19) or in	 its  latter
	      part, there can be no doubt that the reversion
	      of  the appellants to their substantive  posts
	      in  the State Civil Service would not  attract
	      the  application	of
Article  311
unless	 the
	      orders  of  reversion cast  stigma  and  were,
	      therefore, punitive in character.	 There is no
	      case that orders of reversion cast any  stigma
	      upon the appellants.
Parshotam Lal Dhingra  v.
	      Union of' India
(1) is clear authority for the
	      proposition  that unless a person has a  right
	      to  a post, a simple order of  reversion	from
	      that  post  cannot  amount  to  dismissal	  or
	      removal within the meaning of
Article 311
and
	      that a person
	      (1) [1958] S.C.R. 828.
gets  a  right  to a post	 only  when  lie  is
	      substantively appointed it.This  is   what
	      their Lordships said at p. 842:
"It   is,	  therefore,   quite   clear	that
	      appointment   to	 a  permanent  post   in   a
	      Government service, either on probation, or on
	      an officiating basis, is, from the very nature
	      of   such	  employment,  itself  of   a	very
	      transitory  character and, in the	 absence  of
	      any   special   contract	or   specific	rule
	      regulating the conditions of the service,	 the
	      implied  term of such appointment,  under	 the
	      ordinary law of master and servant, is that it
	      is terminable at any time.  'In short, in	 the
	      case of an appointment to a permanent post  in
	      a	 Government  service on probation or  on  an
	      officiating  basis, the servant  so  appointed
	      does not acquire any substantive right to	 the
	      post  and	 consequently cannot  complain,	 any
	      more  than  a  private  servant  employed	  on
	      probation	 or an officiating basis can do,  if
	      his service is terminated at any time' .
This passage was quoted with approval in
The State of Bombay
v.   F.	 A.  Abraham
(1).
See  also
Divisional  Personal
Officer	 Southern  Railway v. S.   Raghavendrachar
(
2)	 and
Union of India and Another v. Gajendra Singh
etc.
(3)
As appellants 1, 3 and 5 were appointed under Rule 9 of	 the
Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, there can be no
doubt  that the State Government was competent to  terminate
their appointments at any time (see
Union of India v. M.  L.
Capoor and Others
(4).
The appellants have not made out their case as specified  in
the writ petition or as urged by them before the High Court.
We hold that the High Court was right in its conclusion.  We
dismiss the appeal.  No order as to costs.
V.P.S.			 Appeal dismissed.
(1)  [1968] Sup. 2 S.C.R. 92, it
(2)  [1966] 3, S.C.R. 106.
(3)  [1972] 3, S.C.R. 660.
(4)  A.I.R. 1974 SC. 87, 103.
590