[Cites
6
, Cited by
43
]
Supreme Court of India
Iftikhar Ahmed And Others vs Syed Meharban Ali And Others on 26 February, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 749, 1974 SCR (3) 464, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 749, 1974 2 SCC 151, 1974 3 SCR 464, 1974 SCD 285, 1975 (1) SCJ 305
Author:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
Bench:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
A. Alagiriswami
PETITIONER:
IFTIKHAR AHMED AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SYED MEHARBAN ALI AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/02/1974

BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.

CITATION:
 1974 AIR  749		  1974 SCR  (3) 464
 1974 SCC  (2) 151


ACT:
Practice--Res-judicata between co-plaintiffs--Order of Court
setting	  aside	  award	 and  remitting	 award	 for   fresh
arbitration-If can be questioned in proceedings arising from
the second award.



HEADNOTE:
The  dispute between the appellants and the respondents,  as
to  who	 were  the bhumidars  of  certain  properties,	war,
referred  by  the  Consolidation  Officer  under  the
U.P.
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953
, to the,Civil Judge, who
referred  it to an arbitrator appointed under the Apt.	 The
arbitrator     held	that	 the	 respondents	 had
no  title as bhumidar , relying upon a judgment of the	High
Court,	which, according to the arbitrator operated as	res-
judicata  between the parties.	That judgment was  delivered
in a suit instituted by the appellant's predecessor and	 the
Present respondents for a declaration that a mortgage decree
in  favour of the defendant in that suit did not affect	 the
shares of the respondents in the properties in dispute,	 and
the  High Court held that the appellant's predecessor  alone
was entitled to the properties, accepting the contention  of
the defendant in that suit that the respondents had no title
whatsoever.
The  Civil  Judge held that the award was  manifestly  wrong
because,  that judgment according to him did not operate  as
res-judicata  between the parties.  He therefore  set  aside
the award and remitted the case to another arbitrator.	 The
second	arbitrator held that the appellant  and	 respondents
were  cobhumidars and determined the shares of	the  parties
holding that the judgment of the High	Court	 did	 not
operate	 as res judicata.  This award was confirmed  by	 the
Civil	  Judge	 and  the High Court agreed with  the  Civil
Judge.
Allowing  the appeal to this Court,
HELD:	  (a)  If a judgment is to operate as  res  judicata
between co- defendants it is necessary to establish (i) that
there was a conflict of interest between the  co-defendants,
(ii)  that it was necessary to decide the conflict in  order
to  give relief to the plaintiff, and (iii) that  the  Court
actually  decided  the question.  There is no reason  why  a
Previous decision could not operate as res judicata  between
co-plaintiffs  also if these three conditions are  satisfied
mutatis mutandis. [467 H;.468 B-C]
(b)  In the judgment of the High Court which was relied upon
as having operated as res judicata there was actual conflict
of  interest between the present appellant on the  one	hand
and  the  present  respondent on the other,  they  were	 the
plaintiffs in that suit, and it was necessary to decide that
conflict  in order to give relief to the defendant  in	that
suit;  and  the	 High  Court  decided  that  the  properties
belonged  exclusively to the appellant's  predecessor.	 The
effect	of  that judgment is that  the	present	 respondents
failed to-establish their contention that they had title  to
the properties. [467 F-H]
(c)  There was no finding by the arbitrator that by  adverse
possession  the	 respondents  had  acquired  title  to	 the
property at any time. [468 F]
(d)  The Provisions of Arbitration Act apply to	 proceedings
before	an  arbitrator	under  the
U.P.  Consolidation	  of
Holdings Act
.  Therefore, if the judgment of the High  Court
operated in law as res judicata it would be an error of	 law
apparent  on  the  face of the award if	 it  says  that	 the
judgment  would	 not operate as res  judicata.	 Hence,	 the
Award  in the present case was liable,to be set aside  under
s. 30
of the Arbitration Act. [468 F-H]
(e)  Under
s. 39
of the Arbitration Act no appeal lies	from
an order remitting an award to an arbitrator under
s. 16
of
the Arbitration Act.  Therefore,
465
the  appellant could not have challenged the order when	 the
Civil Judge set aside the first award and remitted the	case
to  the arbitrator for passing a fresh award.  Hence,  there
is  no	reason why the appellant should	 be  precluded	from
challenging the correctness of that order in this appeal and
getting relief on that basis. [469 B]
(f)  Since, in the circumstances of the case it would be  an
empty  formality to remit the case again to  the  arbitrator
the award of the first arbitrator is restored. [469 C].
Sheonarayan  Singh v. Ramnandan Prasad Narayan Singh  A.I.R.
[1916] P.C. 78. applied.
Chandu	Lal  v.	 Khalilur Rahaman  A.I.R.  [1950]  P.C.	 17,
referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1646 (N)  of
1967.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the judgment and	order  dated
the May 19, 1967 of the Allahabad High Court in First Appeal
No. 424 of 1969.
J. P. Goyal and Sobhagmal Jain, for the appellants.
Hira Lal Jain, (not present) for respondent No. 1(a).
V. S. Desai and N. M. Kshatriya, for respondent no. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
MATHEW,	 J.-In this appeal, by special leave,  the  question
for consideration is whether the High Court of Allahabad was
right  in  setting aside the decree passed by  the  District
Judge,	Meerut, in appeal, setting aside an award passed  by
the   arbitrator   appointed   under   the
Uttar   Pradesh
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953
(hereinafter referred to
as the Act)
In order to appreciate the question in issue, the  following
pedigree is useful
	     Buniyad Ali-Smt.  Kuri (his widow)
	       (died in 1900)
Smt. Tarifun Nisa (daughter)  (died in 1905 or 1906)
Shri Ishtiaq Ahamad
Iftikhar Ahmad
(Appellant No.1)
Sri Aftab Ali-Smt.
(died in 1910)
Intisar Ahmad
(Appellant No.2)
Matluban-Nisa
(died in 1925)
Smt. Kaniz Fatima
Mukhtiar Ahmad
(Appellant No. 3)
Smt. Majidun Nisa
(daughter)
(died in 1920)
Syed Meharaban Ali
(Respondent No.1)
The  appellants	 are the legal	representatives	 of  Ishtiaq
Ahmed.	In the consolidation proceedings under the Act	with
respect	 to  the  properties in	 question  which  originally
belonged to Buniyad Ali, dispute arose between Ishtiaq Ahmed
on  the	 one hand and Meharban Ali and Kaniz Fatima  on	 the
other  hand as regards the title to them.  Meharban Ali	 and
Kaniz  Fatima claimed that they were co-bhumidhars 1 of	 the
properties   along  with  Ishtiaq  Ahmed.    Ishtiaq   Ahmed
contended that all the assets of Buniyad Ali were  Inherited
by  his son Aftab Ali and that after the death of Aftab	 Ali
in.  1910  and his widow in 1925, he  became  the  exclusive
owner of the properties as the other heirs had
466
relinquished  their  rights  in them.	Ishtiaq	 Ahmed	also
claimed	 title to the properties by adverse possession.	  As
the dispute between the parties was concerned with the title
to  the properties, the Consolidation Officer  referred	 the
matter	to the Civil Judge, Meerut who referred the same  to
an arbitrator appointed under the Act.	The arbitrator	held
that Meharban Ali and Kaniz Fatima had no title and so	were
not co-bhumidhars of the properties with Ishtiaq Ahmad.	 For
reaching  this conclusion the arbitrator mainly relied on  a
judgment of the High Court of Allahabad which, according  to
the arbitrator, operated as res judicata between the parties
with respect to the title to the properties.
Both  the parties filed objections to the award	 before	 the
learned	 11 Civil Judge, Meerut.  He held that the  judgment
of  the	 High  Court relied on by  the	arbitrator  did	 not
operate	 as res judicata between the parties as regards	 the
title  to  the	properties  and that  the  decision  of	 the
arbitrator,  based as it was on that judgment  operating  as
res  judicata,	was  manifestly	 wrong	and  the  award	 was
consequently  vitiated	by an error of law apparent  on	 the
face  of the award.  He, therefore, set aside the award	 and
remitted the case to the arbitrator for a fresh decision.
The arbitrator Mr. R. P. Gupta considered the case.  He came
to the conclusion, on the basis of the oral and	 documentary
evidence,  that	 the  parties  were  co-bhumidhars  of	 the
properties except in respect of 9 bighas 3 biswas 3 biswasis
and   determined  their	 shres	in  the	  properties.	 The
arbitrator  was	 of the view that the judgment of  the	High
Court  was  not	 res judicata as regards the  title  of	 the
parties to the properties.
Against	 this award, Ishtiaq Ahmed filed  objections  before
the II Civil Judge, Meerut.  The Civil Judge considered	 the
objections  and	 found that there was no manifest  error  or
illegality in the award and he confirmed the award.
Ishtiaq Ahmed preferred an appeal from this decision  before
the District Judge.  Ishtiaq Ahmed died during the  pendency
of  the	 appeal and his legal representatives,	the  present
appellants, prosecuted the appeal.  The District Judge held,
that the award suffered from an error of law apparent on the
face  of  the  record in that  the  arbitrator	ignored	 the
judgment of the High Court which operated as res judicata as
regards	 the  title of the parties to the  properties.	 He,
therefore,  allowed  the  appeal and set  aside	 the  decree
appealed from and remitted the case to the arbitrator for  a
fresh decision.
The  respondents  filed	 a revision before  the	 High  Court
against	 the  decision of the District Judge  and  the	High
Court  reversed the decision and restored the decree  passed
by the Civil Judge confirming the award.
Mr.  Goel  appearing for the appellants submitted  that	 the
High  Court  went  wrong  in reversing	the  decree  of	 the
District Judge.	 He argued that the award was vitiated by an
error of law apparent on the fare of the record as the award
proceeded  on the basis that the judgment of the High  Court
did not operate as res judicata in respect
467
of  the	 title	of  the	 parties  to  the  properties,	 and
therefore, the decision of the District Judge setting  aside
the award was correct.
Now,  let us consider the nature of the judgment  passed  by
the  High Court and see whether it operated as res  judicata
in  respect of the question of title of the parties  to	 the
properties  and whether there was any manifest error of	 law
apparent on the face of the award.. That judgment related to
the  properties in dispute and was passed in  second  appeal
from a decree in a suit (Suit No. 600 of 1934) instituted by
Meharban   Ali,	 Kaniz	Fatima	and  Ishtiaq  Ahmed  for   a
declaration that the decree obtained in O.S. No. 128 of 1929
by Ishari Prasad, the defendant in that suit on the foot  of
a  mortgage  deed  dated November 5, 1925  executed  in	 his
favour	by  Matlub-un-nissa  did not affect  the  shares  of
Meharban  Ali and Kaniz Fatima in the  mortgaged  properties
and that the mortgage, and the decree obtained thereon	were
invalid	 to  the extent of their shares in  the	 properties.
Ishari	Prasad, the defendant in that suit,  contended	that
Matlub-un-nissa,  the  mortgagor alone was entitled  to	 the
properties mortgaged and that the decree obtained by him  on
the  mortgage  was valid.  In substance, the  contention  of
Ishari Prasad was that Meharban Ali and Kaniz Fatima had  no
title  to  the	properties as the latter  and  the  former's
mother	had relinquished their shares and that the title  to
the  properties vested exclusively in the mother of  Ishtiaq
Ahmed,	namely, Matlub-un-nissa.  The trial Court  passed  a
decree	dismissing  the suit holding that Kaniz	 Fatima	 and
Meharban  Ali's	 mother	 relinquished their  shares  in	 the
properties  and that Matlub-un-nissa, the  mortgagor,  alone
was entitled to the properties and, therefore, the mortgage,
and the decree based thereon were valid.  The plaintiffs  in
the suit (Suit No. 600 of 1934) preferred an appeal from the
decree.	  That	was dismissed.	The  decree  dismissing	 the
appeal was confirmed by the High Court in the second  appeal
filed by them.
There can be no doubt that by the written statement,  Ishari
Prasad, the mortgagee, denied the title of Kaniz Fatima	 and
Meharban  Ali  to the properties and set up  the  contention
that Matlub-un-nissa, the mortgagor, from whom Ishtiaq Ahmed
traced	his  title, alone was entitled	to  the	 properties.
There was, therefore, an actual conflict of interest between
Ishtiaq	  Ahmed	 on  the  one  hand  and  Kaniz	 Fatima	 and
Meharjan  Ali on the other, and it was necessary  to  decide
the  conflict  in  order 10 give  relief  to  the  defendant
(Ishari	 Prasad) and the Court decided that  the  properties
belonged exclusively to the mortgagor, the mother of Ishtiaq
Ahmed.
The effect of the judgment is that Kaniz Fatima and Meharban
Ali failed to establish their contention that they had title
to  the	 properties,  and, the question is,  could  they  be
allowed to agitate the same question?
Now it is settled by a large number of decisions that for  a
judgment  o  operate as res judicata between  or  among	 co-
defendants, it is necessary to establish that (1) there	 was
a conflict of interest between codefendants; (2) that it was
necessary to decide the conflict in order to give the relief
which  the plaintiff claimed in the suit; and (3)  that	 the
court actually decided the question.
468
in Chandu Lai v. Khalilur Rahman(1) Lord Simonds said
	       "It may be added that the doctrine may  apply
	      even  though  the party, against	whom  it  is
	      sought  to  enforce  it, "I  did	not  in	 the
	      previous suit think fit to enter an appearance
	      and  contest  the question.  But to  this	 the
	      qualification  must be added that, if  such  a
	      party is to be bound by a previous judgment it
	      must be proved clearly that he had or must  be
	      deemed  to have had notice that  the  relevant
	      question	was  in issue and would have  to  be
	      decided".
We see no reason why a previous decision should not  operate
as   res  judicata  between  co-plaintiffs  if	 all   these
conditions  are mutatis mutandis satisfied.  In	 considering
any  question  of res judicata we have to bear in  mind	 the
statement  of  the Board in Sheoparsan Singh  v.  Ramanandan
Prasad Narayan Singh(2) that the rule of res judicata "while
founded	 on ancient precedent is dictated by a wisdom  which
is for all time' and that the application of the rule by the
courts "should be influenced by no technical  considerations
of   form,   but   by  matter  of   substance	within	 the
limits.,allowed by law.
"The  raison  detre of the rule is  to  confer
	      finality on decisions arrived at by  competent
	      Courts   between	interested   parties   after
	      genuine contest; and to allow persons who	 had
	      deliberately chosen a position to reprobate it
	      and  to  blow hot now when they  were  blowing
	      cold before would be completely to ignore	 the
	      whole foundation of the rule."
(see Ram Bhaj v. Ahmad Saidakhtar Khan(3).
In the award, the arbitrator has stated that the judgment of
the High Court in the second appeal would not operate as res
judicata as regards the title to the properties but was only
a piece of evidence.  The arbitrator came to the  conclusion
that  the  respondents	were  in  joint	 possession  of	 the
properties  and,  therefore, there was no  ouster.   If	 the
judgment  operated as res judicata, the respondents  had  no
title  to  the	properties.  There was	no  finding  by	 the
arbitrator  that  by adverse possession	 they  had  acquired
title to the properties at any point of time.  The  question
which was referred to the arbitrator was the dispute between
the, parties as regards the title to the properties.  If the
judgment of the High-Court operated in law as  res-judicata,
it  would  be an error of law apparent on the  face  of	 the
award if it were to say that the judgment would not  operate
as res judkata.	 The District Judge was, therefore, right in
holding	 that  the  award was vitiated by an  error  of	 law
apparent on its face in that it was based on the proposition
that the judgment of the High Court would not operate as res
judicata on the Question of title to the properties.  If  an
award  sets forth a proposition of law which  is  erroneous,
then the award is liable to be set aside under
S. 30
of	 the
Arbitration Act.
This Court has held that the provisions of
the
Arbitration  Act
Will  apply  to	proceedings  by	  an
arbitrator  under  the Act (see
Charan Singh and  Others  v.
Babulal and Others
(4).
(1)  A.I.R. 1950 P.C. 17.
(2)  A.I.R. 1916 P.C. 78.
(3)  A.I.R. 1938 Lab. 571.
(4) [1966] Supp.   S.C.R. 63.
469
It  might be recalled that the 11 Civil Judge set aside	 the
first  award  and remitted the case to	the  arbitrator	 for
passing	 a fresh award under
s. 16
of the  Arbitration	Act.
That was only on the basis that the arbitrator committed  an
error of law in relying upon the judgment of the High  Court
as finally determining the title to the, properties.  As  no
appeal under
s. 39
of the Arbitration Act lay from an  order
remitting  an  award  to an arbitrator under
s.	 16
of	 the
Arbitration Act, Ishtiaq Ahmed could not have challenged the
order.	 There is, therefore, no reason why  the  appellants
should be precluded from challenging the correctness of that
order in this appeal and getting relief on that basis.
We  set	 aside	the order of the High Court  and  allow	 the
appeal.	 In 'the circumstances we think it would be an empty
formality to restore the decision of the District Judge	 and
remit  the  case again to the arbitrator.   We	restore	 the
award dated March 30, 1959, passed by Mr. K. C.	 Govil,	 the
first arbitrator.  We make no order as to costs,
V.P.S.
Appeal allowed.
470