[Cites
4
, Cited by
57
]
Supreme Court of India
Nizamuddin vs The State Of West Bengal on 5 November, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 2353, 1975 SCR (2) 593, 1975 CRI. L. J. 12, 1975 3 SCC 95 1975 2 SCR 593, 1975 2 SCR 593, 1975 2 SCR 593 1975 3 SCC 95, 1975 3 SCC 95, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 2353, (1975) 3 SCC 395 1975 SCC(CRI) 21, 1975 SCC(CRI) 21
Author:
P.N. Bhagwati
Bench:
P.N. Bhagwati
,
Y.V. Chandrachud
PETITIONER:
NIZAMUDDIN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/11/1974

BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
BENCH:
BHAGWATI, P.N.
CHANDRACHUD, Y.V.

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 2353		  1975 SCR  (2) 593
 1975 SCC  (3)	95
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1975 SC 728	 (3)
 RF	    1976 SC1207	 (560)
 R	    1979 SC 447	 (6)
 RF	    1980 SC1983	 (4)
 RF	    1987 SC1472	 (12)
 F	    1989 SC1282	 (9)
 R	    1990 SC 220	 (6)
 F	    1992 SC1900	 (14)


ACT:
Preventive  Detention-Delay in arresting detenu pursuant  to
order of detention-Duty of detaining authority to explain.



HEADNOTE:
On  14th  April, 1973, the petitioner was  alleged  to	have
committed  theft of aluminium wire and a criminal  case	 was
filed  but it was ultimately dropped and the petitioner	 was
discharged, because, the witnesses were not willing to	give
evidence  for  fear  of	 danger	 to  their  life.   On	10th
September,  1973,  the District Magistrate passed  an  order
under  s.  3(2)(i) of the
Maintenance of  Internal  Security
Act, 1971
, detaining the petitioner with a view to  prevent-
ing  him  from	acting	in  a  manner  prejudicial  to	 the
maintenance  of	 supplies  and	services  essential  to	 the
community,  on his subjective satisfaction, based  upon	 the
solitary  incident  of	the theft  of  aluminum	 wire.	 The
petitioner was actually detained on 23rd November, 1973.
Allowing the petition challenging the order of detention,
HELD  : The condition precedent for the making of the  order
of  detention, namely the existence of a. real	and  genuine
subjective. satisfaction of the District Magistrate was	 not
satisfied  in  the  case. and  consequently,  the  order  of
detention must be quashed and set aside. [596D-E]
(a)  It	 must be assumed that the petitioner was  discharged
on  or	about 10th September, 1973,  because,  the  District
Magistrate  must  have	made  the  order  of  detention	  in
anticipation  of  the order of discharge.  If that  was	 so,
though the petitioner was available for detention, there was
a  delay  of  about two and half  months  in  detaining	 the
petitioner pursuant to the order of detention.	This  delay,
unless	satisfactorily explained, would	 throw	considerable
doubt  on the genuineness of the subjective satisfaction  of
the  District Magistrate recited in the order of  detention.
If   the  District  Magistrate	was  really  and   genuinely
satisfied he would have acted with greater promptitude.	 But
he has not offered any explanation as to why the  petitioner
was  not detained until 23rd November, 1973, more  than	 two
months after he made the order of detention. [595D-H]
(b)  It	 is  the obligation of the State  or  the  detaining
authority in making its return to the rule nisi, in cases of
habeas	corpus, to place all the relevant facts	 before	 the
court  and  if there is any delay in  arresting	 the  detenu
pursuant  to  the order of detention, which is	prima  facie
unreasonable,  the State must explain the delay.  The  State
cannot	contend	 that  the petitioner  has  not	 raised	 the
contention in his petition. [596B-C]
Sk.   Serajul  v. State of West Bengal W.P.  2000  of  1973,
decided on September 9, 1974, followed.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Writ Petition No.  319  of
1974.
Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution.
Anil Kumar Gupta, for the petitioner.
P. Chatteriee and G. S. Chatterjee, for the respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
BHAGWATI,  J. The petitioner challenges his detention  under
an  order  dated 10th September, 1973 made by  the  District
Magistrate,
594
Burdwan under
section 3(2)(i)
of the Maintenance of Internal
Security Act, 1971.  There were several grounds urged before
us  for challenging the validity of the order  of  detention
but it is not necessary to refer to them since we find	that
there  is one ground which is sufficient to dispose  of	 the
petition.   To	appreciate this ground it  is  necessary  to
notice a few facts.
The order of detention was made on 10th September, 1973	 and
it was based on the subjective satisfaction of the  District
Magistrate  that it was necessary to detain  the  petitioner
with  a	 view  to preventing him from  acting  in  a  manner
prejudicial  to	 the maintenance of  supplies  and  services
essential  to the community.  This subjective  satisfaction,
according  to  the  grounds of detention  furnished  to	 the
petitioner,  was founded on a solitary incident of theft  of
aluminums  wire	 alleged  to  have  been  committed  by	 the
petitioner on 14th April, 1973.	 It appears that in  respect
of  this  incident  a criminal case  was  filed	 inter	alia
against	 the  petitioner  in  the  Court  of  Sub-Divisional
Judicial Magistrate, Asansol, but, as the affidavit-in-reply
filed  by the District Magistrate shows, the witnesses	were
unwilling to depose against the petitioner in open Court  on
account of fear of danger to their life and the	 prosecution
was-,  therefore, constrained to drop th criminal  case	 and
the  petitioner was discharged.	 However, the date when	 the
petitioner was discharged was not set out in the  affidavit-
in-reply.   The petitioner was thereafter detained  on	23rd
November,  1973 pursuant to the order of  detention.   There
was  thus a time lag of about two and a half months  between
the  date of the order of detention and, the date  when	 the
petitioner was actually detained.  The petitioner  contended
that  since,  the District Magistrate did not state  in	 his
affidavit-in-reply as to when the petitioner was discharged,
it must be presumed that the petitioner was discharged on or
about  10th  September,	 1973 and was  available  for  being
detained  under	 the order of detention and yet he  was	 not
arrested  for a period of two and a half months	 until	23rd
November,  1973	 and  that  shows that	there  was  no	real
necessity to detain the petitioner with a view to preventing
him  from acting in a prejudicial manner and the  subjective
satisfaction  of the District Magistrate founding the  order
of  detention  was not genuine.	 There is- great  force,  in
this  contention  of the petitioner and it  must  result  in
invalidation of the order of detention.
It  is obvious from the facts set out in  the  affidavit-in-
reply  that the, petitioner-was arrested in connection	with
the  criminal  case arising out of the incident	 dated	14th
April,	1973  set  out in the  grounds	of  detention.	 The
criminal  case was ultimately dropped as the witnesses	were
not  willing  to come forward to give evidence for  fear  of
danger to their life and the petitioner was discharged.	 The
date of discharge of the petitioner was, however not set out
in  the	 affidavit in-reply.  We asked the  learned  counsel
appearing  on behalf of the respondent as  to  whether.there
was  any record with him from whick he could tell us as	 to'
What was the date on which the petitioner was discharged but
he stated that the only record which he had was that
595
relating  to the order of detention and the record  relating
to the criminal case had not been sent to him.	We were told
that  even  the history-sheet of the petitioner,  which	 was
before	the  District Magistrate when he made the  order  of
detention,   did  not  give  the  date	when  the   criminal
prosecution was dropped that the petitioner was	 discharged.
It  did	 not even make any reference to the  criminal  case.
This is rather unfortunate.  He should have thought that the
fact that a criminal case is pending against the person	 who
is  sought  to	be proceeded against by	 way  of  preventive
detention is a very material circumstance which ought to  be
placed	before the District Magistrate.	  That	circumstance
might quite possibly have an impact on his decision  whether
or not to make an order of detention.  It is not  altogether
unlikely  that the District Magistrate may in a	 given	case
take the view that since a criminal case is pending  against
the  person  sought to be detained, no	order  of  detention
should be made for the present, but the criminal case should
be  allowed to run its full course and only if it  fails  to
result	in  conviction then preventive detention  should  be
resorted  to.  It would be most unfair to the person  sought
to  be detained not to disclose the pendency of	 a  criminal
case against him to the District Magistrate.  But that is  a
different  question  altogether and it need not	 detain	 us.
The  fact remains that there was no record with the  learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent from which  he
could  give us the date when the petitioner was	 discharged.
In  view  of this failure on the part of the  respondent  to
supply	information to the Court as to then  the  petitioner
was  discharged, we must proceed on the assumption  that  he
must have been discharged on or about 10th September,  1973.
The  order of detention must have been made by the  District
Magistrate   in	 anticipation  of  the	discharge   of	 the
petitioner   and  the  discharge  of  the  petitioner	can,
therefore,  be presumed to have taken place at or about	 the
time  when  the order of detention was made, that  is,	10th
September,  1973.   But	 if that be so,	 the  conclusion  is
inescap-able  that though the petitioner was  available	 for
detention  since  about	 10th September, 1973,	he  was	 not
detained  for a period of about two and a half	months	upto
23rd  November,	 1973.	There was delay of about two  and  a
half  months  in detaining the petitioner  pursuant  to	 the
order of detention and this delay, unless satisfactorily ex-
plained,  would throw considerable doubt on the	 genuineness
of  the subjective satisfaction of the	District  Magistrate
recited	 in the order of detention.  It would be  reasonable
to  assume  that if the District Magistrate was	 really	 and
genuinely satisfied after proper application of mind to	 the
materials  before  him that it was necessary to	 detain	 the
petitioner  with a view to preventing him from acting  in  a
prejudicial  manner,  he  would	 have  acted  with   greater
promptitude  in	 securing  the	arrest	of  the	  petitioner
immediately  after the invoking of the order  of  detention,
and the petitioner would not have been allowed to remain  at
large  for  such  a  long period of time  to  carry  on	 his
nefarious  activities.	of course when we say this  we	must
not  be understood to mean that whenever there is  delay  in
arresting  the	subjective  satisfaction  of  the  detaining
authority  must	 be held to be not  genuine  or	 colourable.
Each  case  must  depend  on  its  own	peculiar  acts	 and
circumstances.	 The detaining authority may have a  reason-
able explanation for the delay and that might be  sufficient
to dispel
596
the  inference that its satisfaction was not  genuine.	 But
here we find that though an affidavit-in-reply was filed  by
the   District	Magistrate  himself,  no   explanation	 was
forthcoming  in this affidavit as to why the petitioner	 was
not arrested until 23rd November, 1973, though the order  of
detention was made as far back as 10th September, 1973.
The
learned	 counsel  appearing  on	 behalf	 of  the  respondent
contended  that	 the State was not expected  to	 render	 any
explanation  in	 regard	 to  the  delay	 in  arresting	 the
petitioner pursuant to the order   of  detention because  no
such complaint was made in the petition.     But   this	  is
hardly	an  argument which can avail the State	when  it  is
called upon to answer a rule issued on a petition for a writ
of habeas corpus.  It is the obligation of the State or	 the
detaining,  authority  in making its return to the  rule  in
such a case to place all the relevant facts before the Court
and  if there is any delay in arresting the detenu  pursuant
to the order of detention which is prima facie unreasonable,
the  State must give reasons explaining the delay.
Vide	 Sk.
Serajul	 v.  State of West Bengal
.(1) Since in	the  present
case  no  explanation for the delay has been  given  in	 the
affidavit-in reply filed by the District Magistrate, we	 are
not  at all satisfied that the District	 Magistrate  applied
his  mind  and	arrived at a  real  and	 genuine  subjective
satisfaction that it was necessary to detain the  petitioner
with  a view to preventing him from acting in a	 prejudicial
manner.	 The condition precedent for the making of the order
of detention was, therefore, not satisfied and	consequently
the order of detention must be quashed and set aside.
We  accordingly quash and set aside the order  of  detention
and direct that the petitioner be set at liberty forthwith.
V.P.S.
Petitioned allowed.
(1) W.P. 2000 of 1973, decided on September 9, 1974
597