[Cites
4
, Cited by
82
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri Mandir Sita Ramji vs Lt. Governor Of Delhi & Ors on 6 August, 1974
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 1868, 1975 SCR (1) 597, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 1868, 1975 4 SCC 298, 1975 CURLJ 64, 1975 (1) SCR 597, 77 PUN LR 333
Author:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
Bench:
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
A.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
SHRI MANDIR SITA RAMJI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LT. GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1974

BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
BENCH:
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
RAY, A.N. (CJ)

CITATION:
 1974 AIR 1868		  1975 SCR  (1) 597
 1975 SCC  (4) 298
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1976 SC2095	 (26)


ACT:
Land Acquisition Act
(1 of 1894) s. 5A--Opportunity of being
heard to the objector to notification under
s. 4-
-Should  be
given by the Collector and not by appropriate Government.



HEADNOTE:
The Delhi Administration issued a notification under
s. 4
of
the  Land Acquisition Act, 1894, stating that  certain	land
was  needed  for a public  purpose.   The  appellant-Society
filed  an  objection  under s. 5A that a part  of  the	land
belonged  to  a	 religious  trust.   The  Land	 Acquisition
Collector  then called for a report, but later, without	 any
consciousness of his having done so, submitted his report to
the  Delhi  Administration stating that	 the  appellant	 had
raised	an  objection and the decision may  be	taken  after
inspection  of the site.  The Delhi Administration  did	 not
give any hearing to the appellant but issued the declaration
under  s.  6 including the land with respect  to  which	 the
appellant filed objection.
The appellant challenged the s. 6-notification and a  Single
Judge  of  the	High  Court  quashed  it.   On	appeal,	 the
Divisional  Bench came to the conclusion that the  appellant
should	have  been given an opportunity of being  heard	 and
directing the Delhi Administration to give an opportunity of
being heard to the appellants adjourned the disposal of	 the
appeal.
The  first  respondent thereafter heard	 the  appellant	 and
rejected  its objection.  The Divisional Bench then took  up
the  appeal and dismissed the writ petition holding that  it
was not necessary that the Land Acquisition Collector should
have heard the appellant under s. 5A.
Allowing  the  appeal  to  this	 Court,	 and  quashing	 the
declaration under
s. 6
,
HELD  : (1) The power to hear the objection under S.  5A  is
that of the Collector and not of the appropriate Government;
and the duty of affording such opportunity of being heard by
the Collector under the section is mandatory.  Therefore,  a
decision  by  the  Government on  the  objection,  when	 the
Collector  afforded  no opportunity of being heard,  to	 the
objector, would not be proper.[599D-E]
(2)Merely  because  the	 Government  may  not  accept  the
Collector's  recommendation,  it could not be said  that  he
need  not  make	 his  recommendation and  leave	 it  to	 the
Government  to	decide	the  matter.   The  fact  that	 the
Collector  is not the authority to decide on  the  objection
does  not exonerate him from his duty to hear  the  objector
and make his recommendation. [599E-F]
(3)The	Divisional  Bench of the High Court was	 wrong	in
holding	 that the objection was only a question of  law	 and
that  therefore	 the  Collector could decline  to  make	 his
report and leave it to the appropriate government to  decide
the  question.	The objection raised is a mixed question  of
law and fact and the Land Acquisition Collector should	have
inquired into it and his failure to do so would show that he
declined  to  exercise his jurisdiction under  the  section.
When a procedure is prescribed by the legislature, it is not
for the Court to substitute a different one according to its
notions of justice. [600C-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1726  of
1972.
From  the Judgment and Order dated the 9th May, 1972 of	 the
Delhi  High Court at New Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal	 No.
377 of 1971.
J.   K. jain and T. V. S. Narasimhachari, for the appellant.
L.   N. Sinha, Solicitor General of India, S. N. Prasad, and
R.N. Sachthey, for the respondents No. 1-3.
598
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
MATHEW,	 J.-The appellant filed a writ petition	 before	 the
High  Court  of	 Delhi for  quashing  a	 notification  dated
November 7, 1968, issued under
s. 6
of the Land	 Acquisition
Act, 1894 (hereinafter called the 'Act').  A learned  Single
Judge  of the Court quashed the notification mainly  on	 the
ground	 that  the  Land  Acquisition  Collector   gave	  no
opportunity  to the appellant of being heard in	 respect  of
the objections filed under
s. 5A
of the Act.  The respondent
(Lt.   Governor	 of  Delhi) filed a  Letters  Patent  Appeal
before	a  Division Bench.  The Division Bench	allowed	 the
appeal.	 This appeal, by certificate, has been filed against
that judgment.
The Delhi Administration issued a notification under
s. 4
of
the  Act  on November 13, 1959 stating that  land  measuring
about  34070  acres was needed for a  public  purpose.	 The
notification  specifically excluded from its  purview  "land
under  graveyards, tombs, shrines and the land	attached  to
religious institutions and wakf property".  The appellant, a
society	 registered under the
Societies Registration Act
21
of  1960,  filed  an objection under
s. 5A
of	the  Act  in
respect	 of 324 bighas of land in village Karkar Duma.	 The
objection  was	that  the land in  question  belonged  to  a
religious  trust viz., Mandir Sita Ramji, and  was  exempted
from  the  purview  of	the  notification.   The   Collector
submitted   his	 report	 on  the  objection  to	 the   Delhi
Administration on August 18, 1962 and thereafter on November
7,  1968,  the Delhi Administration issued  the	 declaration
under
s. 6
of the Act including the land in respect of which
Mandir Sita Ramji had filed objection under
s.	  5A
of	 the
Act.
The  objection	filed  by  the	appellant  before  the	Land
Acquisition Collector was not traceable in the office of the
Land  Acquisition  Collector.	But on the  date  fixed	 for
hearing	 viz.,	July 27, 1962, a copy of the  objection	 was
found  in  the	records on which  there	 was  the  following
endorsement:
63 V. Karkar Duma.
"Please report if this property is that of Shri Mandir	Sita
Ramji,	a  charitable  institution and is  exempt  from	 the
notification."
The Land Acquisition Collector, without any further hearing,
and  without  any consciousness of his having called  for  a
report,	 submitted his report dated August 18, 1962  and  in
that  report he stated that an objection was  received	from
Shri Mandir Sita Ramji.	 There is no mention in that  report
that he received any report in pursuance to his order on the
copy of the objection petition or that any personal or other
kind of enquiry was made in respect of the land in  question
subsequent to July 27, 1962.  In that report, the Collector,
after  noting the lands and houses in respect of which	Shri
Mandir	Sita Ramji had filed objections, made the  following
report:
"  Decision may kindly be taken after the inspection of the
site".
599
Thereafter,   it   is	common	ground,	  that	 the   Delhi
Administration	did  not  give a hearing  to  the  appellant
before	publishing the declaration.  It was on the basis  of
these  circumstances that the learned Single Judge  and	 the
Division Bench came to the conclusion that the appellant was
given no opportunity of being heard under
s. 5A
of the Act.
When  the  appeal came up for hearing  before  the  Division
Bench, the Division Bench felt that an opportunity of  being
heard  should  have been given to the appellant and  so	 the
Bench	directed  the  Delhi  Administration  to  give	 the
appellant an opportunity of being heard on the objection and
send  its  report.   The appellant was	heard  and  the	 Lt.
Governor,  by his order dated April 27, 1972,  rejected	 the
objection.   Thereafter, the appeal was again taken  up	 for
hearing	 and the Division Bench came to the conclusion	that
it  was	 not necessary that the Land  Acquisition  Collector
should	have heard the appellant under s. 5A and that  there
was no substance in the contention of the appellant that the
land  in  question was attached to a  religious	 institution
and,  therefore, allowed the appeal and dismissed  the	writ
petition.
The  learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition  on	 the
basis  that the appellant had no opportunity of being  heard
by  the Collector under s. 5A.	The duty to afford  such  an
opportunity  is mandatory.  A decision by the Government  on
the objection, when the Collector afforded no opportunity of
being heard to the objector, would not be proper.  The power
to hear the objection under s. 5A is that the Collector	 and
not of the appropriate Government.  It is no doubt true that
the recommendation of the Land Acquisition Collector is	 not
binding on the Government.  The Government may choose either
to  accept  the	 recommendation or to  reject  it;  but	 the
requirement of the section is that when a person's  property
is proposed to be acquired, he must be given an	 opportunity
to show cause against it.  Merely because the Government may
not  choose  to	 accept	 the  recommendation  of  the	Land
Acquisition Collector, even when he makes one, it cannot  be
said  that  he Reed not make the recommendation at  all	 but
leave  it to the Government to decide the matter.  In  other
words,	the fact that the Collector is not the authority  to
decide the objection does not exonerate him from his duty to
hear   the   objector  on  the	objection   and	  make	 the
recommendation.
The  objection in substance was that the lands	in  question
were attached to a religious institution and were therefore,
immune from being acquired under the notification.  That was
how the Land Acquisition Collector understood the objection.
The objection raised a mixed question of law and fact and it
was  because of that the Collector called for a report.	  To
say,  as  the Division Bench has done,	that  the  objection
raised only a question of law and, therefore, the  Collector
could decline to make the recommendation and leave it to the
appropriate  Government	 to decide the question	 is  neither
here  nor  there, in as much as the High  Court	 itself	 has
stated that the question whether the land is attached to the
religious  institution	would  depend  upon  resolution	  of
questions of fact.  The Division Bench said:
600
"Thus it is the manner of the utilisation of land which will
determine whether it was 'attached to' or not in the present
case.	In as much as nothing has been shown that  the	land
was   utilised	for  the  purpose  of  the  temple  or	 the
institution  or that its income was so utilised, it must  be
held  that the mere contiguity of the land to the temple  of
Shri   Hanuman	 or  its  ownership  by	  Shree	  Sita	 Ram
Bhandar/Mandir Sita Ramji at Pilani would not make the	land
in question 'attached to' any one of these."
If  this  is  so,  it is difficult  to	understand  why	 the
objection raised only a question of law which could be	left
to  the decision of the appropriate Government	without	 the
recommendation	by  the	 Collector.  As we  have  said,	 the
objection  was	that  the lands belonged  to  the  religious
institution  and  would	 come  within  the  purview  of	 the
exempted class of lands in the notification.  In  substance,
this  was an objection that the lands were attached  to	 the
religious institution.	As the objection raised questions of
fact,  the Land Acquisition Collector should  have  enquired
into  them  and	 should	 have  made  his  recommendation  as
provided  in  s. 5A.  The failure of  the  Land	 Acquisition
Collector  to  inquire into the objection after	 giving	 the
appellant  an opportunity of being heard would show that  he
declined to exercise his jurisdiction under the section.  As
we said, the fact that the ultimate decision has to be	made
by  the State Government did not relieve the Collector	from
his  statutory duty to enquire into the objection  and	make
the recommendation.  We see no reason why the Division Bench
should	have departed from the procedure prescribed  by	 the
statute.   The	observance  of the procedure  laid  down  by
statute	 before	 depriving  a  person  of  his	property  is
necessary to generate the feeling that rule of law  prevails
in  this  country.  When a procedure is	 prescribed  by	 the
legislature,  it  is  not  for the  court  to  substitute  a
different one according to its notion of justice.  When	 the
legislature  has  spoken,  the judges cannot  afford  to  be
wiser.
We quash the declaration published under
s. 6
of the Act and
direct	the Land Acquisition Collector to enquire  into	 the
objection  after giving an opportunity to the  appellant  of
being  heard  and make the necessary recommendation  to	 the
appropriate  Government.   The appropriate  Government	will
proceed	 further  in  the  light  of  its  decision  on	 the
recommendation.	  We  set aside the order  of  the  Division
Bench and allow the appeal but make no order as to costs.
V. P. S.		  Appeal allowed
601