[Cites
39
, Cited by
2183
]
Supreme Court of India
Commnr. Of Customs (Import), Mumbai vs M/S. Dilip Kumar And Company on 30 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3606, 2018 (5) ABR 802, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 73
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
R. Banumathi
,
N.V. Ramana
,
Ranjan Gogoi
Reportable


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3327 OF 2007 

COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS (IMPORT), MUMBAI            …APPELLANT(S)
                                                     VERSUS
M/S. DILIP KUMAR AND COMPANY & ORS.                …RESPONDENT(S)




                                              JUDGMENT
N.V. RAMANA, J.
1. This   Constitution   Bench   is   setup   to   examine   the

                        correctness   of   the           ratio        in
Sun   Export

                        Corporation,   Bombay   v.   Collector   of   Customs,

                        Bombay
, (1997) 6 SCC 564 [hereinafter referred as

                        ‘Sun Export Case’ for brevity], namely the question

                        is   ­   What   is   the   interpretative   rule   to   be   applied
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VINOD LAKHINA
Date: 2018.07.30
11:00:29 IST
Reason:
while        interpreting          a           tax        exemption
2
provision/notification when there is an ambiguity as

   to its applicability with reference to the entitlement

   of the assessee or the rate of tax to be applied?
2.
In
Sun Export
Case  (supra), a three­Judge Bench

   ruled   that   an   ambiguity   in   a   tax   exemption

   provision or notification must be interpreted so as to

   favour   the   assessee   claiming   the   benefit   of   such

   exemption.     Such   a   rule   was   doubted   when   this

   appeal   was   placed   before   a   Bench   of   two­Judges.

   The  matter  then   went   before  a   three­Judge  Bench

   consisting one of us (Ranjan Gogoi, J.).
The three­

   Judge Bench having noticed the unsatisfactory state

   of law  as it stands today, opined that the dicta in
Sun Export
Case  (supra), requires reconsideration

   and that is how the matter has been placed before

   this Constitution Bench.
3
3. Few facts necessary, to appreciate the issue involved

   are   as   follows   ­   the   respondents   imported   a

   consignment of Vitamin – E50 powder (feed grade)

   under   Bill   of   Entry   No.   8207,   dated   19.08.1999.

   They claimed the benefit of concessional rate of duty

   at 5%, instead of standard 30%, as per the Customs

   Notification No. 20/1999 and classified the product

   under   Chapter   2309.90   which   admittedly   pertains

   to   prawn   feed.     They   relied   on   the  ratio  in
Sun

   Export
Case  (supra)   and   claimed   the   benefit   of

   exemption.  The benefit of Customs Notification No.

   20/1999   was,   however,   denied   to   the   respondents

   on the plea of the department that the goods under

   import   contained   chemical   ingredients   for   animal

   feed and not animal feed/prawn feed, as such, the

   concessional   rate   of   duty   under   the   extant

   notification   was   not   available.     The   department

   classified the consignment under Chapter 29 which
4
attracts   standard   rate   of   customs   duty.
The

    adjudicating   authority,   namely,   the   Assistant

    Commissioner   of   Customs,   distinguished
Sun

    Export
Case (supra), while accepting the plea of the

    department   to   deny   the   concessional   rate.
The

    Commissioner   of   Customs   (Appeals)   reversed   the

    order   of   the   Assistant   Commissioner   and   came   to

    the conclusion that
Sun Export
Case  (supra) was

    indeed   applicable.           The   department   then

    approached   the   Customs,   Excise   and   Service   Tax

    Tribunal (CESTAT), which affirmed the order of the

    Commissioner   of   Customs   (Appeals).     Aggrieved

    thereby, the present appeal is filed.
4. When   the   appeal   was   placed,   as   noticed   earlier,

    before   a   Bench   of   two­Judges,   the   ruling   in
Sun

    Export
Case  (supra)   was   doubted,   observing   as

    follows­
5
“We have serious doubts as to whether
the   Bombay   High   Court   judgment
affirmed   in   Sun   Export   Corporation's
case is correct. First and foremost, it is
clear   that   the   subsequent   exemption
Notification   largely   expanded   the   first
Notification   which   referred   only   to
animal   feeds   and   nothing   else.   That
being  the   case, it would be difficult to
say   that   a   large   number   of   other
categories   which   have   subsequently
been   added   would   be   clarificatory   and
therefore,   retrospective.   Further,   we
also   feel   that   in   view   of   the   catena   of
judgments   of   this   Court   which   have
held that an exemption Notification has
to   be   strictly   construed   (that   is,  if  the
person claiming exemption does not fall
strictly   within   the   letter   of   the
Notification,   he   cannot   claim
exemption),  have  also   been   ignored  by
this Court in Sun Export Corporation's
case   in   paragraph   13   thereof.   Apart
from   this,   the   view   of   this   Court   in
paragraph 13 that it is well­settled that
if two views are possible, one favourable
to   the   assessee   in   matters   of   taxation
6
has to be preferred is unexceptionable.
           However, this Court was not concerned
in that  case
with the charging Section
           of a taxation statute.
It was concerned
           with the interpretation of an Exemption
           Notification   which,   as   has   been   stated
           above,   would   require   the   exactly
           opposite test to be fulfilled.”



Further this Court found that the subsequent judgment

in
Collector of Customs and Central Excise, Guntur

and   Ors.   V.   Surendra   Cotton   Oil   Mills   and

Fertilizers Co. and Ors.
, 2001 (1) SCC 578 [hereinafter

referred   as  ‘Surendra   Cotton   Oil   Mills   Case’  for

brevity], distinguished
Sun Export
Case  (supra), which

mandated this Court to take a re­look at the proposition
laid down by
the earlier cases in the following manner­

                     “We   also   find   that   in   the
             subsequent   judgment   of   this   Court,
             Surendra Cotton Oil Mills's case, this
             Court   has   distinguished   the
Sun
             Export   Corporation
's   case   and   held
7
that it dealt with 'animal feed' which
was   large   enough   to   include   'animal
feed   supplements'   whereas   the   facts
of
Surendra   Cotton   Oil   Mills
's   case
showed   that   ingredients   of   animal
feed could not be held to be included
in  'animal feed'.
In our opinion, this
Court   did   not   adequately   deal   with
why
Sun   Exports   Corporation
's   case
which is a binding decision of a three
Judges Bench should not be followed,
apart   from   a   specious   distinction
between           'ingredients'           and
'supplements'   which   is   logically
speaking   a   distinction   without   a
difference.
…
This being the  unsatisfactory state
of   law  as   it   stands   today,   we   feel
that   this   matter   should   be   placed
before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
India   to   constitute   an   appropriate
Bench   to   resolve   the   doubts
pointed   out   by   us   in   the   body   of
this Order.”
                               (emphasis supplied)
8
5. We feel that the reference to
Surendra Cotton Oil

   Mills
Case  (supra),  may   not   be   necessary   as   the

   distinction   was   drawn   on   a   factual   footing,   which

   this   Court   may   not   concern   itself   with,   as   we   are

   only concerned with the principle of law.
With this,

   the Division Bench was of the tentative view that the

   opinion   expressed   in
Sun   Export
Case  (supra)

   would   require   reconsideration,   as   the   proposition

   laid down therein was unsatisfactory, and therefore

   placed   before   the   Chief   Justice   of   India   for

   constituting an appropriate Bench.
6. When the matter was placed before a three Judge Bench

   presided over by one of us (Ranjan Gogoi, J.), the Bench

   reiterated   the   view   for   reconsideration   of   the
Sun

   Export
Case  (supra)   and   again   placed   the   matter,
9
before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for constitution

of an appropriate Bench, considering the fact that
Sun

Export
Case  (supra)   was   decided   by   a   Bench

comprising of three learned judges of this Court.  Hence,

this matter came to be placed before this Bench of Five

Judges with following observations­



              “In paragraph 13 of the order of
               this   Court   in   Sun’s
                                           case,   views
               have been    expressed with regard
              to   the   interpretation   of   an
              exemption           notification          to
              support   the   conclusion   reached.
The   same   may   require   a
              reconsideration.
That   apart,  in   the  referral  order  it
              has   been   noticed   that  Sun’s   Case
              (supra)  has   been   distinguished   in
‘Collector   of   Central   Excise,   Guntur
              vs. Surendra Cotton Oil Mills & Fert
.
Co.  The   basis   on   which   the   said
              distinction   has   been   drawn   needs
              to be further pursued.
10
Having considered the matter at
                   some   length,   we   are   of   the
                   tentative   view,   that   the   opinion
                   expressed   in   Sun’s   case   (supra)
                   may   require   a   reconsideration.
Being   a   co­ordinate   Bench,   we
                   believe   we  ought  not   to  proceed
                   any further in the matter. Hence,
                   we direct the Registry to lay the
                   papers   before   the   Hon’ble   the
                   Chief   Justice   of   India   for
                   appropriate orders.”


                                            (emphasis supplied)
7. The   learned   Additional   Solicitor   General,   Ms.   Pinky

    Anand,   submits   that   a   tax   exemption   statute   or

    notification needs to be strictly interpreted.   According

    to   her,   strict   interpretation   is   literal   rule   of

    interpretation, which means that Court has to apply the

    provision   reading   the   language   therein   and   no
11
interpretation is required if the language is clear.  In the

   event of any ambiguity, according to her, the benefit has

   to be given to the revenue and that such ambiguity in

   tax   exemption   provision   must   not   be   interpreted   to

   benefit   the   assessee   who   fails   to   demonstrate   without

   any   doubt   that   such   assessee   is   covered   by   the   tax

   exemption notification.   She elaborated her arguments

   by relying on various judgments and contends that the

   ratio in
Sun Export
Case (supra), which was doubted in
Surendra Cotton Oil Mills
Case (supra), is not correct

   law.
On   merits   of   the   case,   she   submitted   that   the

   artificial   distinction   created   by
Surendra   Cotton   Oil

   Mills
Case  (supra),  in   distinguishing   the   ingredients

   from   supplements   is   not   sound   and   may   not   be

   accepted by the Court.
8. Per contra, among others, Mr. Somnath Shukla, learned

   counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents would
12
submit that the  ratio  and observations in
Sun Export
Case  (supra)  has  to   be  considered   holistically   without

giving   any   narrow   meaning   to   the   conclusion   arrived

therein.     The   rule   of   strict   interpretation   cannot   be

applied in abstract.  It has to be applied keeping in view

the   interpretation   to   be   used   in   relation   to   Customs

Tariff   Entry.     According   to   the   learned   counsel,   when

the   Customs   Tariff   Entry   is   interpreted   broadly,   the

same   should   be   adopted   in   interpreting   exemption

notification.   Indeed, the learned senior counsel would

contend that the rule of strict interpretation should be

limited   to   the   eligibility   conditions   of   an   exemption

notification   and   while   conferring   the   benefits   to   such

exemption.  He distinguished all the judgments relied on

by   the   appellants   and   submits   that   “prawn   feed

supplements”   would   also   be   included   under   the   head

“prawn   feed”,   and   the   judgment   of   the   Tribunal
13
impugned   in   these   appeals   does   not   warrant   any

    interference.
9.
Sun   Export
Case  (supra)  was   a   case   against   the

    judgment of the High Court of Judicature, Bombay.   It

    was concerned with the interpretation of tax exemption

    notification,   being   Notification   No.   234/1982   –   CE,

    dated   01.11.1982,   issued   by   the   Central   Government

    under sub­section (1) of
Section 25
of the Customs Act.

    The High  Court considered  the issue whether Vitamin

    AD­3 mix (feed grade)/animal feed supplement could be

    included   under   the   head   ‘animal   feed,   including

    compound   livestock   feed’.     The   Bombay   High   Court

    decided,   in   the   affirmative,   in   favour   of   the   assessee.

    The   case   then   landed   in   this   Court,   which   was

    persuaded to expand the meaning of ‘animal feed’ in the

    light  of subsequent  notification issued  in  1984, which

    largely   expanded   the   scope   of   exemption   to   the   effect
14
that   ‘animal   feed,   including   compound   livestock   feed,

animal feed supplements and animal feed concentrates’.

This   Court   indeed   countenanced   the   plea,   namely,

whenever there is ambiguity as to whether the subject

matter was included or not, then the benefit of the same

should   be   conferred   on   the   assessee.
The   relevant

portion in
Sun Export
Case (supra), reads as follows:
“13. We are in agreement with the above
          view   expressed   by   the   Bombay   High
          Court.   No   doubt   it   was   contended   on
          behalf   of   the   Revenue   that   the   contrary
          view   taken   by   the   Tribunal   has   been
          challenged   in   this   Court   which   was
          rejected  in limine  at the admission stage.
          We   do   not   think   that   dismissal   at   the
          admission stage can be relied upon as a
          binding   precedent.  Even  assuming   that
          there are two views possible, it is well
          settled   that   one   favourable   to   the
          assessee in matters of taxation has to
          be preferred.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)
15
10. There cannot be any doubt that the ratio in
Sun Export
Case  (supra)  that,   if   two   views   are   possible   in

   interpreting   the   exemption   notification,   the   one

   favourable to the assesseee in the matter of taxation has

   to   be   preferred.     This   principle   created   confusion   and

   resulted   in  unsatisfactory   state   of   law.     In   spite   of

   catena of judgments of this Court, which took the contra

   view,   holding   that   an   exemption   notification   must   be

   strictly construed, and if a person claiming exemption

   does   not   fall   strictly   within   the   description   of   the

   notification otherwise then he cannot claim exemption.
11. About three years after
Sun Export
Case (supra), in the

   year   2000,   this   Court   in
Surendra   Cotton   Oil   Mills
Case  (supra),   expressed   reservations   as   to   the

   soundness   of   the   dicta   in
Sun   Export
Case  (supra),

   observing that
Sun Export
Case (supra) ignored catena
16
of judgments of this Court expressing contra view.  This

    Court prima facie came to the conclusion with regard to

    the   principle   that   when   two   views   are   possible,   one

    favourable to the assessee in matters of taxation has to

    be preferred, is unexceptionable when interpreting the

    charging section of a taxation statute, but the opposite

    principle   would   be   applicable   in   interpretation   of

    exemption notification.
The three­Judge Bench in the

    referral order further observed that the views expressed

    in
Sun   Export
Case  (supra)  with   regard   to

    interpretation   of   exemption   notification   to   support   the

    conclusion, required reconsideration.
12. We   may,   here   itself   notice   that   the   distinction   in

    interpreting a taxing provision (charging provision) and

    in the matter of interpretation of exemption notification

    is too obvious to require any elaboration.   Nonetheless,

    in   a   nutshell,   we   may   mention   that,   as   observed   in
17
Surendra Cotton Oil Mills
Case (supra), in the matter

    of   interpretation   of   charging   section   of   a   taxation

    statute, strict rule of interpretation is mandatory and if

    there   are   two   views   possible   in   the   matter   of

    interpretation of a charging section, the one favourable

    to the assessee need to be applied.   There is, however,

    confusion  in  the matter of interpretation  of exemption

    notification   published   under   taxation   statutes   and   in

    this area also, the decisions are galore1.
13. We   may   passingly,   albeit,   briefly   reiterate   the   general

    principles of interpretation, which were also adverted to


    1  See:
Sun Export Corporation, Bombay v. Collector of
    Customs,   Bombay   and   Anr.
,  (1997)   6   SCC   564;
Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   Pune   v.   Abhi
    Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
, (2005) 3 SCC
    541;
Collector of Central Excise, Bombay­1 and Anr. v.
    Parle   Exports   (Pvt.)   Ltd.
,   (1989)   1   SCC   345;
Commissioner of Customs (Import), Mumbai v. Konkan
    Synthetic   Fibres
,   (2012)   6   SCC   339;
Collector   of
    Customs,   Bombay   v.   Swastic   Wollens   (Pvt.)   Ltd.   And
    Ors.
,   (1988)   Supp.
SCC   796;
Commissioner   of   Customs
    (Preventive), Gujarat v. Reliance Petroleum Ltd.
, (2008) 7
    SCC 220.
18
by   both   the   counsel.   In   his   treatise,   ‘Principles   of

Statutory   Interpretation’   Justice   G.P.   Singh,   lucidly

pointed the importance of construction of statutes in a

modern State as under:
“Legislation   in   modern   State   is
              actuated   with   some   policy   to   curb
              some public evil or to effectuate some
              public   benefit.     The   legislation   is
              primarily   directed   to   the   problems
              before   the   Legislature   based   on
              information   derived   from   past   and
              present   experience.     It   may   also   be
              designed   by   use   of   general   words   to
              cover   similar   problems   arising   in
              future.     But,   from   the   very   nature   of
              things,   it   is   impossible   to   anticipate
              fully   the   varied   situations   arising   in
              future in which the application of the
              legislation in hand may be called for,
              and,   words   chosen   to   communicate
              such indefinite ‘referents’ are bound to
              be,   in   many   cases   lacking   in   clarity
              and   precision   and   thus   giving   rise   to
19
controversial           questions          of
                    construction.”
14.
An Act
of Parliament/Legislature cannot foresee all types

    of situations and all types of consequences.  It is for the

    Court to see whether a particular case falls within the

    broad   principles   of   law   enacted   by   the   Legislature.

    Here, the principles of interpretation of statutes come in

    handy.     In   spite   of   the   fact   that   experts   in   the   field

    assist   in  drafting   the   Acts  and   Rules,  there   are  many

    occasions   where   the   language   used   and   the   phrases

    employed   in   the   statute   are   not   perfect.     Therefore,

    Judges and Courts need to interpret the words.
15. In  doing  so,  the  principles  of  interpretation   have   been

    evolved in common law.  It has also been the practice for

    the appropriate legislative body to enact Interpretation

    Acts   or
General   Clauses   Act
.     In   all   the   Acts   and

    Regulations,   made   either   by   the   Parliament   or
20
Legislature,   the   words   and   phrases   as   defined   in   the
General Clauses Act
and the principles of interpretation
laid down in
General Clauses Act
are to be necessarily

   kept in view.   If while interpreting a Statutory law, any

   doubt arises as to the meaning to be assigned to a word

   or a phrase or a clause used in an enactment and such

   word, phrase or clause is not specifically defined, it is

   legitimate and indeed mandatory to fall back on
General

   Clauses   Act
.     Notwithstanding   this,   we   should

   remember that when there is repugnancy or conflict as

   to the subject or context between the
General Clauses

   Act
and   a   statutory   provision   which   falls   for

   interpretation,  the Court  must necessarily refer to the

   provisions of statute.
16. The purpose of interpretation is essentially to know the

   intention   of   the   Legislature.     Whether   the   Legislature

   intended to apply the law in a given case; whether the
21
Legislature   intended   to   exclude   operation   of   law   in   a

   given   case;   whether   Legislature   intended   to   give

   discretion   to   enforcing   authority   or   to   adjudicating

   agency   to   apply   the   law,   are   essentially   questions   to

   which   answers   can   be   sought   only   by   knowing   the

   intention   of   the   legislation.       Apart   from   the   general

   principles of interpretation of statutes, there are certain

   internal   aids   and   external   aids   which   are   tools   for

   interpreting the statutes.
17. The long title, the preamble, the heading, the marginal

   note, punctuation, illustrations, definitions or dictionary

   clause, a  proviso  to a section, explanation, examples, a

   schedule   to   the   Act   etc.,   are   internal   aids   to

   construction.     The   external   aids   to   construction   are

   Parliamentary debates, history leading to the legislation,

   other   statutes   which   have   a   bearing,   dictionaries,

   thesaurus.
22
18. It   is   well   accepted   that   a   statute   must   be   construed

    according   to   the   intention   of   the   Legislature   and   the

    Courts   should   act   upon   the   true   intention   of   the

    legislation   while   applying   law   and   while   interpreting

    law.   If a statutory provision is open to more than one

    meaning,   the   Court   has   to   choose   the   interpretation

    which   represents   the   intention   of   the   Legislature.
In

    this connection, the following observations made by this

    Court   in
District   Mining   Officer   vs.   Tata   Iron   and

    Steel Co.
, (2001) 7 SCC 358, may be noticed:
“… A statute is an edict of the Legislature
               and   in   construing   a   statute,   it   is
               necessary,   to   seek   the   intention   of   its
               maker.     A   statute   has   to   be   construed
               according to the intent of them that make
               it and the duty of the Court is to act upon
               the true intention of the Legislature.   If a
23
statutory   provision   is   open   to   more   than
one interpretation the Court has to choose
that   interpretation   which   represents   the
true intention of the Legislature.  This task
very often raises the difficulties because of
various   reasons,   inasmuch   as   the   words
used may not be scientific symbols having
any   precise   or   definite   meaning   and   the
language may be an imperfect medium to
convey one’s thought or that the assembly
of   Legislatures   consisting   of   persons   of
various   shades   of   opinion   purport   to
convey a meaning which may be obscure.
It   is   impossible   even   for   the   most
imaginative   Legislature   to   forestall
exhaustively situations and circumstances
that   may   emerge   after   enacting   a   statute
where   its   application   may   be   called   for.
Nonetheless, the function of the Courts is
only   to   expound   and   not   to   legislate.
Legislation   in a modern State is actuated
with some policy to curb some public evil
or to effectuate some public benefit.   The
legislation   is   primarily   directed   to   the
problems   before   the   Legislature   based   on
information derived from past and present
experience.  It may also be designed by use
24
of general words to cover similar problems
             arising   in   future.     But,   from   the   very
             nature   of   things,   it   is   impossible   to
             anticipate   fully   the   varied   situations
             arising  in future in which the application
             of the legislation in hand may be called for,
             and,   words   chosen   to   communicate   such
             indefinite   referents   are   bound   to   be   in
             many cases lacking in clarity and precision
             and   thus   giving   rise   to   controversial
             questions of construction.   The process of
             construction   combines   both   literal   and
             purposive approaches.  In other words the
             legislative   intention   i.e.,   the   true   or   legal
             meaning   of   an   enactment   is   derived   by
             considering the meaning of the words used
             in   the   enactment   in   the   light   of   any
             discernible   purpose   or   object   which
             comprehends the mischief and its remedy
             to which the enactment is directed…”
19. The well  settled principle  is that  when  the  words  in   a

    statute are clear, plain and unambiguous and only one

    meaning can be inferred, the Courts are bound to give
25
effect to the said meaning irrespective of consequences.

    If the words in the statute are plain and unambiguous,

    it becomes necessary to expound those words in their

    natural and ordinary sense.  The words used declare the

    intention   of   the   Legislature.
In
Kanai   Lal   Sur   v.

    Paramnidhi   Sadhukhan
,   AIR   1957   SC   907,   it   was

    held   that   if   the   words   used   are   capable   of   one

    construction   only   then   it   would   not   be   open   to   the

    Courts to adopt any other hypothetical construction on

    the   ground   that   such   construction   is   more   consistent

    with the alleged object and policy of the Act.
20. In   applying   rule   of   plain   meaning   any   hardship   and

    inconvenience cannot be the basis to alter the meaning

    to   the   language   employed   by   the   legislation.     This   is

    especially   so   in   fiscal   statutes   and   penal   statutes.

    Nevertheless, if the plain language results in absurdity,

    the   Court   is   entitled   to   determine   the   meaning   of   the
26
word in the context in which it is used keeping in view

   the   legislative   purpose.2    Not   only   that,   if   the   plain

   construction leads to anomaly and absurdity, the court

   having   regard   to   the   hardship   and   consequences   that

   flow   from   such   a   provision   can   even   explain   the   true

   intention   of   the   legislation.   Having   observed   general

   principles   applicable   to   statutory   interpretation,   it   is

   now time to consider rules of interpretation with respect

   to taxation.
21. In construing penal statutes and taxation statutes, the

   Court   has   to   apply   strict   rule   of   interpretation.     The

   penal statute which tends to deprive a person of right to

   life and  liberty has to  be  given  strict  interpretation  or

   else   many   innocent   might   become   victims   of

   discretionary   decision   making.
Insofar   as   taxation

   statutes are concerned,
Article 265
of the Constitution 3
   2 Assistant Commissioner, Gadag Sub­Division, Gadag 
   v. Mathapathi Basavannewwa, 1995 (6) SCC 355.
   3 265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law­
   No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law.
27
prohibits the State from extracting tax from the citizens

    without authority of law.   It is axiomatic that taxation

    statute   has   to   be   interpreted   strictly   because   State

    cannot at their whims and fancies burden the citizens

    without   authority   of   law.   In   other   words,   when

    competent   Legislature   mandates   taxing   certain

    persons/certain   objects   in   certain   circumstances,   it

    cannot be expanded/interpreted to include those, which

    were not intended by the Legislature.
22. At   the   outset,   we   must   clarify   the   position   of   ‘plain

    meaning   rule   or   clear   and   unambiguous   rule’   with

    respect   of   tax   law.   ‘The   plain   meaning   rule’   suggests

    that   when   the   language   in   the   statute   is   plain   and

    unambiguous,   the   Court   has   to   read   and   understand

    the plain language as such, and there is no scope for

    any interpretation.  This salutary maxim flows from the

    phrase   “cum   inverbis   nulla   ambiguitas   est,   non   debet
28
admitti voluntatis quaestio”. Following  such maxim, the

   courts   sometimes   have   made   strict   interpretation

   subordinate   to   the   plain   meaning   rule 4,   though   strict

   interpretation is used in the precise sense.  To say that

   strict interpretation involves plain reading of the statute

   and to say that one has to utilize strict interpretation in

   the event of ambiguity is self­contradictory.
23. Next, we may consider the meaning and scope of ‘strict

   interpretation’,   as   evolved   in   Indian   law   and   how   the

   higher Courts have made a distinction while interpreting

   a   taxation   statute   on   one   hand   and   tax   exemption

   notification on the other. In Black’s Law Dictionary (10th

   Edn.) ‘strict interpretation’ is described as under:
Strict   interpretation.   (16c)   1.   An
             interpretation according to the narrowest,
             most literal meaning of the words without
             regard  for context and other  permissible

   4
Mangalore Chemicals
Case (Infra para 37).
29
meanings. 2. An interpretation according
to what the interpreter narrowly believes
to   have   been   the   specific   intentions   or
understandings   of   the   text’s   authors   or
ratifiers,   and   no   more.­   Also   termed   (in
senses   1   &   2)  strict  construction,  literal
interpretation;   literal   construction;
restricted   interpretation;   interpretatio
stricta;          interpretatio            restricta;
interpretatio   verbalis.   3.   The   philosophy
underlying   strict   interpretation   of
statues.­   Also   termed   as   close
interpretation; interpretatio restrictive.
See   strict   constructionism   under
constructionism. Cf. large interpretation;
liberal interpretation (2).
“Strict   construction   of   a   statute   is
that which refuses to expand the law by
implications   or   equitable   considerations,
but confines its operation to cases which
are clearly within the letter of the statute,
as well as within its spirit or reason, not
so   as   to   defeat   the   manifest   purpose   of
the   legislature,   but   so   as   to   resolve   all
reasonable   doubts   against   the
applicability   of   the   statute   to   the
particular   case.’   Willam   M.   Lile   et   al.,
30
Brief   Making   and  the   use  of   Law   Books
               343   (Roger   W.   Cooley   &   Charles   Lesly
               Ames eds., 3d ed. 1914).
“Strict   interpretation   is   an   equivocal
               expression,   for   it   means   either   literal   or
               narrow. When a provision is ambiguous,
               one of its meaning may be wider than the
               other, and the strict (i.e., narrow) sense is
               not   necessarily   the   strict   (i.e.,   literal)
               sense.”   John   Salmond   ,   Jurisprudence
               171 n. (t) (Glanville L. Williams ed., 10th
               ed. 1947).
24. As   contended   by   Ms.   Pinky   Anand,   learned   Additional

    Solicitor   General,   the   principle   of   literal   interpretation

    and the principle of strict interpretation are sometimes

    used interchangeably.  This principle, however, may not

    be sustainable in all contexts and situations.   There is

    certainly scope to sustain an argument that all cases of

    literal   interpretation   would   involve   strict   rule   of

    interpretation,   but   strict   rule   may   not   necessarily

    involve   the   former,   especially   in   the   area   of   taxation.
31
The   decision   of   this   Court   in  Punjab   Land

Development   and   Reclamation   Corporation   Ltd.,

Chandigarh   v.   Presiding   Officer,   Labour   Court

Chandigarh   and   Ors.,  (1990)   3   SCC   682,   made   the

said distinction, and explained the literal rule­



          “The   literal   rules   of   construction   require
          the   wording   of   the   Act   to   be   construed
          according   to   its   literal   and   grammatical
          meaning   whatever   the   result   may   be.
Unless otherwise provided, the same word
          must   normally   be   construed   throughout
          the Act in the same sense, and in the case
          of   old  statutes regard must be had to its
          contemporary   meaning   if   there   has   been
          no change with the passage of time.”  



That   strict   interpretation   does   not   encompass   strict­

literalism into its fold.   It may be relevant to note that

simply   juxtaposing   ‘strict   interpretation’   with   ‘literal

rule’ would result in ignoring an important aspect that
32
is ‘apparent legislative intent’.   We are alive to the fact

    that  there  may  be  overlapping  in   some   cases  between

    the aforesaid two rules.  With certainty, we can observe

    that,   ‘strict   interpretation’   does   not   encompass   such

    literalism,  which   lead  to   absurdity  and go   against  the

    legislative intent.  As noted above, if literalism is at the

    far   end   of   the   spectrum,   wherein   it   accepts   no

    implications   or   inferences,   then   ‘strict   interpretation’

    can   be   implied   to   accept   some   form   of   essential

    inferences which literal rule may not accept.
25. We are not suggesting that literal rule de hors the strict

    interpretation   nor   one   should   ignore   to   ascertain   the

    interplay   between   ‘strict   interpretation’   and   ‘literal

    interpretation’.     We   may   reiterate   at   the   cost   of

    repetition that strict interpretation of a statute certainly

    involves literal or plain meaning test. The other tools of

    interpretation,   namely   contextual   or   purposive
33
interpretation cannot be applied nor any resort be made

    to   look   to   other   supporting   material,   especially   in

    taxation   statutes.     Indeed,   it   is   well   settled   that   in   a

    taxation statute, there is no room for any intendment;

    that   regard   must   be   had   to   the   clear   meaning   of   the

    words and that the matter should be governed wholly by

    the language of the notification.  Equity has no place in

    interpretation of a tax statute. Strictly one has to look to

    the   language   used;   there   is   no   room   for   searching

    intendment   nor   drawing   any   presumption.

    Furthermore,   nothing   has   to   be   read   into   nor   should

    anything   be   implied   other   than   essential   inferences

    while considering a taxation statute.
26. Justice   G.P.   Singh,   in   his   treatise   ‘Principles   of


    Statutory Interpretation’ (14th  ed. 2016 p. – 879) after

    referring   to  Re,   Micklethwait,   (1885)   11   Ex   452;

    Partington   v.   A.G.,   (1869)   LR   4   HL   100;
Rajasthan
34
Rajya   Sahakari   Spinning   &   Ginning   Mills

Federation Ltd. v. Deputy CIT, Jaipur
, (
2014) 11 SCC

672,  State Bank of Travancore v. Commissioner of

Income   Tax
,   (1986)   2   SCC   11   and  Cape   Brandy

Syndicate v. IRC, (1921) 1 KB 64, summed up the law

in the following manner­


         “A   taxing   statute   is   to   be   strictly
        construed.  The well­established rule in the
        familiar   words   of   LORD   WENSLEYDALE,
        reaffirmed   by   LORD   HALSBURY   AND
        LORD   SIMONDS,   means:   ‘The   subject   is
        not to be taxed without clear words for that
        purpose;   and   also   that   every   Act   of
        Parliament must be read according to the
        natural   construction   of   its   words.     In   a
        classic   passage   LORD   CAIRNS   stated   the
        principle thus: “If the person sought to be
        taxed comes within the letter of the law he
        must be taxed, however great the hardship
        may appear to the judicial mind to be.  On
        the   other   hand,   if   the   Crown   seeking   to
        recover   the   tax,   cannot   bring   the   subject
        within the letter of the law, the subject is
35
free,   however   apparently   within   the   spirit
         of law the case might otherwise appear to
         be.   In other words, if there be admissible
         in any statute, what is called an equitable
         construction,          certainly,        such        a
         construction is not admissible in a taxing
         statute where you can simply adhere to the
         words   of   the   statute.     VISCOUNT   SIMON
         quoted   with   approval   a   passage   from
         ROWLATT,   J.   expressing   the   principle   in
         the   following   words:   “In   a   taxing   Act   one
         has to look merely at what is clearly said.
         This is no room for any intendment. There
         is   no   equity   about   a   tax.   There   is   no
         presumption   as   to   tax.     Nothing   is   to   be
         read in, nothing is to be implied.  One can
         only look fairly at the language used.” 


It was further observed:
“In all tax matters one has to interpret the
         taxation   statute   strictly.     Simply   because
         one class of legal entities is given a benefit
         which is specifically stated in the Act, does
         not mean that the benefit can be extended
         to legal entities not referred to in the Act as
         there is no equity in matters of taxation….”
36
Yet again, it was observed:
“It may thus be taken as a maxim of
          tax   law,   which   although   not   to   be
          overstressed   ought   not   to   be   forgotten
          that, “the subject is not to be taxed unless
          the   words   of   the   taxing   statute
          unambiguously   impose   the   tax   on   him”,
          [Russel v. Scott, (1948) 2 All ER 1].   The
          proper course in construing revenue Acts
          is   to   give   a   fair   and   reasonable
          construction   to   their   language   without
          leaning   to   one   side   or   the   other   but
          keeping   in   mind   that   no   tax   can   be
          imposed   without   words   clearly   showing
          an   intention   to   lay   the   burden   and   that
          equitable construction of the words is not
          permissible   [Ormond   Investment   Co.   v.
          Betts, (1928) AC 143].   Considerations of
          hardship,   injustice   or   anomalies   do   not
          play any useful role in construing taxing
          statutes   unless   there   be   some   real
          ambiguity [Mapp v. Oram, (1969) 3 All ER
          215]. It has also been said that if taxing
          provision is “so wanting in clarity that no
          meaning   is   reasonably   clear,   the   courts
          will be unable to regard it as of any effect
37
[IRC v. Ross and Coutler, (1948) 1 All ER
           616].”



Further   elaborating   on   this   aspect,   the   learned

author stated as follows:
“Therefore,   if   the   words   used   are
          ambiguous   and   reasonable   open   to   two
          interpretations   benefit   of   interpretation   is
          given   to   the   subject   [Express   Mill   v.
          Municipal   Committee,   Wardha,   AIR   1958
          SC 341].
If the Legislature fails to express
          itself   clearly   and the taxpayer  escapes by
          not being brought within the letter of the
          law,   no   question   of   unjustness   as   such
          arises [
CIT v. Jalgaon Electric Supply Co.
,
          AIR   1960   SC   1182].
But   equitable
          considerations   are   not   relevant   in
          construing   a  taxing   statute, [
CIT, W.B. v.
          Central   India   Industries
,   AIR   1972   SC
          397], and similarly logic or reason cannot
          be   of   much   avail   in   interpreting   a   taxing
          statute   [
Azam   Jha   v.   Expenditure   Tax
          Officer, Hyderabad
, AIR 1972 SC 2319].
It
          is well settled that in the field of taxation,
          hardship  or  equity has no role to play  in
          determining   eligibility   to   tax   and   it   is   for
38
the   Legislature   to   determine   the   same
          [
Kapil   Mohan   v.   Commr.   of   Income   Tax,
          Delhi
,   AIR   1999   SC   573].
Similarly,
          hardship   or   equity   is   not   relevant   in
          interpreting   provisions   imposing   stamp
          duty, which is a tax, and the court should
          not concern itself with the intention of the
          Legislature   when  the  language expressing
          such intention is plain and unambiguous
          [
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Rakesh Kohli
          &   Anr.
,   (2012)   6   SCC   312].
But   just   as
          reliance   upon   equity   does   not   avail   an
          assesse, so it does not avail the Revenue.”



The   passages   extracted   above,   were   quoted   with

approval   by   this   Court   in   at   least   two   decisions

being
Commissioner   of   Income   Tax   vs.   Kasturi

Sons   Ltd.
,   (
1999)   3   SCC   346   and  State   of   West

Bengal vs. Kesoram Industries Limited
, (2004) 10

SCC   201   [hereinafter   referred   as                    ‘Kesoram

Industries Case’ for brevity].   In the later decision,

a   Bench   of   seven   Judges,   after   citing   the   above
39
passage from Justice G.P. Singh’s treatise, summed

up   the   following   principles   applicable   to   the

interpretation of a taxing statute:
“(i)   In   interpreting   a   taxing   statute,
         equitable considerations are entirely out of
         place.     A   taxing   statute   cannot   be
         interpreted   on   any   presumption   or
         assumption.     A   taxing   statute   has   to   be
         interpreted   in   the   light   of   what   is   clearly
         expressed; it cannot imply anything which
         is   not   expressed;   it   cannot   import
         provisions   in   the   statute   so   as   to   supply
         any   deficiency;   (ii)   Before   taxing   any
         person,   it   must   be   shown   that   he   falls
         within the ambit of the charging section by
         clear words used in the section; and (iii) If
         the words are ambiguous and open to two
         interpretations,            the        benefit         of
         interpretation   is   given   to   the   subject   and
         there   is   nothing   unjust   in   a   taxpayer
         escaping   if   the   letter   of   the   law   fails   to
         catch   him   on   account   of   Legislature’s
         failure to express itself clearly”.
40
27. Now   coming   to   the   other   aspect,   as   we   presently

    discuss,   even   with   regard   to   exemption   clauses   or

    exemption   notifications  issued   under   a   taxing   statute,

    this Court in some cases has taken the view  that the

    ambiguity   in   an   exemption   notification   should   be

    construed   in   favour   of   the   subject.     In   subsequent

    cases,   this   Court   diluted   the   principle   saying   that

    mandatory requirements of exemption clause should be

    interpreted strictly and the directory conditions of such

    exemption   notification   can   be   condoned   if   there   is

    sufficient compliance with the main requirements.  This,

    however,   did   not   in   any   manner   tinker   with   the   view

    that   an   ambiguous   exemption   clause   should   be

    interpreted   favouring   the   revenue.     Here   again   this

    Court   applied   different   tests   when   considering   the

    ambiguity of the exemption notification which requires

    strict   construction   and   after   doing   so   at   the   stage   of
41
applying the notification, it came to the conclusion that

    one has to consider liberally.
28. With  the  above  understanding  the  stage   is  now   set  to

    consider the core issue.  In the event of ambiguity in an

    exemption   notification,   should   the   benefit   of   such

    ambiguity   go   to   the   subject/assessee   or   should   such

    ambiguity should be construed in favour of the revenue,

    denying   the   benefit   of   exemption   to   the

    subject/assessee?  There are catena of case laws in this

    area   of   interpretation   of   an   exemption   notification,

    which   we   need   to   consider   herein.     The   case   of

    Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs. James Forrest,

    [(1890)   15   AC   334   (HL)]   –   is   a   case   which   does   not

    discuss   the   interpretative   test   to   be   applied   to

    exemption   clauses   in   a   taxation   statute   –   however,   it

    was observed that ‘it would be unreasonable to suppose

    that an exemption was wide as practicable to make the
42
tax inoperative, that it cannot be assumed to have been

in the mind of the Legislature’ and that exemption ‘from

taxation   to   some   extent   increased   the   burden   on   other

members of the community’.  Though this is a dissenting

view of Lord Halsbury, LC, in subsequent decisions this

has been quoted vividly to support the conclusion that

any vagueness in the exemption clauses must go to the

benefit of the revenue.
Be that as it is, in our country,

at least from 1955, there appears to be a consistent view

that   if   the   words   in   a   taxing   statute   (not   exemption

clause) are ambiguous and open to two interpretations,

the benefit of interpretation is given to the subject and it

does not matter if the taxpayer escapes the tax net on

account of Legislatures’ failure to express itself clearly

(See the passage extracted hereinabove from
Kesoram

Industries
Case (supra)).
43
29. The first case with which we need to concern ourselves

   is the case in
Union of India v. The Commercial Tax

   Officer, West Bengal and Ors.
,  AIR 1956 SC 202.   It

   may   be   noted   that   this   case   was   dealt   with   by   five

   learned Judges of this Court resulting in two different

   opinions;   one   by   the  then   Chief   Justice   of  India,   S.R.

   Das   for   the   majority,   and   Justice   B.P.   Sinha   (as   His

   Lordship   then   was)   rendering   minority   view.     The

   question before this Court was whether the sale of goods

   made   by   one   private   mill   to   the  Government   of  India,

   Ministry of Industries and Supplies were to be deducted

   as taxable turnover of the mill for the exemption given

   under Section 5 of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act,

   1941   (Bengal   Act   VI   of   1941).     The   exemption   under

   Section 5(2)(a)(iii) of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act,

   1941   provided   for   exemption   ‘to   sales   to   the   Indian

   Stores   Department,   the   Supply   Department   of   the

   Government of India, and any railway or water transport
44
administration’.     The   Court   was   to   interpret   the

    aforesaid   provision   in   order   to   ascertain   whether   the

    sale to the Government of India, Ministry of Industries

    and Supplies would be covered under the Section.
30. The   majority   was   of   the   view   that   the   Government   of

    India,   Ministry   of   Industries   and   Supplies   was   not

    similar   to   those   mentioned   in   the   exemption

    notification.     The   majority   extensively   relied   on   the

    history and origin of Ministry of Industries and Supplies

    and   concluded   that   the   functions   of   the   aforesaid

    Ministry were different from the erstwhile departments

    mentioned under the exemption provision.  The majority

    reasoned that the exemption being the creation of the

    statute itself, it should have to be construed strictly and

    the interpretation cannot be extended to sales to other

    departments.     We   might   find   some   clue   as   to   the

    content of a strict construction also.   It was canvassed
45
before the Court that the object of
Section 5(2)(a)(iii)
of

the relevant statute, was to give exemption  not  to the

particular departments but to the sale of such goods to

those   departments   and,   therefore,   sale   of   those   goods

made to any Departments of the Government of India,

which came to be charged with the duty of purchasing

those goods should also come within the purview of the

exemption.     The   Court   while   repelling   the   aforesaid

interpretation, reasoned as under:
“We   are   unable   to  accept  this  line   of
         reasoning.     This   interpretation   will   unduly
         narrow the scope and ambit of the exemption
         by limiting it to sales of only those goods as,
         at   the   date   of   the   Act,   used   to   be   sold   to
         those   two   departments   and   sales   of   other
         goods   even   to   those   two   departments,
         however necessary for the prosecution of the
         war, would not get benefit of the exemption.
         Such could not possibly be the intention of
         the Legislature as expressed by the language
         used by it in framing the Section.”
46
31. The aforesaid placitum is suggestive of the fact that the

    Courts utilized the rule of strict interpretation in order

    to   decipher   the   intention   of   the   Legislature   and

    thereafter   provide   appropriate   interpretation   for   the

    exemption   provided   under   the   provisions   of   the   Act

    which was neither too narrow nor too broad. It may be

    noted that the majority did not take a narrow view as to

    what   strict   interpretation   would   literally   mean;   rather

    they   combined   legislative   intent   to   ascertain   the

    meaning of the statute in accordance with the objective

    intent of the Legislature.
32. On   the   contrary,   the   minority   opinion   of   Justice   B.P.

    Sinha (as His Lordship then was) provided a purposive

    interpretation for
Section 5(2)(a)(iii)
of the Act, which is

    clear from the following passage:
“The judgment under appeal is based
               chiefly   on   the   consideration   that   the
               exemption   clause in  question does  not  in
47
terms   refer   to   the   newly   created
               department   which now goes by  the name
               of   the   Ministry   of   Industry   and   Supply.
               But   this   department   in  so  far  as  it  deals
               with   industry,   is   not   concerned   with   the
               main   purchasing   activities   of   the
               Government of India.   The exemption was
               granted   in   respect   of   the   purchasing
               activity   of   the   Government   of   India   and
               that  function continues to be assigned to
               the   Supply   Department   which   has   now
               become   a   wing   of   the   newly   created
               department   of   the   Government.     The
               question therefore arises whether in those
               circumstances   the   Government   of   India
               could   claim   the   benefit   of   the   exemption.
               The High Court in answering that question
               in   the   negative   has   gone   upon   mere
               nomenclature.     It   has   emphasized   the
               change   in   the   name   and   overlooked   the
               substance of the matter.”
33. The   minority   construed   ‘strict   interpretation’   to   be   an

    interpretation wherein least number of “determinates in

    terms of quantity” would fall under the exemption.  The

    minority   referred   to   an   old   English   case   of
48
Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. James Forrest,

(1890) 15 AC 334.   It may be relevant to note that the

minority could not find the justification to apply strict

interpretation as the exemption notification was broad

enough   to   include   exemptions   for   commodities

purchased by the Government of India.  The Court was

of the opinion that the strict interpretation provided by

the majority was uncalled for as there was no additional

burden   on   others   by   giving   such   exemptions.     The

relevant observations are as follows­

            “The   High   Court   referred   to   the
       observations of Lord Halsbury in the case of
       Commissioner   of   Inland   Revenue   v.   James
       Forrest (1890) 15 AC 334, to the effect that
       exemptions  from taxation should be strictly
       construed   because   otherwise   the   burden   of
       taxation   will   fall   on   other   members   of   the
       community.     Those   observations,   in   my
       opinion, have no relevance to the facts and
       circumstances   of   the   present   controversy,
       because   we   know   that   the   exemption   was
       granted   to   the   Government   of   India   in   the
49
department dealing with purchase of certain
commodities   and   articles   without   reference
to   quantity.     As   already   pointed   out,   the
Indian   Stores   Department   was   concerned
with purchase of stores for public services on
behalf   of   all   Central   Departments   of
Government and local Government, etc., and
the   Government   of   Bengal   as   then
constituted was one of the provinces of India
which   have   been   receiving   subsidies   and
subventions   to make up the  deficit in their
budgets.     As   a  matter   of fact, as  stated on
behalf   of   the   Bengal   Government   the
concession   was   granted   in   order   to   enable
business communities within the province of
Bengal to compete on favourable terms with
others   outside   Bengal   in   the   matter   of
supplying   the   needs   of   the   Government.
Hence,   there   is   no   question   of   liberal
construction   of   the   exemption   resulting   in
throwing a greater burden on other citizens.
On the other hand, the larger the sales in the
province   of   Bengal   as   it   used   to   be,   the
greater   the   benefit   to   the   business
community   doing   business   within   that
province.   It was therefore stated at the Bar
that though the present case involved taxes
50
amounting   to   less   than   Rs.10,000,   the
           question   arising   for   determination   in   this
           case affected much larger amounts because
           such sales within the province amounted to
           several   crores.     I   should  have   thought  that
           the   business   community   in   the   province   of
           Bengal   having   had   the   advantage   of   the
           transactions   of   sale,   the   Government   of
           Bengal   in   all   fairness   should   have   allowed
           the purchasing agency of the Government of
           India the benefit of the exemption until that
           benefit was in terms withdrawn sometimes in
           the beginning of 1949.”
34.
In
Hansraj Gordhandas v. H.H. Dave, Asst
. Collector

   of   Central   Excise   &   Customs,   Surat   and   Ors.,  AIR

   1970 SC 755 = (1969) 2 SCR 253 [hereinafter referred

   as  ‘Hansraj   Gordhandas   Case’  for   brevity],   wherein

   this   Court   was   called   upon   to   interpret   an   exemption

   notification   issued   under   the
Central   Excise   Act
.     It

   would   be   relevant   to   understand   the   factual   context

   which gave rise to the aforesaid case before the Court.

   The appellant was sole proprietor who used to procure
51
cotton   from   a   co­operative   society   during   the   relevant

period.  The society had agreed to carry out the weaving

work   for   the   appellant   on   payment   of   fixed   weaving

charges   at   Re.0.19   np.   per   yard   which   included

expenses the society would have to incur in transporting

the aforesaid cotton fabric.  In the years 1959 and 1960,

the Government issued an exemption notification which

exempted   cotton   fabrics   produced   by   any   co­operative

society   formed   of   owners   of   cotton   power   looms,

registered on or before 31st March, 1961.  The question

before the Court was whether the appellant who got the

cotton   fabric   produced   from   one   of   the   registered   co­

operative society was also covered under the aforesaid

notification.     It   may   be   of   some   significance   that   the

revenue   tried   to   interpret   the   aforesaid   exemption   by

relying   on   the   purposive   interpretation   by   contending

that the object of granting the above exemption was to

encourage the formation of co­operative societies which
52
not only produced cotton fabrics but also consisted of

members, not only owning but having actually operated

not more than four power looms during the three years

immediately   preceding   their   having   joined   the   society.

The   policy   was   that   instead   of   each   such   member

operating his looms on his own, he should combine with

others by forming a society to produce clothes.   It was

argued   that   the   goods   produced   for   which   exemption

could be claimed must be goods produced on his own

and   on   behalf   by   the   society.     The   court   did   not

countenance such purposive interpretation.  It was held

that a taxing legislation should be interpreted wholly by

the   language   of   the   notification.     The   relevant

observations are:
“It   is   well­established   that   in   a   taxing
        statute there is no room for any intendment
        but regard must be had to the clear meaning
        of the words.   The entire matter is governed
        wholly by the language of the notification.  If
        the tax­payer is within the plain terms of the
53
exemption it cannot be denied its benefit by
calling in aid any supposed intention of the
exempting   authority.    If  such  intention  can
be   gathered   from   the   construction   of   the
words   of   the   notification   or   by   necessary
implication therefrom, the matter is different,
but   that   is   not   the   case   here.     In   this
connection we may refer to the observations
of   Lord   Watson   in   Salomon   vs.   Salomon   &
Co., (1897) AC 22):
‘Intention of the Legislature is a common but
very   slippery   phrase,   which,   popularly
understood   may   signify   anything   from
intention embodied in positive enactment to
speculative opinion as to what the legislature
probably would have meant, although there
has been an omission to enact it.  In a Court
of   Law   or   Equity,   what   the   Legislature
intended   to   be  done  or   not  to   be  done   can
only   be   legitimately   ascertained   from   that
which   it   has   chosen   to   enact,   either   in
express   words   or   by   reasonable   and
necessary implication.’
It   is   an   application   of   this   principle   that   a
statutory notification may not be extended so
as to meet a casus omissus.   As appears in
54
the   judgment   of   the   Privy   Council   in
            Crawford v. Spooner.
‘… we cannot aid the Legislature’s defective
            phrasing   of   the   Act,   we   cannot   add,   and
            mend,   and,   by   construction,   make   up
            deficiencies which are left there.’
                  Learned Counsel for the respondents is
            possibly   right   in   his   submission   that   the
            object   behind   the   two   notifications   is   to
            encourage   the   actual   manufacturers   of
            handloom   cloth   to   switch   over   to   power
            looms   by   constituting   themselves   in   co­
            operative Societies.  But the operation of the
            notifications   has   to   be   judged   not   by   the
            object which the rule making authority had
            in   mind   but   by   the   words   which   it   has
            employed to effectuate the legislative intent.”
35.
In   the   judgment   of   two   learned   Judges   in
Union   of

    India   v.   Wood   Papers   Limited
,   (1990)   4   SCC   256

    [hereinafter   referred   as   ‘Wood   Papers   Ltd.   Case’  for

    brevity], a distinction between stage of finding out the

    eligibility to  seek exemption  and stage of applying  the

    nature of exemption was made.
Relying on the decision
55
in
Collector of Central Excise vs. Parle Exports (P)

Ltd.
, (1989) 1 SCC 345, it was held “Do not extend or

widen the ambit at the stage of applicability. But once

that   hurdle   is   crossed,   construe   it   liberally”.
The

reasoning   for   arriving   at   such   conclusion   is   found   in

para 4 of
Wood Papers Ltd.
Case (supra), which reads­


          “…   Literally   exemption   is   freedom   from
         liability, tax or duty.  Fiscally, it may assume
         varying   shapes,   specially,   in   a   growing
         economy.     For   instance   tax   holiday   to   new
         units,   concessional   rate   of   tax   to   goods   or
         persons for limited period or with the specific
         objective etc.   That is why its construction,
         unlike   charging   provision,   has   to   be   tested
         on   different   touchstone.     In   fact,   an
         exemption provision is like an exception and
         on   normal   principle   of   construction   or
         interpretation   of   statutes   it   is   construed
         strictly either because of legislative intention
         or   on   economic   justification   of   inequitable
         burden   or   progressive   approach   of   fiscal
         provisions   intended   to   augment   State
         revenue.   But   once   exception   or   exemption
56
becomes   applicable   no   rule   or   principles
              requires   it   to   be   construed   strictly.    Truly
              speaking liberal and strict construction of
              an exemption provision are to be invoked
              at   different   stages   of   interpreting   it.
              When   the   question   is   whether   a   subject
              falls   in   the   notification   or   in   the
              exemption clause then it being in nature
              of   exception   is   to   be   construed   strictly
              and   against   the   subject,   but   once
              ambiguity   or  doubt   about   applicability   is
              lifted   and   the   subject   falls   in   the
              notification then full play should be given
              to   it   and   it   calls   for   a   wider   and   liberal
              construction…”
                                                (emphasis supplied)
36.
In
Mangalore   Chemicals   &   Fertilizers   Ltd.   vs.   Dy.

    Commissioner of Commercial Taxes
, (1992) Supp. 1

    SCC 21 [hereinafter referred as ‘Mangalore Chemicals

    Case’  for   brevity],   the   facts   of   the   case   were   that   the

    State   Government   issued   a   notification   in   exercise   of

    power   under
Section   8
­A   of   the   Karnataka   Sales   Tax
57
Act, 1957, providing certain incentives to entrepreneurs

starting new industries in the State pursuant to State’s

policy   for   “rapid   industrialization”.     The   notification

contains   a   package   of   reliefs   and   incentives   including

one   concerning   relief   from   payment   of   sales   tax   with

which the case was concerned.   There was no dispute

that   the   appellant   was   entitled   to   the   benefit   of   the

Notification   dated   June   30,   1969.     There   was   also   no

dispute   that   the   refunds   were   eligible   to   be   adjusted

against sales tax payable for respective years.  The only

controversy   was   whether   the   appellant,   not   having

actually   secured   the   “prior   permission”   would   be

entitled to adjustment having regard to the words of the

Notification of August 11, 1975, that “until permission

of   renewal   is   granted   by   the   Deputy   Commissioner   of

Commercial   Taxes,   the   new   industry   should   not   be

allowed to adjust the refunds”.   The contention of the

appellants therein was that the permission for the three
58
years had been sought well before the commencement of

    the respective years but had been withheld for reasons

    which   were   demonstrably   extraneous.     Therefore,

    contention   was   that   if,   in   these   circumstances,   the

    Deputy Commissioner could withold the permission.
37. This   Court   while   accepting   the   interpretation   provided

    by   the   appellant,   observed   on   the   aspect   of   strict

    construction   of   a   provision   concerning   exemptions   as

    follows:
“… There is support of judicial opinion to
               the   view   that   exemptions   from   taxation
               have a tendency to increase the burden on
               the  other  unexempted class of tax payers
               and   should   be   construed   against   the
               subject   in   case   of   ambiguity.     It   is   an
               equally well known principle that a person
               who claims an exemption has to establish
               his case.
… The choice between a strict and a
               liberal  construction arises only in case of
59
doubt   in   regard   to   the   intention   of   the
           legislature   manifest   on   the   statutory
           language.     Indeed,   the   need   to   resort   to
           any   interpretative   process   arises   only
           where the meaning is not manifest on the
           plain words of the statute.  If the words are
           plain   and   clear   and   directly   convey   the
           meaning,   there   is   no   need   for   any
           interpretation.     It   appears   to   us   the   true
           rule   of   construction   of   a   provision   as   to
           exemption is the one stated by this Court
           in
Union   of   India   v.   Wood   Papers   Ltd.
[(1990) 4 SCC 256 = 1990 SCC (Tax) 422 =
           JT (1991) SC 151]”



Three   important   aspects   which   comes   out   of   the

discussion   are   the   recognition   of   horizontal   equity   by

this   court   as   a   consideration   for   application   of   strict

interpretation, subjugation of strict interpretation to the

plain   meaning   rule   and   interpretation   in   favour   of

exclusion in light of ambiguity.
60
38. We   will   now   consider   another   Constitution   Bench

    decision   in
Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   New

    Delhi   v.   Hari   Chand   Shri   Gopal
,  (2011)   1   SCC   236

    [hereinafter  referred  as  ‘Hari   Chand  Case’  for  brevity].

    We need not refer to the facts of the case which gave

    rise   to   the   questions   for   consideration   before   the

    Constitutional   Bench.   K.S.   Radhakrishnan,   J.,   who

    wrote   the   unanimous   opinion   for   the   Constitution

    Bench, framed the question, viz., whether manufacturer

    of a specified final product falling under
Schedule to the

    Central   Excise   Tariff   Act,   1985
is   eligible   to   get   the

    benefit   of   exemption   of   remission   of   excise   duty   on

    specified   intermediate   goods   as   per   the   Central

    Government Notification  dated 11.08.1994, if captively

    consumed for the manufacture of final product on the

    ground that the records kept by it at the recipient end

    would   indicate   its   “intended   use”   and   “substantial

    compliance” with procedure set out in Chapter 10 of the
61
Central   Excise   Rules,   1994,   for   consideration?   The

Constitution   Bench   answering   the   said   question

concluded   that   a   manufacturer   qualified   to   seek

exemption   was   required   to   comply   with   the   pre­

conditions for claiming exemption and therefore is not

exempt   or   absolved   from   following   the   statutory

requirements   as   contained   in   the   Rules.       The

Constitution Bench then considered and reiterated the

settled   principles  qua  the   test   of   construction   of

exemption   clause,   the   mandatory   requirements   to   be

complied with and the distinction between the eligibility

criteria with reference to the conditions which need to

be strictly complied with and the conditions which need

to   be   substantially   complied   with.
The   Constitution

Bench followed the ratio in
Hansraj Gordhandas
Case

(supra),   to   reiterate   the   law   on   the   aspect   of

interpretation of exemption clause in para 29 as follows­
62
“The law is well settled that a person
            who claims exemption or concession has to
            establish   that   he   is   entitled   to   that
            exemption   or   concession.     A   provision
            providing for an exemption, concession or
            exception,  as  the case may be, has to be
            construed   strictly   with   certain   exceptions
            depending upon the settings on which the
            provision   has   been   placed   in   the   statute
            and the object and purpose to be achieved.
            If exemption is available on complying with
            certain  conditions, the  conditions  have to
            be   complied   with.   The   mandatory
            requirements of those conditions must be
            obeyed   or   fulfilled   exactly,   thought   at
            times, some latitude can be shown, if there
            is   failure   to   comply   with   some
            requirements   which   are   directory   in
            nature,   the   non­compliance   of   which
            would not affect the essence or substance
            of the notification granting exemption.”
39. The Constitution Bench then considered the doctrine of

   substantial   compliance   and   “intended   use”.     The
63
relevant portions of the observations in  paras 31 to 34

are in the following terms –

        “31.      Of  course, some of the provisions of
        an exemption notification may be directory in
        nature   and   some   are   mandatory   in   nature.
        A   distinction   between   the   provisions   of   a
        statute   which   are   of   substantive   character
        and   were   built   in   with   certain   specific
        objectives   of   policy,   on   the   one   hand,   and
        those   which   are   merely   procedural   and
        technical in there nature, on the other, must
        be kept clearly distinguished…
        Doctrine   of   substantial   compliance   and
        “intended use”
32.    The doctrine of substantial compliance
        is   a   judicial   invention,   equitable   in   nature,
        designed to avoid hardship in cases where a
        party   does   all   that   can   reasonably   be
        expected of it, but failed or faulted in some
        minor or inconsequent aspects which cannot
        be   described   as   the   “essence”   or   the
        “substance”   of   the   requirements.     Like   the
        concept of “reasonableness”, the acceptance
        or   otherwise   of   a   plea   of   “substantial
        compliance”   depends   upon   the   facts   and
        circumstances of each case and the purpose
64
and object to be achieved and the context of
the   prerequisites   which   are   essential   to
achieve the object and purpose of the rule or
the   regulation.     Such   a   defence   cannot   be
pleased   if   a   clear   statutory   prerequisite
which effectuates the object and the purpose
of the statute has not been met.  Certainly, it
means   that   the   Court   should   determine
whether   the   statute   has   been   followed
sufficiently so as to carry out the intent for
which   the   statute   was   enacted   and   not   a
mirror   image   type   of   strict   compliance.
Substantial   compliance   means   “actual
compliance   in   respect   to   the   substance
essential to every reasonable objective of the
statute”   and   the   Court   should   determine
whether   the   statute   has   been   followed
sufficiently   so   as   to   carry   out   the   intent   of
the   statute   and   accomplish   the   reasonable
objectives for which it was passed.
33.     A   fiscal   statute   generally   seeks   to
preserve   the   need   to   comply   strictly   with
regulatory   requirements that  are important,
especially when a party seeks the benefits of
an   exemption   clause   that   are   important.
Substantial compliance with an enactment is
insisted,   where   mandatory   and   directory
65
requirements   are   lumped   together,   for   in
such a case, if mandatory requirements are
complied  with, it will be proper  to  say  that
the   enactment   has   been   substantially
complied   with   notwithstanding   the   non­
compliance   of   directory   requirements.     In
cases   where   substantial   compliance   has
been   found,   there   has   been   actual
compliance   with   the   statute,   albeit
procedurally   faulty.     The   doctrine   of
substantial compliance seeks to preserve the
need to comply strictly with the conditions or
requirements that are important to invoke a
tax   or   duty   exemption   and   to   forgive   non­
compliance   for   either   unimportant   and
tangential requirements or requirements that
are so confusingly or incorrectly written that
an   earnest   effort   at   compliance   should   be
accepted.
34.   The   test   for   determining   the
applicability   of   the   substantial   compliance
doctrine has been the subject of a myriad of
cases and quite often, the critical question to
be   examined   is   whether   the   requirements
relate to the “substance” or “essence” of the
statute,   if   so,   strict   adherence   to   those
requirements is a precondition to give effect
66
to that doctrine.   On the other hand, if the
            requirements   are   procedural   or  directory   in
            that they are not of the “essence” of the thing
            to be done but are given with a view to the
            orderly   conduct   of   business,   they   may   be
            fulfilled   by   substantial,   if   not   strict
            compliance.     In   other   words,   a   mere
            attempted compliance may not be sufficient,
            but   actual   compliance   with   those   factors
            which are considered as essential.”
40. After considering the various authorities, some of which

   are adverted to above, we are compelled to observe how

   true it is to say that there exists unsatisfactory state of

   law   in   relation   to   interpretation   of   exemption   clauses.

   Various   Benches   which   decided   the   question   of

   interpretation   of   taxing   statute   on   one   hand   and

   exemption   notification   on   the   other,   have   broadly

   assumed (we are justified to say this) that the position is

   well settled in the interpretation of a taxing statute:  It is

   the law that any ambiguity in a taxing statute should

   enure   to   the   benefit   of   the   subject/assessee,   but   any
67
ambiguity   in   the   exemption   clause   of   exemption

   notification   must   be   conferred   in   favour   of   revenue   –

   and   such   exemption   should   be   allowed   to   be   availed

   only to those subjects/assesses who demonstrate that a

   case for exemption squarely falls within the parameters

   enumerated  in  the notification  and that  the claimants

   satisfy   all   the   conditions   precedent   for   availing

   exemption.     Presumably   for   this   reason   the   Bench

   which decided
Surendra Cotton Oil Mills
Case (supra)

   observed   that   there   exists   unsatisfactory   state   of   law

   and   the   Bench   which   referred   the   matter   initially,

   seriously doubted the conclusion in
Sun Export
Case

   (supra) that the ambiguity in an exemption notification

   should be interpreted in favour of the assessee.
41. After thoroughly examining the various precedents some

   of   which   were   cited   before   us   and   after   giving   our

   anxious consideration, we would be more than justified
68
to conclude and also compelled to hold that every taxing

    statue including, charging, computation and exemption

    clause   (at   the   threshold   stage)   should   be   interpreted

    strictly.   Further,   in   case   of   ambiguity   in   a   charging

    provisions, the benefit must necessarily go in favour of

    subject/assessee,   but   the   same   is   not   true   for   an

    exemption notification wherein the benefit of ambiguity

    must   be   strictly   interpreted   in   favour   of   the

    Revenue/State.
42.
In
Govind   Saran   Ganga   Saran   v.   Commissioner   of

    Sales  Tax
,   1985  Supp  (SCC)   205,   this   Court   pointed

    out   three   components   of   a   taxing   statute,   namely

    subject of the tax; person liable to pay tax; and the rate

    at   which   the   tax   is   to   be   levied.
If   there   is   any

    ambiguity in understanding any of the components, no

    tax can be levied till the ambiguity or defect is removed

    by the legislature [See
Mathuram Agrawal v. Sate of
69
Madhya Pradesh
, (1999) 8 SCC 667;
Indian Banks’

   Association vs. Devkala Consultancy Service
, (2004)

   4 JT 587 = AIR 2004 SC 2615; and
Consumer Online

   Foundation vs. Union of India
, (2011) 5 SCC 360.]
43. There is abundant jurisprudential justification for this.

   In   the   governance   of   rule   of   law   by   a   written

   Constitution, there is no implied power of taxation.  The

   tax power must be specifically conferred and it should

   be strictly in accordance with the power so endowed by

   the   Constitution   itself.     It   is   for   this   reason   that   the

   Courts   insist   upon   strict   compliance   before   a   State

   demands and extracts money from its citizens towards

   various taxes.   Any  ambiguity in a  taxation  provision,

   therefore,   is   interpreted   in   favour   of   the

   subject/assessee.  The statement of law that ambiguity

   in a taxation statute should be interpreted strictly and

   in the event of ambiguity the benefit should go to the
70
subject/assessee   may   warrant   visualizing   different

situations.     For   instance,   if   there   is   ambiguity   in   the

subject   of  tax,  that   is  to  say,  who  are   the   persons  or

things liable to pay tax, and whether the revenue has

established   conditions   before   raising   and   justifying   a

demand.  Similar is the case in roping all persons within

the   tax   net,   in   which   event   the   State   is   to   prove   the

liability   of   the   persons,   as   may   arise   within   the   strict

language   of   the   law.     There   cannot   be   any   implied

concept   either   in   identifying   the   subject   of   the   tax   or

person liable to pay tax.  That is why it is often said that

subject   is   not   to   be   taxed,   unless   the   words   of   the

statute unambiguously impose a tax on him, that one

has to look merely at the words clearly stated and that

there is no room for any intendment nor presumption as

to tax.  It is only the letter of the law and not the spirit

of the law to guide the interpreter to decide the liability

to tax ignoring any amount of hardship and eschewing
71
equity in taxation.  Thus, we may emphatically reiterate

      that if in the event of ambiguity in a taxation liability

      statute, the benefit should go to the subject/assessee.

      But, in a situation where the tax exemption has to be

      interpreted, the benefit of doubt should go in favour of

      the   revenue,   the   aforesaid   conclusions   are   expounded

      only as a prelude to better understand jurisprudential

      basis   for   our   conclusion.   We   may   now   consider   the

      decisions which support our view.
44.
In
Hansraj   Gordhandas
Case               (supra),   the

      Constitutional Bench unanimously pointed out that an

      exemption from taxation is to be allowed based wholly

      by   the   language   of   the   notification   and   exemption

      cannot   be   gathered   by   necessary   implication   or   by

      construction of words; in other words, one has to look to

      the   language   alone   and   the   object   and   purpose   for

      granting exemption is irrelevant and immaterial.
72
45.
In
Parle Exports
Case (supra), a bench of two Judges of

   this   Court   considered   the   question   whether   non­

   alcoholic beverage base like Gold spot base, Limca base

   and Thumps Up base, were exempted from payment of

   duty   under   the   Central   Government   notification   of

   March, 1975.   While considering the issue, this Court

   pointed   out   the   Strict   interpretation   to   be   followed   in

   interpretation   of   a   notification   for   exemption.     These

   observations   are   made   in   para   17   of   the   judgment,

   which read as follows:
“How   then  should the courts proceed?
            The expressions in the Schedule and in the
            notification   for   exemption   should   be
            understood   by   the   language   employed
            therein bearing in mind the context in which
            the   expressions   occur.     The   words   used   in
            the   provision,   imposing   taxes   or   granting
            exemption should be understood in the same
            way   in   which   these   are   understood   in
            ordinary   parlance   in   the   area   in   which   the
            law   is   in   force   or   by   the   people   who
73
ordinarily   deal   with   them.     It   is,   however,
necessary to bear in mind certain principles.
The   notification   in   this   case   was   issued
under Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules and
should   be   read   along   with   the   Act.     The
notification must be read as a whole in the
context   of   the   other   relevant   provisions.
When a notification is issued in accordance
with   power   conferred  by   the   statute,  it   has
statutory   force   and   validity   and,   therefore,
the exemption under the notification is as if
it were contained in the Act itself.  See in this
connection the observations of this Court in
Orient   Weaving   Mills   (P)   Ltd.   v.   Union   of
India, 1962 Supp 3 SCR 481 = AIR 1963 SC
98.   See also
Kailash Nath v. State of U.P.
,
AIR   1957   SC   790.   The   principle   is   well
settled that when two views of a notification
are possible, it should be construed in favour
of   the   subject   as   notification   is   part   of   a
fiscal enactment.
But in this connection, it
is well to remember the observations of the
Judicial Committee in Coroline M. Armytage
v. Frederick Wilkinson, (1878) 3 AC 355, that
it is only, however, in the event of there being
a real difficulty in ascertaining the meaning
of  a particular enactment that the question
74
of   strictness   or   of   liberality   of   construction
         arises.  The Judicial Committee reiterated in
         the   said   decision  at page 369 of  the report
         that   in  a   taxing   Act  provisions   enacting   an
         exception to the general rule of taxation are
         to   be   construed   strictly   against   those   who
         invoke   its   benefit.     While   interpreting   an
         exemption   clause,   liberal   interpretation
         should be imparted to the language thereof,
         provided no violence is done to the language
         employed.     It   must,   however,   be   borne   in
         mind   that   absurd   results   of   construction
         should be avoided.”


In the above passage, no doubt this Court observed

that “when two views of a notification are possible, it

should   be   construed   in   favour   of   the   subject   as

notification   is   part   of   fiscal   document”.     This

observation   may   appear   to   support   the   view   that

ambiguity   in   a   notification   for   exemption   must   be

interpreted   to   benefit   the   subject/assessee.     A

careful   reading   of   the   entire   para,   as   extracted

hereinabove   would,   however,   suggest   that   an
75
exception   to   the   general   rule   of   tax   has   to   be

construed strictly against those who invoke for their

benefit.
This   was   explained   in   a   subsequent

decision in
Wood Papers Ltd.
Case (supra).  In para

6, it was observed as follows:
“…   In
Collector   of   Central   Excise   v.
          Parle Exports (P) Ltd.
, (1989) 1 SCC 345,
          this Court while accepting that exemption
          clause   should   be   construed   liberally
          applied   rigorous   test   for   determing   if
          expensive   items   like   Gold   Spot   base   or
          Limca   base   of   Thums   Up   base   were
          covered   in   the   expression   food   products
and food preparations used in Item No. 68
of   First   Schedule   of   Central   Excises   and
          Salt Act and held ‘that it should not be in
          consonance   with   spirit   and   the   reason   of
          law   to   give   exemption   for   non­alcoholic
          beverage   basis   under   the   notification   in
          question’.   Rationale or ratio is same.   Do
          not extend or widen the ambit at stage of
          applicability.     But   once   that   hurdle   is
          crossed   construe   it   liberally.     Since   the
          respondent did not fall in the first clause of
76
the   notification   there   was   no   question   of
               giving the clause a liberal construction and
               hold   that   production   of   goods   by
               respondent   mentioned   in   the   notification
               were entitled to benefit.”
46. The   above   decision,   which   is   also   a   decision   of   two­

    Judge Bench of this Court, for the first time took a view

    that   liberal   and   strict   construction   of   exemption

    provisions   are   to   be   invoked   at   different   stages   of

    interpreting it.   The question whether a subject falls in

    the  notification   or   in   the  exemption   clause,   has   to   be

    strictly construed.  When once the ambiguity or doubt is

    resolved   by   interpreting   the   applicability   of   exemption

    clause strictly, the Court may construe the notification

    by   giving   full   play   bestowing   wider   and   liberal

    construction.   The ratio of
Parle Exports
Case  (supra)

    deduced as follows:
“Do not extend or widen the ambit at
               stage of applicability.  But once that hurdle
               is crossed, construe it liberally”.
77
47. We   do   not   find   any   strong   and   compelling   reasons   to

    differ, taking a  contra  view, from this.   We respectfully

    record   our   concurrence   to   this   view   which   has   been

    subsequently, elaborated by the Constitution Bench in
Hari Chand
Case (supra).
48. The   next   authority,   which   needs   to   be   referred   is   the

    case   in
Mangalore   Chemicals
(supra).    As   we   have

    already made reference to the same earlier, repetition of

    the   same   is   not   necessary.   From   the   above   decisions,

    the   following   position   of   law   would,   therefore,   clear.

    Exemptions from taxation have tendency to increase the

    burden on the other unexempted class of tax payers.  A

    person  claiming exemption, therefore, has to establish

    that   his   case   squarely   falls   within   the   exemption

    notification, and while doing so, a notification should be

    construed against the subject in case of ambiguity.
78
49. The   ratio   in
Mangalore   Chemicals
Case  (supra)   was

    approved   by   a   three­Judge   Bench   in
Novopan   India

    Ltd.   v.   Collector   of   Central   Excise   and   Customs
,

    1994 Supp (3) SCC 606.  In this case, probably for the

    first   time,   the   question   was   posed   as   to   whether   the

    benefit   of   an   exemption   notification   should   go   to   the

    subject/assessee when there is ambiguity.   The three­

    Judge Bench, in the background of English and Indian

    cases, in para 16, unanimously held as follows:
“We are, however, of the opinion that,
              on principle, the decision of this Court in
              Mangalore   Chemicals   –   and   in
Union   of
              India v. Wood Papers
, referred to therein –
              represents   the   correct   view   of   law.     The
              principle   that   in   case   of   ambiguity,   a
              taxing   statute   should   be   construed   in
              favour of the assessee – assuming that the
              said principle is good and sound – does not
              apply   to   the   construction  of  an  exception
              or an exempting provision, they have to be
              construed   strictly.     A   person   invoking   an
              exception   or   an   exemption   provision   to
79
relieve   him   of   the   tax   liability   must
             establish clearly that he is covered by the
             said   provision.     In   case   of   doubt   or
             ambiguity,   benefit   of   it   must   go   to   the
             State….”
50.
In
Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. v. State of Jharkhand
,

   (2005) 4 SCC 272, which is another two­Judge Bench

   decision, this Court laid down that eligibility clause in

   relation   to   exemption   notification   must   be   given   strict

   meaning and in para 44, it was further held –


             “The principle that in the event a provision
             of   fiscal   statute   is   obscure   such
             construction   which   favours   the   assessee
             may be adopted, would have no application
             to   construction   of   an   exemption
             notification, as in such a case it is for the
             assessee to show that he comes within the
             purview   of   exemption   (See
Novopan   India
             Ltd v. CCE and Customs
).”
51.
In
Hari Chand
Case  (supra), as already discussed, the

   question   was   whether   a   person   claiming   exemption   is

   required to comply with the procedure strictly to avail
80
the benefit.  The question posed and decided was indeed

different.     The   said   decision,   which   we   have   already

discussed   supra,   however,   indicates   that   while

construing an exemption notification, the Court has to

distinguish   the   conditions   which   require   strict

compliance, the non­compliance of which would render

the   assessee   ineligible   to   claim   exemption   and   those

which require substantial compliance to be entitled for

exemption.     We   are   pointing   out   this   aspect   to   dispel

any doubt about the legal position as explored in this

decision.     As  already   concluded   in   para   50   above,   we

may   reiterate  that  we  are  only  concerned   in   this  case

with   a   situation   where   there   is   ambiguity   in   an

exemption   notification   or   exemption   clause,   in   which

event the benefit of such ambiguity cannot be extended

to   the  subject/assessee   by   applying   the  principle   that

an obscure and/or ambiguity or doubtful fiscal statute

must   receive   a   construction   favouring   the   assessee.
81
Both the situations are different and while considering

    an   exemption   notification,   the   distinction   cannot   be

    ignored.
52. To sum up, we answer the reference holding as under ­

         (1) Exemption notification should be interpreted
         strictly;   the   burden   of   proving   applicability
         would be on the assessee to show that his case
         comes within the parameters of the exemption
         clause or exemption notification.
(2)   When   there   is   ambiguity   in   exemption
         notification   which   is   subject   to   strict
         interpretation,   the   benefit   of   such   ambiguity
         cannot be claimed by the subject/assessee and
         it must be interpreted in favour of the revenue.  
         (3) The ratio in
Sun Export
case (supra) is not
         correct and all the decisions which took similar
         view   as   in
Sun   Export
Case  (supra)   stands
         over­ruled.
53. The   instant   civil   appeal   may   now   be   placed   before

    appropriate   Bench   for   considering   the   case   on   merits
82
after obtaining orders from the Hon’ble Chief Justice of

India.
…………………………..J.
                                  (Ranjan Gogoi) 


                              …………………………..J.
                                  (N.V. Ramana) 


                              …………………………..J.
                                 (R. Banumathi) 


                         …………………………………..J.
                        (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar) 


                              …………………………..J.
                                 (S. Abdul Nazeer)

New Delhi
July 30, 2018