[Cites
78
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Moolchand Khairati Ram Trust on 9 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5426, 2018 (8) SCC 321, (2018) 7 MAD LJ 37, (2018) 8 SCALE 648, (2018) 6 ALL WC 5785, (2018) 251 DLT 316, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 524
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Arun Mishra
1


                                                                      Reportable


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.3155 OF 2017


UNION OF INDIA                                                … APPELLANT

                                    VERSUS

MOOL CHAND KHAIRATI RAM TRUST                                 … RESPONDENT

                                      WITH

                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.3153­3154 OF 2017

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3156 OF 2017

                                       AND

                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.3157­3158 OF 2017


                               J U D G M E N T

ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.    The   question   involved   in   the   appeals   is   with   respect   to   the

validity   of   Circular   issued   by   the   Government   of   NCT   of   Delhi

(GNCTD) on 2.2.2012 whereby it intimated the hospitals to implement
2
the judgment of Delhi High Court with regard to free treatment to the

weaker   sections   of   the   society   in   terms   of   the   judgment   dated

22.3.2007 in the case of
Social Jurists v. Government of NCT of Delhi

& Ors. Thereafter
, the Land & Development Officer (in short, ‘L&DO')

passed   an   order   dated   2.2.2012   wherein   it   was   stated   that   the

Government of India had taken a policy decision that all the hospitals

which have been provided land by L&DO have to strictly follow the

policy   of   providing   free   treatment   as   provided   in   it.   That   the   said

conditions were applicable to Moolchand Hospital and St. Stephens

Hospital   as   they   were   allotted   land   by   L&DO.   Communication   on

similar lines was issued by Government of NCT of Delhi to Sitaram

Bhartia and the Foundation of Cancer Research imposing condition of

providing free treatment to 10% indoor patients and 25% to outdoor

patients of poor strata of the society.
The decision was taken in the

light of the decision of Delhi High Court in
Social Jurists
case (supra)

which   was   referred   by   this   Court   in   Special   Leave   Petition   [Civil]

No.18599   of   2007   vide   order   dated   1.9.2011   in   which   this   Court

observed that 25% OPD and 10% IPD have to be given treatment free

of cost. Said patients should not be charged with anything. However,

the   concerned   hospital   could   make   the   arrangements   of   the   cost
3
either   by   meeting   the   treatment/medicines   cost   from   its   funds   or

resources or by way of sponsorships or endowments or donations. As

the   respondents­hospitals   were   not   a   party,   they   have   questioned

imposition   of   said   conditions   in   the   impugned   order   by   filing   writ

applications.     The   High   Court   has   quashed   the   imposition   of

conditions hence, the appeals have been preferred.
2.    The factual matrix reflects that the Government of India in the

year 1949 took a decision to provide all possible help to the hospitals

by allotting land to the hospitals and schools at highly concessional

rates so as to involve them in achieving the larger social objective of

providing   health   and   education   to   the   people.   Pursuant   to   the

decision   taken   in   the   meeting   dated   10.6.1949   under   the

Chairmanship of the Secretary (Finance) it was decided that the land

would   be   allotted   to   the   hospitals   and   schools   at   the   rate   of

Rs.2000/­   to   Rs.5000/­   per   acre.   The   hospitals   and   schools   were

treated as charitable institutions. While the first safeguard relating to

institutions being secular and non­communal in character, free help

by   allotment   of   land   to   schools   and   hospitals   was   unanimously

accepted.   It   was   also   agreed   that   non­profit   making   bodies   be
4
included   under   the   term   “charitable   institution”   with   the   aforesaid

institutions. The test should be that the institute should be run for

the good of the public without any profit motive. The relevant portion

of policy decision dated 10.6.1949 is extracted hereunder:
“1) It should be clearly laid down that the land will
          be made available only for institutions of secular
          and     non-communal      character,  schools   and
          hospitals should be freely helped by allotment of
          land but applications from other types of charitable
          institutions should be considered individually on
          merits. It would be risky to lay down a general rule
          as regards the latter.
2) Recognition by an appropriate authority to the
          Government should be a condition precedent the
          allotment of land to schools, hospitals etc.
2) The first safeguard was unanimously accepted.
It was understood that an institution of secular and
          non-communal character was one which did not
          discriminate against any class of people on any
          ground while making an admission. It was also
          agreed that institutions like Arts and Crafts Society
          and other non-profit making bodies should be
          included under the term "Charitable Institution".
          The test should be that the institution should be run
          for the good of the public without any profit
          motive."
3.    It was also deliberated upon on 10.6.1949 that what should be

premium and ground rent chargeable to a charitable institution. As

per the policy
laid down by
the Government of India in the letter of
5
the Department of Education, Land, dated 25.7.1943, the premium

charged   was   too   high,   to   be   easily   payable   by   any   charitable

institution   much   less   by   any   displaced   institution   from   Pakistan.

According to that formula, any charitable institution will have to pay

a premium at the rate of 25,000 to 35,000 per acre, plus ground rent

@ 15% on the premium per annum, that would be obviously too high.

Hence, it was agreed that the premium chargeable on land allocated

to   charitable   institutions   in   Delhi   should   vary   from   Rs.2000/­   to

Rs.5000/­ per acre.
Facts relating to Mool Chand Khairati Ram Trust :
4.    In the year 1927 one Lala Kharaiti Ram of Lahore made a Will

with a codicil registered at Lahore by which Moolchand Khairati Ram

Trust   was   constituted   by   Lala   Kharaiti   Ram   with   the   name   of   his

father Shri Moolchand. The relevant clauses of the Will are extracted

hereunder :
"(8) After meeting the above-mentioned allotments
          the following instructions shall be observed with
          regard to the property of every description that
          may remain after my death:-
(a) All the remaining property of every description
          shall constitute a Trust known as Moolchand
6
Kharaiti Ram Trust, Lahore, the objects of which
           shall be as follows:-
(1) Imparting education in and preaching
           Sanskrit according to Sanatan Dharm Methods, and

              (2) Devising means for imparting education in
           and improving the Ayurvedic System of Medicine
           and preaching the same. In order to gain object
           No.2 it is not prohibited to take help from the
           English or Yunani or any other system of medicine
           and according to need one or more than one
           Ayurvedic Hospital may be opened.”
5.     It was the case of the Trust that the author neither used the

word charity nor charitable while creating the Trust in the Will. In

law,   it   became   a   charitable   trust   on   account   of   the   provisions   of
section   2
of   the   Charitable   Endowments   Act,   1890.   Mool   Chand

hospital acquired the perception of being charitable not from the Will

or the purpose set out for the Trust but from the very nature of the

activity of providing medical relief, more so in view of
section 2(15)
of

the Income Tax Act, 1961 which defines charitable purpose.
6.     The   Trust   was   running   a   hospital   in   Lahore   in   the   name   of

Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Hospital. After partition, the trustees had to

leave Pakistan and migrate to India as refugees in 1947. The Ministry

of   Rehabilitation   allotted   nine   acres   of   land   at   Lajpat   Nagar   to   the
7
Trust on 17.4.1951 on which land at Lajpat Nagar, Delhi, the Trust

built a hospital which has been running since then. At the time of

allotment Lajpat Nagar was not a prime location of Delhi.
7.     It was further the case of the Trust that in the allotment letter

there was no term or condition to provide free treatment to patients

belonging   to   economically   weaker   sections   of   the   society   at   the

hospital. Subsequently, lease deed was formally executed between the

President of India and Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Trust which was to

be effective from 17.4.1951 for a period of 99 years. In this lease deed

also,   there   was   no   such   condition   regarding   free   treatment   to   any

patient.   Thus,   it   was   not   open   to   the   Government   to   impose   the

obligation of providing free medical treatment by an executive order.

The policy of 1949 regarding institution should be run for the good of

the   public   without   any   profit   motive   was   applicable   to   other

institutions   like   Arts   &   Crafts   Society   and   not   to   hospitals.   At   the

most, the only rider in the policy was that the institution would be

run   for   the   good   of   the   public   without   any   profit   motive.   This

policy/test was to be applied at the time of allotment of land and only

such institutions were to be allotted land which in the opinion of the
8
Government fulfilled the said criteria.
Since the policy has not been

converted   into   law   by  enactment   of   an   Act   by  the   legislature,   only

insistence  could  be  that  the  institution   should  be  run   without  any

profit motive and not that the institution be required to provide free

treatment to any specified number of patients. The DDA (Disposal of

Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 are not applicable in the case of

Trust. Clause 14 of the lease deed did not authorize the Government

to   impose   such   conditions.   That   the   decision   of
Social  Jurists
case

(supra) is not applicable as
in that case
there was either conditions of

allotment,   or   the   stipulations   in   the   lease   deed   under   which   the

hospitals were obliged to provide access to significant percentage of

the IPD and OPD facilities. Right to carry on any occupation, trade or

business   is   fundamental   under
Article   19(1)(g)
as   such,   such

restriction could have been imposed by enacting a law under
Article

19(6)
of   the   Constitution   of   India   by   Parliament   or   the   State

legislature. Such condition could not have been imposed by executive

feat in exercise of power under
Article 162.
In the decision in
Social

Jurists
(supra) which has been affirmed by this Court, the Trust was

not   a   party.   The   condition   of   lease   could   not   have   been   altered

unilaterally. This Court while dismissing the SLP on 1.9.2011 by a
9
speaking order, did not intend such result. This Court never intended

to pass adverse order against a person who had not been given notice

or   heard   in   the   matter.   A   contempt   petition   was   filed   in   the   High

Court for proceeding against the hospital run by the trust.
The same

was dismissed by the High Court as they were not parties to the case

of
Social Jurists
(supra). Land was given by way of incentivizing the

Trust to open a hospital in that locality because at that time not so

many   people   were   willing   to   open   hospitals   or   schools.   As   these

services were to be provided by the State, the land was not given at

the   concessional   rate.   It   was   the   market   rate   that   prevailed   in   the

year 1951.
Report of Justice Qureshi Committee was not relied upon

by the High Court while deciding the case of
Social Jurists
(supra) and

High   Court   had   appointed   a   Committee   namely   Mr.   N.N.   Khanna

Committee.   At   that   time   when   Justice   Qureshi   Committee’s   report

was prepared, it was based upon the statement made by disgruntled

workmen   who   were   having   dispute   with   the   management   of   the

hospital   as   such   said   report   cannot   be   looked   into.
It   was   also

submitted   that   there   are   specialist   doctors   in   the   Trust   run   since

1958 who devote one hour each day to OPD patients from the weaker
10
sections of the society without charging them anything and they will

continue to do so.
Facts regarding St. Stephen hospital :
8.     In   the   case   of   St.   Stephen   hospital,   it   was   averred   by   the

hospital   that   it   was   established   in   the   year   1885   by   a   group   of

missionary women in Chandni Chowk, Delhi. In 1908 it moved to its

present location to Tees Hazari, Delhi. Land admeasuring 1.37 acres,

2331 sq.yds. and 1.29 acres was allotted to it by L&DO vide allotment

letters dated 12.6.1970, 25.2.1972 and 19.1.1976 for its additional

requirements.   Subsequent   to   the   agreement,   the   lease   deeds   were

signed and perpetual lease deeds were executed. There was no such

condition   in   the   allotment   letters/lease   deeds   for   providing   free

care/treatment   to   the   patients.   The   hospital   having   regard   to   its

objective   has   always   been   providing   substantial   treatment   to   the

needy. In the writ petition, the order passed by L&DO on 2.2.2012

was   questioned   regarding   the   condition   of   free   care   as   part   of   the

terms and conditions of the lease deed. Same has been allowed by the

High   Court.
Though   land   had   been   obtained   for   purpose   of   the

charitable   institution   it   was   not   open   to   imposing   such   riders   by
11
executive   order.   There   was   no   condition   of   free   care   in   the   1949

policy. Unilateral amendment of the lease deed could not have been

made. The decision of
Social Jurists
(supra) is not applicable as 20

hospitals   were   dealt   with   in
the   said   decision
.   There   was   no

stipulation   regarding  free   care   in   the   allotment   letters/lease   deeds.

The order is without jurisdiction. Hence, the writ petition was filed in

the High Court.
Facts   regarding   Sitaram   Bhartiya   Institute   of   Science   &
Research:
9.    Sitaram   Bhartiya   Institute   of   Science   &   Research   was   a

registered   society.   On   30.3.1984,   it   applied   for   allotment   of   land

admeasuring   3   acres   for   establishing   a   multi­disciplinary   research

complex   in   New   Delhi.   On   22.10.1984   the   DDA   allotted   land

admeasuring 1.52 acres @ Rs.6 lakhs per acre. Request was made by

the said society to charge at the concessional rate that was declined

on   20.11.1984.   On   2.9.1985   lease   deed   was   signed   by   which   a

consideration of Rs.8,76,000/­ for 1.46 acres was transferred to the

petitioner.   The   case   of
Social   Jurists
(supra)   was   filed   in   the   High

Court. The writ petition was disposed of by the High Court.
Pursuant

to the decision in
Social Jurists
(supra), Circular was issued by the
12
Government   on   20.1.2012   to   the   hospitals/societies   to   whom   land

had been allotted at concessional rates to provide free treatment to

the eligible patients or weaker sections category free of charge. The

society took the stand that it was not allotted the land for the purpose

of   hospital   at   concessional   rate.   Hospital   was   asked   by   the

department on 28.6.2012 to provide free treatment. On 28.6.2012 it

directed that it was making arrangement to comply with the order.

On   12.7.2012   the   society   informed   the   Director   of   Health   Services

about   the   stand   taken   by   it   to   comply   with   the   said   directions.

However, on 13.3.2012 contempt application filed against it for not

complying   with   the   directions,   was   disposed   of   by   the   High   Court

holding   that   no   contempt   was   made   out.   On   18.4.2013   and

29.4.2013,   Director   of   Health   Services   required   the   accounts   of

hospitals for the purpose of scrutiny for the last two years from the

date on  which  the possession  of  land was given.  Petitioner pointed

out on 4.5.2013 that there was no condition to provide free treatment

to   economically   weaker  sections   category  as   such   the   hospital   was

not similarly situated. Condition was not applicable. However, name

of petitioner was not removed from the hospitals that failed to provide

free   treatment   hence   the   writ   petition   was   filed   in   the   High   Court.
13
Moreover, similar are the facts of Foundation for Applied Research in

Cancer.
The stand of the Government:
10.    On behalf of the State it was contended that the stand of the

Government   was   that   as   per   the   policy   decision   taken   in   the   year

1949,   it   was   decided   to   allot   the   land   at   concessional   rates  i.e.  @

Rs.2000/­   to   Rs.5000/­   per   acre   to   the   institutions   which   was   far

lesser than the already prevailing concessional rate of Rs.25,000/­ to

Rs.30,000/­ per acre fixed vide letter dated 25.7.1943.
11.    In   the   case   of   Moolchand   Khairati   Ram   Trust   vide   allotment

letter dated 17.4.1951 land was allotted at the rate of Rs.2000/­ to

Rs.5000/­   per   acre   and   ground   rent   @   5%   on   the   premium   per

annum.   Thereafter,   a   lease   deed   was   executed   for   99   years   on

24.4.1968 in favour of Moolchand Khairati Ram Trust.
12.    St. Stephens hospital was similarly allotted 1.37 acres of land

vide   allotment   letter   dated   12.6.1970   which   was   followed   by   lease

deed dated 3.7.1970, whereafter, further land admeasuring 2331 sq.

yds. was allotted vide allotment letter dated 25.2.1972 at the rate of

Rs.5000/­ per acre and ground rent at the rate of 5% per annum.
14
13.   Sitaram Bhartiya Institute of Science & Research was allotted

1.52 acres of land at the rate of Rs.6/­ lakhs per acre on 22.10.1984

followed by lease deed dated 2.9.1985 in respect of another plot of

1.46 acres for a consideration of Rs.8,76,000/­. The Government of

Delhi   with   the   approval   of   Lt.   Governor   of   Delhi   constituted   a

Committee headed by Mr. Justice A.S. Qureshi to review the existing

free   facility   extended   by   the   charitable   hospitals   and   various   other

hospitals which had been allotted land at concessional terms/rates

by the Government. Amongst other measures the Committee opined

as under:
"1. Most of the representatives of the hospital
          submitted that 25% of beds earmarked for poor
          patients were excessive since the cost of medicines
          was too high. It was agreed that it should not be
          more than 15% in any case, but 10% would be
          ideal. Therefore, the Committee recommended 10%
          indoor beds free for poor patients for all purposes
          including medicines and consumables. The free
          treatment services should be available to 25% of
          total OPD patients. This condition should be
          made applicable to all hospitals that have
          been allotted land by the govt.”
                                          (emphasis supplied)
15
14.   The recommendations of the Qureshi Committee were accepted

with some variation in the meeting of the GNCTD presided over by the

Chief Secretary on 23.10.2002.
15.   Earlier, a writ petition was filed by  Social Jurists  under
Article

226
of the Constitution of India in the High Court of Delhi seeking

that conditions of allotment of land to hospital particularly in regard

to free treatment to poor people be complied with and action be taken

in respect of recommendations of the Justice Qureshi Committee. The

writ   petition   was   decided   on   22.3.2007.   Various   directions   were

issued, inter alia, as under:
“A. All the 20 hospitals stated in this judgment
           and/or all other hospitals identically situated shall
           strictly comply with the term of free patient
           treatment to indigent/poor persons of Delhi as
           specified above i.e. 25 OPD and 10% IPD patients
           completely free of charges in all respects.”
16.   The High Court of Delhi vide order dated 17.7.2007 directed all

the   hospitals   which   had   been   given   land   on   concessional   rates   to

abide by the order of free treatment. The special leave petitions were

preferred by the hospitals which were dismissed by a speaking order
16
by this Court. This Court observed that 25% OPD and 10% of IPD

patients   have   to   be   given   treatment   free   of   cost.   The   said   patients

should not be charged with anything.
17.    Thereafter the GNCTD came out with a Circular on 20.1.2012

intimating   hospitals   to   implement   the   directions   of   the   High   Court

with regard to free treatment in terms of judgment dated 2.3.2007.

Land & Development Officer passed an order in this regard to follow

the   policy.   Similar   letters   were   issued   to   Sitaram   Bhartiya   and

Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer.
18.    The Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer was allotted a

plot admeasuring 0.9 acres @ Rs.28,50,000/­ per acre provisionally

with   annual   ground   rent   at   2.5%   per   annum,   the   premium   was

revised to Rs.39,00,000/­ per acre on 22.10.1991. In August 1992, it

represented   to   the   Lt.   Governor   that   as   per   notification   dated

11.09.1991,   the   price   of   the   land   allotted   to   it   was   fixed   at

Rs.3,25,000/­   and   sought   a   refund,   however,   the   request   was

declined.
17
19.   The   High   Court   of   Delhi   had   allowed   the   writ   applications,

hence, the appeals have been preferred. Social Jurists, a civil rights

group   has   filed   Civil   Appeal   Nos.3157­3158   of   2017   against   the

judgment and order passed in the case of Moolchand Kharaiti Ram

Trust   and   others.   Other   appeals   have   been   filed   by   Union   of

India/NCT of Delhi.
Rival Submissions
20.   It was urged by Mr. Sandip Sethi, learned Additional Solicitor

General   on   behalf   of   the   appellants   that   the   High   Court   erred   in

allowing   the   writ   applications.   The   condition   of   providing   10%   IPD

and   25%   OPD   free   medical   treatment   to   poor   strata   of   the   society

cannot be considered to be a restriction in terms of
Article 19(6)
of the

Constitution   of  India putting fetters   on  the  right  of  the  respondent

hospitals to carry on their trade and profession under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India. The direction has been issued in terms of

the   policy   of   allotment   in   public   interest   which   must   override   the

business interest of an individual. The High Court erred in holding it

to be a restraint under
Article 19(6)
which can be imposed only by a

legislation. It was within the competence of the Government to pass
18
Government Order to implement the recommendations of Mr. Justice

A.S. Qureshi Committee.
The respondents Moolchand Khairati Ram

Trust and St. Stephens hospital were given land at the concessional

rate   being   charitable   institutions   with   the   purpose   of   providing

medical   aid   to   poor   and   needy   sections   of   the   society.   The

concessional rates in 1949 were reduced substantially as per policy

from   the   rates   in   1943   with   respect   to   charitable   institutions.   The

Moolchand Khairati Ram Trust and St. Stephens hospital have taken

benefit of State largesse on account of being charitable institutions

cannot   turn   around   and   question   the   conditions   imposed   by   the

Government to provide free medical aid to the percentage of patients.

It was also urged by learned counsel on behalf of the appellants that

in Writ Petition [C] No.2866 of 2002 ­
Social Jurists v. GNCTD & Ors.
decided   by   the   High   Court,   the   cases   were   similarly   placed.   The

allotment was made in those cases also at the concessional rate by

the Government. Though there was some stipulation in some of the

lease deeds of the said hospitals to provide free service to the extent

from   10%   to   70%.   However,   Justice   A.S.   Qureshi   Committee

recommended   a   uniform   standard   of   10%   IPD   and   25%   OPD   free
19
treatment   in   all   hospitals   that   had   been   given   land   by   the

Government at a concessional rate.
21.   It was also urged that in the cases of Sitaram Bhartia Institute

of   Science   &   Research   and   Foundation   for   Applied   Research   in

Cancer, there was a stipulation in the lease deed under clause 7 as

under:
“7. The DDA reserves its right to alter any terms
          and conditions on its discretion.”


      The   Government   was   well   within   its   powers   to   impose   the

condition in terms of the aforesaid clause.
22.   It was also urged that Sunder Lal Jain Charitable hospital had

challenged the said order by preferring a special leave petition that

was dismissed by this Court on 1.9.2011 by a speaking order. Thus,

the   issue   had   attained   finality   and   it   was   incumbent   upon   the

hospitals in question to provide free services to the poor.
23.   Sitaram   Bhartia   Institute   of   Science   &   Research   and

Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer were given land as per the

DDA,   1981   Rules,   in   particular   Rules   3,   4,   5,   6   and   20   at
20
concessional   rates.   The   pre­determined   rates   are   nowhere   close   to

market rates. A bare reading of the rules would reflect that a separate

process   is   given   for   the   sale   of   plots   by   auction   or   tender.   Thus,

allotment of land at pre­determined rates is also concessional.
24.    It was also urged that the definition of ‘charitable’ as given in

Income­tax Act would not govern the field in the present case. Word

‘charitable' is to be seen in the legal sense. Word ‘charitable' is used

and has been relied upon in the Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar,

2nd Edition, 1997, which defines the ‘charitable’ as under:
“includes every gift for a general public use, to
           be applied consistent with existing laws, for benefit
           of an indefinite number of persons, and designed
           to benefit them from an educational, religious,
           moral, physical or social standpoint.”
25.    On the other hand, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of   the   respondents­hospitals   contended   that   legal   obligation   of   a

person can be created by an agreement or statutory law and in no

other   manner.   The   court   cannot   pass   an   order   on   account   of

sympathy in contravention of the settled law as the function of this

court is to protect and preserve the rule of law which has been held to
21
be   basic   feature   of   the   Constitution   in   the   case   of  Kesavananda

Bharti. In the case of Moolchand Khairati Ram Trust, in the Will, the

executor of the Will by which he created the Trust, never intended

that   free   treatment   should   be   provided   to   the   poor   and   needy.

Reliance has been placed on the definition of ‘charity’ in
Charitable

Endowment Act, 1890
and
Income Tax Act, 1961
and the land had

been allotted to the Trust as per the directions issued by the Ministry

of   Rehabilitation   as   the   trustees   came   to   India   as   refugees   from

Pakistan. The policy decision in 1949 did not envisage free treatment

to the patients neither the conditions in allotment letter nor in the

lease deed executed for 99 years. The condition in the policy dated

10.6.1949 that the institution should be run for good of the public

without any profit motive was not applicable to hospitals. Even if it

was   applicable   to   hospitals   it   only   provided   that   the   institutions

would   be   run   for  the   public   good   without   any   profit   motive.
Thus,

condition of free treatment could not have been imposed. The DDA

Rules of 1981 are not applicable. Clause 14 of the lease deed would

not cover imposition of such onerous condition. The decision in
Social

Jurists
(supra) is not applicable. Thus, such a condition could have

been   imposed   in   view   of   provision   under
Article   19(6)
of   the
22
Constitution by enacting a statutory law as defined in
Article 13.
It

was not open to the Executive to impose such conditions. The order of

this Court dated 1.9.2011 is not applicable to respondent­hospitals

as they were not parties to
the said decision
and this Court could not

have issued such directions without hearing them.
Contempt petition

filed   in   the   High   Court   against   the   Trust   for   violating   decision   in
Social Jurists
(supra), was dismissed.  As a matter of fact allotment

was made at the market rates prevailing in 1951. Free services are

being provided in the hospital since 1958 at its own level.
26.    In   the   case   of   St.   Stephens   hospital   similar   arguments   have

been raised, apart from that it was urged by learned senior counsel

that though charity is being performed by the missionaries as such

conditions could not have been imposed by the appellants. There was

no   such   stipulation   in   the   allotment   letters/sale   deeds.   The

interpretation of the  lease deed made by L&DO was impermissible.

Unilaterally such conditions could not have been imposed. It could

have   been   done   by   enacting   statutory   law.
The   conditions   were

impermissible, arbitrary and violative of
Article 14.
The lease deeds

are not governed by the provisions of the
Government Grants Act
. The
23
Executive power referred to in
Articles 73
and
298
of the Constitution

did   not   empower   the   State   to   unilaterally   amend   the   terms   of   a

perpetual lease deed granted by it. The fundamental rights cannot be

abridged by an executive order. Decision in
Social Jurists
(supra) is

distinguishable. There was no similar stipulation in the lease deeds of

respondents.
Judgment   of   the   High   Court   in
Social   Jurists
(supra)

was faulty to the extent that it imposed a condition of free care on

hospitals in whose lease deeds there was no such condition. It was

not open to the court to first create a law or an obligation and then

seek   to   enforce   it.   Charity   would   not   mean   free   services   to   be

provided.   Medical   relief   itself   is   a   charitable   purpose.   It   would   not

mean that it cannot charge for services provided by it. Though while

seeking allotment by the missionaries as charitable society, do not get

actuated   by   a   profit   motive.   Surplus   income   is   also   utilized   for

charitable purpose for providing medical care. The fact that the land

was allotted on concessional rates would not confer any right on the

Government of India to unilaterally amend the lease deed. There was

no provision for free care in 1949 policy.
24
27.    On behalf of Sitaram Bhartiya Institute of Science & Research,

inter alia, it was urged that it was  not covered by the  judgment of

Delhi High Court in
Social Jurists
(supra). The land was not given to

respondent No.1 at concessional rates. No condition for providing free

treatment was prescribed in the allotment letter or in the lease deed.

Since lease was in perpetuity there was no right to impose a further

condition on the lessee which may have financial implications. Clause

7 of the allotment letter does not authorize the lessee to change or

alter any terms of the lease. As no such condition was there in the

letter   of   allotment,   as   such   new   condition   could   not   have   been

imposed. Lease rental is liable to be increased after every 30 years.

The   condition   of   free   treatment   is   not   legally   tenable   or   justified.

Since   the   work   of   the   institute   was   not   charitable   in   nature,   such

conditions could not have  been imposed. Respondent No.1 Sitaram

Bhartiya Institute provides medical services as part of its agenda, as

the same generates valuable research data and funds for respondent

No.1's   research   activities.   A   show   cause   notice   was   issued   to   the

society   on   9.2.2005   alleging   that   it   was   running   a   hospital   on

commercial   lines.   It   was   required   to   show   cause   as   to   why   the

allotment and lease deed should not be canceled, and it was informed
25
to the Commissioner, Institutional Branch, DDA that it was pursuing

its   mission   of   research   in   healthcare   and   medicine.   The

clinical/hospital portion generates valuable research data and funds

which enable respondent No.1 to finance research activities. It was

further   contended   that   there   were   three   categories,   government

organisations, charitable organisations and other institutions, for the

purposes of allotment of land. Other institutions were allotted land at

the   zonal   variant   rates   that   were   the   rate   paid   by   the   respondent.

There   was   no   such   condition.   The   condition   would   have   serious

financial consequences as entire feasibility and viability would have to

be worked out, whether it would be economically viable to undertake

the   project   at   all   or   not.   Such   unconscionable,   unreasonable   and

arbitrary   condition   could   not   have   been   imposed.   Some   of   the

medicines are very expensive. Its cost cannot be borne by the hospital

and it cannot form part of free medical treatment except possibly in

Government hospitals.   No profit no loss condition would not mean

that   it   was   allotted   on   a   concessional   basis.   Respondent   No.1   is   a

self­supporting society,  is doing medical research  also.  In case  free

medical   treatment   is   provided   it   would   diminish   the   respondent's

ability to invest in research. Populist and misplaced policies could not
26
have been framed or imposed. Similar arguments have been raised by

the Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer.
28.   Following questions arise for consideration:
1. Whether by virtue of fact that Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Trust and

St. Stephens Hospital have obtained the land for charitable purposes

at a concessional rate, it was open to the Government to impose a

condition of 10% in IPD and 25% in OPD services to be provided free

of cost to patients of economically weaker sections?
2.  Whether in view of the condition No.7 of the allotment letter issued

in the case of Sitaram Bhartiya Institute and Foundation for Applied

Research in Cancer, the imposition of the aforesaid condition of free

treatment was permissible?
3.   Whether   the   imposition   of   aforesaid   conditions   amounts   to

restriction   under
Article   19(6)
to   carry   on   profession,   trade   or

business under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India?
4.    What is the effect of the previous decision rendered in the case

of
Social Jurists
(supra)?
In reference to question nos.1 & 2 :
27
29.   In order to decide the main question, it is necessary to ponder

on   the   question   with   respect   to   the   meaning   of   charity.     In   the

background   of   the   fact  that   Government   of   India   in   the   year   1949

took a decision for allotment of land at the concessional rate to the

charitable   institutions.     The   hospitals   and   schools  inter   alia  were

treated   as   charitable   institutions   of   secular   and   non­communal

character with a further rider that the same should be run for the

good of public without any profit motive. It was observed that as per

the  policy  decision  dated  25.7.1943,  the   premium  charged  was   too

high.  As per that formula, the premium was Rs.25,000 to Rs.35,000

per   acre   per   annum   plus   ground   rent   at   5%   on   the   premium   per

annum.    It  was  decided  to  allot  the  land  at  the  concessional rates

between Rs.2,000/­ to Rs.5,000/­ per acre.   A substantial area of 9

acres in Lajpat Nagar the heart of Delhi to Moolchand Khairati Ram

Trust and 2.66 acres & 2331 sq. yards to St. Stephens hospital was

allotted.
30.   It   was   urged   on   behalf   of   the   Moolchand   Kharaiti   Ram   Trust

that creator of the Trust never intended that free treatment should be

provided   to   the   poor  and   needy.     Reliance   has   been   placed   on   the
28
definition of charity in
Charitable Endowment Act, 1890
and
Income

Tax Act, 1961
.   The policy decision taken in 1949, did not envisage

free treatment to the patients. In the allotment letter, there was no

such condition that free treatment shall have to be provided to the

patients belonging to economically weaker sections of the society at

the hospital.   The lease deed was executed for 99 years.   The only

condition was that the institution should be run for the good of the

public   without   any   profit   motive.     The   aforesaid   condition   was   not

applicable to the hospitals, even if it was applicable, the only rider

was that it should run without any profit motive.  The free treatment

was not envisaged in the aforesaid expression.
31.    It   was   urged   that   the   hospital   by   itself   is   a   charitable

institution. It carries out obligation and stipulations of free treatment

at   its   own   level.     In   order   to   appreciate   the   submission   made,   we

deem it appropriate to consider the meaning of charitable, charitable

purpose,   charitable   corporation   and   charitable   trust   in   common

parlance.
29
32.     The  Black’s   Law   Dictionary,   Ninth   Edition  defines   ‘charitable’,

‘charitable   purpose’,   ‘charitable   corporation’   and   ‘charitable   trust’

thus:
“Charitable - Dedicated to a general public
           purpose, usu. for the benefit of needy people who
           cannot pay for benefits received.
Charitable purpose – The purpose for which an
           organization must be formed so that it qualifies as
           a charitable organization under the Internal
           Revenue Code – Also termed charitable use.
Charitable corporation – A nonprofit corporation
           that is dedicated to benevolent purposes and thus
           entitled to special tax status under the Internal
           Revenue Code. – Also termed eleemosynary
           corporation.
Charitable trust – A trust created to benefit a
           specific charity, specified charities, or the general
           public rather than a private individual or entity.
           Charitable trusts are often eligible for favorable tax
           treatment. If the trust’s terms do not specify a
           charity or a particular charitable purpose, a court
           may select a charity. – Also termed public trust;
           charitable use.”
33.     In  Webster’s   New   World   Dictionary,   the   expressions   of

‘charitable’ and ‘charity’ are defined thus:
“Charitable – 1. Kind and generous in giving
           money or other help to those in need. 2. of or for
           charity. 3. kindly in judging others; lenient.
30
Charity – 1. in Christianity, the love of God for
         man or of man for his fellow men. 2. an act of good
         will or affection. 3. the feeling of good will;
         benevolence. 4. the quality of being kind or
         lenient in judging others. 5. a giving of money or
         other help to those in need; benefaction. 6. an
         institution, organization, or fund for giving help to
         those in need."
34.   The   Halsbury’s   Laws   of   England,   Vol.5,   Fourth   Edition   while

dealing with the definition of ‘charity’ for the purpose of the Charities

Act, 1960, has discussed the matter thus:
“501. Definition of “charity”. For the purposes of
         the Charities Act, 1960 “charity” means any
         institution, corporate or not, which is established
         for charitable purposes and is subject to the control
         of the High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction
         with respect to charities. “Institution” includes any
         trust or undertaking; and “charitable purposes”
         means purposes which are exclusively charitable
         according to the law of England and Wales. The
         question of whether purposes are or are not
         charitable is therefore determined according to the
         same principles as before 1960.
The requirement that an institution is subject to the
         control of the High Court in the exercise of the
         court's jurisdiction with respect to charities is
         satisfied if the institution is subject to that
         jurisdiction in any significant respect. It does not
         have to be subject to that jurisdiction which the
         court only exercises over charities and not over
         other trusts or other corporate bodies, and it is
         sufficient if the court could restrain the institution
31
from applying its property ultra vires or in breach of
         trust.
The Charities Act 1960 establishes a register of
         charities and it is the duty of the charity trustees of
         any charity which is required to be registered to
         apply for registration. The effect of registration is
         that an institution is for all purposes other than
         rectification of the register conclusively presumed
         to be or to have been a charity at any time when it
         is or was on the register of charities.
The Act
does
         not provide that an institution which, if it were a
         charity, would be required to be registered, but
         which is not registered, is for that reason, not a
         charity."
35.   Again, the Halsbury’s Laws of England while dealing with the

meaning of charity, has discussed the matter thus:
“502. Meaning of “charity”. Since the Charities Act,
         1960 provides no statutory definition of what
         purposes are and what are not charitable, all the
         cases previously decided on the subject are still
         relevant.    The legal meaning of “charitable
         purposes” is said to be precise and technical, and
         the phrase is a term of art, but it is probably
         incapable of definition. The popular use of the
         expressions “charity”, “charitable”, “charitable
         objects” and “charitable purposes” does not
         coincide with their technical legal meaning
         according to the law of England.         The word
         “charitable”, when used in its legal sense, covers
         many objects which a layman might not consider to
         be included under that word, but it excludes some
         benevolent or philanthropic activities which a
         layman might consider charitable.
32
Charitable uses or trusts form a distinct head of
equity, and it is the court's duty to determine
whether particular purposes are charitable. To be
charitable a purpose must satisfy certain tests; it
must either fall within the list of purposes
enumerated in the preamble to the ancient statute
of Elizabeth I (sometimes referred to as the Statute
of Charitable Uses or the Charitable Uses Act, 1601)
or within one of the four categories of charitable
purposes
laid down by
Lord Macnaghten and
derived from the preamble and in the case of the
fourth of those categories it must be within the
spirit and intendment of the ancient statute, either
directly or by analogy with decided cases on the
same point, or it must have been declared to be
charitable by some other statute. In addition, it
must be for the public benefit, that is to say, it
must be both beneficial and available to a sufficient
section of the community.
References to "charity" in any legislative Act should
be construed in their technical legal sense unless a
contrary intention appears from the context. For
income tax purposes "charity" means any body of
persons or trust established for charitable purposes
only. References in any enactment or document to
a charity within the meaning, purview, and
interpretation of the ancient statute of Elizabeth I,
or of the preamble to it, are to be construed as
references to a charity within the meaning which
the word bears as a legal term according to the law
of England and Wales.
An activity which is charitable in the legal sense is
not any the less charitable because it is being
carried on without any regular organization by a
person who may discontinue it at any time. Such
an activity would come within the statutory
definition of charity as a trust or undertaking.”
33
36.   The charitable trust can be enforced by the Court, which knows

about   what   charitable   purposes   are.     In   the   Halsbury’s   Laws   of

England, the following discussion has been made in this regard :
“504. Purposes must be exclusively charitable. To
          be a charity in law, a trust or institution must be
          established for purposes which are exclusively
          charitable; a charitable trust can be enforced by
          the court at the suit of the Attorney General, for the
          court knows what are charitable purposes and can
          apply the trust property accordingly, but a trust for
          benevolent purposes cannot be so enforced and is
          therefore void for uncertainty.”
37.   Public   welfare   is   one   of   the   essential   requirements   of   legal

charity, which has been discussed in Halsbury’s Laws of England in

paragraph 505, which is extracted hereunder:
“505. Public benefit essential. It is a clearly
          established principle of the law of charities that a
          purpose is not charitable unless it is directed to the
          public benefit so that the element of public benefit
          is the necessary condition of legal charity. There
          are two distinct elements in this requirement: the
          purpose itself must be beneficial and not harmful to
          the public, and the benefit of the purpose must be
          available to a sufficient section of the public. The
          line of distinction between purposes of a public and
          a private nature is fine and practically incapable of
          definition."
34
38.    The benefit to the poor is one of the essential requirements of

charity.     The   concept   has   been   discussed   in   paragraph   509   of

Halsbury’s Laws of England, which reads thus:
“509. Benefit to rich as well as poor. An object
           may     be   charitable      in    the    legal   sense
           notwithstanding that it will benefit the rich as well
           as the poor, but it is difficult to believe that a trust
           would be held charitable if the poor were excluded
           from its benefits.”
39.    In Incorporated Council of Law Reporting for England and Wales

vs. A­G (1971) 3 All ER I029, CA, it was observed that when a purpose

has been proved to be of general public welfare or beneficial to the

community,   it   will   be   held   to   be   charitable   unless   there   is   some

reason for holding that it is not within the spirit and intendment of

the Preamble.
40.    The   Cy­pres   doctrine   is   applied   by   the   Courts   in   England   to

administer   a   charitable   trust   of   which   the   particular   mode   of

application has not been defined.  Where a clear charitable intention

is   expressed,   it   will   not   be   permitted   to   fail   because   the   mode,   if

specified,   cannot   be   executed,   but   the   law   will   substitute   another

mode.  The Cy­pres doctrine has been discussed in paragraph 696 of

Halsbury’s Laws of England, which is extracted hereunder:
35
“696. The cy-pres doctrine. Where a clear
charitable intention is expressed, it will not be
permitted to fail because the mode, if specified,
cannot be executed, but the law will substitute
another mode cy-pres, that is, as near as possible
to the mode specified by the donor.
An application cy-pres results from the exercise of
the court’s ordinary jurisdiction to administer a
charitable trust of which the particular mode of
application has not been defined by the donor.
Where he has in fact prescribed a particular mode
of application and that mode is incapable of being
performed, but he had a charitable intention which
transcended the particular mode of application
prescribed, the court, in the exercise of this
jurisdiction, can carry out the charitable intention
as though the particular direction had not been
expressed at all.
However, where the particular mode of application
prescribed by the donor was the essence of his
intention, which may be shown by a condition or by
particularity of language, and that mode is
incapable of being performed, there is nothing left
upon which the court can found its jurisdiction, so
that in such circumstances the court has no power
to direct any other charitable application in place of
that which has failed.
Where the particular mode of application does not
exhaust a gift, these principles apply to the surplus.
There can be no question under English law of a cy-
pres application of property subject to trusts which
are not charitable in law.”
36
41.   It has also been observed in the Halsbury’s Laws that not all

hospitals are charitable institutions, for there may be hospitals run

commercially,   with   a   view   to   the   profit   of   private   individuals   or

hospitals,   the   services   of   which   are   not   available   to   a   sufficient

section of the public.   The mere fact that a hospital is supported by

the   payment   of   fees   does   not   prevent   its   being   a   charitable

corporation.     In   paragraph   707,   the   following   discussion   has   been

made:
"707. Hospital supported partly by fees. Not all
          hospitals are charitable institutions, for there may
          be hospitals run commercially, with a view to the
          profit of private individuals, or hospitals the
          services of which are not available to a sufficient
          section of the public. The mere fact that a hospital
          is supported by the payment of fees does not
          prevent it's being a charitable corporation, and the
          same is true of schools. Furthermore, the Charity
          Commissioners have the power to authorize the
          committee of management of a voluntary hospital
          to provide facilities for paying patients in certain
          circumstances."
42.   In   the   Law   Lexicon,   the   Encyclopedic   Law   Dictionary   by   P.

Ramanatha   Aiyer,   the   discussion   has   been   made   with   the   help   of

certain   decisions   and   dictionaries,   with   regard   to   charitable,
37
charitable object, charitable purpose, charity and charitable trust of

public nature, relevant parts of which are reproduced hereunder:
“Charitable. Having the character or purpose of a
        charity. The word "charitable", in a legal sense,
        includes every gift for a general public use, to be
        applied consistent with existing laws, for benefit of
        an indefinite number of persons, and designed to
        benefit them from an educational, religious, moral,
        physical or social standpoint.       This term is
        synonymous with "beneficent", "benevolent", and
        "eleemosynary". (Black)
        Connected with an object of charity, of the nature
        of charity [
S.49
, Indian Evidence Act and
S.92(1)
,
        C.P.C.]

        Charitable purpose.
In Charitable Endowments
        Act
"Charitable purpose" includes relief of the poor,
        education, medical relief, and advancement of any
        other object of general public utility, but does not
        include a purpose which related exclusively to
        religious teaching or worship.      Act VI of 1890
        (Charitable Endowments),
S. 2
.
Per MUKERJI, J.        The expression “charitable
        purposes” in Act XXI of 1860 should be understood
        in a wide sense. If relief wants of occasioned by
        lack of pecuniary means is charity, adoption of
        preventive measures to ward off pecuniary wants is
        also charity. 51 CLJ 272 = AIR 1930 Cal 397.
CHARITABLE PURPOSES, technically, and in the eye
        of a Court of justice, “has a meaning so extensive
        as to include everything which is expressly
        described as a ‘charitable use’ in 43 Eliz. c. 4,
S. 1
,
        or is within what has been called the equity of the
        statute, but there is perhaps not one person in a
        thousand who knows what is the technical and
38
legal meaning of the word ‘charity’.   Per Lord
CAIRNS in Dolan v. Macdermott, (1868) 3 Ch App
678.
This term has the legal technical meaning given it
by English law. Commissioners of Income Tax v.
Pemsel, (1891), App Cas 532; and see Cunnack v.
Edwards, (1896) 2 Ch 679 (CA). [In the Income Tax
Act, 1842 (5 & 6 Vic. c. 35), sch. A, S. 61]

“Charitable purposes” in
S. 4
of the Income-tax Act
would          include relief of the poor, education,
medical relief and the     advancement of any other
object of general public utility.      Trusts for the
benefit of the inhabitants of a particular locality are
regarded as charitable, but trusts for the benefit of
a              particular political party or for the
advancement of particular political purposes or
opinions are not regarded as charitable. A gift for
such purposes as a particular individual or
individuals may consider to be charitable is not a
good charitable purpose although a gift for such
charitable purposes as the managing committee of
a trust may think fit would be good, because the
committee would be bound to keep within the
ambit of charity, and if they go beyond the legal
boundary, they can be               controlled by the
Court. 43 Bom LR 1027 = 1942 Bom 61.
The definition includes relief of the poor. Relief of
the poor by itself would not be a charitable object
unless it involved an         object of general public
utility. Relief for the poor relations of the settlor or
donor will not be a charitable purpose within the
definition.
Trustees of Gordhandas Govindram
Family Charity Trust v. Commissioner of Income Tax
,
AIR 1952 Bom 346. [
S. 4(3)(i)
Income Tax Act 1992]

‘Charitable purpose' – the dominant purpose of a
State Bar Council is to ensure quality service of
competent lawyers to the litigating public, a spread
39
legal literacy, promote law reforms and provide
legal assistance to the poor, such purpose is the
advancement of the object of general public utility
and it will be a charitable purpose.
C.I.T. Bombay v.
Bar Council of                 Maharashtra, AIR 1981
SC 1462, 1467. [
Income Tax Act
(43 of 1961), Ss.
2(15) and 11.]

Charity. "In the broadest sense charity includes
whatever        proceeds from a sense of moral duty
or from humane feelings towards others,
uninfluenced by one's own advantage or
pleasure." (Doyle v. Lyun, 19 Am Rep 431.). In
Jones v.          Williams, Ambll. 651, Lord CAMDEN
defined a charity to be "a gift to a general public
use, which may extend to the poor as well as to the
rich." It embraces all that is usually understood by
the words "benevolence, "Philanthropy" and "good
will". A gift to a home for the friendless is a gift to
charity.
This “word”, in its widest sense, denotes all the
good affections men ought to bear towards each
other; in its most restricted and common sense,
Relief of the Poor. In neither of these senses is it
employed in the English Chancery Courts. Here its
signification is derived chiefly from the Statute of
Elizabeth (43 Eliz. c. 4.).     Those purposes are
considered      charitable   which    that   statute
enumerates, or which by analogies are deemed
within its spirit and intendment”. Per GRANT, M.R.,
Morice v. Dhurhan Bp., 9 Ves. 405.
The term “charity” under the Hanafi School of
Mahommedan Law has a more general import than
under the English Law. A wakf of property by a
Mahommedan to defray the expenses of the poor,
the fakirs, the orphans, the needy and the indigent,
and to defray the expenses of good deeds, creates
a trust for public purposes of a charitable nature.
(32 All 499 = 7 ALJ 420=6 IC 188.)
40
In common parlance, the word ‘charity' means a
           giving to some one in necessitous circumstances
           and in law it means a giving for public good. A
           private gift to one's own self or Kith and Kin may be
           meritorious and pious but is not a charity in the
           legal sense.
Fazlul Rabhi v. State of West Bengal
,
           AIR 1965 SC 1722, 1727. [
West Bengal Estates
           Acquisition Act, 1953
(1 of 1954),
S. 6(1)(i)
]

           A benevolence, specially to the poor [S. 378, ill. (n),
I.P.C
.]”
43.   From the aforesaid discussion, it is apparent that charitable is

the public purpose for the benefit of the needy people, who cannot

pay for benefits received.   The Internal Revenue Code may define it

separately   for   its   purposes   what   is   charitable   so   as   to   claim   the

benefit under the Act.  The charitable trust is a trust which is for the

benefit of general public.  Charitable is a kind and generous in giving

money  or  other  help   to  those  in   need   as  defined   in  Webster’s   New

World Dictionary and Black’s Law Dictionary.  The Halsbury’s Laws of

England   discussed   the   meaning   of   charity,   which   provides   that   if

there   is   no   statutory   definition   of   charitable   purposes,   to   be   a

charitable purpose, it must satisfy certain tests.   It must be for the

public benefit and available to a sufficient section of the community.

The reference to charity should be construed in their technical legal
41
sense.  For income tax purpose, the charity may be defined in the Act

and in that light, the interpretation of the Act has to be made.  Public

benefit is an essential ingredient of charitable activities.   There are

two distinct requirements, the purpose itself must be beneficial and

not harmful to the public.   In paragraph 509 of Halsbury's Laws of

England,   it  has   been   discussed   that   it  is   difficult  to   believe   that   a

trust   would   be   held   charitable   if   the   poor   are   excluded   from   its

benefits.
44.    The cy­pres doctrine has been discussed in paragraph 696 of

Halsbury's Laws of England.  The said doctrine can be clearly pressed

into   service   in   the   instant   matter   when   the   Government   land   has

been allotted to the hospitals even if the mode of giving charity was

not   specified.     It   can   be   specified   later   on   and   the   Court   is   not

powerless to enforce that purpose of the charitable trust, of which the

particular mode of the application had not been defined by the donor

or otherwise.
In
Ironmongers’ Co. vs. A­G
(1844) 10 CI & Fin 908 at

927,   HL,   it   was   observed   that   where   a   testator   intends   to   benefit

several charitable objects, one of which fails, the fund must not be

distributed   among   other   objects   if   the   one   that   fails   bears   no
42
resemblance to the other.   In reference  Lambeth Charities  (1853) 22

LJ Ch 959, it was observed that when trusts have been altered by a

scheme, and the trusts of the scheme become impossible so that a

new cy­pres scheme is required, the trusts of the new scheme must

be as close as possible to the original trusts of the gift.
45.    The relief of the poor is one of the essential requirements of the

charity.  All hospitals are not charitable institutions as there may be

hospitals   which   run   commercially.     The   hospitals,   which   are

operating   under   the   guise   of   charity,   are   in   fact   being   run   on   a

commercial basis and it has become impossible for the poor to afford

the life­saving drugs at an affordable price.   Their right to life is in

jeopardy.     Merely   by   the   expression   hospital,   it   could   not   be

successfully   claimed   by   the   respondent­hospitals   that   they   are

charitable.   They can be directed to fulfill their obligation and fulfill

the purpose by undertaking charitable activities and give it the real

meaning by giving free services as envisaged in the policy. The claim

of the hospitals that they are undertaking charity at their own level

cannot   be   used   as   a   shield   to   the   performance   of   charity   in   an

organized   way.   The   very   spirit   of   the   argument   that   as   they   do
43
charity,   it   cannot   be   fastened   upon   them,   is   self­destructive   and

tends by its tenor to negate unjust obstruction created in the path of

real charity
46.   The   definition   of   “charitable   purpose”   as   defined   in   the
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890
is extracted hereunder:
“2. Definition. – In this Act "charitable purpose"
includes relief of the poor, education, medical relief
          and the advancement of any other object of
          general public utility, but does not include a
          purpose which relates exclusively to religious
          teaching or worship."
It   is   apparent   from   the   definition   that   charitable   purpose

includes relief of the poor, education and medical needs.  As per the

provisions of the
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890
, relief of the poor

and   medical   relief   is   included   as   such   conditions   which   had   been

imposed are clearly within the parameters of aforesaid definition.
47.   The charity in the broadest sense includes whatever proceeds

from a sense of moral duty or from humane feelings towards others

uninfluenced   by   one's   own   advantage   or   pleasure.       In   its   widest

sense, denotes all the good affections men ought to bear towards each

other; in its most restricted and common sense, relief of the poor.  In
44
the Mahommedan Law, the charity has a more general import than

under  the  English   Law.     A  wakf  of  property  by  a  Mahommedan   to

defray the expenses of the poor, the fakirs, the orphans, the needy

and the indigent and to defray the expenses of good deeds, creates a

trust   for   public   purposes   of   a   charitable   nature.     In   common

parlance,   the   word   charity   means   giving   to   someone   in   any

necessitous circumstances and in law, it means a giving for public

good.
48.
In
P.C. Raja Ratnam Institution vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi

&   Ors.
,  1990   (Supp)   SCC   97,   wherein   this   Court   considered   the

definition of ‘charitable purpose’ under
Section 115 (4) (a)
of the Delhi

Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, the school in question was run by a

Society.    It  was  claimed   that  it was  a non­profit making  registered

society and its object was to organize and run schools in Delhi and

elsewhere   with   a   view   to   promoting   education   and   welfare.     The

question   arose   whether   it   was   necessary   for   the   educational

institution   to   qualify   for   exemption   from   the   tax   liability   to   offer

medical relief.  In that context, it was observed by this Court that the

test of charitable purpose would be satisfied by the proof of any of the
45
three   conditions,   namely,   relief   of   the   poor,   education   or   medical

relief.  The fact that some fee was charged from the students was not

decisive.     The   explanation   was   held   inclusive   and   not   exhaustive.

This Court observed thus:
“3. The learned Counsel for the petitioner has
          contended that in view of the language of Section
          115(4)(a), quoted below, it is not correct to suggest
          that to qualify for exemption from the tax liability it
          is necessary for a society to offer medical relief:
“(a) lands and buildings or portions of lands
                and buildings exclusively occupied and used
                for public worship or by a society or body for a
                charitable purpose:
Provided that such society or body is supported
          wholly or in part by voluntary contributions, applies
          its profits, if any, or other income in promoting its
          objects and does not pay any dividend or bonus to
          its members.
Explanation-"Charitable purpose" includes relief of
          the poor, education and medical relief but does not
          include a purpose which relates exclusively to
          religious teaching;”

          The argument is well founded. The test of
          'charitable purpose' is satisfied by the proof of any
          of the three conditions, namely, relief of the poor,
          education, or medical relief. The fact that some fee
          is charged from the students is also not decisive
          inasmuch as the proviso indicates that the
          expenditure incurred in running the society may be
          supported either wholly or in part by voluntary
          contributions. Besides, the explanation is in terms
          inclusive and not exhaustive. The impugned
46
judgment must,            therefore,      be    held     to    be
          erroneous.”

      The question in the aforesaid case was altogether different with

respect to the meaning of charitable purpose as defined under Section

115 (4) (a).
49.
In
Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs. Children Book Trust
, (1992)

3 SCC 390, this Court considered the provisions of
Section 115(4)(a)
of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 and dealt with the question

of charitable purpose, context of property tax in respect of lands and

buildings and exemption to lands and buildings occupied and used

by a society for charitable purpose.   It was held that conditions for

applicability of the tax exemption were firstly on the society must be

charitable and not earn a profit.  This Court considered the meaning

of   charitable   purpose   for   imparting   education   sans   an   element   of

public   welfare   not   per   se   charitable.     Secondly,   society   must   be

supported   wholly   or   in   part   by   voluntary   contribution   and   lastly,

society must utilize its income in promoting its object and must not

pay any dividend or bonus to its members.  This Court observed that

the   tax   liability   of   a   registered   society   running   recognized   private

unaided   school   should   be   considered   in   the   light   of   the   above
47
conditions.  Transfer of funds by the school to the society even in the

name of contribution would amount to transfer by the society itself

and,   therefore,   cannot   be   considered   for   the   purposes   of   the

exemption.  It was also observed that where running of school by the

society   generating   positive   income   from   the   fees   and   donations

received from the students/parents, the activity of the school was not

for a charitable purpose but for commercial purpose.  The conditions

of   charitable   purposes   having   not   been   fulfilled,   society   was   not

entitled   to   tax   exemption.     This   Court   has   further   observed   that

where the predominant object is to sub­serve charitable purpose and

not to earn a profit, it would be a charitable purpose.  This Court has

observed thus:
“68.      Therefore, an element of public benefit or
          philanthropy has to be present. The reason why we
          stress on this aspect of the matter is if education is
          run on commercial lines, merely because it is a
          school, it does not mean it would be entitled to the
          exemption under
Section 115(4)
of the Act.
xxx                xxx            xxx
76. In view of the above rulings, it would be clear
          that where the predominant object is to subserve
          charitable purpose and not to earn profit it would
          be a charitable purpose. However, the argument of
          the appellant is as per the
Delhi School
          Education Act
and the rules framed thereunder, if
          the society cannot utilise the fund and the school
          cannot be run for private gain in the absence of any
          profit, it would be a charitable    purpose.
48
77.      We have already seen that merely because
education is imparted in the school, that by itself,
cannot be regarded as a charitable object. Today,
education has acquired a wider              meaning.
If education is imparted with a profit motive, to
hold, in such a case, as charitable purpose, will not
be correct. We are inclined to agree with Mr. B. Sen,
learned counsel for the Delhi Municipal Corporation
in     this   regard.     Therefore,     it    would
necessarily involve public benefit.
78.       The rulings arising out of
Income Tax Act
may not be of great help because in the
Income Tax
Act
"charitable purpose" includes the relief of the
poor,      education,   medical    relief    and     the
advancement of any other object of general public
utility. The advancement of any other object of
general public utility is not found under the
Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act
. In other words, the
definition is narrower in scope. This is our answer to
question No. 1.
xxx                xxx              xxx
85.       The last aspect of the matter is utilisation of
the               income in promoting its objects and
not paying any dividend or bonus to its members.
The learned counsel for the appellant and the
intervenor would urge that on the basis of Cane
(Valuation Officer) vs. Royal College of Music,
(1961) 2 QBD 89, the position in the instant case is
the same. At page 121 the                      following
observation is found:
"One, I think, that enriches the corporation
    itself or       relieves it of a burden or furthers
    its objects or powers."
49
Thus,   it   is   apparent   from   the   aforesaid   discussion   that   the

charitable object would be served if it is not to earn a profit.
50.    The medical and legal professions stand on a different pedestal

in the matter of fulfilling the obligations towards the society. They are

not   meant   to   be   for   commercial   activity   which   by   and   large   has

become   a   bitter  reality   of   the   day.   ‘Free   treatment'   to   economically

weaker sections is a normal obligation by very nature of charity, and

it   was   also   contended   on   behalf   of   the   hospitals   that   the   medical

treatment   itself   is   regarded   as   charitable   one.   The   question   arises

when medical profession is charitable, what meaning is to be given to

charity   and   whether   by   virtue   of   commercial   gains   only   by   giving

treatment,   it   would   still   retain     charitable       character   in   its   true

meaning.   Charity   in   common   parlance   is   a   relief   to   the   poor   and

needy.
51.    What   may   be   proper   for   others   in   the   society,   may   still   be

improper   for   members   of   the   legal   profession.   The   same   ethical

standard applies with equal force to the medical profession. Medical

profession   deals   with   the   life   of   human   beings.   There   has   to   be   a

balancing of human rights with the commercial gains.
50
52.    In the wake of globalisation, we are in a regime of Intellectual

Property   Rights.   Even   these   rights   have   to   give   way   to   the   human

rights.   It   is   an   obligation   of   the   Government   to   provide   life­saving

drugs to have­nots at affordable prices so as to save their lives, which

is   part   of
Article   21
of   the   Constitution   of   India.   It   is   equally   an

obligation of the State to devise such measures that have­nots are not

deprived of the very treatment itself. Administering medicines is also

a part of medical therapy. Thus, in our considered opinion members

of the medical profession owe a constitutional duty to treat the have­

nots.   They   cannot   refuse   to   treat   a   person   who   is   in   dire   need   of

treatment by a particular medicine or by a particular expert merely

on the ground that he is not in a position to afford the fee payable for

such an opinion/treatment. The moment it is permitted, the medical

profession   would   become   purely   a   commercial   activity,   it   is   not

supposed to be so due to its nobleness. Thus, in our opinion, when

the   Government   land   had   been   obtained   for   charitable   purpose   of

running  the   hospital,   the  Government  is   within  its   right  to   impose

such an obligation.
51
53.   The nobility and obligation of the medical profession have also

found statutory recognition in the form of regulations framed by the

Medical Council of India in the exercise of the power conferred under

section   20A   read   with
section   33(m)
of   the   Indian   Medical   Council

Act,   1956.   The   Medical   Council  of   India   with   prior  approval  of   the

Central   Government   has   made   the   regulations   relating   to   the

standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics for

registered medical practitioners. Chapter 1 whereof contains the code

of medical ethics. Part B of
Regulation 1
.1 deals with the character of

a   physician.
Regulation   1
.1.1   provides   that   the   institution   shall

uphold the dignity and honour of the profession.
Regulation 1
.1.2 is

self­explanatory and the same is extracted hereunder:
“1.1.2 The prime object of the medical profession is
          to render service to humanity; reward or financial
          gain is a subordinate consideration. Whosoever
          chooses his profession, assumes the obligation to
          conduct himself in accordance with its ideals. A
          physician should be an upright man, instructed in
          the art of healings. He shall keep himself pure in
          character and be diligent in caring for the sick; he
          should be modest, sober, patient, prompt in
          discharging his duty without anxiety; conducting
          himself with propriety in his profession and in all
          the actions of his life.”
52
It lays down in an unequivocal term that the medical profession

has   to   render   service   to   humanity;   reward   or   financial   gain   is   a

subordinate consideration. The doctor is supposed to be noble in all

actions of his life.
54.   Under
Regulation   1
.2.1   it   is   the   duty   of   the   member   of   the

medical profession to make available to the patients the benefits of

their   professional   attainments.
Regulation   1
.2.1       is       extracted

hereunder:
"1.2.1     The principal objective of the medical
          profession is to render service to humanity with full
          respect for the dignity of profession and man.
          Physicians should merit the confidence of patients
          entrusted to their care, rendering to each a full
          measure of service and devotion. Physicians should
          try continuously to improve medical knowledge and
          skills and should make available to their patients
          and colleagues the benefits of their professional
          attainments. The physician should practice
          methods of healing founded on a scientific basis
          and should not associate professionally with
          anyone who violates this principle. The honoured
          ideals of the medical profession imply that the
          responsibilities of the physician extend not only to
          individuals but also to society."
55.   Under
Regulation 1
.8, the physician engaged in the practice of

medicine has to give priority to the medical interests of the patients
53
and not to the personal financial interests.
Regulation 1
.8 is extracted

hereunder:
“1.8 Payment of Professional Services: The
           physician, engaged in the practice of medicine shall
           give priority to the interests of patients. The
           personal financial interests of a physician should
           not conflict with the medical interests of patients. A
           physician should announce his fees before
           rendering service and not after the operation or
           treatment is underway. Remuneration received for
           such services should be in the form and amount
           specifically announced to the patient at the time
           the service is rendered. It is unethical to enter into
           a contract of "no cure no payment". Physician
           rendering service on behalf of the state shall refrain
           from anticipating or accepting any consideration."
56.    Under
Regulation   2
.1   it   is   provided   that   in   the   case   of

emergency the physician must treat the patient. No physician shall

arbitrarily refuse treatment to a patient. At the time of registration,

the medical practitioner has to submit a declaration that "I solemnly

pledge myself to consecrate my life to service of humanity" and that "I

will     maintain   the   utmost   respect   for   human   life   from   the   time   of

conception." And he is duty­bound to maintain all means in his power

to honour the noble provisions of the medical profession and he has

to abide by the regulations framed by the Medical Council of India.

Considering the object of the statutory rules also, medical profession
54
owes a duty to serve the poor and have­nots, irrespective of financial

status,   they   have   to   treat   everybody   equally   with   respect   to   social

standing   and   economic   disparity,   that   cannot   be   achieved   without

free treatment to the needy.
57.    When the Government land has been allotted to the hospitals,

they   would   not   be   doing   free   service   but   being   a   recipient   of

Government largesse at concessional rates and continue to enjoy it,

they  owe   a  duty   to   act   in   public   interest.   In   our   opinion,   not  only

Moolchand   Kharaiti   Ram   Trust   and   St.   Stephens   Hospital   have

obtained   the   land   at   a   concessional   rate,   the   other   two   hospitals,

namely,   Sita   Ram   Bhartia   Institute   of   Science   &   Research   and

Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer have also obtained land at

a lower pre­determined rate, not at market rate. It was not by way of

a   public   auction   that   they   have   received   the   land.   Besides   in   the

cases   of   Sita   Ram   Bhartiya   Institute   of   Science   &   Research   and

Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer, clause 7 was inserted in

the allotment letters to the effect that "The DDA reserves its right to

alter any terms and conditions on its discretion."
55
58.    It   was   contended   on   behalf   of   Sita   Ram   Bhartia   Institute   of

Science & Research and Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer

that their request for allotment of land at concessional rate had been

turned down. It was urged on behalf of the State that DDA (Disposal

of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981, in particular Rules 3 to 6 and

20 indicate that the land was allotted to the charitable institutions at

pre­determined rates and not on market rates. The allotment of land

to   aforesaid   two   institutes   was   at   pre­determined   rates.   The   pre­

determined rates are nowhere close to the market rates. As per the

DDA   Rules,   land   has   to   be   disposed   of   by   way   of   open   auction   or

tender.   The   pre­determined   rates   are   nowhere   near   market   rates

fetched in auction or tender thus they are also the concessional ones.

Apart   from   that,   as   already   discussed,   as   hospitals   are   enjoying

Government land it is open to the Government to impose such riders

and stipulations for free treatment to be given to economically weaker

sections.
59. The realization of human rights vests responsibilities upon the

State. The State has to constantly make an endeavor for realization of

human rights agenda, particularly in relation to economic, social and
56
cultural rights. Right to health is provided in
Article 25
of Universal

Declaration of Human Rights of 10.12.1948 (the UDHR). The Article

provides that:
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living
           adequate for the health and well-being of himself
           and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
           and medical care and necessary social services,
           and the right to security in the event of
           unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old
           age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances
           beyond his control.”
60.   The   State   has   to   ensure   the   basic   necessities   like   food,

nutrition,   medical   assistance,   hygiene   etc.   and   contribute   to   the

improvement   of   health.   Right   to   life   includes   right   to   health   as

observed in
State of Punjab & Ors. v. Mohinder Singh Chawla & Ors.
(1997) 2 SCC 83.
Right to life and personal liberty under
Article 21
of

the   Constitution   also   includes   right   of   patients   to   be   treated   with

dignity as observed by this Court in
Balram Prasad v. Kunal Saha &

Ors.
(2014) 1 SCC 384.
Right to health  i.e., right to live in a clean,

hygienic   and   safe   environment   is   a   right   under
Article   21
of   the

Constitution   as   observed   in
Occupational   Health   and   Safety

Association v. Union of India & Ors.
, AIR 2014 SC 1469.
The concept
57
of   emergency   medical   aid   has   been   discussed   by   this   Court   in
Pt.

Parmanand   Katara   v.   Union   of   India   &   Ors.
(1989)   4   SCC   286.
In
Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity & Ors. v. State of West Bengal &

Anr.
(1996) 4 SCC 37, right to medical treatment has been extended

to prisoners also.
61.
In
Parmanand Katara
(supra) this Court has observed that every

doctor   whether   at   a   Government   hospital   or   otherwise   has   the

professional obligation to extend his services with due expertise for

protecting life.  The  obligation   being  total,   absolute  and  paramount,

laws   of   procedure   whether   in   statutes   or   otherwise,   which   would

interfere   with   the   discharge   of   this   obligation   cannot   be   sustained

and must, therefore, give way, and there is an obligation  upon the

doctor to treat the injured victim on his appearance before him either

by himself or being carried by others. It has also been observed by

this Court that the effort to save the person should be the top priority

not   only   of   the   medical   professional   but   even   of   the   Police   or   any

other person who happens to be connected with the matter or who

happens   to   notice   such   an   incident   or   a   situation.   Apprehensions

that the doctor will have to face police interrogation and stand as a
58
witness   in   court   and   face   all   the   harassments,   should   not  prevent

them from discharging their duty as medical professionals to save a

human life and to do all that is necessary.
62.
In
Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity
(supra), this Court has

observed   that   the   Constitution   envisages   the   establishment   of   a

welfare State. In a welfare State, the primary duty of the Government

is   to   secure   the   welfare   of   the   people.   Providing   adequate   medical

facilities   for   the   people   is   an   essential   part   of   the   obligations

undertaken by the Government in a welfare State. The Government

discharges   this   obligation   by   running   hospitals   and   health   centers

which   provide   medical  care   to   the   person   seeking  to   avail  of   those

facilities.   Preservation   of   human   life   is   thus   of   paramount

importance.   Government   is   duty­bound   to   provide   timely   care   to

persons in serious conditions. Medical facilities cannot be denied by

the Government on the ground of non­availability of bed. Denial of

medical assistance on unjust ground was held to be in violation of

right to life under
Article 21
and the State was directed to pay the

compensation of Rs.25,000 to the petitioner and requisite directions

were issued by this Court. The State cannot avoid its constitutional
59
obligation in that regard on account of financial constraints and was

directed   to   allocate   funds   for   providing   adequate   medical

infrastructure.
63.   In our opinion, the State can also impose such obligation when

the   Government   land   is   held   by   such   hospitals   and   it   is   the

constitutional obligation imposed upon such hospitals. Under
Article

47
, State has to make constant endeavor to raise the level of nutrition

and the standard of living and to improve public health. It is also one

of the fundamental duties enshrined in
Article 51A(h)
to develop the

scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform. It

would   be   inhuman   to   deny   a   person   who   is   not   having   sufficient

means or no means, the life­saving treatment, simply on the ground

that   he   is   not   having   enough   money.   Due   to   financial   reasons,   if

treatment is refused, it would be against the very basic tenets of the

medical profession  and the  concept of  charity in whatever form we

envisage the same, besides being unconstitutional would be violative

of   basic   human   rights.   In   our   opinion,   when   the   State   largesse   is

being enjoyed by these hospitals in the form of land beside it is their

obligation  by  the  very nature  of  the  medical  services  to  extend  the
60
reciprocal   obligation   to   the   public   by   providing   free   treatment   as

envisaged in the impugned order. In case they want to wriggle out of

it and not to comply with it, they have to surrender the land and orge

out   the   benefit   which   they   have   received   by   virtue   of   holding   the

Government land in an aforesaid manner.
64.   It is regrettable that the land had been obtained by Moolchand

Kharaiti Ram Trust which claims to be charitable and St. Stephens

Hospital   run   by   the   Missionaries   admittedly   for   charity,   are

questioning the very conditions for which they have come into being

and   it   appears   with   the   passage   of   time   they   have   lost   the   very

purpose   of   their   establishment.   In   our   opinion   they   should   have

welcomed   the   conditions   imposed   by   the   Government,   considering

their objectives and for the purpose, they have obtained the land. Two

other   hospitals,   namely,   Sita   Ram   Bhartia   Institute   of   Science   &

Research and Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer also cannot

wriggle out of their such obligations.
65.   Even when the purpose of the charitable activity is not defined,

it is open to the court to define it. The decision of the Government

cannot be said to be foreign to the purpose for which land is held.
61
Thus,   the   action   of   the   State   cannot   be   said   to   be   unauthorized,

illegal or arbitrary in any manner whatsoever and is in furtherance of

the very objectives for which the medical profession exists. It is very

unfortunate that by and large the hospitals have now become centers

of commercial exploitation and instances have come to notice when a

dead body is kept as security for clearance of bills of hospitals which

is  per se  illegal and criminal act. In future, whenever such an act is

reported   to   the   police,   it   is   supposed   to   register   a   case   against

management of Hospital and all concerned doctors involved in such

inhumane act, which destroys the basic principles of human dignity

and   tantamount   to   a   criminal   breach   of   the   trust   reposed   in   the

medical profession.
66.   It is unfortunate that most of the hospitals are being run on a

commercial   basis   and   various   ills   have   sunk   in   the   noble   medical

profession.   Right   from   wrong   reporting,   uncalled   for   investigation

inclusive of invasive one, even as to heart and other parts of the body,

which   are   wholly   unnecessary,   are   performed,   it   is   time   for   soul­

searching for such big hospitals in and around Delhi, Gurgaon etc.

and other places. They must ponder what they are doing. Is it not a
62
criminal  act?   Simply   by   the   fact   that   action   is   not   taken   does   not

absolve the responsibility.  Time has come to fix accountability and to

set   right   the   evils   which   have   rotten   the   system.     The   medical

profession   had   never   been   intended   to   be   an   exploitative   device   to

earn money at the cost of patients who require godly approach and

helping hand of doctors. Every prescription starts from Rx, not from

the amount of bill.   Being big commercial international hospitals in

and   around   Delhi,   they   are   not   above   the   ethical   standards   which

they have to maintain at all costs even by extending financial help to

the have­nots.
67.    The   poor   cannot   be   deprived   of   the   treatment   by   the   best

physician due to his economic disability in case he requires it. It is

the obligation on the medical professionals, hospitals, the State and

all concerned to ensure that such person is given treatment and not

deprived of the same due to poverty. That is what is envisaged in the

Constitution also. On the making of a doctor, the State spends and

invests a huge amount of public money and it is the corresponding

obligation to serve the needy and the treatment cannot be refused on

the ground of financial inability of the patient to bear it. To such an
63
extent,   the   right   and   moral   obligation   can   be   enforced   and   that

precisely has been done by issuance  of the impugned directions to

provide   free   treatment   in   IPD   and   OPD   to   economically   weaker

sections of society.  They have suffered so long and benefit has not

percolated down to them of distributive justice and they are deprived

of equal justice and proper treatment due to lack of financial means.

It is apparent from the policy decision dated 10.6.1949 and also the

provisions contained in
section 2
of the Charitable Endowments Act,

1890 that running of hospitals  is regarded  as a charitable activity.

The   further   rider   in   policy   was   that   such   institution   claiming

allotment should be secular and of non­communal character.
68.    The Arts and Crafts Society and other non­profit making bodies

were   also   included   under   the   term   ‘charitable   institution'   with   the

rider   that   the   institution   should   be   run   for   the   good   of   the   public

without any profit motive. It was contended on behalf of the hospitals

that the aforesaid condition is not applicable to hospitals and would

apply   to   Arts   and   Crafts   Association,   and   there   was   no   specific

stipulation   with   respect   to   providing   free   treatment   in   the   letter   of

allotments and lease deed. In our opinion, the rider that the Arts and
64
Crafts institution should be run for good of the public, without any

profit motive is primarily applicable to the charitable institutions like

hospitals etc. then it has been only specified as an obligation to Arts

and Crafts institution etc. too. As such there would be an obligation

upon hospitals being charitable by their very nature to provide free

treatment to economically weaker sections of society. The expression

‘no   profit   motive'   would   also   exclude   the   hospitals   being   run   for

commercial   gains.   That   would   be   violative   of   the   very   foundational

basis and fulcrum on which the allotment order had been issued and

lease deeds have been executed. Once having claimed themselves to

be charitable institutions, it does not lie in the armory of defense to

raise such plea and having obtained the benefit of the public largesse.

It is not open to raising the aforesaid challenge within the framework

of legal parameters. As a matter of fact, as these hospitals are being

run for commercial gains, it would be open to the lessor to terminate

the lease. That can be done in case there is a refusal to comply with

or violation in any manner of the obligation of providing free medical

treatment   to   10%   IPD   and   25%   OPD   patients   belonging   to

economically   weaker   sections   of   the   society.   The   imposition   of   the

said condition is inherent in the policy and in the very grant on the
65
basis of which the land is held and even otherwise in the case of two

other institutes i.e. Sita Ram Bhartia Institute of Science & Research

and Foundation for Applied Research in Cancer, as they are holding

the Government land for the hospital  purpose and research functions

in the hospital, the allotment was also made at a pre­determined rate

and not by way of auction and considering the specific stipulation in

clause   7   of   the   lease   deed   and   considering   the   aforesaid   other

aspects,   and   it   being   charitable   activity,   it   was   open   to   the

Government to obligate them by providing free medical treatment.
69.   It is  apparent that decision in
Social Jurists
(supra) has  been

rendered on the basis of the terms and conditions contained in the

allotment   letters   as   well   as   stipulations   made   in   the   lease   deeds.

Some representations were made relating to free treatment.
The High

Court,   hence   in
Social   Jurists
(supra),   opined   that   it   was   not

necessary to incorporate each and every condition in the lease deed

and other corresponding documents would also be seen and it was

not only contractual but statutory, and public law obligation enjoined

upon the hospitals to fulfil condition of free treatment.  The order was
66
affirmed by this Court by a reasoned order, hence it becomes binding

as precedent.
70.   It is apparent that in the case of Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Trust

and   St.   Stephens   Hospital,   the   lands   were   allotted   for   charitable

purposes   under  the  Scheme  of  the   year  1949,  as   further  modified,

thus, the policy under which they had obtained lease deed would also

be a relevant document and of paramount importance for entitlement

to hold the land for purpose as specified in the policy, as that is the

basic document governing the rights of the parties, and the terms and

conditions of lease deed, would be supplemental to the main objective

of the policy.  The lease deed can supplement not supplant the main

policy  or rules  as   the  case  may   be  under which   the  allotment  has

been obtained and lease deed has been executed.
71.   In our considered opinion, not only by the policy that prevailed

in 1949, the land at concessional rates for charitable purposes, had

been   obtained   and   free   treatment   being   as   stipulated   in   the   order

dated 02.02.2012 issued by the Government of India, is within the

realm of the policy under which allotment had been made at highly

concessional rates in the heart of Delhi and the Delhi Development
67
Authority   Rules   framed   in   1981.     They   cannot   wriggle   out   of   their

obligation  by  contending  that  there  was  no  such  stipulation   in  the

allotment  letter   or  lease   deed.     Allotment   letter  and   lease   deed   are

subject to the riders in the main policy and rules under which grant

has been made.   It is the foundation of the allotment letter and the

lease deed.
72.   In the case of Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Science & Research

and Foundation  for Applied  Research  in  Cancer,  the allotment  had

been   made   by   the   DDA   when   the   Delhi   Development   Authority

(Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 were in vogue.
73.   In the case of Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Science & Research,

applications   were   made   to   the   DDA   for   allotment   of   land   for

establishing a multi­disciplinary research complex in New Delhi.  The

allotment was made for 1.52 acres of land at Rs.6 lacs per acre on

22.10.1984,   followed   by   lease   deed   dated   02.09.1985   in   respect   of

another plot of land of 1.46 acres for a consideration of Rs.8,76,000.

Thus, it was clearly subject to Rules 5 and 20 of aforesaid DDA Rules,

1981.  Rules 5 and 20 are extracted hereinbelow:
68
“5. Rules of premium for allotment of Nazul land to
     certain public institutions.- The Authority may allot
     Nazul land to schools, colleges, universities,
     hospitals, other social or     charitable institutions,
     religious,          political,          semi-political
     organisations and local bodies for remunerative,
     semi-remunerative or unremunerative purposes at
     the premia and ground rent in force immediately
     before the coming into force of these rules, or at
     such rates as the Central Government may
     determine from time to time.
[Explanation.- For the purpose of this rule the
     expression            ‘hospitals’ do not include the
     hospitals/dispensaries established by a company,
     firm or trust as referred to in Sub-rule (2) of Rule
     (4).]
20. Allotment to certain public institutions. - [***]
     No allotment of Nazul land to public institution
     referred to in Rule 5 shall be made unless -
(a) according to the aims and objects of that public
institution -
(i) it directly subserves the interests of the
         population of the Union Territory of Delhi;
(ii) it is generally conducive to the planned
         development of the Union Territory of Delhi;
(iii) it is apparent from the nature of work to be
         carried out by that public institution, that the
         same cannot, with equal efficiency be carried
         out elsewhere than in that Union       Territory.
(b) it is a society registered under the
Societies
      Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860) or such
      institution is owned and run by the Government or
      any Local Authority, or is constituted or
      established under any law [for the time being in
69
force or it is a company, firm or trust for the
            purpose    of   establishment of   hospital  or
            dispensary];
(c) it is of non-profit making character;
(d) it is in possession of sufficient funds to meet
            the cost of land and the construction of buildings
            for its use; and
(e) allotment to such institution is sponsored or
            recommended        by    a   [Department of       the
            Government of National Capital           Territory of
            Delhi] or a Ministry of the Central Government:
[Provided that in case of allotment to a company,
           firm or trust for the purpose of establishment of
           hospital or dispensary by tenders or auction, as the
           case may be, such company, firm or trust, as the
           case may be, shall not be required to be sponsored
           by a Department of the Government of National
           Capital               Territory of Delhi or a Ministry
           of the Central Government.]”
74.    It   is   apparent   from   Rule   5   that   allotment   of   lands   to   the

charitable institutions would be at pre­determined rates and not on

market rates.  According to Rule 20 above, the allotment is subject to

the further rider that public institution should sub­serve the interests

of the population of the Union Territory of Delhi and such institutions

should   be   of   non­profit   motive   character.     There   was   a   clear

stipulation by way of the condition in clause 7 of the allotment letter

to   the   effect   that   DDA   reserves   the   right   to   alter   any   terms   and
70
conditions   on   its   discretion.     Thus,   it   appears   that   the   land   was

obtained   for         research   purposes.     Later   on,   it   was   noticed   that

hospitals were set up and were running on commercial lines, which

was objected to by the DDA as it was in clear violation of the terms

and conditions.  As the land was obtained at concessional rates, not

on market rates, the hospitals were bound to serve the public good

and the imposition of such condition in the lease deed could not be

said to be impermissible, arbitrary or irrational.  The allotments that

were made in favour of Sitaram Bhartiya Institute and Foundation for

Applied Research in Cancer were at pre­determined rates, which were

lesser than the market rates.
75.   The   contention   raised   on   behalf   of   Moolchand   Kharaiti   Ram

Trust to the effect that this Court cannot proceed to make an order on

account   of   sympathy   in   contravention   of   settled   law   and   it   will

seriously damage the credibility of this institution.  In our view, it is

wholly impermissible submission.   The Trust cannot be permitted to

wriggle   out   of   its   obligation   unjustly   and   unfairly.     Originally   the

Trust   was   set   up   for   pure   charity.     In   raising   such   unworthy   and

untenable submission, Trust has lost its main objective and assumed
71
a   commercial   character   and   it   is   regrettable   that   it   has   to   be

reminded of its responsibility by the Court for the purpose for which

it   exists   and   having   obtained   the   land   on   a   particular   basis,   is

observed only in breach thereof.  The adverse remarks in the report of

Justice Qureshi Committee with respect to the institution cannot be

brushed aside on the sole ground that comments recorded in Justice

Qureshi's report were based on the statement made by disgruntled

employees of the hospitals, who were in dispute with the management

of the hospital.
76.    Learned   senior   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   St.   Stephens

Hospital   has   also   relied   on   the   decision   rendered   in  Divisional

Manager, Aravali Golf Club & anr. v. Chander Hass & anr.,  (2008) 1

SCC 683, to contend that it is not open to the Court to create a law or

an   obligation   and   then   seek   to   enforce   it.     The   statement   in   the

factual matrix has no legs to stand and we are conscious that we are

not   trying   to   create   any   new   obligation.     It   was   a   self­created

obligation   on   missionaries   to   do   charity   for   which   they   exist   while

obtaining  the   land   and   Court   is   duty   bound   to   enforce   it.     By   the

stipulation   in   the   question   of   free   treatment,   the   policy   rules   of
72
allotment have been given a shape that is enforceable and cannot be

termed to be a new imposition not contemplated initially.
77.   On   behalf   of   Moolchand   Kharaiti   Ram   Trust,   Will   has   been

relied upon to indicate the purpose of creation of Trust. It is apparent

that Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Trust was created by a Will executed by

Lala Kharaiti Ram resident of Lahore in 1927. The Will was produced

for   perusal.   The   objects   of   the   creation   of   Trust   were   imparting

education in and preaching Sanskrit according to Sanatan Dharam

methods; and, secondly, for devising means for imparting education

in and improving the “Ayurvedic system of medicine” and preaching

the same. In order to achieve the latter object, it was not prohibited to

take help from the English or Yunani or any other system of medicine

and according to need, one or more than one Ayurvedic Hospital may

be opened. It was contended that it was not in the deed of the Trust

to impart free medical aid. The ground raised and what is contained

in   the   Will   is   against   the   very   purpose   for   which   the   Moolchand

Kharaiti Ram Hospital is being run. When its object was of improving

the   Ayurvedic   system   of   medicine   only   as   is   apparent   from   the

material   on   record   that   at   present   the   said   activities   had   been
73
confined to one room and the changed main activity is an Allopathic

system of medicine which was not at all the intendment of the creator

of   the   Trust.   We   leave   the   matter   at   that   in   these   proceedings.
However,   having   obtained   the   land   for   charitable   purposes   for   the

hospital,   for  no   profit   and   for  the   public   good,   whatever   system   of

medicine   is   being   administered,   it   can   be   obligated   with   such

charitable rider of free treatment as envisaged in the impugned order

issued by the Government.
78.    Similarly, St. Stephens Hospital is Missionaries’ hospital and its

very objective admittedly is to provide the charitable services free of

charge but it has also become more or less a commercial venture as

in the case of other hospitals inter alia involved in the instant matter,

how such provision for charity is opposed is beyond comprehension,

is   it   charity   versus   charity.   They   have   to   abide   by   the   just   and

reasonable   legal   conditions   for   free   treatment   which   are

constitutionally envisaged also.
79.    It was also urged on behalf of Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Hospital

that though nine acres of land was allotted at Lajpat Nagar, it was not

a prime locality at the relevant time and the land was given at the
74
market   rate.   The   submissions   are   wholly   baseless   and   against   the

record and cannot be countenanced. The record belies the same.


In   Reference   to   question   No.3   relating   to
Article   19(1)(g)
and
19(6):
80.    It   was   contended   on   behalf   of   the   respondents/hospitals   that

imposition   of   such   a   stipulation   for   free   treatment   tantamounts   to

imposing restriction on the right enshrined in
Article 19(1)(g)
of the

Constitution   which   confers   a   Fundamental   Right   on   all   citizens   of

India to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade

or business in India. Since the Trustees are Indian citizens, they are

exercising   their   fundamental   right   in   running   the   hospitals.   If   any

restriction was to be placed on their right to run the institution by

providing   the   manner   in   which   they   must   run   their   hospitals   by

providing free treatment to a particular percentage of patients, this

could   only   be   done   by   enacting   a   ‘law’   under
Article   19(6)
of   the

Constitution. It was further contended that ‘law’ is clearly defined in
Article   13
of   the   Constitution   as   ‘statutory   law’   which   has   a

foundation in a legislation enacted either by the Parliament or State

Legislatures. Reliance has been placed on
Kharak Singh v. State of

U.P.
(1964)   1   SCR   322   in   which   this   Court   observed   that   the
75
provisions contained in Police Regulations had no statutory basis but

were   merely   executive   or   departmental   instructions   and   that   they

could therefore not be “a law” which the State was entitled to make

under
Article 19(2)
to (6) to regulate or curtail Fundamental Rights

nor would it constitute a procedure established by law in furtherance

of
Article   21
of   the   Constitution   and   if   any   action   under   those

executive instructions violated the Fundamental Rights of a person,

the person concerned would be entitled to relief from the courts.
81.   Reliance   has   also   been   placed   on
Bijoe   Emmanuel   &   Ors.   v.

State of Kerala & Ors.
(1986) 3 SCC 615 wherein the Government had

issued  circulars   requiring  all  students   to   join   in  the   singing  of  the

National   Anthem.   It   might   have   been   a   very  laudable   object   of   the

Government and its policy but this Court held that the Circular being

only   executive   instructions   of   the   Government,   could   not   infringe

upon the Fundamental Rights of the students and stated that “The

law is now well settled that any law which be made under clauses (2)

to (6) of
Article 19
to regulate the exercise of the right to the freedoms

guaranteed  by
Article   19(1)(a)
to  (e)  and  (g)  must  be  ‘a  law’  having
76
statutory force and not a mere executive or departmental instruction.”

This Court observed:
“15. If the two circulars are to be so interpreted as
        to compel each and every pupil to join in the
        singing of the National Anthem despite his genuine,
        conscientious religious objection, then such
        compulsion would clearly contravene the rights
        guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(a)
and
Article 25(1).
16. We have referred to
Article 19(1)(a)
which
        guarantees to all citizens freedom of speech and
        expression and to
Article 19(2)
which provides that
        nothing in
Article 19(1)(a)
shall prevent a State
        from making any law, in so far as such law imposes
        reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
        conferred by
Article 19(1)(a)
in the interests of the
        sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of
        the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
        public order, decency or morality, or in relation to
        contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to an
        offence. The law is now well settled that any law
        which may be made, under Clauses (2) to (6) of
Article 19
to regulate the exercise of the right to
        the freedoms guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(a)
to (e)
        and (g) must be 'a law' having statutory force and
        not a mere executive or departmental instruction.
In
Kharak Singh v. State of U.P.
AIR 1963 SC 1295,
        1299, the question arose whether a police
        regulation which was a mere departmental
        instruction, having no statutory basis could be said
        to be a law for the purpose of
Article 19(2)
to (6).
        The Constitution Bench answered the question in
        the negative and said:
Though learned counsel for the respondent
           started by attempting such a justification by
           invoking Section 12 of the Indian Police Act he
           gave this up and conceded that the regulations
77
contained in Chapter XX had no such statutory
  basis but were merely executive or departmental
  instructions framed for the guidance of the police
  officers. They would not, therefore, be "a law"
which the State is entitled to make under the
  relevant Clauses (2) to (6) of
Article 19
in order to
  regulate or curtail fundamental rights guaranteed
  by the several sub-clauses of
Article 19(1)
, nor
  would the same be "a procedure established by
  law" within
Article 21.
The position, therefore, is
  that if the action of the police which is the arm of
  the executive of the State is found to infringe any
  of the freedoms guaranteed to the petitioner the
  petitioner would be entitled to the relief of
  mandamus which he seeks, to restrain the State
  from taking action under the regulations.
17. The two circulars on which the department has
placed reliance in the present case have no
statutory basis and are mere departmental
instructions. They cannot, therefore, form the
foundation of any action aimed at denying a
citizen's Fundamental Right under
Article 19(1)(a).
Further it is not possible to hold that the two
circulars were issued 'in the interest of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of
the State, friendly relation with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to
contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to an
offence’ and if not so issued, they cannot again be
invoked to deny a citizen's Fundamental Right
under
Article 19(1)(a).
In
Kameshwar Prasad v.
State of Bihar
(1962) Supp 3 SCR 369, a
Constitution Bench of the court had to consider the
validity of Rule 4A of the Bihar Government
Servants Conduct Rules which prohibited any form
of demonstration even if such demonstration was
innocent and incapable of causing a breach of
public tranquillity. The Court said:
78
No doubt, if the rule were so framed as to
             single out those types of demonstration which
             were likely to lead to a disturbance of public
             tranquillity or which would fall under the other
             limiting criteria specified in
Article 19(2)
the
             validity of the rule could have been sustained.
             The vice of the rule, in our opinion, consists in
             this that it lays a ban on every type of
             demonstration-be the same however innocent
             and however incapable of causing a breach of
             public tranquillity and does not confine itself to
             those forms of demonstrations which might lead
             to that result.
Examining the action of the Education Authorities in
      the light of
Kharak Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
and
Kameshwar Prasad v. State of Bihar
(supra) we have
      no option but to hold that the expulsion of the children
      from the school for not joining the singing of the
      National Anthem though they respectfully stood up in
      silence when the Anthem was sung was violative of
Article 19(1)(a)
.”
82.   Reliance has also been placed on
State of M.P. & Anr. v. Thakur

Bharat Singh
, AIR 1967 SC 1170 wherein it was pointed out that the

executive power of the State under
Article 162
being only an executive

power   and   not   a   legislative   power   anything   done   in   exercise   of

executive   power   under
Article   162
does   not   become   law   under   the

Constitution.   This   Court   in   the   factual   matrix   of   the   case   that

executive order was issued during an emergency was pending under
Article 19.
It was contended that
Article 358
protects action of both
79
legislative and executive. The decision in the aforesaid case was not

supported by
Article 358
of the Constitution. It was observed:
"(4). Counsel for the State did not challenge the
        view that the restrictions which may be imposed
        under cl. (b) of
S. 3(1)
requiring a person to leave
        his hearth, home, and place of business and live
        and remain in another place wholly unfamiliar to
        him may operate seriously to his prejudice, and
        may on that account be unreasonable. xx xxx.
(5) xx xx Counsel for the State while conceding
        that if
S. 3(1)(b)
was, because it infringed the
        fundamental freedom of citizens, void before the
        proclamation of emergency, and that it was not
        revived by the proclamation, submitted that Art.
358 protects action both legislative and executive
        taken after proclamation of emergency and,
        therefore any executive action taken by an officer
        of the State or by the State will not be liable to be
        challenged on the ground that it infringes the
        fundamental freedoms under
Art. 19.
In our
        judgment, this argument involves a grave fallacy.
        All executive action which operates to the prejudice
        of any person must have the authority of law to
        support it, and the terms of
Art. 358
do not detract
        from that rule.
Article 358
expressly authorises the
        State to take legislative or executive action
        provided such action was competent for the State
        to make or take, but for the provisions contained in
        Part III of the Constitution.
Article 358
does not
        purport to invest the State with arbitrary authority
        to take action to the prejudice of citizens and
        others : it merely provides that so long as the
        proclamation of emergency subsists laws may be
        enacted, and executive action may be taken in
        pursuance of lawful authority, which if the
80
provisions of
Art. 19
were operative would have
been invalid. Our federal structure is founded on
certain fundamental principles : (1) the sovereignty
of the people with limited Government authority,
i.e. the Government must be conducted in
accordance with the will of the majority of the
people. The people govern themselves through
their representatives, whereas the official agencies
of the executive Government possess only such
powers as have been conferred upon them by the
people; (2) There is distribution of powers between
the three organs of the State - legislative, executive
and judicial - each organ having some check direct
or indirect on the other; and (3) the rule of law
which includes judicial review of arbitrary executive
actions. As pointed out by Dicey in his "Introduction
to the study of the Law of the Constitution", 10th
Edn., at p. 202 the expression "rule of law" has
three meanings, or may be regarded from three
different points of view.
"It means, in the first place, the absolute
supremacy or predominance of regular law as
opposed to the influence of arbitrary power, and
excludes the existence of arbitrariness, of
prerogative, or even of wide discretionary authority
on the part of the Government."
At p. 188 Dicey points out :
"In almost every continental community the
   executive exercises far wider discretionary
   authority in the matter of arrest, of temporary
   imprisonment, of expulsion from its territory, and
   the like, than is either legally claimed or in fact
   exerted by the government in England : and a
   study of European politics now and again reminds
   English readers that wherever there is discretion
   there is room for arbitrariness and that in a
   republic    no   less   than     under    monarchy
   discretionary authority on the part of the
   government must mean insecurity for legal
   freedom on the part of its subjects."
81
We have adopted under our Constitution not the
      continental system but the British system under which
      the rule of law prevails. Every Act done by the
      Government or by its officers must if it is to operate to
      the prejudice of any person, be supported by some
      legislative authority.
xxx                      xxx              xxx
7. We are therefore of the view that the order made
      by the State in exercise of the authority conferred by
      S. 3(1)(b) of the Madhya                  Pradesh Public
      Security Act 25 of 1959 was invalid and for the acts
      done to the prejudice of the respondent after the
      declaration of emergency under
Art. 352
no immunity
      from the process of the Court could be claimed under
Art. 358
of the Constitution, since the order was not
      supported by any valid legislation.”
83.   For   deciding   the   aforesaid   submission   pivotal   question   arises

whether imposition of condition tantamounts to a restriction imposed

within   the   purview   of
Article   19(6)
of   the   Constitution.   In   our

considered opinion the High Court has erred in law in holding that

such stipulation could have been imposed only by a statutory law. In

our considered opinion, it is not a restriction on the right to carry on

medical   profession,   the   medical   profession   has   obligated   itself   by

such conditions by very nature of its professional activity and when

the State land is being held which is for the public good with no profit

motive, such land is held for the charitable purpose of public good.

The   charitable   purpose   would   include,   as   already   discussed,   the

aforesaid obligation of free treatment to the persons of economically
82
weaker   strata   of   the   society.   It   is   not   a   restriction   but   the   very

purpose   of   existence   of   medical   profession   and   very   purpose   of

policy/Rules to grant land to institutions without public actions that

would have fetched market rate and does not amount to putting any

fetter to practice the medical profession or to carry on occupation. On

due   consideration   of   the   very   object   of   the   medical   activity   its

professional   and   other   obligations   for   the   proper   treatment   of   the

persons of economically weaker sections of the society deprived of the

fruits of development. The benefits of various welfare schemes hardly

reach to them in spite of efforts made, economic disparity is writ large

and persists. They cannot afford such treatment and thus in lieu of

holding land of Government at concessional rate and enjoying huge

occupancy benefits inter alia for aforesaid reasons, the hospitals can

be  asked  to  impart free  treatment as  envisaged  in  the Government

order.
84.    The   hospitals   now­a­days   have   five­star   facilities.   The   entire

concept   has   been   changed   to   make   commercial   gains.     They   are

becoming unaffordable.   The charges are phenomenally high, and at

times   unrealistic   to   the   service   provided.     The   dark   side   of   such
83
hospitals   can   be   illuminated   only   by   sharing   obligation   towards

economically   weaker   sections   of   the   society.     It   would   be   almost

inhuman   to   deny   proper   treatment   to   the   poor   owing   to   economic

condition   and   when   hospitals   claim   that   they   are   doing   charity   at

their own level, we find impugned order dated 2.2.2012 is simply an

expression   to   the   aforesaid   activity   which   has   been   given   a

channelized form.
85.   We are of the considered opinion that there was no necessity of

enacting a law, as the policy/rules under which the land has been

obtained, the hospitals were obligated to render free treatment as the

land was allotted to them for earning no profit and held in trust for

public good.   Similar is the provision in the rules of 1981 and apart

from that the regulations framed by the Medical Council of India also

enjoins upon the medical profession to extend such help and in view

of the object of the hospitals, trust, and missionaries it is apparent

that  there   was   no   necessity  of   any  legislation  and   the   Government

was competent to enforce in the circumstances, the contractual and

statutory liability and on common law basis.
84
86.    The   right   to   carry   on   the   medical   profession   has   not   been

restricted,   however,   what   was   enjoined   upon   the   respondent­

hospitals   to   perform   otherwise   had   been   given   a   concrete   shape.

Thus,   it   was   permissible   to   issue   circular   in   the   exercise   of   power

under
Article   162
of   the   Constitution.     It   was   urged   on   behalf   of

hospitals that they were doing a charitable work at their own, thus, it

could not be said to be a restriction within the meaning contemplated

under
Article 19(6)
for which a law was required.  No new restriction

has   been   imposed   for   the   first   time   under
Article   19(6)
of   the

Constitution of India, as such in our opinion, there was no necessity

for   enacting   a   law,   such   guidelines   could   be   issued   under   the

executive powers.
87.
In
Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur & Ors. v. The State of Punjab
(1955) 2 SCR 225= AIR 1955 SC 549, this Court observed that it is

open   to   the   State   to   issue   executive   orders   even   if   there   is   no

legislation in support thereof provided the State could legislate on the

subject in respect of which action is taken. There can be executive

orders   in   the   absence   of   legislation   in   the   field.   This   Court   has

observed:
85
“7.
Article 73
of the Constitution relates to the
executive powers of the Union, while the
corresponding provision in regard to the executive
powers of a State is contained in
article 162.
The
provisions of these articles are analogous to those
of
section 8
and
49
respectively of the
Government
of India Act, 1935
and lay down the rule of
distribution of executive powers between the Union
and the States, following the same analogy as is
provided in regard to the distribution of legislative
powers between them.
Article 162
, with which we
are directly concerned in this case, lays down:
"Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
  executive power of a State shall extend to the
  matters with respect to which the Legislature of
  the State has the power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which
the Legislature of a State and Parliament have
power to make laws, the executive power of the
State shall be subject to, and limited by, the
executive power expressly conferred by this
Constitution or by any law made by Parliament
upon the Union or authorities thereof."
Thus, under this article, the executive
authority of the State is executive in respect to
matters enumerated in List II of Seventh Schedule.
The authority also extends to the Concurrent List
except as provided in the Constitution itself or in
any law passed by the Parliament. Similarly,
article
73
provides that the executive powers of the Union
shall extend to matters with respect to which the
Parliament has power to made laws and to the
exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as
are exercisable by the Government of India by
virtue of any treaty or any agreement. The proviso
engrafted on clause (1) further lays down that
although with regard to the matters in the
Concurrent List the executive authority shall be
ordinarily left to be State it would be open to the
Parliament to provide that in exceptional cases the
86
executive power of the Union shall extend to these
matters also.
Neither of these articles contain any definition
as to what the executive function is and what
activities would legitimately come within its scope.
They are concerned primarily with the distribution
of the executive power between the Union on the
one hand and the States on the other. They do not
mean, as Mr. Pathak seems to suggest, that it is
only when the Parliament or the State Legislature
has legislated on certain items appertaining to their
respective lists, that the Union or the State
executive, as the case may be, can proceed to
function in respect to them.
On the other hand, the language of
article
162
clearly indicates that the powers of the State
executive do extend to matters upon which the
state Legislature is competent to legislate and are
not confined to matters over which legislation has
been passed already. The same principle underlies
article 73
of the Constitution. These provisions of
the Constitution, therefore, do not lend any support
to Mr. Pathak's contention.
xxx                 xxx             xxx
12. It may not be possible to frame an exhaustive
definition of what executive function means and
implies. Ordinarily, the executive power connotes
the residue of governmental functions that remain
after legislative and judicial functions are taken
away.
The Indian Constitution has not indeed
recognised the doctrine of separation of powers in
its absolute rigidity but the functions of the
different parts or branches of the Government have
been sufficiently differentiated and consequently it
can very well be said that our Constitution does not
87
contemplate assumption, by one organ or part of
the State, of functions that essentially belong to
another. The executive indeed can exercise the
powers of departmental or subordinate legislation
when such powers are delegated to it by the
legislature.
It can also when so empowered, exercise
judicial functions in a limited way. The executive
Government, however, can never go against the
provisions of the Constitution or of any law. This is
clear from the provisions of
article 154
of the
Constitution but, as we have already stated, it does
not follow from this that in order to enable the
executive to function there must be a law already in
existence and that the powers of executive are
limited merely to the carrying out of these laws.
13. The limits within which the executive
Government can function under the Indian
Constitution can be ascertained without much
difficulty by reference to the form of the executive
which our Constitution has set up.                 Our
Constitution, though federal in its structure, is
modelled on the British Parliamentary system
where the executive is deemed to have the primary
responsibility for the formulation of governmental
policy and its transmission into law though the
condition precedent to the exercise of this
responsibility is it's retaining the confidence of the
legislative branch of the State.
The executive function comprises both the
determination of the policy as well as carrying it
into execution.        This evidently includes the
initiation of legislation, the maintenance of order,
the promotion of social and economic welfare, the
direction of foreign policy, in fact, the carrying on or
supervision of the general administration of the
State.
88
xxx                     xxx                  xxx

          17.     Specific   legislation    may    indeed    be
necessary if the Government require certain powers
          in addition to what they possess under ordinary law
          in order to carry on the particular trade or business.
          Thus when it is necessary to encroach upon private
          rights in order to enable the Government to carry
          on their business, a specific legislation sanctioning
          such course would have to be passed.
18. In the present case it is not disputed that the
          entire expenses necessary for carrying on the
          business of printing and publishing the textbooks
          for recognised schools in Punjab were estimated
          and shown in the annual financial statement and
          that the demands for grants, which were made
          under different heads, were sanctioned by the
          State Legislature and due Appropriation Acts were
          passed.
For the purpose of carrying on the business
          the Government do not require any additional
          powers and whatever is necessary for their
          purpose, they can have by entering into contracts
          with authors and other people. This power of
          contract is expressly vested in the Government
          under
article 298
of the Constitution. In these
          circumstances, we are unable to agree with Mr.
          Pathak that the carrying on of the business of
          printing and publishing textbooks was beyond the
          competence of the executive Government without a
          specific legislation sanctioning such course."
88.
In
U.  Unichoyi   &   Ors.   v.  State   of   Kerala
,   AIR   1962   SC   12,   in

which   notification   issued   by   the   Government   of   Kerala   was

questioned   that   wages   prescribed   were   something   above   the
89
minimum wages, the fixation was questioned on the ground that it

affected the rights of the industries to carry on their activities under
Article   19(1)(g)
of   the   Constitution.
The   submissions   were   rejected

following the earlier decisions of this Court in
Bijay Cotton Mills Ltd.

v. State of Ajmer
, AIR 1955 SC 33.  This Court observed that when a

Committee   consisting   of   representatives   of   the   industry   and   the

employees considered the problem and made its recommendation and

when they were accepted by the Government, it would ordinarily not

be   possible   to   examine   the   merits   of   the   recommendation.     The

submission   made   upon   infringement   of
Article   19(1)(g)
read   with
Article 19(6)
was rejected.  This Court observed thus:
“10. In the case of The Edward Mills Co. Ltd.,
          Beawar v. State of Ajmer, 1955-I SCR 735: ( (S) AIR
          1955 SC 25) the validity of
S. 27
of the Act was
          challenged on the ground of excessive delegation.
          It was urged that the Act prescribed no principles
          and laid down no standard which could furnish an
          intelligent guidance to the administrative authority
          in making selection while acting under
S. 27
and
          so the matter was left entirely to the discretion of
          the appropriate Government which can amend the
          schedule in any way it liked and such delegation
          virtually amounted to a surrender by the
          Legislature of its essential legislative function. This
          contention was rejected by Mukherjea, J., as he
          then was, who spoke for the Court. The learned
          Judge observed that the Legislature undoubtedly
          intended to apply the Act to those industries only
          where by reason of unorganised labour or want of
90
proper arrangements for effective regulation of
wages or for other causes the wages of labourers
in a particular industry were very low. He also
pointed out that conditions of labour vary under
different circumstances and from State to State
and the expediency of including a particular trade
or industry within the schedule depends upon a
variety of facts which are by no means uniform
and which can best be ascertained by a person
who is placed in charge of the administration of a
particular State. That is why the Court concluded
that in enacting
S. 27
it could not be said that the
Legislature had in any way stripped itself of its
essential powers or assigned to the administrative
authority anything but an accessory or subordinate
power which was deemed necessary to carry out
the purpose and the policy of the Act.
11.
In the same year another attempt was made to
challenge the validity of the Act in
Bijay Cotton
Mills Ltd. v. State of Ajmer
(1955)-1 SCR 752; ((S)
AIR 1955 SC 33). This time the crucial sections of
the Act, namely, Ss. 3, 4 and 5 were attacked, and
the challenge was based on the ground that the
restrictions imposed by them upon the freedom of
contract     violated    the   fundamental     right
guaranteed under
Art. 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution.
This challenge was repelled by Mukherjea, J., as he
then was, who again spoke for the Court. The
learned Judge held that the restrictions were
imposed in the interest of the general public and
with a view to carry out one of the directive
principles of State policy as embodied in
Art. 43
and so the impugned sections were protected by
the terms of Cl. (6) of
Art. 19.
In repelling the
argument of the employers' inability to meet the
burden of the minimum wage rates it was
observed that "the employers cannot be heard to
complain if they are compelled to pay minimum
wages to their labourers even though the
labourers on account of their poverty and
91
helplessness are willing to work on lesser wages,
and that if individual employers might find it
difficult to carry on business on the basis of
minimum wages fixed under the Act that cannot
be the reason for striking down the law itself as
unreasonable. The inability of the employers may
in many cases be due entirely to the economic
conditions of those employers." It would thus be
seen that these two decisions have firmly
established the validity of the Act, and there can
no longer be any doubt that in fixing the minimum
wage rates as contemplated by the Act the
hardship caused to individual employers or their
inability to meet the burden has no relevance.
Incidentally, it may be pointed out that in dealing
with the minimum wage rates intended to be
prescribed by the Act Mukherjea, J., has in one
place observed that the labourers should be
secured adequate living wages. In the context it is
clear that the learned Judge was not referring to
living wages properly so-called but to the
minimum wages with which alone the Act is
concerned. In view of these two decisions we have
not allowed Mr. Nambiar to raise any contentions
against the validity of the Act. It is true that Mr.
Nambiar attempted to argue that certain aspects
of the matter on which he wished to rely had not
been duly considered by the Court in
Bijay Cotton
Mills Ltd.
's case (1955)-1 SCR 752; ((S) AIR 1955
SC 33). In our opinion it is futile to attempt to
reopen an issue which is clearly concluded by the
decisions of this Court. Therefore, we will proceed
to deal with the present petition, as we must, on
the basis that the Act under which the Committee
was appointed and the notification was ultimately
issued is valid.”
92
89.
In
Minerva  Talkies, Bangalore & Ors. v. State of Karnataka &

Ors.
1988   Suppl.   SCC   176   in   which   Rule   41­A   of   the   Karnataka

Cinemas (Regulation) Rules, 1971 came to be questioned as violative

of
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.  The argument that the

income   would   be   reduced   as   such   the   rule   was   prohibitive   not

restrictive, this Court rejected the submission of violation of
Article

19(1)(g)
and observed thus :
“12. The appellants’/petitioners' contention that
          restriction under Rule 41-A is unreasonable is
          founded on the premise that Rule 41-A is not
          regulatory in nature instead it totally prohibits
          exhibition of cinematograph films for one show
          and its impact is excessive as it reduces
          appellants’/petitioners' income to the extent of
          one-fifth. The appellants/petitioners have no
          unrestricted fundamental right to carry on
          business of exhibiting cinematograph films. Their
          right to carry on business is regulated by the
          provisions of the Act and the Rules framed
          thereunder. These provisions are necessary to
          ensure public safety, public health and other allied
          matters. As already discussed Rule 41-A has
          placed limit on the number of shows which a
          licensee can hold in a day. The rule does not
          prohibit exhibition of cinematograph films instead
          it regulates it by providing that instead of five
          shows only four shows should be exhibited in a
          day.
In
Narender Kumar v. Union of India
, (1960) 2
          SCR 375, this Court held that a law made in the
          public interest prohibiting a business would be
          valid as the 'prohibition' is only a kind of
          'restriction'. The expression "restriction" includes
          "prohibition" also. Rule 41-A, however, does not
93
take away the licensees' right to carry on business
         of exhibiting cinematograph films. It merely
         regulates it. No rule or law can be declared to be
         unreasonable merely because there is reduction in
         the income of a citizen on account of the
         regulation of the business. In our opinion, Rule 41-
         A does not place any unreasonable restriction on
         the appellants’/petitioners' fundamental right
         guaranteed to them under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the
         Constitution.”
90.
In
T.V. Balakrishnan v. State of T.N. & Ors.
, 1995 Suppl. 4 SCC

236, wherein Rules 1­A (3)(b), 2, 3(ii) and 7(4) of Tamil Nadu Timber

Transit Rules, 1968 had been questioned on the ground of violation of
Article 19 (1)(g).
It was held that it was not restrictive but regulatory,

hence was intra vires.  This Court has discussed the matter thus:
4. The High Court further found that the impugned
         Rules were only regulatory and did not in any
         manner infract the right of the petitioners
         guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the
         Constitution of India. The High Court rejected the
         argument on the following reasoning:
“When the rules as framed are intended to
             subserve the aims of the Act which was meant
             to consolidate the law relating to the forest
             produce, the transit thereof and the duty
             leviable thereon; and hence those rules were
             meant to effectuate same of all of these
             objects. Having noticed the uphill task faced
             by the Government in preventing illicit felling
             of trees, over large extents with limited man
             power, and checking at check-posts at forest
             frontiers having been found to be insufficient,
             ineffective and being no match to the swift
             manner in which they are carried away by
94
lorries; and on raids conducted in places like
                Mettupalayam, Tambaram and elsewhere large
                stocks of illicit timber having been found in
                saw-mills and with dealers, the impugned
                rules, which insist on a Form II pass to
                accompany during every movement of timber,
                and hammer mark being affixed on the
                transported timber, are absolutely necessary
                for the protection and management of forest
                wealth in the State of Tamil Nadu. Hence, the
                impugned rules are not violative of
Article
                19(1)(g)
.”
5. Having found that the rules were regulatory and
          not prohibitive, the High Court also rejected the
          argument based on Articles 301-304 of the
          Constitution of India. So far as the enhancement of
          fee is concerned, the High Court examined the
          scheme and operation of the rules and came to the
          conclusion that the State Government was
          providing sufficient services to the timber
          merchants at every check-point and as such the
          principle of quid pro quo was satisfied.”
91.   In  State of Orrisa and Anr vs. Radheyshyam Meher & Ors.  AIR

1995   SC   855   =   1995   (1)   SCC   652   the   question   which   arose   for

consideration was about the power of the State Government in the

absence of rule or regulations to permit the opening of medical store

in campus of hospital remaining open day and night.  Objection was

raised by store­keepers across road close to hospital that opening of

store in campus will jeopardise their interest and they will not be able

to   sustain   themselves.     This   Court   observed   that   the   intention   in
95
starting day and night store within the campus has direct nexus with

the   public   interest   particularly   with   that   of   patients   and   that   the

policy decision of the Government in absence of rules and regulations

was not liable to be interfered with.  This Court has observed thus:
“5. Learned Counsel appearing for the appellants
           vehemently urged before us that the said
           advertisement inviting applications for settling the
           shop to have a medical store inside the hospital
           premises was issued in pursuance of the
           Government policy and with the sole object to
           make the medicines available to the patients even
           at odd hours and, therefore, the High Court should
           not have interfered with the administrative
           decision of the Government taken in the public
           interest. We find considerable force and much
           substance in these submissions.
6. In the aforesaid background the question arises
           whether, in the absence of any rule or regulation
           to the contrary, can the power of the State be
           abridged on the basis of an individual interest of
           certain trader, even to the extent of restricting the
           State's capacity to advance larger public goods. It
           can hardly be disputed that the consideration of
           availability of the medicines to the patients should
           be the uppermost consideration as compared to
           the right of a person to derive income and make
           profits for his sustenance by running a medical
           store for the reason that the medical stores are
           primarily meant for the patients and not the
           patients for the medical stores or those who run
           the same. The submission of the respondents that
           if a medical store is opened within the campus of
           the hospital, the same will jeopardise their interest
           adversely affecting their business and that they
           will not be able to sustain themselves could not be
96
a valid ground to disallow the appellants to open a
          shop within the hospital campus. Undoubtedly, the
          opening of a medical store within the hospital
          campus will provide a great facility to the patients
          who may not be having any attendant of their own
          in the hospital for their assistance at odd hours in
          the event of an emergency to go out to purchase
          the medicines. There may be patients having an
          attendant who may not find it convenient or safe
          to go out of the campus to purchase the medicines
          in the night hours. In these facts and
          circumstances, the paramount consideration
          should be the convenience of the patients and
          protection of their interest and not the hardship
          that may be caused to the medical store keepers
          who may be having their shops outside the
          hospital campus. Thus the intention of the
          appellants to open a medical store within the
          hospital campus is to salvage the difficulties of the
          patients admitted in the hospital and this object of
          the appellants has direct nexus with the Public
          Interest particularly that of the patients and,
          therefore, the High Court should not have
          interfered with the decision of the State
          Government to settle the holding of a medical
          store in the Hospital premises. However, if the
          respondents so choose, they may keep their
          medical stores also open day and night.
Consequently, the impugned order could not be
          sustained."
92.
In
Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. v. Union of India
1996 (10) SCC

104,   compulsory   packing   of   specified   commodities   with   jute

packaging   material   (gunny   bags)   was   held   not   to   be   violative   of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
and
301
of the Constitution.  This Court held that
97
the   Act   primarily   intended   to   provide   socio­economic   justice   to

agriculturist.     This   Court   observed   that   the   role   of
Article   14
in

ushering in healthy social order by providing equal opportunities to

all   citizens   to   make   fundamental   rights   meaningful   and   life   worth

living   should   also   consider   the   role   of
Article   38
in   securing   and

protecting   social,   economic   and   political   justice   and   in   the   case   of

economic legislation presumption of constitutionality arises in favour

of   legislation.     It   is   empowered   to   make   experiments   on   economic

legislation   having   regard   to   various   socio­economic   aspects.     Court

should   not   adjudge   crudities   and   inequities   arising   from   economic

legislation.  With respect to human rights and fundamental freedom,

in   the   Universal   Declaration   of   Human   Rights,   democracy,

development, and respect for human rights, this Court has observed

thus:
“15.
In
Valsamma Paul v. Cochin University
, (1996)
           3 SCC 545, a Bench of this Court has held that
           human rights are derived from the dignity and
           worth inherent in the human person. Human rights
           and fundamental freedoms have been reiterated in
           the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Democracy, development, and respect for human
           rights and the fundamental freedoms are
           interdependent and have mutual reinforcement.
Article 29(2)
of the Declaration of Human Rights
           provides that:
98
"…in the exercise of this right and freedoms,
    everyone shall be subject only to such
    limitations as are determined by law solely for
    the purpose of securing due recognition and
    respect for the rights and freedoms of others
    and of leading the just requirements of
    morality, public order and general welfare in a
    democratic society."
The concept of equality and equal protection of
law guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution in
its proper spectrum encompasses social and
economic justice in a political democracy as its
species to eliminate inequalities in status and to
provide facilities and opportunities among the
individual and groups of people to secure
adequate means of livelihood which is the
foundation for stability of political democracy.”
          xxx                 xxx             xxx
18.
Article 14
of the Constitution is a shining star
among the fundamental rights which guarantees
equality to every citizen and equal protection of
laws to all persons. Equality before law is a
correlative to the concept of rule of law for all-
around evaluation healthy social order. Directives
set forth social principles to eliminate inequalities
in income, in status and opportunity and to provide
facilities and opportunities to every citizen to make
the fundamental rights meaningful and the life of
every citizen worth living and at its best, with the
dignity of person and fraternity, lest they remain
empty vessels and teasing illusions to majority
population.
xxx               xxx               xxx
21.
Article 38
of the Constitution enjoins the
State to strive to promote the welfare of the
people by securing and protecting, as effectively
as it may, the social order in which justice - social,
economic and political - shall, inform all the
99
institutions of the national life striving to minimise
inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities, opportunities
amongst individuals and groups of people residing
in different areas or engaged in different
avocations. As stated earlier, agriculture is the
mainstay of rural economic and empowerment of
the agriculturists. Agriculture, therefore, is an
industry. To the tiller of the soil, livelihood depends
on the production and return of the agricultural
produce and sustained agro-economic growth. The
climatic conditions throughout Bharat are not
uniform. They vary from tropical to moderate
conditions. Tillers of the soil being in unorganised
sector, their voice is scarcely heard and was not
even remotely voiced in these cases. Their
fundamental right to cultivation is as a part of right
to livelihood. It is a bastion of economic and social
justice envisaged in the Preamble and
Article 38
of
the constitution. As stated earlier, the rights,
liberties, and privileges assured to every citizen
are linked with corresponding concepts of duty,
public order, and morality. Therefore, the jural
postulates form the foundation for the functioning
of a just society. The fundamental rights ensured in
Part III are, therefore, made subject to restrictions
i.e., public purpose in Part IV Directives, public
interest or public order in the interest of general
public. In enlivening the fundamental rights and
the public purpose in the Directives, Parliament is
the best Judge to decide what is good for the
community, by whose suffrage it comes into
existence and the majority political party assumes
governance of the country. The Directive Principles
are the fundamentals in their manifestos. Any
digression is unconstitutional. The Constitution
enjoins upon the Executive, Legislature, and the
Judiciary to balance the competing and conflicting
claims involved in a dispute so as to harmonise the
competing claims to establish an egalitarian social
order. It is a settled law that the Fundamental
100
Rights and the Directive Principles are two wheels
of the chariot; none of the two is less important
than the other. Snap one, the other will lose its
efficacy. Together, they constitute the conscience
of the Constitution to bring about social revolution
under rule of law. The Fundamental Rights and the
Directives are, therefore, harmoniously interpreted
to make the law a social engineer to provide flesh
and blood to the dry bones of law. The Directives
would serve the Court as a beacon light to
interpretation. Fundamental Rights are rightful
means to the end, viz., social and economic justice
provided in the Directives and the Preamble. The
Fundamental Rights and the Directives establish
the trinity of equality, liberty, and fraternity in an
egalitarian social order and prevent exploitation.
22. Social Justice, therefore, forms the basis of
progressive stability in the society and human
progress. Economic justice means abolishing such
economic conditions which remove the inequality
of economic value between man and man,
concentration of wealth and means of production
in the hands of a few and are detrimental to the
vast. Law, therefore, must seek to serve as a
flexible instrument of socio-economic adjustment
to bring about peaceful socio-economic revolution
under rule of law. The Constitution, the
fundamental supreme lex distributes the sovereign
power between the Executive, the Legislature, and
the Judiciary. The three instrumentalities, within
their play endeavour to elongate the constitutional
basic structure built in the Preamble, Fundamental
Rights and Directives, namely, establishment of an
egalitarian social order in which every citizen
receives equality of opportunity and of status,
social and economic justice. The Court, therefore,
must strive to give harmonious interpretation to
propel forward march and progress towards
establishing an egalitarian social order.”
101
93.   This   Court   has   observed   that   above   economic   justice   means

abolition   of   such   economic   conditions   which   remove   inequality

between   man   and   man.     In   our   opinion,   there   has   to   be   positive

action for that equality.
94.
In
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. & Ors. v. Punjab Drugs

Manufacturers   Association   &   Ors.
(1999)   6   SCC   247   constitutional

validity of the policy of the Government of the State of Punjab was

challenged   whereby  directions   issued   to   the   purchasing   authorities

that   certain   medicines   used   in   the   government   hospitals   and

dispensaries were to be purchased from public sector manufacturers

only   was   quashed   by   the   High   Court   while   allowing   writ   petition.

Whereas Rajasthan High Court has dismissed a similar writ petition.

Both the matters were decided by this Court.
This Court relied upon

the decision in
Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur v. State of Punjab
, AIR

1955 SC 549 (quoted above) and observed that such restriction could

be imposed by framing policy by exercising powers of the State under
Article   162
of   the   Constitution.     Therefore,   the   contention   of   the

appellants   in   regard   to   creation   of   monopoly   and   violation   of   the
102
fundamental   rights   under
Articles   19(1)(g)
and
19(6)
was   turned

down. This Court has observed thus:
“16. It is clear from the various
judgments
referred to above
that a decision which would
          partially affect the sale prospects of a company,
          cannot be equated with creation of monopoly. In
          Ram Jawaya Kapur AIR 1955 SC 549 and
          Naraindas's [1974] 4 SCC 788 cases, the
          Constitution Bench also held that the policy
          restrictions, as discussed above, can be imposed
          by exercise of executive power of the State under
Article 162
of the Constitution. Therefore, the
          contention of the appellants in regard to creation
          of monopoly and violation of the fundamental right
          under
Articles 19(1)(g)
and
19(6)
should fail. The
          judgment cited above also show that preference
          shown to cooperative institutions or public sector
          undertakings being in public interest, will not be
          construed as arbitrary so as to give rise to a
          contention of violation of
Article 14
of the
          Constitution.
We have noted above that this Court
          in the cases of
Oil & Natural Gas Commission v.
          Association of Natural Gas Consuming Industries of
          Gujarat
(1990) Supp SCC 397 ; Krishna Kakkanth
          (1997) 9 SCC 495 and Hindustan Paper Corpn. Ltd.
v. Govt. of Kerala (1986) 3 SCC 398, has held that
          the preference shown to cooperative institutions or
          public sector undertakings being in public interest,
          will not be construed as arbitrary so as to give rise
          to a contention of violation of
Article 14
of the
          Constitution.
xxx               xxx              xxx
19. For the above reasons, we are of the opinion
          that the High Court was right in coming to the
          conclusion that by the impugned policy, there was
          no creation of any monopoly nor is there any
          violation Of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
or 19(6) of the
          Constitution. In view of the above, we are of the
103
opinion that these appeals should fail and the
          same are dismissed accordingly. No costs.
CA Nos. 3723 and 3744 of 1988:
20. These appeals are preferred against the
          judgment and order of the High Court of Punjab
          and Haryana dated 3-6-1988 made in Civil WP No.
          6144 of 1987 wherein the High Court was pleased
          to allow the writ petition filed by the respondents
          in these civil appeals, quashing the policy decision
          of the State of Punjab whereby the State had
          directed its authorities concerned to purchase
          certain medicines from the public sector
          undertakings only. We have today in CA Nos. 4550-
          51 of 1989 held that a similar policy decision
          issued by the State of Rajasthan does not amount
          to creation of monopoly nor is there any violation
          of
Article 14
or 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. The
          facts giving rise to the writ petitions before the
          Punjab and Haryana High Court from which the
          above civil appeals have arisen being the same,
          we allow these civil appeals and set aside the
          judgment and order of the Punjab and Haryana
          High Court dated 3-6-1988 made in Civil WP No.
          6144 of 1987. Consequently, the said writ petition
          stands dismissed. No costs."
(emphasis supplied)
95.   In   our   considered   opinion   such   stipulation   for   free   treatment

does   not   amount   to   restriction   under
Article   19(6)
on   the   right

enshrined   under
Article   19(1)(g)
and   even   otherwise   it   was   not

necessary to enact a statutory provision by the Government in view of

existing liability as per policy/rules/statutory provisions as to ethical

standards and other statutory provisions in force.
104
In Reference to question No.4 – decision in Social Jurists v. Govt.
of NCT
96.
In the decision rendered by Delhi High Court in
Social Jurists, A

Lawyer Group v. Government of NCT of Delhi
, (supra), there were 20

hospitals   as   respondents.     Out   of   these   20   hospitals,   18   hospitals

were allotted land by Delhi Development Authority (DDA) and in the

case   of   Veerawali  and  Vimhans   hospitals,   the  land   was   allotted   by

Land and Development Office (L&DO).  The Head of L&DO allotted the

lands to  the  aforesaid two  hospitals on concessional rates.   Out of

remaining   18   hospitals,   16   hospitals   were   provided   lands   on   the

condition of free patient treatment specifically mentioned in the lease

deed.     However,   according   to   remaining   two   hospitals  i.e.,   Escort

Heart   Institute   and   Research   Centre   and   Dharam   Shila   Cancer

Foundation   and   Research   Centre,   who   were   also   allotted   land   by

DDA, there was no condition requiring them to provide free patient

care and treatment to the poor sections of the society.  Though in the

letter of  allotment, the said condition was specifically  incorporated.

The terms and conditions of the lease deed certainly did not contain

the stipulation of free treatment, however, in view of the conditions of
105
letter of allotment, the High Court of Delhi in paragraphs 47 and 48

observed thus:
“47.    The first letter of allotment issued to both
           these hospitals contained the term of free
           treatment to poorer sections. The relevant terms of
           the letter has been referred by us supra. Without
           execution of any document, the hospitals had in
           furtherance to the letter of allotment accepted the
           terms and conditions of the letter including this
           condition and (a) paid the money demanded in
           terms of the letter of allotment and (b) took
           possession thereof, without any protest or
           reservation.
48. In other words, a party's right had to be
           controlled in accordance with the terms of letter of
           allotment and, therefore, a complete contract
           existed between the parties. The terms and
           conditions of the letter of allotment empowered the
           authorities to add or impose such other conditions
           which the allottee was obliged to agree having
           taken benefit thereof. The terms and conditions of
           the Lease Deed certainly does not contain the
           condition of free treatment to poorer sections of the
           Society but the same was part of the letter of
           allotment itself and they would be applicable to the
           allotments mutatis mutandis particularly when
           there is no conflict between them and they duly are
           supplement to each other."
97.    The High Court of Delhi also referred to Rules 5 and 21 of the

Delhi   Development   Authority   (Disposal   of   Developed   Nazul   Land)

Rules,   1981.     Rule   5   deals   with   rules   of   premium   for   allotment   of

Nazul land to certain public institutions, whereas Rule 20 deals with
106
allotment   to   certain   public   institutions.     Rule   5   provides   that   the

Authority   may   allot   Nazul   land   to   schools,   colleges,   universities,

hospitals,   other   social   charitable   institutions,   religious,   political,

semi­political organizations and local bodies for remunerative, semi­

remunerative or unremunerative purposes at the premia and ground

rent in force immediately before the coming into force of these rules,

or at such rates as the Central Government may determine from time

to time.   Rule 20 (a) (i) provides that no allotment of Nazul land to

public   institution,   referred   to   in   Rule   5   shall   be   made   unless,

according to the aims and objects of public institution, it directly sub­

serves the interests of the population of the Union Territory of Delhi.

Rule   20   (c)   provides   that   public   institution   should   be   a   non­profit

making character.   There is no such stipulation running contrary to

the aforesaid provisions.   The condition of free patient treatment to

the poor with reference to Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of

Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981, was examined by the High Court

of Delhi, the relevant portion is extracted hereunder:
“56.    The condition of 25% free patient treatment
           to the poor thus is a condition which has been
           imposed in furtherance to the policy of the
           Government which in turn is in strict consonance to
           the spirit contained in Rules 5 and 20 of the Rules
107
and the Constitutional mandate. The DDA had
specifically incorporated this condition at/after the
time when on the tall representations and
negotiations made by the hospitals and their
undertaking to abide by such conditions, was
repeatedly accepted that it issued the letter of
allotment containing these terms. On facts of the
case and in law, they cannot abrogate themselves
from completely satisfying the condition of 'free
patient treatment'.
57. The letter of allotment, thus, is a concluded
contract between the parties and the Lease Deed,
as per the language of the letter of allotment, is
executed in compliance to one of the terms of that
letter and as contemplated under the Nazul Land
Rules.
58. The hospitals cannot pick up the document of
lease in exclusion to preceding and subsequent
documents which complete the rights, privileges,
and obligations between the parties in relation to
the allotment. In the case of Union of India and v.
Jain Sabha, New Delhi
(supra), the Supreme Court
had clearly held that an offer extended by an
allotment letter/revised offer once accepted, would
bind the parties and that for reconsideration of the
action, the allottee could only make a request to
the authorities for a sympathetic consideration and
cannot breach the terms of the allotment. The
Court specifically observed as under:
".....The allotment of land belonging to the
    people at practically no price is meant for
    serving the public interest i.e., spread of
    education or other charitable purposes; it is not
    meant to enable the allottees to make money
    or profiteer with the aid of public property."
108
98.   The High Court held that it was not open to hospitals to wriggle

out of their contractual, statutory and public law obligation.   There

was no scope for reading and confining the rights and obligations of

the parties in isolation.
99.   The   recommendation   made   in   the   report   of   Justice   Qureshi

Committee   was   also   considered   by   the   High   Court   of   Delhi,   the

relevant part is extracted hereunder:
“66.     The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi had
          constituted a special committee being Justice
          Qureshi Committee for this purpose. This
          committee after taking into consideration various
          aspects including workability of this condition had
          recommended that 10% IPD and 25% OPD patients
          should be treated free in all respects in every such
          hospital. Such patients belonging to the poor strata
          of the society should not be required to pay any
          charges. The relevant part of the report of the
          committee reads as under:
“1. Most of the representative of the hospital
               submitted that 25% beds earmarked for poor
               patients were excessive since the cost of
               medicines was too high. It was agreed that it
               should not be more than 15% in any case, but
               10% would be ideal. Therefore, committee
               recommended 10% indoor beds free for poor
               patients for all-purpose including medicines
               and consumables. The free treatment services
               should be available to 25% of total OPD
               patients. This condition should be applicable to
               all the hospitals that have been allotted land
               by the govt.
109
xxx                       xxx
                    xxx
3. The free treatment should be totally free and
                not partly free and should be uniform for all
                hospitals that have been allotted land by the
                Government.
4. It is also suggested that all those institutions
                should provide the free services to the extent
                of 10% also who have not been allotted
                Government land. Even Nursing Homes should
                provide 5% of their beds for poor and needy
                patients.
5. In consideration of persistent violation of
                expressed      and   implied     terms    by    the
                institutions, the allotment of land should be
                cancelled and should be reallotted by a new
                lease deed on new and uniform terms and
                conditions for thirty years, on commercial rates
                of ground rent, to a new management in which
                Government should have at least 3 nominees
                nominated by Lt. Governor having wide
                experience of rendering free services. The
                renewed lease must clearly mention that the
                lease is not transferable and any contravention
                would result in automatic cancellation."
100. The Government of NCT of Delhi accepted the recommendation

of the Justice Qureshi Committee as reasonable and took the decision

that it should be enforced.   However, Union of India stated that the

matter was under its consideration and they had not taken a final

view   in   the   matter.     At   the   relevant   time,   the   similar   view   was

expressed by Maninder Acharya Committee that the condition of free

treatment   of   poor   strata   of   society   should   be   reasonable,   but   its
110
implementation   should   be   strictly   enforced   and   in   the   event   of

default,   strict   action   should   be   taken.     The   High   Court   in
Social

Jurists
(supra) has further observed with respect to land in Delhi and

allotment of vital assets thus:
"95. No right exists without any obligation and no
           obligation can be dissected from the duty tagged
           with it. Right should correlate to a duty. The wider
           interpretations given to
Article 21
read with
Article
           47
of the Constitution of India are not only meant
           for the State but they are equally true for all who
           are placed at an advantageous situation because of
           the help or allotment of vital assets. Such assets
           would be impossible to be gathered in a city like
           Delhi where the land is not available in feet, much
           less in acres, which the State at the cost of its own
           projects had provided land at concessional rates to
           these hospitals. The principle of equality, fairness,
           and equity would command these hospitals to
           discharge their obligations of free patient treatment
           to poor strata of Delhi."
101. The aforesaid decision in
Social Jurists
(supra) was questioned

before   this   Court   by   way   of   several   special   leave   petitions   filed   by

Dharamshila Hospital & Research Centre etc. and Sundar Lal Jain

Charitable   Hospital   also   challenged   the   abovesaid   decision   by

preferring SLP (C) No.5630 of 2008.   The said special leave petitions

were dismissed by reasoned order dated 01.09.2011.    The order in

entirety is extracted hereunder:
111
“The special leave petitions are dismissed.
25% OPD and 10% IPD patients have to be given
          treatment free of cost. The said patients should not
          be charged with         anything. But that will not
          come in the way of the concerned hospital making
          its   own    arrangements      for   meeting     the
          treatment/medicines cost, either by meeting the
          cost from its funds or resources or by way of
          sponsorships or endowments or donations."
102. Thereafter,   the   Government   of   India   on   2.2.2012,   issued   the

impugned order with respect to the policy of free patient treatment to

indigent/poor persons of Delhi to be followed by the private hospitals

allotted   land   by  Land   &  Development   Office   on   concessional  rates.

The said order is reproduced hereinbelow:
“Government of India
                    Ministry of Urban Development
                     Land & Development Office
                     Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi

      No.L&DO/L-II-B-18(107)/2012/42-47                         Dated
      2/2/2012

                                   Order

      SUB: Policy of free patient treatment to indigent/poor
           persons of Delhi to be followed by the private
           hospitals allotted land by Land & Development
           Office on concessional rates –         regarding.
112
Land & Development Office, Ministry of Urban
Development, Govt. of India had allotted land to the
registered societies and trusts on concessional rates
for establishment of hospitals. As per the Government
policy for allotment of land in force in 1943, a
charitable institution was required to pay a premium at
the rate of about Rs.25,000/- to Rs.35,000/- per acre.
In 1949, the policy was reviewed and it was felt that
these prevailing land rates were on the higher side. It
was then decided that land should be allotted to
Charitable Trusts and Institutions for opening schools
and hospitals at a nominal premium ranging from
Rs.2,000 to Rs.5,000/- per acre depending on the
locality in which the land is situated subject to an
annual ground rent of 5% of the premium. In order to
avail the concessional rate, the institution should be
non-profit making and function for the welfare of the
public.
2. Thereafter, the allotments of land were made by the
Land &    Development Office at the rate of Rs.2,000/-
to Rs.5,000/- per acre to 5 hospitals, namely (1) Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital, (2) Mool Chand Khairati Ram
Hospital, (3) St. Stephen's Hospital, (4) Veeranwali
International Hospital (Delhi Hospital Society)/PRIMUS
ORTHO and (5) R.B. Seth Jassa Ram Hospital (initial
allotment of land was made by DDA and after that an
additional strip of land 773 sq. yds. was allotted by
L&DO), during the period 1951 to 1976 in accordance
with the said policy and at the rate of Rs.10,000/- per
acre to one hospital namely VIMHANS as per the
prevailing concessional rate in 1981 keeping in mind
that these hospitals were genuinely charitable in
nature and would provide free treatment for the poor
patients and function for the welfare of the public. Out
of these 6 hospitals, the lease deed of two hospitals
namely, Veeranwali International Hospital (Delhi
Hospital Society)/PRIMUS ORTHO and VIMHANS had
the free treatment condition to the extent of 70% of
total beds whereas, in respect of remaining four
113
hospitals, conditions for free treatment have not been
provided.
3. The Govt. of NCT of Delhi has issued guidelines for
the provision of Free Treatment facilities to patients of
EWS category in private hospitals in pursuance of
directions issued on 22.3.2007 by the Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi in WP (C) No.2866/2002 in the matter of
Social Jurist vs. GNCT Delhi
, which inter-alia includes as
follows: -
i.    The conditions of free patient treatment shall be
       25% of       patients for OPD and 10% of beds in
       the IPD for free                  treatment. The
       percentage of patients will not be liable to pay
       any expenses in the hospital for admission, bed,
       medication, treatment, surgery facility, nursing
       facility,                  consumables, and non-
consumables etc. The hospital              charging
       any money shall be liable for action under the
       law and it would be treated as a violation of the
       orders of the court. The Director/M.S./member of
       the trust or the society running the hospital shall
       be     personally   liable   in   the    event   of
       breach/violation/default.
ii.   The hospital shall maintain the records which
       would reflect the name of the patient,
       father's/husband's name, residence, name of the
       disease suffering from, details of expenses
       incurred on treatment, the facilities provided,
       identification of the patient as poor and its
       verification done by the        hospital.
iii.   The hospital shall also maintain details of
       reference from Government hospital and the
       reports submitted by the        private hospital to
       Government hospital in the form of feedback of
       treatment provided to the patient. The records
       so maintained shall have to be produced to the
       Inspection team, constituted by the Delhi High
       Court, as and when                 required for its
       verification and quarterly details should have to
114
be sent to Directorate of Health Services (DHS),
        Govt. of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) under intimation
        to the office of Land and Development Office.
 iv.    The details shall have also to be made available
        to the       Monitoring Committee constituted by
        Govt. of NCT of Delhi also as and when required.
  v.    Every private hospital shall have to establish a
        referral          centre/desk functional round the
        clock, where the patients referred from Govt.
        hospital would be able to report. The referral
        desk shall be managed by a nodal responsible
        person whose name, telephone, e-mail address
        and fax number is to be sent to the Govt.
Hospitals,        DHS         and       should       be
        prominently displayed. The hospital shall also
        display the       facilities available at the hospital
        and the daily position of availability of free beds
        quota so that the patients coming           directly to
        the hospital would know the position in advance.
 vi.    In case of any change in the nodal person, the
        same should also be intimated within 24 hours to
        Govt. Hospitals and DHS, the list of which shall
        be provided shortly.
vii.    The establishment of the referral desk should be
        ensured within two weeks from the issue of this
        letter and the               Director/In charge of the
        hospital shall be personally liable in the event of
        default.
viii.   The hospital shall send daily information of
        availability of free beds to the DHS, GNCTD twice
        a day between 9 AM – 9.30 AM and at 5 PM-5.30
        PM on all working days and also to the concerned
        nearby Govt. hospital to which the private
        hospital is proposed to be linked for general and
        for           specialized purposes. The details of
        geographical linkage, the telephone numbers/fax
        numbers and the name of the nodal officer of
        Govt. hospitals shall be intimated shortly. In case
        no information is received within the stipulated
        time from the private hospitals then it shall be
        presumed that the beds are available in private
115
hospitals and the patient referred shall be
        accommodated.
ix.    The patient referred by Govt. hospitals or directly
        reporting to the private hospital shall be
        admitted if required, and be treated totally free.
        As per court’s directions, these patients shall not
        incur any expenditure for their entire treatment
        in the hospital.
x.    After the discharge of such patients provided
        with the     treatment, the hospital shall submit a
        report to the referring hospital with a copy to the
        DHS, GNCTD indicating therein the complete
        details    of   treatment     provided   and     the
        expenditure incurred thereon.
xi.    The criteria of providing free treatment would be
        such        persons who have no income or have
income below Rs.4,000/- per month for the time
        being which can be revised from time to time.
xii.    Besides admission of the patient referred from
        Govt.            hospitals, the hospital shall also
provide OPD/IPD/Casualty treatment free to the
        patients directly reporting to the           private
        hospitals and would inform the nearest Govt.
        hospital and to the DHS within two days of
        his/her admission.
xiii.   The patients admitted in any other manner, not
        covered by the above guidelines shall not be
        entitled for claiming            compliance of the
        conditions imposed.
xiv.    As per directions of the court, all the hospitals
        stated in the judgment and/or all other hospitals
        identically situated shall strictly comply with the
        term of free patient treatment to indigent/poor
        persons.
xv.     No benefits shall be applicable to such hospitals
        that had provided free treatment fully or partially
        in the past with the higher conditions as
        applicable for that time with regard to any set off
        of the expenses or otherwise on that ground.
xvi.    The above revised conditions i.e. 25% free OPD
        patient's and 10% free IPD beds and treatment
116
on these beds shall be prospective from the date
         of pronouncement of judgment.
xvii.    Such hospitals which have not complied with the
         conditions at all and persist with the default, for
         them the conditions shall operate from the date
         their hospitals have become functional.
xviii.   An Inspection Committee constituted by the High
         Court would also inspect any of the private
         hospitals. The                Inspection Committee
         shall, have to be entertained and would be
         facilitated to carry out physical inspection of the
         hospital where the free treatment has been
         provided and would also be shown the records of
         having provided free treatment.            The said
         committee has been given the liberty to revive
         the petition or for issuance of any directions from
         the court and wherever necessary for action
         against               violators/defaulters under the
         provisions of
Contempt of Court Act
read with
Article 215
of the Constitution of India.
4.    The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India while
dismissing the bunch of Special Leave Petitions in the
SLP Civil No.18599/2007 vide its order dated 1.9.2011
has ordered that:
"25% OPD and 10% IPD patients have to be
         given treatment free of cost. The said patients
         should not be charged            anything. But
         that will not come in the way of the concerned
         hospital making its own arrangements for
         meeting the treatment/medicines cost, either by
         meeting the cost from its funds or resources or
         by way of sponsorships or          endowments
         or donations."
5. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has affirmed the
aforesaid directions passed by the Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi. The Government of India has taken a policy
decision on the basis of the judgment passed by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court that all the six hospitals which
117
have been provided land by Land & Development Office
     must strictly follow the policy of providing treatment
     free of cost to 25% OPD and 10% IPD patients. The
     Government of India further incorporates the aforesaid
     conditions mentioned in the para 3 (i) to (xviii) above as
     a part of the terms and conditions of lease/allotment.
6. Non-observance or violation of any of the above-said
     guidelines shall mean or be construed as violation of
     the terms of lease/allotment.
(Mahmood Ahmed)
                                       Land & Development Officer”
103. It was also submitted that decision in
Social Jurists
(supra) is

not   at   all   applicable   to   the   Trust.     We   have   examined   the   case

thoroughly and we find that condition of free treatment had been the

primary objective, which would be applicable to hospitals in question

and to all other similarly situated hospitals, whether they were party

to   the   aforesaid   decision   or   not.
The   decision   rendered   in
Social

Jurists
(supra) would be applicable to similarly situated institutions

having been rendered in the public interest institution and affirmed

by this Court by a reasoned order.
104. It is not the case of unilateral imposition of the condition of free

treatment   on   the   hospitals.     The   inquiry   was   conducted,   hospitals

were heard and evidence was recorded by Justice Qureshi Committee
118
and   thereafter   recommendation   made   in   the   report   had   been

accepted.     The   hospitals   were   required   to   show   cause.     Pursuant

thereto, the reply had been filed.  Thus, the decision cannot be said to

be unilateral.
105. It   is   apparent   that   before   imposing   the   conditions   in   lease

deeds, a High Level 10­Member Committee for hospitals in Delhi was

constituted,   headed   by   Mr.   Justice   A.S.   Qureshi   regarding   the

working of the hospitals and nursing homes in Delhi, to review the

existing free treatment facilities extended by the charitable and other

hospitals   who   had   been   allotted   land   on   concessional   terms/rates

pre­determined   by   the   Government,   and   to   suggest   suitable   policy

guidelines   for   free   treatment   facilities   for   needy   and   deserving

patients   uniformly   in   the   beneficiary   institutions,   in   particular,   to

specify   the   diagnostic,   treatment,   lodging,   surgery,   medicines   and

other facilities that would be given free or partially free; to suggest a

proper referral system for the optimum utilization of free treatment by

deserving and needy patients; and to suggest a suitable enforcement

and   monitoring   mechanism   for   the   above,   including   a   legal

framework.   The   Committee   held   various   meetings,   conducted
119
enquiries, various hospitals were heard including Moolchand Kharaiti

Ram Hospital. The Government observed that there were resistance

and persistent refusal of the management of Moolchand Kharaiti Ram

Hospital   to   send   a   reply   to   the   questionnaire   and   to   submit   the

documents   which   they   were   required   to   submit   at   the   end   of   the

enquiry. The first visit made to Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Hospital was

on 16.1.2001 and the second on 21.3.2001. Various other hospitals

were also visited. The Committee observed that there was no legal,

social   or   moral   justification   for   allowing   such   money­making

commercial concerns. The land was allotted for a charitable purpose

and to do charitable service which has now been totally replaced by

exploitative commercial hospitals.
106. With   respect   to   Moolchand   Kharaiti   Ram   Hospital,   Justice

Qureshi Committee has discussed the matter in extensive details. It

has been observed that initially the Trust was truly charitable. It was

granted 9 acres of prime land situated on the Ring Road in Lajpat

Nagar in South Delhi. Initially the hospital continued to serve as a

free Ayurvedic hospital for patients in OPD and IPD sections. It also

carried on the research for Ayurvedic medicines. Later on the trustees
120
decided to introduce Allopathic treatment also. The Allopathic Section

has   been   upgraded   with   air­conditioned   deluxe   and   super­deluxe

rooms which are called Wards. Presently the Allopathic section covers

about   90%   of   the   hospital   activities   and   the   Ayurvedic   section   is

reduced to about 10%. There is only nominal Ayurvedic treatment of

patients in OPD and IPD,   which had originally 4 wards. Now it is

reduced to only one ward in which there are very few patients. There

were only 4 or 5 Ayurvedic patients in the ward on 21.3.2001. The

manufacturing of Ayurvedic medicines is also considerably reduced.

After noting in detail the statements of various witnesses working in

the hospital, and after analysing them, the Committee has found that

the Moolchand Kharaiti Ram Hospital has acted not only contrary to

the wishes of its founder but also violated the terms and conditions

regarding free treatment to the poor, openly both in letter and spirit.

The management of hospital does not consider it to be a charitable

hospital at all. The land would not have been allotted to Trust if it

was not charitable. Be that as it may, nonetheless the land has been

allotted for charitable purpose to the hospital. Their stand was that

the word ‘poor’ was not defined in the lease deed or anywhere else,

was adversely commented upon. Some adverse comments were also
121
made   with   respect   to   the   interpolation   in   the   Will.   We   are   not

considering   the   aforesaid   question   of   interpolation   in   the   instant

matter  as   nothing  turns   on   it.   The   Committee   observed   that   if   the

hospital   was   not   saved   immediately   it   may   be   too   late   because   it

appears to be in the process of being sold out. The facts are writ large

along with the statements of witnesses recorded in the course of the

inquiry.
In   addition,   the   High   Court   of   Delhi   during   the   course   of

hearing   of
Social   Jurists
(supra)   has   also   constituted   a   Committee

headed   by   Shri   N.N.   Khanna   and   also   considered   the   same   and

thereafter   the   decision   had   been   rendered   in
Social   Jurists
case

(supra).
107. Reliance has been placed on behalf of Moolchand Kharaiti Ram

Trust   to   the   decision   rendered   in
Asit   Kumar   Kar   v.   State   of   West

Bengal & Ors.
,  (2009) 2 SCC 703, wherein it was observed that no

adverse orders to be passed against a party without hearing him.
On

this account, it was contended that the Court could not have passed

the adverse order against the hospitals, who were not heard in the

matter   of
Social   Jurists
(supra).     It   was   also   contended   that   a

contempt petition was filed by Union of India, which was dismissed
122
on the ground that the hospitals in question were not impleaded as a

party to the writ petition, that does not help the hospitals in question.

We have examined the matter on merits in the present case afresh

unfettered by previous decision and have found Government's order

dated 2.2.2012, to be absolutely proper.
108. Reliance has also been placed on
Delhi Development Authority &

Anr. v. Joint Action Committee Allottee of SFS Flats & Ors.
,  (2008) 2

SCC  672,   wherein   it   was   held   that   novation   of   contract   cannot   be

done   unilaterally,   and   the   new   terms   must   be   brought   to   the

knowledge   of   the   offeree   and   his   acceptance   thereto   must   be

obtained.     It   was   further   observed   that   when   a   contract   has   been

worked   out,   a   fresh   liability   cannot   be   thrust   upon   a   contracting

party and it was beyond the scope of the original terms contained in

the  offer  letter  and   the  allotment  letter,   in  which  the   imposition   of

extra charges was not contemplated.  In factual matrix being different

decision has no application to the instant case as it was stipulated

right   from   the   beginning   in   the   policy/rules   that   land   to   such

institution   has   been   given   for   charitable   purposes   of   hospitality,

research etc. at concessional rates and/or with non­profit motive.  It
123
is not the case of new obligation being fastened at the time of renewal

of the contract.
109. However,  we make  it  clear that  the  hospitals  in question  and

other   similarly   situated   hospitals,   shall   scrupulously   observe   the

conditions   framed   in   the   order   dated   2.2.2012   and   in   case   any

violation is reported, the same shall be viewed sternly and the lease

shall be cancelled.   We are constrained to pass this order as there

had   been   resistance   to   wholesome   policy   violation   of   the   afore­

conditions contained in order dated 2.2.2012.  Such violation cannot

be       permitted to prevail.  We hereby direct the Government of NCT

of Delhi to file a periodical report to this Court within a period of one

year   from   today   with   respect   to   compliance   of   conditions   by   the

respondents­hospitals and other similar hospitals in Delhi, not only

governed   by   the   decision   of
Social   Jurists
case   (supra),   but   also

governed by this judgment.
110. Resultantly, in our considered opinion, the judgment and order

passed by the High Court are not sustainable and the same is liable
124
to be set aside and is hereby quashed.   The appeals are accordingly

allowed.  Parties to bear their own costs.
…………………………..J.
                                                (Arun Mishra)



                                                 ……..…………………..J.
                                                 (Uday Umesh Lalit)


July 9, 2018   
New Delhi.