[Cites
1
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd vs T Natarajan on 17 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3349, 2018 (9) SCC 235, (2018) 190 ALLINDCAS 56, (2018) 3 JLJR 435, (2018) 4 ARBILR 109, (2018) 4 CAL HN 181, (2018) 4 JCR 49 (SC), 2018 (4) KCCR SN 443 (SC), (2018) 4 PAT LJR 24, (2018) 9 SCALE 28, 2019 (134) ALR SOC 20 (SC), AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2637
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.6748 OF 2018
                                [Arising out of SLP (C) No.33100 of 2015]


                         Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. & Anr.             .. Appellant(s)

                              Versus

                         T. Natarajan                                    .. Respondent(s)


                                              J U D G M E N T


                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)   Leave granted.
2)   This   appeal   is   filed   against   the   final   judgment

                         and order dated 08.10.2015 passed by the High Court

                         of   Judicature   at   Madras   in   W.A.   No.589   of   2015

                         whereby the Division Bench of the High Court allowed
Signature Not Verified
the writ appeal filed by the respondent herein and set
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.07.17
17:58:28 IST
Reason:
aside the order dated 17.04.2014 passed by the Single
1
Judge of the High Court in Writ Petition No. 10026 of

2013 by which the writ petition filed by the respondent

herein was dismissed.
3)    In order to appreciate the issues involved in the

appeal,   it  is   necessary  to   set  out  the  facts  in  detail.

The facts are taken from the SLP paper book.
4)    The appellants herein were respondent Nos.1 and

2   and   the   sole   respondent   herein   was   the   writ

petitioner in the writ petition before the High Court out

of which this appeal arises.
5)    Appellant   No.1   is   the   Government   Company

called Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter referred

to as "the IOC").  The IOC is engaged in the business of

manufacturing and sale of several petroleum products

such   as   petrol,   High­Speed   Diesel   (HSD),   lubricants

etc.   The IOC has set up several retail outlets all over

the   country   for   sale   of   their   products   through   their

retail dealers.
2
6)   On 31.08.1989, the IOC appointed respondent as

its   retail   dealer   for   sale   of   petroleum   products.     A

dealership agreement (Annexure P­12) was accordingly

executed between the IOC and the respondent in this

regard.
7)    The respondent had to carry on the business as

per   the   terms   and   conditions   of   the   dealership

agreement.   The   respondent   accordingly   set   up   his

petrol   pump   in   the   name   and   style   of   M/s   Lakshmi

Service Station at GST Road, Kooteripattu Town (Tamil

Nadu) and started selling petroleum products of IOC.
8)    On   01.08.2008,   Deputy   Inspector   of   Labour

(Weights & Measures) carried out an inspection of the

respondent's petrol pump. It was followed by another

inspection carried out by the Sales Officer of the IOC

on   02.08.2008.   In   these   two   inspections,   it   was

noticed  that “totalizer wires  of L&T Line  DU in petrol

pump model serial No.1578 used  at MS  2 pump was
3
found  cut”.   In  other  words, in  these inspections,  "no

totalizer seal" was found in place.
9)    It   is   these   inspections,   which   gave   rise   to

issuance   of   show   cause   notice   by   the   IOC   to   the

respondent   on   27.08.2008.   The   show   cause   notice,

after   setting   out   the   details   of   the   inspections,

proceeded   that   why   the   dealership   agreement   of   the

respondent   dated   31.08.1989   be   not   terminated   for

the   alleged   breaches   noticed   in   the   inspections.   The

respondent   was   called   upon   to   file   his   reply.     The

respondent filed his reply.
10)   Not   satisfied   with   the   reply   filed   by   the

respondent,   the   IOC,   vide   letter   dated   11.03.2009

terminated the respondent's dealership agreement.
11)   The respondent felt aggrieved by the termination

of his dealership agreement and invoked clause 69 of

the   dealership   agreement   which   provided   for

resolution   of   disputes   by   the   Arbitrator   arising   in
4
relation to the dealership agreement and he requested

the   IOC   to   refer   the   matter   to   the   Arbitrator   for   his

decision.     The   IOC   acceded     to   the   respondent’s

request and accordingly referred the matter relating to

termination of his dealership to the sole Arbitrator.
12)   The Arbitrator then embarked upon the reference

and   passed   his   reasoned   award   dated   14.10.2011.

The operative part of the award reads as under:
“The   act   of   continuing   the   sales   even   after
      the breakage of Totalizer Seal committed by
      the   claimant,   in   question,   calls   for   stern
      action.   However, it is noted that there was
      no   variation   in   the   quality   and   quantity.
      Again,   the   petitioner   has   already   suffered
      substantially for more than two (2) years for
      the   closed   status   of   the   retail   outlets.
      Therefore, a lenient view may be considered
      by   the   respondent,   bearing   in   mind   the
      element of benefit of doubt.
13)   The   IOC,   felt   aggrieved   by   the   award   of   the

Arbitrator,   questioned   its   legality   by   filing   an

application (OP  No.358 of 2012) under
Section 34
of

the   Arbitration   and   Conciliation   Act,   1996   (for   short

“the   Act”)     whereas   the   respondent   filed   an   interim
5
application   No.447/2012   seeking   resumption   of

supply of fuel to him before the High Court.
14)   By   order   dated   23.11.2012,   the   High   Court

dismissed the application and upheld the award. The

operative part of the order reads as under:
"In   the   result,   the   arbitral   award   dated
      14.10.2011 made by the third respondent is
      confirmed with liberty given to the dealer to
      approach   IOC   with   request   in   writing   for
      continuation   of   distributorship   and   for
      supply   and   sale   and   with   further   direction
      issued to IOC to duly consider such request
      of   the   first   respondent/dealer   within   one
      week from the date of receipt of such written
      request.     The   OP   filed   by   the   IOC   and   the
      application filed by the dealer are accordingly
      disposed of."
15)   The aforesaid order attained finality, as neither of

the   parties   filed   any   appeal   against   the   aforesaid

order.
16)   The   respondent   then   on   20.02.2013   filed   a

representation to the appellant (IOC) requesting them

for resumption of the supply of fuel to him pursuant to

the   directions   of   the   award.     By   letter   dated
6
13.03.2013,   the   IOC   rejected   the   representation

assigning the reasons for rejection of the respondent's

representation.
17)   The respondent felt aggrieved by the rejection of

his   representation,   filed   writ   petition   before   the

Madras   High   Court   under   Article   226/227   of   the

Constitution   of   India.   The   appellant   (IOC)   contested

the writ petition and defended their order of rejection

of the respondent's representation.
18)   By   order   dated   17.04.2014,   the   Single   Judge

(writ   Court)   dismissed   the   writ   petition   finding   no

merit   to   the   challenge   made   to   the   rejection   of   the

respondent's   representation  and  upheld  the  same  as

being   just   and   proper   calling   no   interference.   The

respondent felt aggrieved and filed intra court appeal

before the Division Bench.
19)   By impugned  order, the Division Bench allowed

the   respondent’s   appeal   and   while   setting   aside   the
7
order of the Single Judge issued a mandamus to the

IOC to restore the respondent's dealership and resume

the   supply   of   fuel to   his  fuel  station.    The  operative

part  of   the   order   of  the  Division Bench contained in

Para 21 and 22 reads as under:
“21. The application filed by the Corporation
      to   set   aside   the   award   has   already   been
      dismissed by the learned Single Judge.   The
      Corporation   is   now   taking   advantage   of   the
      liberty   granted   by   the   learned   Single   Judge
      while   confirming   the   award   to   consider   the
      representation.   There is absolutely no need
      to   submit   a   representation   and   passing
      orders thereon by the Corporation in view of
      the   conclusiveness   reached   to   the   award
      setting aside the order of termination.  Since
      the   supply   was   stopped   only   on   account   of
      the   order   of   termination   of   dealership,
      naturally   supplies   should   resume
      immediately   after   the   award   and   upholding
      the said award by the learned Single Judge.
      This   aspect   was   not   considered   by   the
      learned Single Judge.  We are therefore of the
      view that the appellant must succeed.
22.  In  the result,  the  order dated 13 March
      2013 on the file of the second respondent is
      set   aside.     The   writ   petition   filed   by   the
      appellant is allowed.   The first respondent is
      directed   to   pass   a   consequential   order
      pursuant to the award dated 14 October 2011
      restoring the dealership of the appellant and
      resume   supplies   to   the   fuel   station.     Such
8
exercise shall be completed within a period of
      one   week   from   the   date   of   receipt   or
      production of a copy of this judgment.”
20)   It is against this aforementioned order, the

IOC   felt   aggrieved   and   filed   this   appeal   by   way   of

special leave before this Court.
21)   Heard   Mr.   Huzefa   Ahmadi,   learned   senior

counsel for the appellants and Mr. Mohan Parasaran,

learned senior counsel for the respondent.
22)   Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel while

assailing the legality and correctness of the impugned

order mainly urged three submissions.
23)   In   the   first   place,   learned   senior   counsel   urged

that   the   well   reasoned   order   passed   by   the   Single

Judge (writ Court), which rightly resulted in upholding

of   the   respondent’s   termination   letter   of   dealership

should   have   been   upheld   by   the   Division   Bench.

According to learned counsel, there was no case made

out for any interference by the Division Bench in the
9
order  of  the  Single Judge, who rightly  dismissed the

respondent's writ petition.
24)   In the second place, learned counsel urged that

the approach of the Division Bench in dealing with the

issue   in   question   itself   was   faulty   inasmuch   as   it

wrongly proceeded on the assumption that the award

dated 14.10.2011 had set aside the termination letter

dated   13.03.2013   and   restored   the   respondent's

dealership in his favour.
25)   Learned   counsel   pointed   out   that   on   proper

interpretation of the reasoning and the operative part

of the award, it is clear that the Arbitrator recorded a

categorical   finding   against   the   respondent   that

breaches   alleged   by   the   appellants   against   the

respondent on the basis of inspection were held made

out requiring stern action.
26)   Learned   counsel   further   pointed   out   that   the

award followed by the observations of the Single Judge
10
at   best   gave   liberty   to   the   respondent   to   file   a

representation   for   re­consideration   of   his   case   for

restoration   of   his   dealership   by   the   IOC   but   not

beyond it.  Indeed, according to learned counsel, if the

award had been in favour of the respondent, then in

such  case,   there  was no need for the Arbitrator  and

Single Judge to give liberty to the respondent to apply

for re­consideration of his case.
27)   In   the   third   place,   learned   counsel   urged   that

once   the   IOC   considered   the   case   of   the   respondent

and found no case to grant him any relief much less

the benefit of restoration of his dealership, the issue

attained finality between the parties.
28)   It was his submission that the Division Bench, in

this circumstance, in its writ jurisdiction had no power

to  sit  as an  Appellate Court over the decision of the

IOC   and   direct   restoration   of   the   respondent's

dealership.
11
29)   It is mainly these three submissions, the learned

senior counsel elaborated his submissions by referring

to various documents on record.
30)   In   reply,   Mr.   Mohan   Parasaran,   learned   senior

counsel, supported the impugned order and contended

that   the   impugned   order   does   not   call   for   any

interference   and,   therefore,   the   appeal   deserves

dismissal.
31)   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and on perusal of the record of the case, we find force

in   the   submissions   urged   by   the   learned   senior

counsel for the appellant.
32)   The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in  this   appeal,  is  whether   the   Division

Bench was right in reversing the decision of the Single

Judge (writ court). In other words, the question, which

arises for consideration is whether the Division Bench

was right in setting aside the letter dated 13.03.2013
12
of   IOC  which  terminated the respondent's dealership

and   was,   therefore,   justified   in   issuing   a   mandamus

against   the   IOC   to   restore   the   dealership   of   the

respondent   herein   and   resume   supply   of   fuel   to   his

fuel station.
33)   In   our   considered   opinion,   the   Division   Bench

was not justified in doing so and this we say for the

following reasons.
34)   Coming   first   to   the   question   as   to   what   is   the

proper   interpretation   of   the   award   dated   14.10.2011

and   the   order   of   the  Single Judge which  upheld  the

award and what it actually decide, in our opinion, a

plain   reading   of   these   orders   indicates   that   the

Arbitrator, in clear terms, held against the respondent

that   he   committed   breaches   of   the   dealership

agreement and as a result of this categorical finding,

the   Arbitrator,   in   substance,   upheld   the   letter   of

termination   of   dealership   calling   for   stern   action
13
against   the   respondent.   Indeed,   once   the   breaches

were held made out, the only consequence that ensued

from   such   finding   was   to   uphold   the   letter   of

termination of dealership agreement.  Since arbitration

clause   69   (c)   empowers   the   Arbitrator   to   pass   any

order in the arbitration proceedings, the Arbitrator and

so   also   the   Single   Judge   while   upholding   the   award

considered it proper to grant liberty to the respondent

to file a representation to the IOC for re­consideration

of   his   case   for   restoration   of   his   dealership.   Such

liberty   could   never   be   construed   to   mean   that   the

Arbitrator had either set aside the letter of termination

of   the   respondent's   dealership   or   directed   to   restore

the supply of fuel to the respondent.
35)   The respondent, pursuant to the liberty granted,

filed his representation to the IOC but the IOC, in their

discretion, rejected the same with reasons.
14
36)   In   our   opinion,   reconsideration   of   the

respondent's case as to whether his dealership should

be restored or not was an independent cause of action

between   the   parties   and   the   same   arose   after   the

award was passed and upheld by the Single Judge.  It

has, therefore, nothing to do with the award and nor it

could be linked with the arbitration proceedings.
37)   In our opinion, it was solely within the discretion

of the IOC ­ they being the principal to decide as to

whether   the   respondent's   dealership   should   be

restored or not and, if so, on what grounds. The IOC

considered the case of the respondent and after taking

into account all the facts and circumstances appearing

in the respondent’s working, came to a conclusion that

it was not possible for them to restore his dealership.

It   was   accordingly   informed   to   the   respondent   vide

letter dated 13.03.2013.
15
38)   In our opinion, the writ Court (Single Judge) was,

therefore, justified in dismissing the respondent's writ

petition   and   upholding   the   rejection   on   the   ground

that   the   High   Court   cannot   interfere   in   the

administrative   decision   of   IOC   and   nor   it   can

substitute its decision by acting as an Appellate Court

over such decision in exercise of writ jurisdiction. It is

more   so   when   such   decision   is   based   on   reasons

involving no arbitrariness of any nature therein which

may call for any interference by the High Court.
39)   The   Division   Bench,   in   our   opinion,   committed

an error in interpreting the award. The Division Bench

proceeded on entirely wrong assumption that since the

award   was   in   respondent's   favour,   the   IOC   had   to

simply   issue   a   consequential   order   in   compliance

thereof   directing   the   IOC   to   revive   the   respondent's

dealership   and   restore   the   supply   of   fuel   to   the

respondent.   As   held  supra,   this   approach   of   the
16
Division Bench was erroneous and is, therefore, legally

unsustainable.
40)   In the light of what is discussed above, we are of

the considered view that the reasoning and conclusion

arrived   at   by   the   Single   Judge   is   just   and   proper,

whereas   the   reasoning   and   conclusion   arrived   at   by

the Division Bench is not proper and hence deserves to

be set aside.
41)   Learned   senior  counsel for  the respondent then

argued   that   the   IOC   has   issued   certain   circulars

providing   therein   as   to   how   the   cases   of   terminated

dealership   of   any   dealer   is   to   be   re­considered.   This

submission, in our opinion, has no merit and we do

not consider it proper to go into this aspect of the case

in the light of what is held above.
42)   In view of the foregoing discussion, we allow the

appeal, set aside the impugned order of the Division

Bench and restore the order of the Single Judge (writ
17
Court) and, in consequence, dismiss the writ petition

filed by the respondent.
…..………………………………J.
                             (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)


                           .………………………………..J
                            (UDAY UMESH LALIT)

New Delhi,
July 17, 2018
18