[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Diyora And Bhanderi Corporation vs Sarine Technologies Ltd. on 30 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1297, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 78
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
1


                                                                                  NON-REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7304-7305 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.17685-86 of 2018)


                         Diyora and Bhanderi Corporation
                         through its partner and Ors.                                ………Appellants


                                                            VERSUS


                         Sarine Technologies Ltd.                                     ..…. Respondent


                                                         JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     Commercial Trade Mark Suit No.8 of 2017 was filed by the

                         respondent herein (‘plaintiff’, for short) in the Court of District Judge, Surat

                         contending inter alia that it had validly subsisting Copyright in Advisor™

                         software both in Israel as well as in USA; that it had secured registration in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
USA in the 6th version (or version 6.0) of its Advisor™ software bearing
Date: 2018.07.30
12:52:30 IST
Reason:
registration No.TX8-252-522; that as per International Copyright Order,
2
1999 this right also extended to India, being a Member Country under the

Berne Copyright Union in like manner as if it was published in India and

that the petitioners (‘defendants’, for short) herein had infringed the

copyright of the Plaintiff over Advisor™ software.         According to the

plaintiff said software, using a three dimensional representation helps in

analyzing how best a raw precious stone can be cut and polished so that best

quality diamonds and precious stones could finally emerge and thus helps in

deriving maximum advantage. The plaintiff prayed inter alia for permanent

injunction against the defendants in respect of …… “Advisor™ software,

for which copyright subsists under common law and also version 6.0

whereof, the code for which also includes programming from previous

versions, has been registered in the USA copyright No.TX8-252-522”. The

plaintiff also filed an application for interim injunction (Exh.-5) and prayed

for following relief:-
“(i) An order of ex-parte ad interim injunction be passed in
      favour of the Plaintiff and against the defendants, their
      affiliates, subsidiaries, related parties, officers, directors,
      representatives, agents, distributors, assigns, nominees and
      customers restraining them from directly or indirectly, jointly or
      severally, using distributing, selling, offering for sale any
      inclusion scanning services that infringe the Plaintiff’s
      copyright as well as any future machine/device that
      incorporates the copyrighted software of the Plaintiff and
      infringes the copyright of the Plaintiff in its Advisor™
3
software, for which copyright subsists under common law and
      also version 6.0 whereof, the code for which also includes
      programming from previous versions, has been registered in the
      United States of America as Copyright No.TX8-252-522; And
      be made absolute till final decision of the suit.”
3.    The matter was contested and the trial court by its order dated

22.09.2017 dismissed the application for interim injunction. In an appeal

preferred by the plaintiff, the High Court by its order dated 21.12.2017 set

aside the order passed by the trial court and remitted the matter back to the

trial court for fresh consideration. It was observed by the High Court as

under:-
“[6.1] In any case as observed hereinabove whether the source
      code or the object code of the plaintiff’s software and the
      defendants’ software are the same or not or the defendants have
      copied the source code or the object code of the plaintiff’s
      software or not would go to the root of the matter. The source
      code or the object code of the plaintiff’s and defendants’
      software are required to be compared by calling upon both of
      them to provide their respective source code and object code
      which can be sent to any impartial and independent expert for
      comparison. Therefore, we are of the opinion that without
      further entering into the merits of the case and /or expressing
      anything on merits, the matter is required to be remanded to the
      learned Judge, Commercial Court for deciding the application
      Exh.5 afresh and after calling upon both, the plaintiff and the
      defendants to provide their respective source code and object
      code to the Court so that the same can be sent to any impartial
      and independent expert for comparison. On the aforesaid
      ground alone the impugned order passed by the learned Judge,
4
Commercial Court deserves to be quashed and set aside and the
      matter is required to be remanded to the learned Judge,
      Commercial Court for deciding the application Exh.5 afresh
      and after undertaking the exercise as stated hereinabove.
[7.0] In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
      present Appeal from Order succeeds. Impugned order passed
      below Exh.5 application by the learned Judge, Commercial
      Court, Vadodara in Commercial Trade Mark Suit No.8/2017 is
      hereby quashed and set aside and the matter is remanded to the
      learned Judge, Commercial Court, Vadodara for deciding the
      application Exh.5 afresh in accordance with law and on its own
      merits, however while deciding the application Exh.5, the
      learned Judge, Commercial Court to call upon the plaintiff and
      the defendants to provide their respective source code and
      object code of their respective software to the Court and the
      Court may send the same to some impartial and independent
      expert for comparison with the source code and object code of
      the plaintiff. The aforesaid exercise shall be completed within a
      period of 4 weeks from the date of receipt of the present order
      and/or the receipt of the writ of the present order. Present
      Appeal from Order is allowed to the aforesaid extent. No
      costs.”


      The aforesaid order was challenged in this Court by the defendants

but this Court did not find any ground to interfere and the Special Leave

Petition was dismissed on 16.03.2018.
4.    While the matter thus stood remitted to the trial court, following

orders were passed by the trial court:-
5
a)    On 12.02.2018 a local Commissioner was appointed and both

the parties were directed to provide source code and object code of

their respective software to the local Commissioner. Paragraph 12 of

the order was as under:-
“12. The Court Commissioner is directed to furnish the
      source and object code of defendants’ software “Work
      Manager” in sealed cover on 21.02.2018. Plaintiff is also
      directed to submit the certified copy of the copyrighted
      software’s source code and object code in sealed cover on
      21.02.2018.”

      The parties were also directed to furnish the names of experts

for comparing source code and object code.
b)    On 28.02.2018 some directions were passed.           One such

direction was,

      “The plaintiff is further directed to furnish on affidavit
      that whatever source code and object code is registered,
      the same has been furnished to the Court Commissioner.”
c)    On 16.03.2018 the trial court appointed one Mr. Robert “Bob”

Zeidman whose name was suggested by the plaintiff as technical

expert to compare the software of the plaintiff and defendants and “to

report the Court as to whether the source code and object code of the

defendants have infringed the copyright of the plaintiff”. The order

indicates that names of three Institutions namely Centre for
6
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Department of

      Computer Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology,

      Bombay and Department of Computer Science and Engineering

      Indian Institute of Technology, Madras were suggested by the

      defendants but were objected by the plaintiff on grounds inter alia that

      the Advocate for the defendants was associated with these Institutions

      and there was an apprehension regarding impartiality, independence

      of those Institutions. This objection was rejected by the trial court

      saying that merely because one of the Advocates had got educated

      from these Institutions would not mean that these Institutions could be

      won over by the defendants. The trial court however found that the

      profiles of the professors of the Institutions which were attached with

      the application, did not reveal that they could conduct the task of

      comparison of source code and object code. The trial court thus found

      said Mr. Zeidman to be the most competent person to undertake the

      task of comparing the software of source code and object code of the

      plaintiff and the defendants.
5.    The order dated 16.03.2018 passed by the trial court appointing said

Mr. Zeidman as an expert was challenged by the defendants by filing Special

Civil application No.4468 of 2018 in the High Court of Gujarat at
7
Ahmedabad. One of the objections raised by the defendants was that if their

software were to be shared with third parties, knowingly or unknowingly, the

defendants would face tremendous prejudice and hardship. The submission

was rejected by the High Court. It also observed that it was open to the trial

court to appoint any expert available in India or any other foreign expert and

the trial court having found Mr. Zeidman to be the most appropriate person,

such assessment made by the trial court was not erroneous on any count.

The High Court thus dismissed said Special Civil Application by its order

dated 01.05.2018.
6.    After the disposal of the matter by the High Court on 01.05.2018, an

application was preferred by the defendants and one of the prayers was:-
“(d) Direction be issued to compare the source code and
      object code of the defendants’ software with the certified copy
      of the Registered Advisor Software 6.0 only, in consonance
      with the order of this Hon’ble Court dated 12.02.2018.”

      It was contended that the plaintiff had submitted additional material to

be compared by the expert and that the matter be confined to source code of

software Advisor 6.0. This matter was dealt with by the trial court by

passing following direction in its order dated 04.05.2018:-
“Having considered the submissions, in these
      circumstances, it is made clear that the expert shall compare
      registered object code and source code of the software of the
      plaintiff with the defendants’ software.          The other
8
material/additional material (which is not in accordance to the
      orders of the court) produced by the plaintiff in the sealed cover
      need not to be considered by the expert. It is made clear that
      this Court has passed the order for comparison of the source
      code and object code in respect of registered version of the
      plaintiff. The orders dated 12.02.2018 and 28.02.2018 passed
      by this court and order dated 21.10.2017 of the Hon’ble High
      Court be complied with in letter and spirit. It is again made
      clear by the court that at the time of deciding the logistic for
      comparison of source and object code, the Court will decide
      that what material is required to be sent for comparison in
      compliance of the orders. Further, keeping in view the
      confidentiality of source code, the certified copy of the software
      advisor 6.0 be kept in sealed cover. The separate order for safe
      custody of the software will be passed today.”
7.    On 07.05.2018, an email was addressed by the counsel for the

defendants to said Mr. Zeidman asking him whether he was willing to visit

India or the software be sent to him to undertake the task of comparing the

software and further as to what would be his professional fees and other

miscellaneous costs. Various emails have been placed on record to show

that the defendants were in touch with said Mr. Zeidman regarding his visit

and engagement as an expert to undertake the task.
8.    On 01.06.2018 while considering the application filed by the plaintiff

regarding logistics how the expert would carry out the exercise of

comparison, it was observed by the trial court :-
“However, the outcome of the aforesaid remains that the
      expert may compare the source code and object code of the
9
defendants with that of the plaintiffs source code and object in
      the Advisor™ software (all previous and existing) whether
      registered or otherwise.”
9.    The aforesaid order dated 01.06.2018 was challenged by the

defendants in the High Court by preferring Special Civil Application No.

9010 of 2018. The defendants also challenged the validity of the provisions

of
Section 8
of the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and

Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015.            The basic

submission of the defendants was that the scope of the matter which was

clearly restricted to comparison of source code and object code in respect of

registered version of the plaintiff as against the source code and object code

of the software of the defendants vide order dated 04.05.2018, was sought to

be expanded by the order dated 01.06.2018. As against the source code and

object code in respect of registered version of the plaintiff, the comparison

could now be with all previous and existing software whether registered or

otherwise. The objection was rejected by the High Court on the ground that

while exercising power under
Article 227
of the Constitution, the High Court

could not act as a Court of Appeal. Since no submissions were advanced

regarding validity of the provisions of aforesaid
Section 8
, the High Court

felt it unnecessary to go into the validity of said provision.
10
10.   These orders dated 01.05.2018 and 04.07.2018 passed by the High

Court have now been called in question by the defendants by filing

aforementioned Special Leave Petition Nos.17685-17686 of 2018 which

were filed on 10th July, 2018. The matter came up before this Court on

16.07.2018. The learned Senior Counsel who appeared on caveat at that

stage submitted that the expert in question Mr. Zeidman had already arrived

to conduct the comparison and that the plaintiff would be put to great

prejudice if the work of comparison were to be suspended pending

consideration by this Court. This Court, therefore, passed following order

on 16.07.2018:
“Issue notice.
Let counter affidavit be filed by the respondent within
      two days. Rejoinder affidavit be filed within three days
      thereafter.
In the meantime, status quo as of today shall be
      maintained by the parties in relation to the subject matter of the
      case.
We also direct that the entire expenditure of to and fro
      passage of the expert shall initially be borne by the respondent
      in the present matter and in case we dismiss the mater, then the
      petitioners shall reimburse the expenses entirety for being paid
      to the respondent.
List these matters on 24th July, 2018”
11
11.       The parties having exchanged pleadings the matter was immediately

taken up for hearing. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing

for the defendants submitted inter alia:
(a)       The apprehension expressed regarding impartiality and independence

of institutions of repute suggested by the defendants was completely

uncalled for. The profile of the concerned professors indicated tremendous

experience of the      gentlemen in question in matters of decoding software

and appropriate comparison;
(b)       In matters such as this, an expert should not normally be taken from

outside the country inasmuch as various confidential materials and data

would have to be shared with such expert to enable him to conduct the

exercise of comparison. If at a later point in time such material and data is

found to be in possession of any third parties, it would be impossible to hold

such a foreign expert responsible and the processes of the courts of the

country would not be able to reach such an expert and grant appropriate

relief.
(c)       The matter as regards the scope of comparison having been concluded

by directions issued by the trial court on 4.05.2018 there was no occasion

for the trial court to expand the scope vide order dated 1.06.2018.
12
12.   Mr. Gopal Jain, learned Senior Advocate who appeared for the

plaintiff, in reply submitted:
(a)   The record indicated that the appointment and engagement of Mr.

Zeidman as an expert to undertake the task of comparison was accepted and

acquiesced in by the defendants.       Various emails emanating from the

defendants were pressed into service in support of this submission.
(b)   In any case, the process undertaken by the expert for comparison was

such that a separate laptop was to be used to make the appropriate

comparison. Such laptop would be without any internet connection and

would always be in the custody of the local commissioner. After the day’s

work regarding comparison, the entire material would be erased. These

precautionary steps would ensure that the data submitted by either of the

parties would not be compromised in any situation.
(c)   The scope of the matter was rightly extended inasmuch as the

complaint of the plaintiff was not only based on registered copyright but also

under common law and as such it was the specific case of the plaintiff that

the earlier or antecedent versions of version 6.0 were also required to be

compared in order to place complete picture before the Court.
13
13.    We have gone through the entire record and considered the rival

submissions. In our view, two issues arise for consideration:
(I)    The propriety and correctness of the order appointing said Mr.

Zeidman as an expert in the mater; and

(II)   Whether the scope of the comparison ought to be restricted to version

6.0 in respect of which the plaintiff has registered copyright.
14.    As regards the first submission, we certainly do not approve the nature

of objection which was raised by the plaintiff when names of three reputed

institutions were suggested by the defendants. These institutions are of great

repute and standing and merely because one of the Advocates had studied in

those institutions was no ground to have any apprehension about impartiality

and integrity of those institutions. Secondly the professors whose names

were suggested are also individuals of great standing and repute. They are

experts in their field, specially in computer software and decoding of

software. If the idea was only to compare the software, we see no reason

how those experts could in any way be said to be lacking in requisite

experience in that behalf. This is not to suggest that Mr. Zeidman does not

have the requisite experience. The point is that the other professors were not

lacking in any way in terms of experience and standing. Be that as it may

since Mr. Zeidman was appointed, the correspondence and emails on record
14
suggest that such appointment was accepted by the defendants.               The

defendants were in touch with said Mr. Zeidman to ensure how best the

exercise of comparison could be undertaken.           The correspondence and

emails suggest that the appointment and engagement of said Mr. Zeidman

was not only accepted but the defendants had clearly acquiesced in such

arrangement. Mr. Gopal Jain, learned Senior Advocate is, therefore, right in

his submission that at this length of time, there would be no reason to upset

the arrangement.    We, therefore, reject the submission of Mr. Rohtagi,

learned Senior Advocate and affirm the appointment of Mr. Zeidman as an

expert. The safety arrangements which have been put in place, as indicated

by Mr. Jain, learned Senior Advocate do ensure safety and security of the

data that may be exchanged by the parties in order to facilitate the task of

comparison. The objection raised by Mr. Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate

as regards security of the data therefore needs to be rejected. At this stage, a

clarification is necessary. The task entrusted to the expert is to compare the

respective softwares and make an appropriate report. Whether that amounts

to infringement or not is for the Courts to decide.
15.   As regards the second issue, the case that was projected by the

plaintiff was undoubtedly based on the right emanating from registered

copyright and also under the rights in common law. But at the interim stage,
15
it was not the content and extent of the right under common law which was

gone into to consider whether prima facie case was established by the

plaintiff. The matter went on the aspect of registered copy right and rights

emanating thereunder. The trial court, therefore, was justified in restricting

comparison of the source code and object code in respect of the registered

version of the plaintiff vide its order dated 4.05.2018. That order was never

challenged by the plaintiff.     Having accepted that order, there was no

occasion or reason for the plaintiff to seek expansion of the scope. The trial

court was in error in expanding the scope of the order by its order dated

1.06.2018. We therefore, accept the submission of Mr. Rohatgi, learned

Senior Advocate on this issue and direct that the comparison shall be

restricted to source code to object code in respect of registered version of the

plaintiff.
16.    We now come to the last aspect which was dealt with in the order of

this Court on 16.07.2018. In terms of said order which was passed at the

instance of the defendants, the entire expenditure of to and fro passage of the

expert would be reimbursed by the defendants to the plaintiff in case the

challenge were to fail. However, out of two issues which arose for our

consideration, we have accepted the submission of the defendants as regards

second issue. We, therefore, direct the plaintiff to indicate the sum that it
16
had expended for to and fro passage of the expert within 3 days from the

date of this Judgment and one half of that amount shall be made over by the

defendants to the plaintiff within 7 days thereafter.
17.   We make it clear that we have not gone into the factual controversy in

the matter and merits of the case shall be gone into uninfluenced by any

observations in this Judgment or in the Judgments under appeal.
18.   With these observations present appeals stand disposed of. No costs,

apart from what has been indicated in the preceding paragraph.
………………………J.
                                                        (Abhay Manohar Sapre)




                                                        ………………..……..J.
                                                        (Uday Umesh Lalit)

New Delhi,
July 30, 2018