[Cites
40
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
State Election Commissioner, Bihar ... vs Janakdhari Prasad . on 3 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3320, 2018 (4) AJR 639, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2819, (2018) 7 MAD LJ 242, (2018) 3 PAT LJR 250, (2018) 8 SCALE 497, (2018) 5 ALL WC 4629, (2018) 3 JCR 303 (SC), (2018) 3 JLJR 215, 2018 (8) SCC 1, 2018 (131) ALR SOC 70 (SC), 2018 (191) AIC (SOC) 10 (SC), 2018 (3) KLT SN 56 (SC), 2018 (4) KCCR SN 427 (SC)
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1



                                                                                   Reportable


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.1463 OF 2008

                         State Election Commissioner,                        …Appellant(s)
                         Bihar Patna & others

                                                        Versus
                          
                         Janakdhari Prasad and others                        …Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T

                         Dipak Misra, CJI

                              Janakdhari   Prasad,   the   1st  respondent   herein,   was

                         elected  in  the  year  2001 as a member of Panchayat Samiti,

                         Nagarnausa.   On   13th  February,   2004,   the   fifth   respondent,

                         Ravindra   Nath   Sharma,   filed   a   petition   before   the   State

                         Election   Commission,   Bihar   (for   short   “the   Commission”)

                         contending, inter alia, that the respondent No. 1 was working
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.07.03
as an Assistant Government Pleader in Hilsa, sub­division of
16:55:19 IST
Reason:
District Nalanda and, therefore, he was disqualified to hold the
2
post of member, Panchayat Samiti in view of
Section 139(l)(c)
of the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 (for brevity, ‘the Act’).
2.    The   Election   Commission,   in   order   to   decide   the   issue

whether   the   1st  respondent   was   in   service   of   the   State

Government within the sweep of
Section 139(l)(c)
of the Act,

referred   to   the   appointment   letter   issued   by   the   Law

Department, Government of Bihar, vide which the respondent

herein was appointed as an Advocate in the panel of Assistant

Government Advocates and thereafter observed that the said

respondent  was   holding  a post under  the State  Government

and was receiving fees for the cases conducted by him from

the   Government   and   hence,   he   would   be   deemed   to   be   in

service   of   the   State.   Being   of   this   view,   the   Election

Commission   vide   order   dated   29.03.2004   disqualified   the

respondent under
Section 139(l)(c)
of the Act from the post of

Member in the Panchayat Samiti.
3.    Aggrieved   by   this   Order   of   the   Commission,   the   1 st

respondent   knocked   at   the   doors   of   the   High   Court   of

Judicature at Patna by preferring a Writ Petition (CWJC) No.
3
4322 of 2004 under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India for

quashment of the order of the Commission. The learned Single

Judge   opined   that   the   word   “service”   has   not   been   defined

under the Act and hence, its meaning has to be ascertained in

the   context   it   is   used   and   the   context   in   which   it   is   used

denotes   various   classes   or   category   of   posts   within   it.   The

learned Single Judge further observed that no hard and fast

rule can be laid to ascertain as to which category of office shall

come within the expression “service”, for host of factors have

to be taken into consideration to determine such relationship.
He further proceeded to observe that none of the factors may

be   conclusive   and   no   single   factor   may   be   considered

absolutely essential. Eventually, he stated:­


             “In my opinion, for bringing an office within the
             expression   'service'   of   State   Government   there
             has to be a relationship of Master and Servant,
             age of entering and retirement, scale of pay or
             fixed remuneration, the Conduct and Discipline
             Rules and such other factors. The presence of
             one ingredient or the other may not necessarily
             bring  a   particular   office   within   the   expression
             'service'   in   the   context   of   disqualification   but
             presence of some or the other is necessary for
             the purpose"
4
Thereafter, the learned Single Judge examined the nature

of   appointment   of   a   Government   pleader   who   is   paid   a

retainer­ship as fee and differentiated between the nature of

appointment of an Assistant Government Pleader from that of

a   Government   Pleader   and   came   to   hold   that   so   far   as   the

Assistant Government Pleader is concerned, he is appointed to

assist the Government Pleader and for the professional work

rendered, he is paid remuneration but not paid any retainer

fee. He further expressed the view that a Government Pleader

is not entitled to appear against the State Government but an

Assistant Government Pleader, can appear, against the State

Government  in a case. The Assistant Government Pleader is

basically an Advocate on the roll of the State Bar Council and

besides giving professional advice to other litigants by virtue of

his/her   engagement   by   the   State   Government,   he/she   also

advises   and   represents   the   State   Government   in   Courts   of

Law. The appointment of the Government Pleader is governed

by   the   executive   instruction   which   is   a   tenure   appointment

and he remains a legal practitioner for all purpose and intent.
5
That   apart,   the   engagement   of   an   advocate   as   an   Assistant

Government   Pleader   is   a   professional   engagement   and   the

relationship   between   the   State   and   that   of   the   Assistant

Government Pleader is that of a lawyer and client and not of

Master and Servant. There is neither minimum or maximum

age   limit   for   engagement   of   a   person   as   an   Assistant

Government   Pleader   nor   there   is   any   age   of   retirement.

Assistant Government Pleader is paid fees for the professional

work   done   by   him   and   his   remuneration   is   not   fixed   in   a

particular time scale.  Additionally, no Discipline Rules govern

his conduct and he is bound by same Code of Conduct as any

other   lawyer.   Considering   all   the   aspects   in   a   cumulative

manner,   he   arrived   at   the   conclusion   that   the   Assistant

Government   Pleader   cannot   be   said   to   be   in   service   of   the

State  Government  so as to bring him  within the mischief of
Section 139(l)(c)
of the Act.
4.    On the issue of office of profit, the learned Single Judge

observed   that   the   expression   "in   service"   of   the   State

Government   and   the   expression   "office   of   profit"   in   State
6
Government are not synonymous and, therefore, a person may

hold   an   office   of   profit   under   the   State   but   that   does   not

amount to the fact that he is "in service" of the State.  With the

aforesaid reasoning, he set aside the order of the Commission.
5.    Aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   view,   the   State   Election

Commissioner filed an appeal, being L.P.A No. 879 of 2004,

before a Division Bench of the High Court, which concurred

with  the   view  expressed by  the Single Judge and  dismissed

the   appeal  vide  impugned   judgment   and   order   dated

27.10.2005.  The said dismissal has led to filing of the present

appeal by special leave.
6.    Criticising the impugned judgment and order of the High

Court,   it   is   submitted   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the

appellants that the 1st respondent was appointed in respect of

a   sanctioned   post   and,   therefore,   he   is   in   service   of   the

Government which would indubitably disqualify him to remain

as   a   member.   It   is   his   further   submission   that   the   word

“service”   contextually   is   of   wider   import   and   it   has   to   be

conferred   a   purposive   meaning   so   that   the   democracy   is
7
sustained at the ground level and the elected representatives

remain connected to their electorate.
7.    Despite service of notice, none has appeared on behalf of
the respondents.
8.    To appreciate the controversy at hand, we may refer to
Article   243F(1)(b)
of   the   Constitution   of   India.   It   reads   as

follows:­

             "
Article   243F.
Disqualifications   for
             membership.­   (1)   A   person   shall   be
             disqualified   for   being   chosen   as,   and   for
             being, a member of a Panchayat­

                  xxxx               xxxx                xxxx
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any
             law made by the Legislature of the State."
Article 243F(1)(b)
makes it quite clear that a member of

Panchayat shall stand disqualified by or under any law made

by the Legislature of the State. The Constitution of India has

left it to the wisdom of the State Legislature.
9.    The Legislature of the State of Bihar has enacted the Act

and
Section   139
of   the   Act   stipulates   that   the   persons
8
disqualified shall cease to hold the office. The said provision is

as under:­


             "
Section   139
.  Disqualification.­  (1)
             Notwithstanding anything contained in this
             Act,   a   person   shall   be   disqualified   for
             election or after election for holding the post
             as Mukhia, member of the Gram­Panchayat,
             Sarpanch,   Panch   of   the   Gram   Katchahri,
             member   of   the   Panchayat   Samiti   and
             member of Zila Parishad, if such person
(a)   is not citizen of India;
(b) is so disqualified by or under any law
             for the time being in force for the purposes
             of elections to the legislature of the State:
Provided   that   no   person   shall   be
             disqualified   on   the   ground   that   he   is   less
             than   twenty   five   years   of   age,   if   he   has
             attained the age of twenty one years;
(c) is   in   the   service   of   Central   or   State
             Government or any local authority;
(d) is   in   service   of   any   such   institution
             receiving   aids   from   Central   or   State
             government or any local authority;
(e) has   been   adjudged   by   a   competent
             court to be of unsound mind;
(f)  has been dismissed from the service of
             Central   or   State   Government   or   any   local
             authority   for   misconduct   and   has   been
9
declared   to   be   disqualified   for   employment
in the public service;
(g) has been sentenced by a criminal court
whether   within   or   out   of   India   to
imprisonment   for   an   offence,   other   than   a
political   offence,   for   a   term   exceeding   six
months   or   has   been   ordered   to   furnish
security   for   good   behaviour   under
Section
109
or
Section 110
of the Code of Criminal
Procedure,   1973   (Act   2,   1974)   and   such
sentence   or order  not having  subsequently
been reversed;
(h) has under any law for the time being
in force become ineligible to be a member of
any local authority;
(i)   holds   any   salaried   office   or   office   of
profit under the Panchayat;
(j)  has   been   found   guilty   of   corrupt
practices.
Provided that on being found guilty of
corrupt  practices, the disqualification  shall
cease after six years of general election.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a
member   of   a   Panchayat   at   any   level   has
become   subject   to   any   of   the
disqualifications   mentioned   in   sub­section
(1),   the   question   shall   be   referred   for   the
decision   of   such   authority   and   in   such
manner   as   the   Government   may   by   law
provide.
(3) If   a   person,   who   is   chosen   as   a
member   of   Panchayat,   a   Mukhia,   a
10
Sarpanch,   is   or   becomes   a   member   of   the
          Lok   Sabha,   Rajya   Sabha,   Legislative
          Assembly,   Legislative   Council,   or   is   or
          becomes   a   municipal   councillor   or   a
          councillor   of   a   Municipal   Corporation   or   a
          member of Sanitary Board or a member of a
          notified area committee or a member of any
          other   Panchayat,   Mukhia,   Sarpanch,   then
          within   fifteen   days   from   the   date   of
          commencement   of   the   term   of   office   of   a
          member   of   Lok   Sabha,   Rajya   Sabha,
          Legislative Assembly, Legislative Council or
          of a councilor of municipality or Municipal
          Corporation or a member of Sanitary Board
          or  notified area committee or a member of
          other   Panchayat   or   Mukhia   or   Sarpanch,
          his   seat   in   the   Panchayat   shall   become
          vacant   unless   he   has   previously   resigned
          his   seat   in   the   Lok   Sabha,   Rajya   Sabha,
          Legislative   Assembly,   Legislative   Council,
          Municipality   or   the   Municipal   Corporation,
          Sanitary   Board   or   the   notified   area
          committee or of any such Panchayat as the
          case may be."
Rule 122 of the Bihar Panchayat Election Rules, 1995, as

amended in 2002, empowers the State Election Commission to

decide disqualification of an elected member of a Panchayat.
The said Rule reads as follows:­


          "Rule   122.   Under   provisions   of
Section
          139(2)
of   the   Bihar   Panchayat   Raj   Act,
          1993,   the   State  Election Commission shall
          be   the   competent   authority   to   decide
          whether a member of the Panchayat at any
11
level   has   become   subject   to   any   of   the
              disqualifications   mentioned   in
Section
              139(1)
of   the   Act.   The   matter   of
              disqualification   may   be   brought   to   the
              notice of the State Election Commission in
              the   form   of   a   complaint,   application   or
              information by any person or authority. The
              State   Election   Commission   may   also   take
              suo   moto   cognizance   of   such   matters   and
              decide   such   matters   expeditiously   after
              allowing   sufficient   opportunity   to   the
              affected parties of being heard."
We have reproduced the relevant Section and the Rule to

appreciate the controversy in entirety.
10.    In   the   case   at   hand,   we   are   concerned   with
Section

139(1)(c)
and   (d)   of   the   Act.   In
Section   139(1)(c)
,   there   is   a

postulate that a person shall be disqualified if such a person is

in   the   service   of   Central   or   State   Government   or   any   local

authority.
Section 139(1)(d)
lays down a disqualification if the

person   is   in   service   of   such   institution   receiving   aids   from

Central   or   State   Government   or   any   local   authority.   As   is

noticeable,   the   key   word   in   both   the   provisions   pertains   to

‘service’.
12
11.   As has been stated earlier, the learned single Judge has

drawn   a   distinction   between   “office   of   profit”   and   “service

under   the   Government”.   We   think   it   apposite   to   restate   the

legal position, the distinction between the two facets as above

and   thereafter   x­ray   the   provision,   the   legislative   purpose

behind the same and the nature of appointment.
12.   A   three­Judge   Bench   in
Ravanna   Subanna   v.   G.S.

Kaggeerappa1
,   was   dealing   with   the   acceptance   of

nomination papers of the appellant on the ground that he was

holding   an   office   of   profit   under   the   Government   at   the

relevant time as he was the Chairman of Taluk Development

Committee and was, hence, disqualified for being chosen as a

Councillor under Section 14 of the Mysore Town Municipalities

Act, 1951 (for short, “1951 Act”). The objection was overruled

by   the   Returning   Officer   and   eventually   the   appellant   was

declared elected. Challenging the election, the respondent filed

an   election   petition   before   the   concerned   Sub­Judge   who

dismissed the petition opining that the elected candidate was

not   holding   an   office   of   profit   under   the   Government   as
1 AIR 1954 SC 653
13
contemplated   by
Section   14
of   the   1951   Act.   The   said

judgment   was   reversed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High

Court   in   an   appeal   and   respondent   was   declared   elected.
Section 14(1)
enumerated various grounds of disqualification

and one of such grounds was that of a person holding an office

of profit under the Government of India or the Government of

any State specified in the First Schedule.   It further provided

that if any person is elected as a councilor in contravention of

the   provisions,   his   seat  shall   be  deemed  to  be  vacant.    The

Court addressed to the issue of disqualification and posed the

question   whether   the   appellant   held   an   office   of   profit   as

provided for under
Section 14(1)(A)(a)(iii)
of the 1951 Act.   The

three­Judge Bench expressed thus:­


            “12. … The plain meaning of the expression
            seems   to   be   that   an   office   must   be   held
            under Government to which any pay, salary,
            emoluments   or   allowance   is   attached.   The
            word “profit” connotes the idea of pecuniary
            gain. If there is really a gain, its quantum or
            amount   would   not   be   material;   but   the
            amount of money receivable by a person in
            connection with the office he holds may be
            material in deciding whether the office really
            carries any profit.”
14
Analysing the facts of the case in detail, the Court ruled:­


          “12.   …   From   the   facts   stated   above,   we
          think it can reasonably be inferred that the
          fee of Rs. 6 which the non­official Chairman
          is   entitled   to   draw   for   each   sitting   of   the
          committee, he attends, is not meant to be a
          payment  by  way   of remuneration  or  profit,
          but it is given to him as a consolidated fee
          for the out­of­pocket expenses which he has
          to   incur   for   attending   the   meetings   of   the
          committee. We do not think that it was the
          intention  of the Government which created
          these Taluk Development Committees which
          were   to   be   manned   exclusively   by   non­
          officials, that the office of the Chairman or of
          the   members   should   carry   any   profit   or
          remuneration.”

 And, again:­

          “13.   …   it   cannot   be   argued   that   even   if   a
          Chairman   or   a   member   of   a   Government
          committee   works   in   a   purely   honorary
          capacity   and   there   is   no   remuneration
          attached   to   the   office,   he   will   still   be
          regarded as a person holding office of profit
          in view of the provisions of the section. …”


     After   expressing   the   aforesaid   view,   the   three­Judge
Bench of this Court reversed the judgment of the High Court.
15
13.
In
Sakhawant Ali v. State of Orissa2
,  the issue arose

whether the nomination papers were correctly rejected by the

Election Officer on the ground that the appellant therein was

employed as a legal practitioner against the Municipality in a

case under
Section 198
of the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Act.
The   candidate   whose   nomination   paper   was   rejected   moved

the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution praying

for a writ or order of prohibition to the State Government and

the Election Officer restraining them from holding the election

but the High Court rejected the said prayer. The Court took

note   of   the   fact   that   the
Orissa   Municipal   Act,   1950
was

passed   by   the   State   Legislature.
Section   16
of   the   said   Act

prescribed the disqualification of a candidate for election and

it provided that no person shall be qualified for election to a

seat  in a municipality if such person is employed as a paid

legal   practitioner   on   behalf   of   the   municipality   or   as   legal

practitioner against the municipality.  A contention was raised

before the High Court that the person sought to contest the

election could not be declared to be disqualified as the said Act
2 AIR 1955 SC 166
16
had come into operation on 15th April, 1951 and consequently,

he   could   not   have   been   disqualified   from   15th  March,   1951

when he filed the nomination papers. The Constitution Bench

analysed
Section   1
of   the   said   Act   and   opined  that   the

disqualification   was   attracted   regard   being   had   to   the

sub­section (5) of
Section 1
of the said Act that had stipulated

that the said provision in express terms provided that after the

Act had received the assent of the Governor elections could be

held   under   the   Act   but   were   only   to   take   effect   on   the   Act

coming into force, which meant the coming into force of the

Act   in   such   area  or   areas  on   such   date   or   dates  which   the

State   Government   might   appoint   from   time   to   time   under
Section 1(3)
of the Act. There was thus contemplation under

the very provisions of
Section 1(5)
to the holding of elections

under the Act in spite of the fact that the Act had not come

into force in a particular area.  The Court further observed:­

             “11.  The   right   of   the   appellant   to   practice
             the profession of law guaranteed by
Article
             19(1)(g)
cannot   be   said   to   have   been
             violated,   because   in   laying   down   the
             disqualification   in
Section   16(1)(ix)
of   the
             Act   the   Legislature   does   not   prevent   him
17
from practising his profession of law but it
             only lays down that if he wants to stand as
             a candidate for election he shall not either
             be employed as a paid legal practitioner on
             behalf of the municipality or act as a legal
             practitioner against the municipality. There
             is   no   fundamental   right   in   any   person   to
             stand   as   a   candidate   for   election   to   the
             municipality.   The   only   fundamental   right
             which is guaranteed is that of practising any
             profession   or   carrying   on   any   occupation,
             trade   or   business.   There   is   no   violation   of
             the   latter   right   in   prescribing   the
             disqualification   of   the   type   enacted   in
Section 16(1)(ix)
of the Act.”
14.   A   Constitution   Bench   in  Guru  Gobinda   Basu  v.
Sankari   Prasad   Ghosal   and   others3  was   dealing   with   an

issue wherein the appellant was a chartered accountant and a

partner   of   firm   of   auditors   carrying   on   business   under   the

name and style of a company and the said firm acted as the

auditor of certain companies and corporations. The appellant

carried   with   it   the   right   to   receive   fees,   remuneration   as

Director of the West Bengal Financial Corporation. The Court,

analyzing
Article 102(l)(a)
of the Constitution and concurring

with the view of the High Court stated thus:­



3 AIR 1964 SC 254
18
"…   We   agree   with   the   High   Court   that  for
             holding   an   office   of   profit   under   the
             Government, one need not be in the service
             of   Government   and   there   need   be   no
             relationship of master and servant between
             them.,   The   Constitution   itself   makes   a
             distinction between 'the holder of an office
             of   profit   under   the   Government'   and   'the
             holder   of   a   post   or   service   under   the
             Government'; see Arts. 309 and 314. …”
15.   The   Court   referred   to   the   decision   in
Maulana  Abdul

Shakur  v.  Rikhab Chand
and another4.  In the said case,

the   question  arose   before a Constitution  Bench  whether  the

returned candidate was holding an office of profit, for he was

the manager of a school run by a committee of management

formed   under   the   provisions   of   Durgah   Khwaja   Saheb   Act,

1955. It was contended before the Court that the Government

of   India   had   the   power   of   appointment   and   removal   of   the

members of the committee of management, as also the power

to   appoint   the   administrator   in   consultation   with   the

committee and, therefore, the returned candidate was under
the control and supervision of the Government and hence, he

was holding an office of profit under the Government of India.

4 AIR 1958 SC 52
19
The   Court   repelled   the   submission   by   drawing   a   distinction

between the holder of an office of profit under the Government

and the holder of an office of profit under some other authority

subject to the control of Government. The Court expressed its

opinion thus:­


            “No   doubt   the   Committee   of   the   Durgah
            Endowment   is   to   be   appointed   by   the
            Government   of   India,   but   it   is   a   body
            corporate   with   perpetual   succession   acting
            within   the   four   corners   of   the   Act.   Merely
            because  the Committee or  the members of
            the   Committee   are   removeable   by   the
            Government of India or the Committee can
            make   bye­laws   prescribing   the   duties   and
            powers   of   its   employees   cannot   in   our
            opinion   convert   the   servants   of   the
            Committee   into   holders   of   office   of   profit
            under   the   Government   of   India.   The
            appellant   is   neither   appointed   by   the
            Government of India nor is removable by the
            Government  of India  nor  is  he paid out of
            the   revenues   of   India.   The   power   of   the
            Government to appoint a person to an office
            of profit or to continue him in that office or
            revoke   his   appointment   at   their   discretion
            and   payment   from   out   of   Government
            revenues   are   important   factors   in
            determining whether that person is holding
            an   office   of   profit   under   the   Government
            though   payment   from   a   source  other   than
            Government   revenue   is   not   always   a
20
decisive factor. But the appointment of the
             appellant does not come within this test.”  

      The   aforesaid   passage   lucidly   states   what   basically

constitutes an office of profit.
16.
In
Mahadeo v. Shantibhai
and others5, question arose

whether a lawyer had incurred disqualification on account of

holding   an   office   of   profit   under   the   Government.   The

appellant   was   kept   on   the   panel   of   Railway   Pleaders   for

conducting suits filed against the Union of India in the courts

of Ujjain on the terms and conditions therein mentioned. One

of   the   terms   shows   that   the   appellant   was   ordinarily   to   be

entrusted with cases up to valuation of rupees three thousand

only. Another condition was that he would not accept any brief

against any Railway in any court.  Clause (13) of the terms of

the appointment letter read as follows:­

             “You will be expected to watch cases coming
             up   for   hearing   against   this   Railway   in   the
             various   courts   at   UJB   and   give   timely
             intimation   of   the  same  to   this   office.   If  no
             instructions   regarding   any   particular   case
             are received by you, you will be expected to
             appear   in   the   court   and   obtain   an
             adjournment   to   save   the   ex   parte
5 (1969) 2 SCR 422
21
proceedings   against   this   Railway   in   the
             court. You will be paid Rs 5 for every such
             adjournment  if you  are not  entrusted with
             the conduct of the suit later on.”
17.   The Court referred to the observations of House of Lords

in  Mcmillan   v.   Guest6  wherein   Lord   Wright,   delivering   the

opinion, said:­

             “The word “office” is of indefinite content. Its
             various meanings cover four columns of the
             New   English   Dictionary,   but   I   take   as   the
             most relevant for purposes of this case the
             following:   “A   position   or   place   to   which
             certain duties are “attached, especially one
             of a more or less public character.” 

 Eventually, the Court expressed the view:­

             “If by “office” is meant the right and duty to
             exercise   an   employment   or   a   position   to
             which   certain   duties   are   attached   as
             observed by this Court, it is difficult to see
             why the engagement of the appellant in this
             case   under   the   letter   of   February   6,   1962
             would not amount to the appellant’s holding
             an   office.   By   the   said   letter   he   accepted
             certain   obligations   and   was   required   to
             discharge certain duties. He was not free to
             take   a   brief   against   the   Railway
             Administration. Whether or not the Railway
             Administration thought it proper to entrust
             any particular case or litigation pending in
             the court to him, it was his duty to watch all
             cases   coming   up   for   hearing   against   the
6 [1942] AC 561
22
Railway   Administration   and   to   give   timely
intimation   of   the   same   to   the   office   of   the
Chief   Commercial   Superintendent.   Even   if
no   instructions   regarding   any   particular
case were given to him, he was expected to
appear in court and obtain an adjournment.
In effect this cast a duty on him to appear in
court  and  obtain an adjournment so as to
protect   the   interests   of   the   Railway.   The
duty or obligation was a continuing one so
long as the railway did not think it proper to
remove his name from the panel of Railway
lawyers or so long as he did not intimate to
the Railway Administration that he desired
to   be   free   from   his   obligation   to   render
service to the Railway. In the absence of the
above   he   was   bound   by   the   terms   of   the
engagement   to   watch   the   interests   of   the
Railway   Administration,   give   them   timely
intimation   of   cases   in   which   they   were
involved and on his own initiative apply for
an adjournment in proceedings in which the
Railway   had   made   no   arrangement   for
representation. It is true that he would get a
sum of money only if he appeared but the
possibility   that   the   Railway   might   not
engage   him  is  a matter  of no  moment.  An
office   of   profit   really   means   an   office   in
respect  of which a profit may  accrue. It is
not necessary that it should be possible to
predicate   of   a   holder   of   an   office   of   profit
that he was bound to get a certain amount
of profit irrespective of the duties discharged
by him.”
23
In the aforesaid judgment, as we notice, the Court laid

emphasis   on   the   terms   of   appointment   and   also   on   the

concept of accrual of profit.
18.
In
Srimati Kanta Kathuria v. Manak Chand Surana7
,

the   issue   that   arose   for   consideration   was   whether   the

appellant was holding an office of profit within the meaning of
Article   191
of   the   Constitution   or   not.   The   appellant   was

appointed to assist the Government Advocate in the absence of

any   Assistant   Counsel.   The   letter   of   appointment   stipulated

that   the   appellant   was   appointed   as   a   Special   Government

Pleader to conduct the particular case on behalf of the State of

Rajasthan alongwith Government Advocate.   The Government

laid down the fees payable to the appellant.  In the said case,

the   High   Court   opined   that   the   appellant   held   an   office   of

profit.
The majority referred to the decision in Great Western

Railway   Company   v.   Beater8  and  Mcmillan  case   and

referring to
Mahadeo
(supra) opined:­




7 (1969) 3 SCC 268
8 8 Tax Cases 231,235
24
“29.  That  case in no  way  militates against
           the view which we have taken in this case.
           That case is more like the case of a standing
           Counsel   disqualified   by   the   House   of
           Commons.   It   is   stated   in  Rogers  (on
           Elections Vol. II) at p. 10:
“However,   in   the  Cambridge   case  (121
           Journ.   220),   in   1866,   the   return   of   Mr
           Forsyth was avoided on the ground that he
           held a new office of profit under the Crown,
           within   the   24th   section.   In   the   scheme
           submitted to and approved by Her Majesty
           in   Council   was   inserted   the   office   of
           standing   counsel   with   a   certain   yearly
           payment   (in   the   scheme   called   ‘salary’)
           affixed to it, which Mr Forsyth received, in
           addition   to   the   usual   fees   of   counsel.
The
           Committee avoided the return.”

     The majority also referred to the decision in
Sakhawant

Ali
(supra) which dealt with an instance where the legislature

had provided that the paid legal practitioner could not stand

in  the   municipal  elections.   Elucidating  further, it  has been

expressed thus:­

           “36.  In view of the above reasons, we must
           hold that the appellant was not disqualified
           for   election   under
Article   191
of   the
           Constitution.   But   assuming   that   she   held
           an   office   of  profit, this disqualification has
           been   removed   retrospectively   by   the
           Rajasthan Legislative Assembly by enacting
           the impugned Act.”
25
19.   A   two­Judge   Bench  in  Madhukar   G.E.   Pankakar  v.
Jaswant  Chobbildas   Rajani  and  others9  was dealing  with

the election of the President of a Municipal Council under the

Maharashtra   Municipalities   Act,   1965.   An   unsuccessful

candidate   challenged   the   election   of   the   returned   candidate

singularly on the ground that the candidate was disqualified

under
Section 16(1)(g)
of the said
Municipal Act
inasmuch as

on the date of nomination he was holding an office of profit

under the Government, as he was then, admittedly working as

a   panel   doctor   appointed   under   the   Employees’   State

Insurance   Scheme   (ESI   Scheme),   a   beneficial   project

contemplated   by   the   Employees’
State   Insurance   Act,   1948
.
The returned candidate, a doctor, was admittedly on the date

of filing of nomination, functioning as such but had resigned

before   actual   polling   took   place.   The   Election   Tribunal

accepted the stand of the election petitioner and declared the

election of the returned candidate void. It further proceeded to

hold   that   the   election   petitioner,   being   the   sole   surviving

candidate,   was   the   President.   Commenting   on   the   election
9 (1977) 1 SCC 70
26
petition in the backdrop of facts, Krishna Iyer, J., who penned

the judgment, wrote:­

            “6.  It   is   plain   democratic   sense   that   the
            electoral   process   should   ordinarily   receive   no
            judicial jolt except where pollution of purity or
            contravention   of   legal   mandates   invite   the
            court’s   jurisdiction   to   review   the   result   and
            restore   legality,   legitimacy   and   respect   for
            norms. The frequency of forensic overturning of
            poll verdicts injects instability into the electoral
            system,   kindles   hopes   in   worsted   candidates
            and   induces   post­mortem   discoveries   of
            “disqualifications” as a desperate gamble in the
            system of fluctuating litigative fortunes. This is
            a   caveat   against   overuse   of   the   court   as   an
            antidote   for   a   poll   defeat.   Of   course,
            where a clear breach is made out, the guns of
            law   shall   go   into   action,   and   not   retreat   from
            the rule of law.”
20.   In the said case,
Section 16(1)(g)
which provided for office

of profit, read thus:­ 

            “16(l)(g):   No   person   shall   be   qualified   to
            become   a   Councillor   whether   by   election,
            co­option   or   nomination,   who   is   a
            subordinate   officer   or   servant   of
            Government or any local authority or holds
            an office of profit under Government or any
            local authority;”

      It   was   contended   before   the   Election   Tribunal   that   the

elected candidate was not entitled to become a councilor as he
27
held an office of profit under the Government.   To appreciate

the concept of office of profit, this Court referred to
Section 58
of the ESI Act, 1948, ESI Scheme and opined that the elected

candidate although was a private doctor and running a private

clinic   was   also   an   insurance   medical   practitioner   subject   to

the   discipline,   directions,   obligations   and   control   of   the

relevant   officers   appointed   by   the   State   Government   in

implementing   the   medical   benefit   scheme.   His   letter   of

appointment read that being a medical practitioner ‘appointed

as   such   to   provide   medical   benefit   under   the   Act   and   to

perform such other functions as may be assigned to him’.
21.     We may note with profit that in the said case, Krishna
Iyer,   J.   clarified   the   conflict   between
Mahadeo
(supra)   and
Srimati Kanta Kathuria
(supra) by stating thus:­

            “41.  …   Judicial   technology   sometimes
            distinguishes, sometimes demolishes earlier
            decisions; the art is fine and its use skilful.
            Both the cases dealt with advocates and we
            have referred to them in the earlier resume
            of   precedents.   Even   so,   a   closer   look   will
            disclose why we follow the larger Bench (as
            we   are   bound   to,   even   if   there   is   a   plain
            conflict   between   the   two   cases).   Justice
            Rowlatt’s  locus   classicus  in  Great   Western
            Rly.   Co.  (followed   by   this   Court   in   many
28
cases)   helps   us   steer   clear   of   logomachy
 about   “office”   especially   since   the  New
 English   Dictionary  fills   four   columns.
 Rowlatt,   J.   rivetted   attention   on   a
 subsisting,   permanent,   substantive
 position,   which   had   an   existence
 independent   from   the   person   who   filled   it,
 which went on and was filled in succession
 by successive holders’. So, the first step is
 to   enquire   whether   “a   permanent,
 substantive   position,   which   had   an
 existence independent from the person who
 filled it” can be postulated in the case of an
 insurance medical practitioner. By contrast,
 is   the   post   an   ephemeral,   ad   hoc,
 provisional   incumbency   created,   not
 independently but as a list or panel elastic
 and   expiring   or   expanding,   distinguished
 from   a   thing   that   survives   even   when   no
 person   had   been   appointed   for   the   time
 being?   “Thin   partitions   do   their   bounds
 divide”,   we   agree,   but   the   distinction,
 though   delicate,   is   real.   An   office   of
 insurance   medical   practitioner   can   be
 conjured up if it exists even where no doctor
 sits in the saddle and has duties attached to
 it qua office. We cannot equate it with the
 post of a peon or security gunman who too
 has duties to perform or a workshop where
 government vehicles are repaired, or a milk
 vendor from an approved list who supplies
 milk   to   government   hospitals.  A   panel   of
 lawyers for legal aid to the poor or a body of
 doctors enlisted for emergency service in an
 epidemic   outbreak   charged   with
 responsibilities and paid by the Government
 cannot   be  a  pile  of  offices  of  profit.  If  this
                                
 perspective be correct,   Kanta         and   Mahadeo
29
fit into a legal scheme. In the former, an ad
              hoc   Assistant   Government   Pleader   with
              duties   and   remuneration   was   held   to   fall
              outside   “office   of   profit”.   It   was   a   casual
              engagement,   not   exalted   to   a   permanent
                                       
              position, occupied  pro tempore            by 
                                                           A    or     In
                                                                  B.
              Mahadeo ,   a   permanent   panel   of   lawyers
              “maintained by the Railway Administration”
              with   special   duties   of   a   lasting   nature
              constituted the offices of profit — more like
              standing counsel. …” 
                                             [Emphasis supplied]

      We   may   hasten   to   say   that   we   concur   with   the   said

harmonization   as   we   find   that   it   is   founded   on   apposite

reasoning and also in accord with the precedents holding the

view as regards ‘office of profit’.   Be it noted, eventually, the

Court   ruled   that   the   appellant   therein   a   doctor   functioning

under the ESI Scheme was not holding an office of profit.
22.
In
Ashok Kumar Bhattacharyya v. Ajoy Biswas
and

others10,  a   three­Judge   Bench   while   dealing   with   the   issue

whether   the   respondent   No.   1   was   disqualified   for   being

elected   as   a   member   of   the   House   of   People   as   he   held   an

office   of   profit   under   the   Government   of   Tripura   within   the

meaning   of
Article   102(1)(a)
of   the   Constitution,   for   on   the

10 (1985) 1 SCC 151
30
relevant date  he was an Accountant­ in­charge of the Agartala

Municipality.   After referring to many an authority, the Court

ruled that for determination of the question whether a person

holds   an   office   of   profit   under   the   Government,   each   case

must   be   measured   and   judged   in   the   light   of   the   relevant

provisions.  The Court further opined:­


            “21.   …   Local   Authority   as   such   or   any   other
            authority   does   not   cease   to   become
            independent entity separate from Government.
            Whether   in   a   particular   case   it   is   so   or   not
            must depend upon the facts and circumstances
            of the relevant provisions. To make in all cases
            employees   of   Local   Authorities   subject   to   the
            control of Government, holders of office of profit
            under   the   Government   would   be   to   obliterate
            the   specific   differentiation   made   under
Article
            58(2)
of   the   Constitution   and   to   extend
            disqualification   under
Article   102(1)(a)
to   an
            extent   not   warranted   by   the   language   of   the
            article.”


      On the basis of the aforesaid, ultimately the three­Judge

Bench   recorded   its   finding   that  the   first  respondent   did  not

hold an office of profit under the Government of Tripura on the

date of filing of the nomination.
31
23.
In
Shibu   Soren   v.   Dayanand   Sahay
and   others11,   a

three­Judge   Bench,   while   dealing   with   the   office   of   profit,

opined   that   the  expression   "office   of   profit"   has   not   been

defined either in the Constitution or in the
Representation of

People   Act
.   Anaylsing   further,   the   Court   proceeded   to   state

that in common parlance, the expression 'profit' connotes an

idea of some pecuniary gain. If there is really some gain, its

label ­ 'honorarium' ­ 'remuneration' ­ 'salary' is not material.
It is the substance and not the form which matters and even

the   quantum   or   amount   of  "pecuniary  gain"  is  not  relevant.
What needs to be found out is whether the amount of money

receivable   by   the   concerned   person   in   connection   with   the

office he holds, gives to him some "pecuniary gain", other than

as 'compensation' to defray his out of pocket expenses, which

may   have   the   possibility   to   bring   that   person   under   the

influence of the executive, which is conferring that benefit on

him.  Eventually, the Court held that:­

             “The   question   whether   a   person   holds   an
             office   of   profit,   as   already   noticed,   is
             required   to   be   interpreted   in   a   realistic
11 (2001) 7 SCC 425
32
manner   having   regard   to   the   facts   and
             circumstances   of   each   case   and   relevant
             statutory   provisions.   While   'a   strict   and
             narrow   construction'   may   not   be   adopted
             which   may   have   the   effect   of   'shutting   off
             many prominent and other eligible persons
             to   contest   the   elections'   but   at   the   same
             time   "in   dealing   with  a  statutory  provision
             which   imposes   a   disqualification   on   a
             citizen   it   would   be   unreasonable   to   take
             merely a broad and general view and ignore
             the   essential   points".   The   approach   which
             appeals   to   us   to   interpret   the   expression
             "office   of   profit"   is   that   it   should   be
             interpreted   with   the   flavour   of   reality
             bearing   in   mind   the   object   for   enactment
             of
Article 102(1)(a)
namely to eliminate or in
             any   event   to   reduce   the   risk   of   conflict
             between   the   duty   and   interest   amongst
             members of the legislature by ensuring that
             the   legislature   does   not   have   persons   who
             receive benefits from the Executive and may
             thus be amenable to its influence.”

      The   aforesaid   passage   emphasizes   on   the   purpose   of

disqualification, the approach of the Court while appreciating

the   expression   and   to   reduce   the   risk   of   conflict   of   interest

between the duties and interest.
24.
In
Jaya Bachchan v. Union of India
and others12, the

issue   arose   whether   the   petitioner   was   holding   an   office   of

profit. She was appointed as Chairman of the Uttar Pradesh

12 (2006) 5 SCC 266
33
Film Development Council and was entitled to certain benefits.
The   Court   analyzing   the   law   enunciated   in
Ravanna   Subanna
(supra) and
Shibu Soren
(supra) opined that it is well settled that

where   the   office   carries   with   it   certain   emoluments   or   the

order   of   appointment   states   that   the   person   appointed   is

entitled   to   certain   emoluments,   then   it   will   be   an   office   of

profit,   even   if   the   holder   of   the   office   chooses   not   to

receive/draw   such  emoluments.  What  is relevant  is  whether

pecuniary gain is "receivable" in regard to the office and not

whether   pecuniary   gain   is,   in   fact,   received   or   received

negligibly.
25.   In the case at hand, the first respondent was treated as

disqualified   on   the   foundation  that   he  was   in  service   of  the

Government. In this context, we may usefully refer to the letter

of   appointment   issued   by   the   Government   of   Bihar,   Legal

(Justice)   Department   to   the   District   Magistrate,   Nalanda.   It

reads as follows:­

              "Letter No.­C/A(S) 40­01/98/3049/B 
              Government of Bihar Legal (Justice) 
              Department
34
From
Sri Birendra Singh,
Joint Secretary to the Government, Bihar

To
District Magistrate, 
Nalanda, Biharsharif
                  Patna, Dated 18th August, 2000

Sub.: In relation to appointment of Assistant
Government Advocate for the Court at 
Nalanda and Hilsa

Sir,
In   reference   to   your   letter   No.   6224   dated
20.7.99   on   above   mentioned   subject   and
law   Department   Letter   No.   2413   dated
6.7.2000   as   per   direction   I   have  to   inform
that the State Government has been kind to
appoint Sri Janakdhari Prasad, Advocate on
the post of Assistant Government Advocate
in   the   panel   of   Assistant   Government
Advocates   constituted   for   the   Court   at
Nalanda and Hilsa.
After this appointment the total number of
Assistant   Government   Advocates   in   the
Court   of   Nalanda   would   be   19   (Nineteen)
and   the   total   number   of   Assistant
Government Advocates in the Court of Hilsa
would be 4 (four).
Faithfully yours, 
                                                          Sd/­

           Joint Secretary to the Govt., Bihar"
35
Analyzing   the   letter,  the  Election   Commission  has  held

that the elected candidate was holding a post under the State

Government   and,   therefore,   he   was   disqualified   under   sub­

section (l)(c) of
Section 139
of the Act.
26.   On a careful scrutiny of the communication, it is quite

vivid that the respondent No. l was appointed to the post of

Assistant   Government   Advocate   in   the   panel   of   Assistant

Government Advocates constituted for the courts at Nalanda

and Hilsa. There is no mention of any fixed remuneration.
27.   In the obtaining factual score, would it be appropriate to

accept   the   submission   of   the   appellants   that   the   elected

candidate was in the service of the government. The legislature

has, in exercise of its legislative power and wisdom, not used

the words “office of profit”. Therefore, whether such a letter of

appointment can  be construed to determine if the person is

holding   an   office   of   profit   is   not   necessary   to   be   addressed

although we have referred to certain authorities to appreciate

the context and its fundamental purpose. In the instant case,

the   election   pertains   to   a   Panchayat   Samiti   which   basically
36
relates to the concept at the grass root level. The legislature,

as it seems to us, has not thought of office of profit because

had it thought so it would have provided in that manner.
In
Sakhawant   Ali
(supra),   the   legislature   had   provided   a

disqualification   keeping   in   view   the   conflict   of   interest.   The

absence   of   such   a   provision   possibly   is   to   include   persons

from different fields as long as they are not in service under

the   government   or   a   service   in   an   institution   receiving   aids

from the Central or State Government or any local authority.

The legislature, as the postulate stands today, has confined to

categories of service mentioned hereinbefore. It depends on the

legislative   wisdom.   It   further   needs   to   be   stated   that   the

nature of disqualification has to be strictly construed keeping

in mind that right to contest an election is not a fundamental

right but the said right may be curtailed under valid statutory

provision.
28.   The aforesaid being the position, we may presently focus

on what constitutes a service.
In
State of Assam and others
37
v. Kanak Chandra Dutta13  , Bachawat, J.
, speaking for the

Constitution Bench, held that a person holding a post under a

State is a person serving or employed under the State. There is

a relationship of master and servant between the State and a

person   holding   a   post   under   it.   The   existence   of   this

relationship   is   indicated   by   the  State's   right   to   select   and

appoint   the   holder   of   the   post,   its   right   to   suspend   and

dismiss him, its right to control the manner and method of his

doing   the   work   and   the   payment   by   it   of   his   wages   or

remuneration.  A   relationship   of   master   and   servant   may   be

established by the presence of all or some of these indicia, in

conjunction with other circumstances and it is a question of

fact in each case whether there is such a relation between the

State and the alleged holder of a post.
29.
In this  regard, reference to another Constitution Bench

decision in
Roshan Lal Tandon v. Union of India14
would be

apposite. In the said case, it has been opined that the legal

position of a Government servant is more one of status than a


13 AIR 1967 SC 884
14 AIR 1967 SC 1889
38
contract.   The   hall­mark   of  status   is  the   attachment   to   legal

relationship   of   rights   and   duties   imposed   by   the   public   law

and not by mere agreement by the parties. The duties of status

are fixed by the law and status is a condition of membership of

a group of which powers and duties are exclusively determined

by law and not by agreement between the parties concerned.

As   is   evincible,   emphasis   was   given   on   the   status   in

contradistinction to contractual service.
30.   Learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   Commission,   has

placed heavy reliance on
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi and

others  v.  State of U.P.
and others15.  In the said case, the

Government of the State of U.P. had terminated by a general

order   the   appointments   of   all   Government   Counsel   (Civil,

Criminal, Revenue) in all the districts of the State of U.P. The

High Court had upheld the circular by which the order was

passed. In appeal, by special leave, the Court dealt with two

contentions,   namely,   the   nature   of   appointments   and   the

minimum basis of status attached to those appointments. For


15 (1991) 1 SCC 212
39
the   purpose   of   examination   whether   the   ground   of

arbitrariness   was   available   to   vitiate   the   circular,   the   Court

referred to the Legal Remembrancer's Manual and especially

paragraphs   7.06   to   7.09   which   deals   with   appointment   and

renewal   of   local   practitioners   finally   selected   by   the

government.  The said paragraph deals with the term, tenure,

bar on political activity,  renewal of term and character roll.
31.   Relying on the same and other aspects, the Court held:­

             "The   above   provisions   in   the   L.R.   Manual
             clearly   show  that  the Government  Counsel
             in the districts are treated as Law Officers of
             the   State   who   are   holders   of   an   'office'   or
             ‘
               post'.   The   aforesaid   provisions   in   Chapter
             VII   relating   to   appointment   and   conditions
             of   engagement   of   District   Government
             Counsel show that the appointments are to
             be made and ordinarily renewed on objective
             assessment   of   suitability   of   the   person
             based on the opinion of the District Officer
             and the District Judge; and character roll is
             maintained   for   keeping   a   record   of   the
             suitability   of   the   appointee   to   enable   an
             objective assessment for the purpose of his
             continuance as a Law Officer in the district.
             There are provisions to bar private practice
             and   participation   in   political   activity   by
             D.G.Cs. Apart from clause 3 of para 7.06 to
             which   we   shall   advert   a   little   later,   these
             provisions   clearly   indicate   that   the
40
appointment   and   engagement   of   District
             Government   Counsel   is   not   the   same   as
             that by a private litigant of his counsel and
             there is obviously an element of continuity
             of the appointment unless the appointee is
             found   to   be   unsuitable   either   by   his   own
             work,   conduct   or   age   or   in   comparison   to
             any more suitable candidate available at the
             place   of   appointment.   Suitability   of   the
             appointee being the prime criterion for any
             such   appointment,   it   is   obvious   that
             appointment   of   the   best   amongst   those
             available, is the object sought to be achieved
             by these provisions, which, even otherwise,
             should   be   the   paramount   consideration   in
             discharge   of   this   governmental   function
             aimed at promoting public interest. All Govt.
             Counsel   are   paid   remuneration   out   of   the
             public exchequer and there is a clear public
             element attaching to the 'office' or 'post'."
After   so   stating,   the   Court   referred   to
Sections   24
and
321
of   the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure   and   further

analyzed   the   ratio   in
Mundrika   Prasad   Singh  v.  State   of

Bihar16
and
Mukul Dalal and others v. Union of India
and

others17  and   came   to   hold   that   the   office   of   the   Public

Prosecutor is a public one and the primacy given to the Public

Prosecutor under the scheme of Code has a social purpose.
16 (1979) 4 SCC 701
17 (1988) 3 SCC 144
41
32.   In this regard, we may reproduce a passage from the said

authority which is as follows:­

            “We   are,   therefore,   unable   to   accept   the
            argument of the learned Additional Advocate
            General   that   the   appointment   of   District
            Government   Counsel   by   the   State
            Government   is   only   a   professional
            engagement   like   that   between   a   private
            client   and   his   lawyer,   or   that   it   is   purely
            contractual   with   no   public   element
            attaching to it, which may be terminated at
            any time at the sweet will of the Government
            excluding   judicial   review.   We   have   already
            indicated   the   presence   of   public   element
            attached   to   the   `office'   or   `post'   of   District
            Government   Counsel   of   every   category
            covered   by   the   impugned   circular.   This
            is sufficient   to   attract
Article   14
of   the
            Constitution   and   bring   the   question   of
            validity of the impugned circular within the
            scope of judicial review.”
33. Eventually,   the   Court   analyzing   the   test   of
Article   14
,

opined:­

            “In   our   opinion,   the   wide   sweep   of
Article
            14
undoubtedly   takes   within   its   fold   the
            impugned   circular   issued   by   the   State   of
            U.P.   in   exercise   of   its   executive   power,
            irrespective   of   the   precise   nature   of
            appointment of the Government Counsel in
            the   districts   and   the   other   rights,
            contractual   or   statutory,   which   the
            appointees   may   have.   It   is   for   this   reason
            that   we   base   our   decision   on   the   ground
42
that   independent   of   any   statutory   right,
            available   to   the   appointees,   and   assuming
            for the purpose of this case that the rights
            flow only from the contract of appointment,
            the impugned circular, issued in exercise of
            the   executive   power   of   the   State,   must
            satisfy
Article 14
of the Constitution and if it
            is shown to be arbitrary, it must be struck
            down. However, we have referred to certain
            provisions   relating   to   initial   appointment,
            termination or renewal of tenure to indicate
            that   the   action   is   controlled   at   least   by
            settled   guidelines,   followed   by   the   State   of
            U.P., for a long time. This too is relevant for
            deciding   the   question   of   arbitrariness
            alleged in the present case.”

      The aforesaid passages clearly show that the Court went

by the concept of public element attached to the office or post

of Government Pleader.  It has not expressed the opinion that

they are under the Government service. Be that as it may, as

has   been   held   by   the   learned   Single   Judge   and   rightly   so,

there   is   no   master­servant   relationship   and   the   respondent

was   not   amenable   to   any   disciplinary   proceeding.   He   has

correctly expressed the view that the conduct of the advocate

is subject to the discipline of the  Bar Council.  As we notice,

there   is   nothing   on   record to  show   that  he  was  getting  any

remuneration. Even if some remuneration is attached to the
43
office, he cannot be treated to be under the service of the State

Government.  The aspects which are essential for establishing

a relationship of master and servant are absent. Therefore, the

returned   candidate   could   not   have   been   treated   to   be   in

service under the State Government.
34.   In   view   of   the   premised   reasons,   we   do   not   find   any

substance   in   the   appeal   and   the   same   is,   accordingly,

dismissed.   In the facts and circumstances of the case, there

shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………CJI.
(Dipak Misra)


                                            ……………………………...J.
                                            (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                            ……………………………...J.
New Delhi;                                  (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
03 July, 2018