[Cites
11
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Col Ran Singh Dudee on 3 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 789
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Adarsh Kumar Goel
1


                                                                                        Reportable

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.11009 of 2017



                         Union of India & Others                                ………Appellants


                                                         VERSUS


                         Col Ran Singh Dudee                                    ....…. Respondent

                                                           AND

                                CIVIL APPEAL (Diary No.40312/2017) No. 5973 of 2018



                                                       JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
These appeals question the following judgments and orders passed by

                         the Armed Forces Tribunal, Regional Bench, Lucknow.
(a)   Civil Appeal No.11009 of 2017 is directed against the Judgment and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.07.03
17:11:44 IST
Order dated 17.01.2017:
Reason:
2
(b)   Civil Appeal (Diary) No.40312 of 2017 with an application for leave

to appeal is directed against the Judgment and Order dated 12.09.2017.
Leave to appeal granted.
2.    The relevant facts in the present case are as under:-
(A)   The respondent was initially enrolled in the Indian Army as

Sowar in 1981. He cleared the examination conducted by Union Public

Service Commission in the year 1988 and got commissioned as an Officer

and was posted as Second Lieutenant in the Ordnance Corps of the Army.
During his career, he received some commendations and appreciations.

However, the respondent was summarily tried under
Section 83
of the Army

Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) by Commander, 29 Artillery

Brigade for the offence of ‘absenting himself without leave’ for 03 days

from 27.06.1991 to 29.06.1991.      The Respondent pleaded guilty to the

charge under
Section 39(a)
of the Army Act and was sentenced to

‘Reprimand’.
(B)   While the respondent was serving as Major in 2004-05, he was

tried by General Court Martial on four charges. The first charge was under
Section 52
to the effect that while the respondent was posted at Saugor

between November 2000 and May 2002, he pursued a case for procurement

of 8.64 hectares of land belonging to Government of Madhya Pradesh for the
3
purposes of building a War Memorial in the memory of late Sepoy Hawa

Singh, who was the elder brother of the respondent. The second charge was

connected to the first one and was to the effect that while performing duties

as officiating Commanding Officer he improperly wrote a Demi Official

letter on 09.11.2000 to the Collector, Saugor for allotment of the aforesaid

land. The third charge was connected to the second one while according to

the fourth charge the respondent had failed to submit report about the

acquisition of said land in contravention of Army Order 3/S/98.
(C)   On 16.05.2005, he was found guilty of the first and third

charges but not guilty of the second and fourth charges and was sentenced to

be cashiered and to suffer rigorous imprisonment for three years.         On

21.10.2005, the competent disciplinary authority confirmed the findings as

regards the first, second and fourth charges but did not confirm the finding

on the third charge The sentence awarded by the General Court Martial was

confirmed with remission of six months out of three years rigorous

imprisonment. Though the Court of Inquiry relating to the matter in issue

was undertaken on 07.07.2001 the trial in respect of said charges had

commenced on 19.10.2004.
(D)   The respondent being aggrieved, preferred statutory complaint

under
Section 165
of the Act. During the pendency of said complaint,
4
selection for promotion to the rank of Colonel of 1988 Batch Officers was

undertaken in August 2006 and appropriate selections were made. Since the

respondent, by that time had stood punished in the General Court Martial,

his candidature was not considered.
(E)    As his Statutory Complaint was not considered in due course,

the respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Delhi which was

later transferred to Armed Forces Tribunal, Calcutta. In pursuance of the

directions issued at the interim stage by the Armed Forces Tribunal, the

consideration of the pending Statutory Complaint was taken up and the

matter was referred to the learned Solicitor General of India for his opinion.

As the opinion given by the learned Solicitor General on 01.11.2013 has

been extensively quoted and relied upon in the Judgments under appeal, the

concluding part of the opinion is extracted hereunder:
“17. Since the first Court of Inquiry was ordered to be
      convened on 07.07.2001, it can be said that the knowledge of
      the alleged offence (i.e. fraudulent allotment of land) was
      gained on or before such date.         The Applicant’s trial
      commenced from 19.10.2004, which is 3 years beyond such
      date. Thus, in my opinion, the CGM proceedings are barred by
      limitation.
18. Even on merits, the finding of the guilt by the CGM is not
      tenable in view of the fact that even the Ministry is not clear in
      whose name the land was allotted, as mentioned above in
      paragraph 12 and that the allotment was even otherwise valid in
      so far as the MP Government was concerned, as dealt with in
5
paragraph 15. There has been no challenge to the findings
      arrived at by the magisterial inquiry.
19. It is also an admitted fact that the purpose of the allotment
      was only to build a war memorial, which has not been done by
      virtue of surrender of the land to the Government. I am also
      unable to see any wrongful pecuniary gain. From an overall
      perspective, the intent of the Applicant cannot be said to be
      something which is forbidden by law. It was only to perpetuate
      the memory of his brother. Taking all these facts cumulatively,
      in my opinion, the findings of the GCM appear to be
      unacceptable. My view is also confirmed by Note 89 as would
      be evident from the file of Mr. Praveen Kumar (Director AG-
I”).”

      (F)   By Order dated 20.11.2013, the Central Government allowed

the Statutory Complaint preferred by the respondent and directed:-
“8. Now, therefore, the Central Government, under the powers
      conferred under
section 165
of the Army Act, 1950 do hereby
      annul the proceedings of the General Court Martial findings and
      sentence dated 16th May, 2005 and confirmation order dated 21 st
      October, 2005 being illegal and unjust and allow the petition
      filed by IC-47908F, Major Ran Singh Dudee, of 36 DOU.
      Consequently, the penalty imposed upon IC-47908F Ex Major
      Ran Singh Dudee of 369 DOU stands quashed and he is entitled
      to all consequential benefits as admissible under rules on the
      subject.”


      (G)   The respondent was thereafter reinstated in service on

13.01.2014 and paid all consequential benefits for the entire period. On

16.08.2014, the respondent was promoted to the rank of Lt. Colonel with

effect from 16.12.2004. Sometime in January, 2015, an officer who was

junior to the respondent was promoted to the rank of Brigadier.           A
6
representation was therefore made by the respondent for grant of all

“consequential benefits”. He was principally aggrieved by his non-
empanelment for promotion to the rank of Brigadier. Around this time on

30.06.2015, the respondent was granted Time Scale promotion as Colonel,

on completion of 26 years of service.
(H)   As regards the grievance made by the respondent and his

representation in that behalf, the matter was again referred to the Law

Officer of the Government of India who in his opinion dated 30.12.2015

opined that the respondent could not be denied promotion to the rank his

batch mates and immediate juniors were promoted, that the Government of

India having directed in the Order dated 20.11.2013 that all consequential

benefits be given to the respondent, the mandatory demands under the

relevant Rules would stand waived and that the respondent should be

granted the rank of a Brigadier. Serious reservation was however expressed

by the Department which was of the view that no promotion to the rank of

Brigadier could be granted except through the modalities of selection by the

Selection Board and an appropriate Note was written in that behalf by the

Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Defence on 03.02.2016. No.3

Selection Board was thereafter constituted and in the assessment made by
7
said Selection Board on 26.04.2016, the respondent was not found fit and as

such was not empanelled.
(I)    The respondent being aggrieved filed OA No. 260 of 2016 in

the Armed Forces Tribunal, Regional Bench, Lucknow questioning his non-

empanelment in the rank of Brigadier. It was submitted, inter alia, that:
(i)    The respondent came from a family of soldiers.           Though

      enrolled as Sowar in the year 1981 by sheer dint of hard work he got

      the status of a Commissioned Officer in the year 1988. In his posting

      in Kargil he received COAS Commendation Card. He also received

      Letter of Appreciation from General Officer Commanding 36 Infantry

      Division and was recommended for Sena Medal in 2002.
(ii)   In 1990 he had made complaints against his superiors citing

      various irregularities.   Further, sensing threat to his life he had

      reported the matter to the Brigadier Commander. Offended by such

      reporting, the respondent was falsely implicated in a Court of Enquiry

      which found nothing against him. A first information report was also

      lodged which was found to be stage managed. On the contrary in the

      Court of Enquiry, the officers against whom the respondent had

      complained, were found guilty and were suitably punished.
8
(iii)   In the year 1997 while he was posted at Jodhpur, he was a

      member of the Tender Opening Board for Pokhran field firing ranges.
He had lodged complaint to the superior authorities with regard to

      mal-practices in auction proceedings pursuant to which proceedings of

      auction were annulled.
(iv)    Since he had reported about corrupt practices of the superiors,

      the superiors in retaliation had forged the documents of Revenue

      Court ascribing motive to the respondent as regards allotment of land.

      Though initially he was visited with an order of punishment, namely,

      “Recording of Displeasure”, said punishment was later set aside.
(v)     He was wrongly implicated in the General Court Martial. In

      any case his innocence stood established by reason of order dated

      20.11.2013 which inter alia had directed that he was entitled to all

      consequential benefits.
(vi) In his submission because of the pendency of General Court

      Martial proceedings he was kept out of active service for nine years.

      Relying on the opinion given by the Law Officer on 30.12.2015 he

      submitted that he was entitled to the rank of Brigadier.


      (J)     On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the appellants

that the respondent did not fulfill the required criteria in terms of policy and
9
had not put in requisite period of service while holding the rank of Colonel.

It was further submitted that promotion to the post of Colonel could either

be purely on the basis of selection by the Board or could simply be on the

basis of length of service which is normally known as time scale promotion.

The Selection Board in question, namely, No.3 Selection Board had not

found the respondent fit to be promoted by “Selection”.
(K)    The Armed Forces Tribunal principally relied on the opinion

dated 01.11.2013 of the learned Solicitor General and the order dated

20.11.2013 to come to the conclusion that the respondent was framed by

certain persons on unfounded grounds. It further held that the order dated

20.11.2013 was clear that the respondent was entitled to all “consequential

benefits” and as opined by the Law Officer in his opinion dated 30.12.2015

the respondent ought to have been promoted as Brigadier. The Armed

Forces Tribunal found that the Department was not justified in ignoring the

opinion of the Law Officer and in generating the Note dated 03.02.2016. It

concluded:
“There is no room for doubt that ordinarily, right to consider is
      a fundamental right and in case, the case is considered and
      incumbent does not qualify because of lack of criteria, he
      cannot lay claim for promotion. However, the fact remains
      where in the facts and circumstances as in the present, because
      of grant of consequential benefits and loss of promotional
      avenues by virtue of pendency of General Court Martial (supra)
      and having suspended service period on account of such
10
proceeding which has been held to be based on unfounded facts
      and allegations, rights that accrue to the Applicant on account
      of setting aside of punishment order, include the right to seek
      promotion to the higher rank from the date his juniors have
      been promoted keeping in view the facts and circumstances of
      the present case.”


      (L)   The Armed Forces Tribunal thus by its judgment and order

dated 17.01.2017 directed that a final decision be taken by the appellants

keeping in view the opinion expressed by the Law Officer for promotion of

the respondent to the rank of Brigadier “Selection Grade”.
(M)   The appellants being aggrieved approached this Court by filing

Civil Appeal No.11009 of 2017. While issuing notice, this Court passed the

following direction on 01.02.2017:
“In the meantime, there will be stay of operation of the
      impugned judgment on the condition that the appellants shall
      take a decision on the promotion of the respondent to the rank
      of Colonel, within a period of two weeks from today, in
      accordance with law.”


      (N)   No.3 Selection Board was, therefore, constituted on 3.02.2017

which considered the candidature of the respondent and the question

whether he was fit to be promoted by selection to the rank of Colonel. The

proceedings dated 13.02.2017 indicate that the Board considered the profile

of the respondent alongwith three other officers (Two of them being

empanelled officers - the second being the lowest empanelled officer and the
11
third being one who was not empanelled). As per record, the matter was

considered on the basis of six indicia namely (i) Overall C.R. Profile, (ii)

Lowest C.R. Assessment, (iii) Recommendations for promotions, (iv)

Course Profile, (v) Lowest Course grading and (vi) Discipline Profile. As

against the candidates who were empanelled and the one who was not

empanelled, the respondent’s profile was found to be lower than all three of

them in terms of aforesaid Indicia Nos.(ii), (iv) and (v). Further as against

Indicia No.(vi), where all those three officers had “NIL” entry the profile of

the respondent indicated “reprimand” which was issued in 1991. It may be

noted that only one out of those three officers who was empanelled had

“Average CR Profile” graded as “Above Average to Outstanding” which was

the same as the respondent. Considering the comparative profile of the

respondent and those three officers, it was found that the respondent was not

fit to be promoted by selection to the post of Colonel.
The assessment made by the aforesaid No.3 Selection Board was

approved by Chief of Army Staff.
(O)    The Comparative Chart regarding profile of those three officers

and the respondent is extracted hereunder. We have however not disclosed

the names of those three officers.
12
Comparative Profile

                  Last           Officer not Officer         Respondent
                  Empanelled     Empanelled Empanelled
                  Officer
Name              Lt. Col x      Lt. Col y     Lt. Col z   Col (TS)
                                                           RS Dudee
Overall CR        Above          Above         Above       Above
Profile           Average        Average       Average to Average to
                                               Outstanding Outstanding
Lowest CR         8              8             8           7
assessment
RecommendationsShould            Should        Should        01x May
for promotion  promote           promote       promote       promote
Course Profile Average to        Average to    Average to    Below
               above             above         above         Average to
               Average           Average       Average       Average
Lowest Course C                  C             C             E
Grading
Discipline     Nil               Nil           Nil           Reprimand
Profile                                                      Dec 91
Army Act
Section 39
(Absence
                                                             without
                                                             Leave)


      (P)    The respondent challenged the decision of No.3 Selection
Board by filing OA No.104 of 2017 before the Armed Forces Tribunal,

Regional Bench, Lucknow. When Civil Appeal No.11009 of 2017 was taken

up, this Court recorded the fact that the Selection Board had found the

respondent unfit to be promoted as Colonel against which decision challenge

was pending before the Armed Forces Tribunal. The appeal was, therefore,
13
adjourned to await the decision of the Armed Forces Tribunal while

continuing the interim order passed earlier.
(Q)    The Tribunal reproduced the Comparative Chart which was

part of the record including names of the officers concerned. According to

the Tribunal the entry of “Reprimand” which was of the year 1991 could not

and ought not to have been taken into account, more particularly when a

clear opinion was expressed by the Law Officer on 30.12.2015. It did not

consider the fact that on Indicia Nos.(ii), (iv) and (v) the respondent was

definitely found lower than other three officers but relied upon the fact that

the overall C.R. Profile was adjudged “Above Average to Outstanding”

whereas the lowest empanelled officer was actually graded as “Above

Average”. The Tribunal observed:
“31. We have noticed that over all profile of the
      empanelled officer is above average whereas the applicant’s
      over all profile is above average to outstanding. How the
      applicant’s over all profile has been adjudged to be lower than
      the last selectee is not comprehensible.
32. We thus feel that the Selection Board has not acted
      fairly and justly after applying mind to the original records and
      seems to have considered the applicant’s case with pre-disposed
      mind.”


      (R)    The Tribunal thus found the analysis and assessment made by

No.3 Selection Board to be perverse. While allowing Original Application
14
No.104 of 2017 vide its judgment and order dated 12.09.2017, the Tribunal

directed the appellants to constitute a fresh Selection Board and reconsider

the case of the respondent in the light of the judgment of the Tribunal. The

Tribunal also awarded costs to the respondent which were quantified at Rs.5

lakhs.
(S)   The appellants thereafter approached the Armed Forces

Tribunal under
Section 31
of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 seeking

leave to appeal to this Court. The application was however rejected on

13.11.2017, whereafter Civil Appeal (Diary) No.40312 of 2017 was

preferred by the appellant alongwith an application for leave to appeal.
3.       Both these appeals being inter-connected and between the same

parties, were taken up for hearing together. We heard Mr. Maninder Singh,

learned Additional Solicitor General who appeared for the appellants while

Colonel (TS) RS Dudee(Retd.) appeared in-person and made his

submissions.
4.       The hierarchy in the Army and the method of selection and promotion

was considered by this Court in
Union of India v. Lt. General Rajendra

Singh Kadyan1
as under:
1
2000 (6) SCC 698
15
“11. The hierarchy in the Army and the method of
          selection and promotion to various posts starting from the post
          of Lieutenant and going up to the post of the Chief of the Army
          Staff will clearly indicate that the posts of Lieutenant, Captain
          and Major are automatic promotion posts on passing the
          promotion examination irrespective of inter se merit, whereas
          the posts from Major to Lt. Colonel, Lt. Colonel to Colonel,
          Colonel to Brigadier, Brigadier to Major General and Major
          General to Lt. General are all selection posts filled up by
          promotion on the basis of relative merit assessed by the
          designated Selection Boards…..”


          Since the aforesaid decision, there has been an amendement and as the

situation presently stands2, all promotions upto the rank of Lt. Colonel are

time-bound promotions without involvement of any selection process and it

is only for the promotion from the post of Lt. Colonel to Colonel and

upwards that Selection Boards are constituted. The composition of relevant

Selection Boards in terms of Selection System is as under:-
“Composition of Selection Boards
1. Special Selection Board
(a) Function: To screen officers for promotion from Maj Gen. to Lt.
Gen.
(b) Composition:
(i) Chairman          - COAS
                 (ii)Members           - Army Cdrs (5) VCOAS
                 (iii)Secretary        -MS
2
Ref.: Para 3 of Written Submissions of the appellants
16
2. No. 1 Selection Board
(a) Function: To screen Brig for promotion to the rank of Maj.Gen.
(b) Composition
(i)Chairman         - COAS
(ii)Members         - Army Cdrs (5) VCOAS/PSO (1)
(iii)Secretary     -MS
3. No. 2 Selection Board
(a)Function: To screen Col. for promotion to the rank of Brig.
(b)Composition
            (i)Chairman          - Army Cdr (1)
            (ii)Members          - Corps Cdr (1)
                                   Lt. Gen. of Staff
                                   [Should have commanded a Div.(1)]
                                   Maj. Gen. (GOC Div) (1)
                                   Maj. Gen. (Staff) (1)

             (iii)Secretary    - Addl.MS (B)
(iv)In attendance - Respective Heads of Arm/Services
4. No. 3 Selection Board
(a)Function: To screen Lt. Cols to the rank of Col.
(b)Composition
            (i)Chairman        - Corps Cdr or Lt. Gen. who has
                                 commanded a Corps(1)
            (ii)Members        - Div. Cdr (2), Maj Gens on Staff (2)
             (iii)Secretary    -Dy. MS(B)
(iv)In Attendance - Respective Heads of Arm/Services.”
5.    We are presently concerned with selection from the post of Lt.

Colonel to the rank of Colonel and the appropriate Selection Board would

therefore be No.3 Selection Board with Officer of the rank of Lt. General as
17
Chairperson, two members of the rank of Major General and two Div.

Commanders. On few occasions this Court has considered the cases where

the assessment and analysis made by such Selection Boards were directly

put in question.      Some of the observations of this Court are extremely

relevant for the present purposes:
(a)    In
Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. B.S. Mahajan3
this Court

observed:
“……..It is needless to emphasise that it is not the function
         of the court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection
         Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the
         candidates. Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not
         has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee
         which has the expertise on the subject. The court has no such
         expertise. The decision of the Selection Committee can be
         interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or
         patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee
         or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides
         affecting the selection etc. ……”
(b)     In Air Vice Marshal S.L. Chhabra, VSM (Retd.) v. Union of

India4, this Court observed:
“……No oblique motive has been suggested on behalf of the
         appellant against any of the members of the Selection Board
         and there is no reason or occasion for us to infer such motive on
         the part of the members of the Selection Board for denying the
         promotion to the appellant with reference to the year 1987.
         Public interest should be the primary consideration of all
         Selection Boards, constituted for selecting candidates, for
3
1990 (3) SCC 305
4
1993 Supp (4) SCC 441
18
promotion to the higher posts, but it is all the more important in
         respect of Selection Boards, meant for selecting officers for
         higher posts in the Indian Air Force. The court cannot encroach
         over this power, by substituting its own view and opinion…..”
(c)   In
Union of India v. Lt. General Rajendra Singh

Kadyan (Supra
), this Court observed:
“…..Critical analysis or appraisal of the file by the Court
         may neither be conducive to the interests of the officers
         concerned or for the morale of the entire force. Maybe one may
         emphasize one aspect rather than the other but in the appraisal
         of the total profile, the entire service profile has been taken care
         of by the authorities concerned and we cannot substitute our
         view to that of the authorities. It is a well-known principle of
         administrative law that when relevant considerations have been
         taken note of and irrelevant aspects have been eschewed from
         consideration and that no relevant aspect has been ignored and
         the administrative decisions have nexus with the facts on
         record, the same cannot be attacked on merits. Judicial review
         is permissible only to the extent of finding whether the process
         in reaching decision has been observed correctly and not the
         decision as such…..”
(d)   Further, in
Surinder Shukla v. Union of India5
, it was

observed:
“11.      Considering the comparative batch merit, if the
         Selection Board did not recommend the name of the appellant
         for promotion to the rank of Colonel which appears to have
         been approved by the Chief of Army Staff, it is not for the court
         exercising power of judicial review to enter into the merit of the
         decision. The Selection Board was constituted by senior officers
         presided over by an officer of the rank of Lt. General. It has
         been contended before us that the Selection Board was not even
         aware of the identity of the candidates considered by them
         because only in the member data sheet all the informations of
5
(2008) 2 SCC 649
19
the candidates required to be considered by the Selection Board
      are stated, but the identity of the officers is not disclosed. The
      appellant moreover did not allege any mala fide against the
      members of the Selection Board…..”
6.    The first question that arises is regarding the significance of the

expression “consequential benefits” as used in the order dated 20.11.2013.

The matter which was directly in issue and under consideration was the

correctness and validity of General Court Martial proceedings.             While

annulling the findings and effect of such General Court Martial proceedings,

the idea was to confer those benefits which the officer stood denied directly

as a result of pendency of such proceedings. Such benefits would therefore

be those which are easily quantifiable namely those in the nature of loss of

salary, emoluments and other benefits.       But the expression cannot be

construed to mean that even promotions which are strictly on the basis of

comparative merit and selection must also stand conferred upon the officer.
It is true that as a result of pendency of the General Court Martial

proceedings the respondent was kept out of service for nearly nine years and

as such his profile would show inadequacy to a certain extent. On the other

hand the Department was also denied of proper assessment of the profile of

the respondent for those years. The correct approach in the matter is the one
20
which was considered by this Court in Lt. Col.
K. D. Gupta v. Union of

India and Others6
as under:-
“8. The respondents have maintained that the petitioner has
         not served in the appropriate grades for the requisite period and
         has not possessed the necessary experience and training and
         consequential assessment of ability which are a precondition for
         promotion. The defence services have their own peculiarities
         and special requirements. The considerations which apply to
         other government servants in the matter of promotion cannot as
         a matter of course be applied to defence personnel of the
         petitioner’s category and rank. Requisite experience,
         consequent exposure and appropriate review are indispensable
         for according promotion and the petitioner, therefore, cannot be
         given promotions as claimed by him on the basis that his
         batchmates have earned such promotions. Individual capacity
         and special qualities on the basis of assessment have to be
         found but in the case of the petitioner these are not available.
         We find force in the stand of the respondents and do not accept
         the petitioner’s contention that he can be granted promotion to
         the higher ranks as claimed by him by adopting the promotions
         obtained by his batchmates as the measure.”
7.       The opinion of the learned Solicitor General dated 01.11.2013 and the

consequential order dated 20.11.2013 must be confined to the question of

validity and correctness of the General Court Martial proceedings and the

benefits which respondent stood denied purely as a result thereof. The

concept that he must be granted those promotions which his batchmates or

juniors received and the idea that he must also be considered for promotions

which are strictly based on “selection” basis have not been accepted by this
6
1989 Suppl (1) SCC 416
21
Court in
K.D. Gupta
(supra). The Tribunal therefore completely erred in

passing the directions in its order dated 17.01.2017.
Since the opinion of the

Law Officer dated 30.12.2015 was not consistent with the provisions of the

relevant rules and the law declared by this Court in
K.D. Gupta
(supra), the

Department was justified in expressing serious reservations and in

generating note dated 03.02.2016. The Tribunal, in our considered view,

attached undue importance to the opinion of the Law Officer dated

30.12.2015.
8.    Be that as it may, the matter was considered on merits by No.3

Selection Board which found the respondent unfit for selection as “Colonel”.

The matter was analyzed by the Board on six indicia or parameters. The

assessment was cumulative taking into account the grading as against those

six parameters. Admittedly, the respondent was lower in terms of indicia

Nos.(ii), (iv) and (v) as against all other three officers, which included one

who was not empanelled at all. Apart therefrom, the entry of reprimand as

against indicia No.(vi) also put the case of the respondent in the negative. At

this stage we may consider whether the entry of reprimand of the year 1991

was rightly or wrongly taken into account.
9.    In terms of Paragraph 10 (f) of the Selection Policy dated 06.05.1987

which has been placed on record by the appellants, disciplinary award forms
22
part of the overall profile of an Officer. Said provision in fact lays down,

“character, qualities, disciplinary background and decorations form an

important input to the overall profile of an Officer and due consideration

should be given while assessing border line cases.” The action on part of the

Selection Board in relying upon the entry of reprimand was thus consistent

with Selection Policy and could not be characterized as incorrect or illegal in

any manner. In any case that was not the only pointer which weighed with

the Selection Board. Even eschewing such entry, the respondent was still

found to be lower as against three Officers on other three indicia. It is

relevant to note at this juncture that even though one out of those three

Officers had fared better than the respondent on those three indicia and also

did not have any entry or reprimand, he was not an empanelled Officer. It is

precisely for this reason that the law as
laid down by
this Court is, “whether

a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly

constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.”
10.   It is true that overall CR profile of the respondent was better than the

last empanelled officer. But the respondent was certainly lower on other

three indicia or parameters.    It is the cumulative assessment which the

Selection Board was expected to and did undertake. Going by the law
laid

down by
this Court, it cannot be said that the assessment of the Selection
23
Board suffered on any count. This case is not where irrelevant factors have

been taken into account or relevant factors have been missed out or

eliminated from consideration. The Selection Board comprised of high

ranked officials from Indian Army. No malafides have been and could be

attributed to the actions on part of the members of the Selection Board. The

Tribunal was thus wholly unjustified in finding the assessment made by the

Selection Board to be perverse.
11.   Having considered the matter in its entirety, we cannot support the

view taken by the Tribunal. According to us, the approach of the Tribunal

and the assessment made by it were completely erroneous. The Tribunal was

also not justified in awarding costs of Rupees five lakhs to the respondent.
12.   It may be that the respondent was wrongly proceeded against and

punished by General Court Martial.       He was also awarded sentence of

imprisonment and lost out nine years of service. The prejudice is quite

apparent. However sympathy cannot outweigh the considerations on merit.

He has received time scale promotion to the rank of Colonel after having put

in 26 years of regular service.      But if he was not found suitable for

empanelment by way of selection, the matter must end there.
24
13.   We therefore allow both the appeals and set aside Judgments and

Orders dated 17.01.2017 and 12.09.2017 passed by the Armed Forces

Tribunal, Regional Bench, Lucknow.
14.   No order as to costs.
………………………J.
                                              (Adarsh Kumar Goel)



                                              ………………..……J.
                                              (Uday Umesh Lalit)

New Delhi,
July 3, 2018