[Cites
66
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
New Okhla Industrial Development ... vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax on 2 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3179, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 426 (SC)
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS.792-793 OF 2014

         NEW OKHLA INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
         AUTHORITY                                                              ... APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

         CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
         & ORS.                                                              ... RESPONDENTS



                                              J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
The appellant by these appeals has challenged the

         Division               Bench    judgment    of     Allahabad    High    Court     dated

         28.02.2011               dismissing    the    writ     petition       filled   by    the

         appellant challenging the notices issued by the Income

         Tax Authority under
Section 142
of the Income Tax Act,

         1961 as well as the judgment dated 04.11.2011 rejecting

         the review application.
2.              The facts giving rise to these appeals are:
The    appellant-New        Okhla      Industrial          Development

         Authority (hereinafter referred to as the “Authority”)
Signature Not Verified
has
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.07.02
been    constituted        under
Section    3
of    the     U.P.
16:07:43 IST
Reason:
Industrial               Area      Development       Act,      1976     (hereinafter
2
referred to as the ‘Act, 1976’) by notification dated

17.04.1976.
The        Act,        1976
was        enacted     by     State

Legislature      to    provide          for     the     constitution          of     an

Authority for the development of certain areas in the

State into industrial and urban township and for matters

connected      therewith.
Under        the     Act,        1976
various

functions have been entrusted to the Authorities. Notices

under
Section 142
of the Income Tax Act dated 28.07.1998

and    08.08.1998      were        issued        to    the     appellant.          The

appellant      challenging          the        said    notices        filed        writ

petition contending that appellant is a local authority,

hence,    is   exempted       from       payment       of    income     tax    under
Section 10(20)
and
Section 10(20A)
of Income Tax Act,

1961    (hereinafter        referred       to    as    “I.T.Act,       1961).       The

writ petition was allowed by the Division Bench of the

Allahabad      High    Court       on    14.02.2000          holding       that     the

appellant is a local body. It was held that it is covered

by the exemption under
Section 10(20A)
of I.T.Act, 1961.
The Division Bench, however, did not go into the question

whether it is also exempt under
Section 10(20)
.
3.     By the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992, the

Parliament     had    inserted          Part    IXA    of     the     Constitution

providing      for    the     constitution            of     Municipalities.          A

notification dated 24.12.2001 was issued by the Governor
3
in exercise of the power under the proviso to clause (1)

of
Article 243Q
of the Constitution of India specifying

the appellant to be an “industrial township” with effect

from    the       date    of    the     notification         in    the     Official

Gazette.      A    notice      dated    29.08.2005       was      issued     by    the

Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax to the appellant for

furnishing        Income       Tax    Return    for    the     assessment         year

2003-2004         and    2004-2005.      Notice       mentioned       that    after

omission        of
Section       10(20A)
w.e.f.       01.04.2003          the

Authority has become taxable. Notice under
Section 142(1)
was also enclosed for the above purpose.
4.     Notices were also issued to different Banks requiring

different         information.        The    appellant       vide     its    letter

dated    20.09.2005         replied      the     notice      dated       29.08.2005

stating that it is a local authority and exempt from

Income Tax hence notice under
Section 142
be withdrawn.

The    Income      Tax    authorities        also     issued      notice     to    the

different Banks to deduct TDS as required under
Section

194A
of the Income Tax Act and remit the same to the

Central Government Account.
5.     The    appellant        filed    a    writ     petition        praying      for

quashing the notice under
Section 142
of the Income Tax

Act     dated      29.08.2005.         The     appellant       also      challenged

notice dated 31.08.2005 issued under
Section 131
to the
4
Bankers of the appellant. Notice dated 21.09.2005 under
Section 194A
was also sought to be quashed. The writ

petition was contested by the Income Tax Department. The

High Court in the writ petition decided the only question

“whether       New    Okhla    Industrial        Development         Authority

(NOIDA) is a local authority after 01.04.2003 within the

meaning of
Section 10(20)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961”.

The   Division       Bench    of   the   High    Court      relying    on   two

judgments of this Court in
Agricultural Produce Market

Committee, Narela, Delhi vs. Commissioner of Income Tax

and another
, (
2008) 9 SCC 434 and Adityapur Industrial

Area Development Authority vs. Union of India and others
,

(2006) 5 SCC 100, held that after 01.03.2003 the NOIDA is

not   a   local      authority     within    the      meaning    of
Section

10(20)
of    the     I.T.Act,    1961.       The   writ    petition      was

consequently         dismissed.     Although,         the    appellant      had

prayed for quashing notices issued to its Bankers and

notice under
Section 194A
but the High Court did not

advert to the said issue.
We do not find any necessity to

advert     to     the    aforesaid       issues,        since,       different

concerned       Banks     have     already       filed       civil     appeals

challenging the judgment of the High Court rendered in

their writ petition which has been separately challenged

by a group of civil appeals being Civil Appeal arising
5
out    of
SLP(C)         No.3168       of    2017-Commissioner          of    Income

Tax(TDS), Kanpur vs. Canara Bank
where we have considered

and decided those issues by our judgment of this date.

After dismissal of the writ petition dated 28.02.2011 the

appellant          filed      a    review       application      which       too       was

dismissed on 04.11.2011. Aggrieved by those two judgments

Civil Appeal Nos.792-793 of 2014 have been filed by the

appellant.
6.     We    have       heard      Shri    Balbir    Singh,      learned         senior

counsel       appearing            for     the     appellant         and        Shri     K

Radhakrishnan, learned senior counsel appearing for the

Revenue.          We   have       also    heard    various      learned         counsel

appearing for different Banks.
7.     Learned counsel for appellant submits that both the

judgments of this Court relied on by the High Court for

dismissing         the      writ    petition       were   not    applicable            and

clearly distinguishable. He submits that judgment of this

Court        in
Agricultural            Produce    Market           Committee,

Narela
(supra) was a case where this Court was concerned

with    status         of    Agricultural         Produce     Market        Committee

which       was    not      akin    to    the    appellant      in   view       of     the

statutory          provisions        contained       in   Act,       1976,       hence,

reliance on such case was misplaced.
6
8.    With regard to judgment of this Court in Adityapur

Industrial      Area         Development     Authority(surpa),     it    is

submitted that this Court essentially has considered
in
the above case
regarding the exemption under
Article 289
of the Constitution of India whereas appellant does not

rely on
Article 289.
He further submits that Governor of

U.P. has issued notification dated 24.12.2001 under the

proviso   to
Article        243Q(1)(a)
which   provision    was   not

considered in the above mentioned two cases, hence, the

present     case        is     clearly     distinguishable      from    the

aforesaid two judgments. It is submitted that Municipal

Services are being provided by the authority, hence, it

is a local authority entitled to the benefit of
Section

10(20)
of the I.T. Act, 1961. The constitutional scheme

envisages performance of municipal functions even by a

body which may not be elected and yet performs municipal

functions.
Article 243Q
envisaged such authority and also

having been recognised such an authority by issuing the

notification, it is a local authority and is entitled for

the   benefit      of    exemption.        There   does   not   exist   any

elected municipality for the industrial development area

and it is the appellant which is entrusted to discharge

municipal    functions as          enumerated in      the 12th    Schedule

under
Article 243P
of the Constitution. The appellant was
7
not only a creation of a statute but has been statutorily

charged     to        perform     functions,       including      municipal

functions. The appellant is a local body having local

fund and its accounts are audited by the Examiner of the

Local Fund accounts. The appellant also has authorisation

by    law   to    levy      tax   in    contradistinction        to    a   mere

development authority.
9.     Learned counsel appearing for the Revenue refuting

the submissions of appellant contends that in view of the

Explanation added to
Section 10(20)
of the I.T.Act, 1961

by
Finance Act, 2002
, the appellant is no longer covered

by the definition of ‘local authority’. The definition of

‘local authority’ as contained in Explanation is not an

inclusive definition but being an exhaustive definition

unless the appellant is covered by any of the clauses

mentioned        in    the      Explanation       it   cannot     claim       an

exemption.       It    is    further     submitted     that     omission      of
Section 10(20A)
by the same
Finance Act
clearly indicates

that    those     authorities          which   were    treated    as       local

authority prior to
Finance Act
is no longer entitled to

avail the benefit of exemption. It is evident from the

Constitution 74th Amendment Act, 1992 that the Parliament

has    introduced        certain        minimum    safeguards         so   that

municipalities could act as vibrant democratic units of
8
self-government so as to not leave them to the vagaries

of laws being enacted by different State Legislatures.

The Parliament was focussed on making provisions of local

self-government alone and not on the aspect of municipal

services and Legislation on municipalities operates in a

different legislative field as compared to Legislation on

Industrial           Development         Authorities.            After         the

Constitution Amendment both
U.P. Municipality Act, 1916
and
U.P.     Municipal       Corporation        Act,    1959
have   been

amended   in    the     light      of   constitutional         provisions      as

contained    in      Part    IXA   of   the     Constitution         whereas   no

amendments     have     been    made     in   Act,     1976    which     clearly

indicates      that     the     authority        was   never     treated       as

municipality within the meaning of
Article 243Q.
There

are large number of factors which must be possessed by

the municipality under the constitutional scheme which is

absent in the authority.
10. Hence,          Constitution        never     recognised         industrial

township as referred to in proviso to
Article 243Q
as

equivalent      to    municipality.        Further,      the     notification

under the proviso to
Article 243Q
dated 24.12.2001 itself

indicates that no municipality has been constituted in

the   area     in    which     appellant        operated.      The    Authority

clearly is not a local authority.
The Finance Act, 2002
9
brought substantial changes in the definition of local

authority by defining local authority exclusively and by

omitting
Section 10(20A)
, the benefits earlier enjoyed by

various authorities which were treated local authorities

were taken away. The provisions of
Section 10
sub-section

(20) are clear and taking plain and literal meaning of

the   provision,       the     appellant        is    not     entitled         for

exemption; the High court has rightly dismissed the writ

petition filed by the appellant.
11. Learned counsel appearing for the Banks have also

adopted the submissions made by the learned counsel for

the   Revenue     in   support     of       their    contention        that    the

appellant    is    a   local    authority       within      the    meaning      of
Section 10
sub-section (20) of the I.T. Tax, 1961.
12. Learned counsel for both the parties have relied on

various judgments of this Court which shall be referred

to while considering the submissions made by the parties.
13. We     have    considered      the       submissions      made      by     the

learned counsel for the parties and perused the records.
14. The only issue which needs to be considered in these

appeals    is     as   to    whether     the    appellant         is   a     local

authority within the meaning of
Section 10(20)
as amended

by
Finance Act, 2002
w.e.f. 01.04.2003. Before we proceed

further,    it    is   necessary       to    notice    the   provisions         of
10
Section 10(20)
which existed prior to its amendment by
Finance Act, 2002
and after amendment w.e.f. 01.04.2003:
Section   10(20)
prior to
Section             10(20)
after
amendment by the Finance amendment           by the
Finance
Act, 2002
Act, 2002

the   income   of    a   local   the   income   of    a   local
authority       which       is   authority       which       is
chargeable under the head        chargeable under the head
“Income      from        house   “Income      from        house
property”, “Capital gains”       property”, “Capital gains”
or   “Income     from    other   or   “Income     from    other
sources” or from a trade or      sources” or from a trade or
business carried on by it        business carried on by it
which accrues or arises from     which accrues or arises from
the supply of a commodity or     the supply of a commodity or
service [(not being water or     service [(not being water or
electricity) within its own      electricity) within its own
jurisdictional area or from      jurisdictional area or from
the   supply  of    water   or   the   supply  of    water   or
electricity      within     or   electricity      within     or
outside        its         own   outside        its         own
jurisdictional area;             jurisdictional area;
Explanation.—For    the
                                 purposes of this clause, the
                                 expression “local authority”
                                 means—    (i)    Panchayat  as
                                 referred to in clause (d) of
                                 article      243     of    the
                                 Constitution87; or
(ii)     Municipality     as
                                 referred to in clause (e) of
                                 article    243P    of    the
                                 Constitution88; or
(iii)   Municipal  Committee
                                 and District Board, legally
                                 entitled to, or entrusted by
                                 the Government with, the
                                 control or management of a
                                 Municipal or local fund; or
(iv)   Cantonment   Board   as
11
defined in
section 389
of
                                the Cantonments Act, 1924 (2
                                of 1924);
“10(20A) any income of an
authority    constituted  in Section 10(20A):Omitted by
India by or under any law the Finance Act, 2002 w.e.f.
enacted    either    for the 1.4.2002
purpose of dealing with and
satisfying    the   need for
housing accommodation or for
the purpose of planning,
development or improvement
of    cities,     towns  and
villages, or for both;”
15. The constitutional provisions contained in Part IXA

of the Constitution of India as inserted by Constitution

74th Amendment Act, 1992 also need to be noted.
Article

243P
contains the definitions.
Article 243P(e)
defines

Municipality which is to the following effect:
“243P(e)”Municipality” means an institution of
     self-government   constituted  under
Article
     243Q;
”
16.
Article   243Q
provides    for   the   Constitution   of

Municipalities which is to the following effect:
“243Q.    Constitution   of    Municipalities.-
(1) There shall be constituted in every State,-
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called)
     for a transitional area, that is to say, an
     area in transition from a rural area to an
     urban area;
12
(b) a Municipal   Council    for    a   smaller   urban
     area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban
     area,

     in accordance with the provisions of this Part:
Provided that a Municipality under this
     clause may not be constituted in such urban
     area or part thereof as the Governor may,
     having regard to the size of tile area and the
     municipal services being provided or proposed
     to be provided by an industrial establishment
     in that area and such other factors as he may
     deem fit, by public notification, specify to be
     an industrial township.
(2) In this article, a transitional area, a
     smaller urban area or a larger urban area means
     such area as the Governor may, having regard to
     the population of the area, the density of the
     population therein, the revenue generated for
     local   administration,   the   percentage   of
     employment in non agricultural activities, the
     economic importance or such other factors as he
     may deem fit, specify by public notification
     for the purposes of this Part.”
17.
Article    243R
pertains         to     Composition     of

Municipalities which is to the following effect:
“243R. Composition of Municipalities.-(1) Save
     as provided in clause ( 2 ), all the seats in a
     Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen
     by   direct  election   from  the   territorial
     constituencies in the Municipal area and for
     this purpose each Municipal area shall be
     divided into territorial constituencies to be
     known as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law,
     provide-
(a)for the representation in a Municipality of-
13
(i) persons having special knowledge or
           experience in Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the
           People and the members of the Legislative
           Assembly   of   the   State  representing
           constituencies which comprise wholly or
           partly the Municipal area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States
           and the members of the Legislative Council
           of the State registered electors within
           tile Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees
           constituted under clause ( 5 ) of
article
           243S:
Provided that the persons referred to in
     paragraph (i) shall not have the right to vote
     in the meetings of the Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson
     of a Municipality.”
18.
Article       243S
provides   for       Constitution      and

composition   of       Wards    Committees,     etc.
Article     243T
provides for reservation of seats of SC and ST for every

Municipality and number of seats reserved.
Article 243U
provides         for           duration        of       Municipalities

sub-clause(1)states        that        every    Municipality,       unless

sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in

force,   shall    continue       for   five    years   from   the    date

appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
19. Article ZF provides for continuance of existing laws

and Municipalities which is to the following effect:
14
“243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and
        Municipalities.- Notwithstanding  anything   in
        this Part, any provision of any law relating to
        Municipalities in force in a State immediately
        before the commencement of the
Constitution
        (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992
, which is
        inconsistent with the provisions of this Part,
        shall continue to be in force until amended or
        repealed by a competent Legislature or other
        competent authority or until the expiration of
        one year from such commencement, whichever is
        earlier:
Provided    that  all   the   Municipalities
        existing immediately before such commencement
        shall continue till the expiration of their
        duration,    unless  sooner   dissolved   by   a
        resolution passed to that effect by the
        Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the
        case of a State having a Legislative Council,
        by each House of the Legislature of that
        State.”
20. It is also relevant to notice certain provisions of

Act,    1976,   before   we   proceed    further   to   examine    the

issue. The authority has been constituted by notification

dated 17.04.1976 exercising power under
Section 3
of Act,

1976.
Section   3
provides   for    Constitution      of    the

Authority which is to the following effect:
“3.(1)  The   State   Government  may,   by
        notification, constitute for the purposes of
        this Act, An authority to be called (Name of
        the area) Industrial Development Authority, for
        any industrial development area.
        (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate.
(3)   The   Authority    shall     consist      of   the
        following:–
15
(a) The Secretary to the Government, Uttar
Pradesh, Member Industries Department or his
Nominee not below Chairman the rank of Joint
Secretary-ex-official.        Member Chairman
(b) The Secretary to the Government, Uttar
Pradesh, Member Public works Department or his
nominee not below the rank of Joint Secretary
ex-official.                            Member
(c) The Secretary to the Government, Uttar
Pradesh, Local Member Self-Government or his
nominee   not   below  the  rank   of   joint
Secretary-ex official.
Member
(d) The Secretary to the Government, Uttar
Pradesh, Finance Member Department or his
nominee   not   below  the rank  of  Joint
Secretary-ex official.
(e)   The    Managing   Director, U.P.   State
Industrial   Development Member Corporation-ex
official.
(f) Five members to be nominated by the State
Government Member by notification.     Member
(g) Chief Executive Officer.   Member Secretary

(4) The headquarters of the Authority shall be
at such place as may be notified by the State
Government.
(5) The procedure for the conduct of the
meetings for the Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(6) No act or proceedings of the Authority
shall be invalid by reason of the existence of
any vacancy in or defect in the constitution of
the Authority.”
16
21.
Section 6
provides for the function of the Authority

which is to the following effect:
“6.(1) The object of the Authority shall be
     to secure the planned development of the
     industrial development area.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
     objects of the Authority, the Authority shall
     perform the following functions :–
(b) to prepare a plan for the development of
     the industrial development area;
(c)   to  demarcate   and develop   sites  for
     industrial, commercial and residential purpose
     according to the plan;
(d) to provide infrastructure for industrial,
     commercial and residential purposes;
(e) to provide amenities;
(f) to allocate and transfer either by way of
     sale or lease or otherwise plots of land for
     industrial, commercial or residential purposes;
(g) to regulate the erection of buildings and
     setting up of industries: and
(h) to lay down the purpose for which a
     particular site or plot of land shall be used,
     namely   for   industrial  or   commercial  or
     residential purpose or any other specified
     purpose in such area.”
22.
Section     7
deals    with   power   of   the     Authority   in

respect of transfer of land.
Section 8
deals with power

to issue directions in respect of creation of building.
Section   9
deals   with   ban    on   erection   of    building   in
17
contravention of regulations.
Section 10
deals with power

to    require    proper    maintenance    of   site    or    building.
Section 11
empowers the Authority to levy of tax. By
Section 12
certain provisions of
U.P. Urban Planning and

Development Act, 1973
has been made applicable.

Chapter VII deals Finance, Accounts and Audit.
23. We may also notice the notification dated 24.12.2001

issued by the Governor in exercise of the powers under

the    proviso    to      Clause   (1)   of
Article      243Q.
The

notification is as follows:
“NOTIFICATION
                   No.6709/77-4-2001-56 Bha/99

           In exercise of the powers under the proviso
       to   Clause   (1)   of
Article   243Q
of   the
       Constitution of India, the Governor, having
       regard to the size of the New Okhla Industrial
       Development Area, which has been declared as an
       industrial   development   area   by   Government
       Notification No.4157-HI/XVIII-11, dated April
       17, 1976 and the municipal services being
       provided    by    the  New    Okhla    Industrial
       Development Authority in that area, is pleased
       to specify the said New Okhla Industrial
       Development Area to be an “industrial township”
       with effect from the date of publication of
       this notification in the official gazette.
By order,

                                                         Sd/-
(Anoop Mishra)
                                                  Secretary.”
18
24. The submissions made by the parties can be dealt with

in the following two heads:
A.   The status of the Authority by virtue of notification
dated 24.12.2001 issued under Clause (1) of
Article 243Q.
B.   Whether the appellant is a local authority “within
the meaning of
Section 10
sub-section (20) as explained
in Explanation added by
Finance Act, 2002
.
(A) Part IXA of the Constitution:
25. The   Statement   of   Objects   and   Reasons   of   the

Constitution 74th Amendment Act, 1992, briefly outlined

the object and purpose for which Constitution Amendment

was brought in. It is useful to refer to the Statement of

Objects and Reasons of the Constitution Amendment which

is to the following effect:
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

     In many States local bodies have become weak
     and ineffective on account of a variety of
     reasons, including the failure to hold regular
     elections,    prolonged    supersessions    and
     inadequate devolution of powers and functions.
     As a result, Urban Local Bodies are not able to
     perform effectively as vibrant democratic units
     of self-government.
2. Having regard to these inadequacies, it is
     considered necessary that provisions relating
     to Urban Local Bodies are incorporated in the
     Constitution particularly for-
(i)   putting   on   a   firmer   footing the
     relationship between the State Government and
     the Urban Local Bodies with respect to-
19
(a) the functions and taxation powers; and
(b) arrangements for revenue sharing;
(ii) Ensuring regular conduct of elections;
(iii) ensuring timely elections in the case of
     supersession; and
(iv) providing adequate representation for the
     weaker   sections    like   Scheduled  Castes,
     Scheduled Tribes and women.”
26. The Kishansing Tomar Municipal Corporation Of The

City Of Ahmedabad Ad Others, 2006 (8) SCC 352, noticing

the object and purpose of Constitution 74 th Amendment Act,

1992 stated as following:
“12. It may be noted that Part IX-A was
     inserted in the Constitution by virtue of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth) Amendment Act,
     1992
.   The   object   of   introducing   these
     provisions was that in many States the local
     bodies were not working properly and the timely
     elections were not being held and the nominated
     bodies were continuing for long periods.
     Elections had been irregular and many times
     unnecessarily delayed or postponed and the
     elected bodies had been superseded or suspended
     without adequate justification at the whims and
     fancies of the State authorities. These views
     were expressed by the then Minister of State
     for Urban Development while introducing the
     Constitution Amendment Bill before Parliament
     and thus the new provisions were added in the
     Constitution with a view to restore the
     rightful place in political governance for
     local bodies. It was considered necessary to
     provide a constitutional status to such bodies
     and to ensure regular and fair conduct of
     elections. In the Statement of Objects and
     Reasons in the Constitution Amendment Bill
     relating to urban local bodies, it was stated:”
20
27. The constitutional provisions as contained in Part

IXA delineate that the Constitution itself provided for

constitution              of         Municipalities,            duration         of

Municipalities,                 powers          of          Authorities         and

responsibilities                of        the         Municipalities.           The

Municipalities are created as vibrant democratic units of

self-government.                The      duration      of     Municipality      was

provided for five years contemplating regular election

for        electing        representatives             to      represent        the

Municipality. The special features of the Municipality as

was        contemplated         by     the      constitutional          provisions

contained in Part IXA cannot be said to be present in

Authority as delineated by statutory scheme of Act, 1976.

It    is    true    that       various    municipal         functions    are   also

being performed by the Authority as per Act, 1976 but the

mere   facts       that    certain       municipal      functions       were   also

performed       by     the       authority       it    cannot        acquire    the

essential          features       of     the     Municipality         which     are

contemplated by Part IXA of the Constitution. The main

thrust of the argument of the learned counsel for the

appellant that the High Court having not adverted to the

notification         dated      24.12.2001       issued      under    proviso    to
Article 243Q(1)
the judgments relied on by the High Court
21
for dismissing the writ petition is not sustainable. We

thus have to focus on proviso to
Article 243Q(1).
For the

purpose and object of the industrial township referred to

therein whether industrial township mentioned therein can

be   equated    with    Municipality      as   defined    under
Article

243P(e).
Article 243P(e)
provides that the “Municipality

means an institution of self-government constituted under
Article 243Q.
Whether the appellant is a institution of

self-government        constituted    under
Article     243Q
is   the

main question to be answered? Sub-clause (1) of
Article

243Q
provides that there shall be constituted in every

State-   a     Nagar   Panchayat,    a    Municipal      Council    and   a

Municipal Corporation, in accordance with the provisions

of this Part.          The proviso to sub-clause (1) provides

that: “Provided that a municipality under this clause may

not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as

the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area

and the municipal services being provided or proposed to

be provided for an industrial establishment in that area

and such other factors as may he may deem fit, by public

notification, specify to be an industrial township.”.
28. Thus, proviso does not contemplate constitution of an

industrial       establishment       as    a    Municipality        rather

clarifies an exception where Municipality under clause
22
(1) of
Article 243Q
may not be constituted in an urban

area. The proviso is an exception to the constitution of

Municipality as contemplated by sub-clause (1) of
Article

243Q.
No other interpretation of the proviso conforms to

the constitution scheme.
29. A Constitution Bench of this Court had noticed the

principles of statutory interpretation of a proviso in
S.

Sundaram   Pillai   and   others   vs.   V.R.   Pattabiraman   and

others
, 1985(1) SCC 591. The following has been
laid down

by
this Court in paragraphs 37 to 43:
“37. In short, generally speaking, a
     proviso is intended to limit the enacted
     provision so as to except something which would
     have otherwise been within it or in some
     measure   to   modify  the   enacting   clause.
     Sometimes a proviso may be embedded in the main
     provision and becomes an integral part of it so
     as to amount to a substantive provision itself.
38. Apart from the authorities
referred to
     above
, this Court has in a long course of
     decisions explained and adumbrated the various
     shades, aspects and elements of a proviso.
In
State of Rajasthan v. Leela Jain
,AIR 1965 SC
     1296, the following observations were made:
“So   far  as   a   general  principle  of
           construction of a proviso is concerned, it
           has been broadly stated that the function
           of a proviso is to limit the main part of
           the section and carve out something which
           but for the proviso would have been within
           the operative part.”
23
39. In the case of STO, Circle-I, Jabalpur v.
Hanuman Prasad, AIR 1967 SC 565, Bhargava, J.
observed thus:
“It is well-recognised that a proviso is
   added to a principal clause primarily with
   the object of taking out of the scope of
   that principal clause what is included in
   it and what the legislature desires should
   be excluded.”
40.
In
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes v. R.S.
Jhaver
, AIR 1968 SC 59, this Court made the
following observations:
“Generally speaking, it is true that the
   proviso is an exception to the main part of
   the section; but it is recognised that in
   exceptional cases a proviso may be a
   substantive provision itself.”
41.
In
Dwarka Prasad v. Dwarka Das Saraf
, AIR
1975 SC 1758 Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for the
Court observed thus: (SCC pp. 136-37, paras 16,
18)

   “There is some validity in this submission
   but if, on a fair construction, the
   principal provision is clean a proviso
   cannot expand or limit it. Sometimes a
   proviso is engrafted by an apprehensive
   draftsman to remove possible doubts, to
   make matters plain, to light up ambiguous
   edges. Here, such is the case.
*    *    *

        If the rule of construction is that
   prima facie a proviso should be limited in
   its operation to the subject-matter of the
   enacting clause, the stand we have taken is
   sound. To expand the enacting clause,
   inflated by the proviso, sins against the
   fundamental rule of construction that a
   proviso must be considered in relation to
24
the principal matter to which it stands as
   a proviso. A proviso ordinarily is but a
   proviso, although the golden rule is to
   read the whole section, inclusive of the
   proviso, in such manner that they mutually
   throw light on each other and result in a
   harmonious construction.”
42.
In
Hiralal Rattanlal v. State of U.P.
, 1973
(1)SCC 216, this Court made the following
observations: [SCC para 22, p. 224: SCC (Tax)
p. 315]

   “Ordinarily a proviso to a section is
   intended to take out a part of the main
   section for special treatment. It is not
   expected to enlarge the scope of the main
   section. But cases have arisen in which
   this Court has held that despite the fact
   that a provision is called proviso, it is
   really   a  separate   provision  and   the
   so-called proviso has substantially altered
   the main section.”
43. We need not multiply authorities after
authorities on this point because the legal
position seems to be clearly and manifestly
well established. To sum up, a proviso may
serve four different purposes:
(1)   qualifying   or   excepting   certain
         provisions from the main enactment:
(2)   it may entirely change the very
         concept of the intendment of the
         enactment by insisting on certain
         mandatory conditions to be fulfilled
         in order to make the enactment
         workable:
(3)   it may be so embedded in the Act
         itself as to become an integral part
         of the enactment and thus acquire the
25
tenor and colour of the substantive
                     enactment itself; and

           (4)       it may be used merely to act as an
                     optional addenda to the enactment
                     with the sole object of explaining
                     the real intendment of the statutory
                     provision.”
30. Applying rules of interpretation as
laid down by
this

Court, it is clear that proviso is an exception to the

constitutional provisions which provide that there shall

be   constituted      in    every        State       a    Nagar      Panchayat,      a

Municipal Council and a Municipal Corporation. Exception

is covered by proviso that where an industrial township

is   providing       municipal       services            the   Governor      having

regard to the size of the area and the municipal services

either being provided or proposed to be provided by an

industrial establishment specify it to be an industrial

township. The words ‘industrial township’ have been used

in   contradiction         of   a    Nagar          Panchayat,        a   Municipal

Council    and   a    Municipal          Corporation.               The   object   of

issuance   of    notification            is    to    relieve        the   mandatory

requirement of constitution of a Municipality in a State

in   the   circumstances            as        mentioned        in     proviso      but

exemption from constituting Municipality does not lead to

mean that the industrial establishment which is providing

municipal services to an industrial township is same as
26
Municipality         as     defined      in
Article         243P(e).
We     have

already noticed that
Article 243P(e)
defines Municipality

as an institution of self-government constituted under
Article      243Q
,    the        word   constituted        used       under
Article

243P(e)
read     with
Article     243Q
clearly      refers     to   the

constitution          in        every   State       a     Nagar       Panchayat,       a

Municipal Council or a Municipal Corporation. Further,

the words in proviso “a Municipality under this clause

may not be constituted” clearly means that the words “may

not    be    constituted”           used     in    proviso          are    clearly    in

contradistinction with the word constituted as used in
Article      243P(e)
and
Article       243Q.
Thus,       notification

under       proviso        to
Article     243Q(1)
is     not     akin    to

constitution of Municipality. We, thus, are clear in our

mind     that       industrial          township         as     specified           under

notification dated 24.12.2001 is not akin to Municipality

as contemplated under
Article 243Q.
31. At       this     juncture,         we    may       also    notice        the    two

judgments as relied on by the High Court and three more

judgments where
Article 243Q
came for consideration. The

first judgment which needs to be noticed is
Adityapur

Industrial       Area           Development       Authority
(supra).        The

Adityapur           Industrial           Development                Authority         was

constituted under the Bihar Industrial Area Development
27
Authority Act, 1974.    In paragraph 2 of the judgment the

constitution of the authority was noticed which is to the

following effect:
“2.    The     appellant   Authority     has    been
     constituted under the
Bihar Industrial Area
     Development Authority Act, 1974
to provide for
     planned development of industrial area, for
     promotion of industries and matters appurtenant
     thereto. The appellant Authority is a body
     corporate having perpetual succession and a
     common seal with power to acquire, hold and
     dispose    of    properties,    both    movable    and
     immovable, to contract, and by the said name
     sue or be sued. The Authority consists of a
     Chairman, a Managing Director and five other
     Directors appointed by the State Government.
     The Authority is responsible for the planned
     development of the industrial area including
     preparation of the master plan of the area and
     promotion of industries in the area and other
     amenities incidental thereto. The Authority has
     its   own    establishment     for    which    it   is
     authorised to frame regulations with prior
     approval of the State Government. The State
     Government     is   authorised    to    entrust    the
     Authority from time to time with any work
     connected      with    planned    development,      or
     maintenance of the industrial area and its
     amenities     and    matters   connected     thereto.
Section 7
of the Act obliges the Authority to
     maintain its own fund to which shall be
     credited moneys received by the Authority from
     the State Government by way of grants, loans,
     advances    or    otherwise,    all    fees,    rents,
     charges, levies and fines received by the
     Authority under the Act, all moneys received by
     the Authority from disposal of its movable or
     immovable assets and all moneys received by the
     Authority by way of loan from financial and
     other institutions and debentures floated for
     the execution of a scheme or schemes of the
     Authority     duly     approved    by    the     State
     Government. Unless the State Government directs
28
otherwise, all moneys received by the Authority
       shall be credited to its funds which shall be
       kept with State Bank of India and/or one or
       more of the nationalised banks and drawn as and
       when required by the Authority.”
32. On       the     question   as   to   whether        the   Adityapur

Industrial Area Development Authority was covered within

the meaning of local authority as per
Section 10(20)
as

amended by the
Finance Act, 2002
, the High Court held

that   the    appellant      authority    could    not    have   claimed

benefit      under     the   provisions    after     01.04.2003.      In

paragraphs 6 and 7 following was held:
“6. It would thus be seen that the income of
       a local authority chargeable under the head
       “Income from house property”, “Capital gains”
       or “Income from other sources” or from a trade
       or business carried on by it was earlier
       excluded in computing the total income of the
       Authority of a previous year. However, in view
       of the amendment, with effect from 1-4-2003 the
       Explanation “local authority” was defined to
       include only the authorities enumerated in the
       Explanation,   which   does  not   include   an
       authority such as the appellant. At the same
       time
Section 10
(20-A) which related to income
       of an authority constituted in India by or
       under any law enacted for the purpose of
       dealing with and satisfying the need for
       housing accommodation or for the purpose of
       planning, development or improvement of cities,
       towns and villages, which before the amendment
       was not included in computing the         total
       income, was omitted. Consequently, the benefit
       conferred by sub-section (20-A) on such an
       authority was taken away.
29
7. The High Court by its impugned judgment
     and order held that in view of the fact that
Section 10
(20-A) was omitted and an Explanation
     was added to
Section 10(20)
enumerating the
     “local authorities” contemplated by
Section
     10(20)
, the appellant Authority could not claim
     any benefit under those provisions after
     1-4-2003. It further held that the exemption
     under
Article 289(1)
was also not available to
     the appellant Authority as it was a distinct
     legal entity, and its income could not be said
     to be the income of the State so as to be
     exempt from Union taxation. The said decision
     of the High Court is impugned in this appeal.”
33. One of the submissions which was raised before this

Court was that exemption under
Article 289(1)
, was also

available to the appellant-Authority. The said submission

was considered and negativated. Apart from rejecting the

claim under
Article 289(1)
, this court noticing
Section

10(20)
has held in paragraph 13:
“13. Applying the above test to the facts of
     the present case it is clear that the benefit,
     conferred by
Section 10
(20-
A) of the Income Tax
     Act, 1961
on the assessee herein, has been
     expressly taken away. Moreover, the Explanation
     added to
Section 10(20)
enumerates the “local
     authorities” which do not cover the assessee
     herein. Therefore, we do not find any merit in
     the submission advanced on behalf of the
     assessee.”
34. In the present case although exemption under
Article

289
was not claimed or contended but the above judgment
30
cannot be said to be not relevant to the present case

since, the Court has also dwelled upon
Section 10(20)
as

amended w.e.f. 01.04.2003. We, thus, do not accept the

submission of the appellant that
the above case
was not

relevant for the present case and was wrongly relied on

by the High Court.
35. The second judgment which is relied on by the High

court is
Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Narela
(supra). The Agricultural Produce Market Committee was

constituted        under      the
Delhi     Agricultural          Produce

Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1998
. The question arose as

to   whether      Agricultural      Market    Committee    is    a    “local

authority” under the Explanation to
Section 10(20)
of the

Income Tax Act, 1961. In the above context it was noticed

that   all     Agricultural      Market      Committees    at    different

places    were     enjoying    exemption      from   income     tax    under
Section 10(20)
prior to its amendment by the
Finance Act,

2002
w.e.f.     01.04.2003.       The     definition        of    ‘local

authority’ under
Section 3(31)
of General Clauses Act,

1897 is as follows:
“”local authority” shall mean a municipal
       committee,   district   board,   body  or   port
       Commissioners   or   other   authority   legally
       entitled to, or entrusted by the Government
       with, the control or management of a municipal
       or local fund;”
31
36.
In
the above case
this Court noticed in extenso the

provisions        of
Delhi     Agricultural          Produce     Marketing

(Regulation) Act, 1998
and provisions of
Section 10(20)
of    the   Income       Tax     Act,    1961.      Definition       of    local

authority as contained in Explanation to
Section 10(20)
and
Section 3(31)
of the General Clauses Act was also

noticed     and        discussed.       This     Court     held     that     the

definition    of       local     authority     in
General       Clauses    Act
under
Section 3(31)
is no longer applicable after the

amendment    of
Section     10(20)
by
Finance        Act,    2002
.

Following was
laid down by
this Court in paragraphs 31

and 32:
31.    Certain   glaring   features   can  be
       deciphered from the above comparative chart.
Under
Section 3(31)
of the General Clauses Act,
       1897, “local authority” was defined to mean “a
       Municipal Committee, District Board, Body of
       Port Commissioners or other authority legally
       entitled to … the control or management of a
       municipal or local fund”. The words “other
       authority” in
Section 3(31)
of the 1897 Act
       have   been   omitted  by   Parliament  in  the
       Explanation/definition    clause   inserted  in
Section 10(20)
of the 1961 Act vide the
Finance
       Act, 2002
. Therefore, in our view, it would not
       be correct to say that the entire definition of
       the word “local authority” is bodily lifted
       from
Section 3(31)
of the 1897 Act and
       incorporated, by Parliament, in the said
       Explanation to
Section 10(20)
of the 1961 Act.
       This deliberate omission is important.
32
32. It may be noted that various High Courts
had taken the view prior to the
Finance Act,
2002
that AMC(s) is a “local authority”. That
was because there was no definition of the word
“local authority” in the 1961 Act. Those
judgments proceeded primarily on the functional
tests as
laid down in
the judgment of this
Court vide para 2 in R.C. Jain. We quote
hereinbelow para 2 which reads as under: (SCC
pp. 311-12)

 “2. Let us, therefore, concentrate and
 confine our attention and enquiry to the
 definition of ‘local authority’ in
Section
 3(31)
of the General Clauses Act. A proper
 and careful scrutiny of the language of
Section 3(31)
suggests that an authority, in
 order to be a local authority, must be of
 like nature and character as a Municipal
 Committee, District Board or Body of Port
 Commissioners, possessing, therefore, many,
 if not all, of the distinctive attributes and
 characteristics of a Municipal Committee,
 District    Board,    or   Body    of    Port
 Commissioners, but, possessing one essential
 feature, namely, that it is legally entitled
 to or entrusted by the Government with, the
 control and management of a municipal or
 local fund. What then are the distinctive
 attributes and characteristics, all or many
 of which a Municipal Committee, District
 Board or Body of Port Commissioners shares
 with any other local authority? First, the
 authorities   must    have   separate   legal
 existence as corporate bodies. They must not
 be mere governmental agencies but must be
 legally independent entities. Next, they must
 function   in   a  defined   area   and  must
 ordinarily, wholly or partly, directly or
 indirectly, be elected by the inhabitants of
 the area. Next, they must enjoy a certain
 degree of autonomy, with freedom to decide
 for themselves questions of policy affecting
 the area administered by them. The autonomy
 may not be complete and the degree of the
 dependence may vary considerably but, an
 appreciable measure of autonomy there must
33
be. Next, they must be entrusted by statute
       with such governmental functions and duties
       as are usually entrusted to municipal bodies,
       such as those connected with providing
       amenities to the inhabitants of the locality,
       like health and education services, water and
       sewerage, town planning and development,
       roads,   markets,    transportation,    social
       welfare services, etc. etc. Broadly we may
       say that they may be entrusted with the
       performance of civic duties and functions
       which would otherwise be governmental duties
       and functions. Finally, they must have the
       power to raise funds for the furtherance of
       their activities and the fulfilment of their
       projects by levying taxes, rates, charges, or
       fees. This may be in addition to moneys
       provided   by  Government   or   obtained   by
       borrowing or otherwise. What is essential is
       that control or management of the fund must
       vest in the authority.”
37. The
Court further held
that Explanation under
Section

10(20)
provides an exhaustive definition and the tests
laid down by
this Court in an earlier case i.e.
Union of

India and others vs. R.C. Jain and others
, 1981 (2) SCC

308, are no longer applicable. In paragraph 35 following

was stated:
“35. One more aspect needs to be mentioned.
     In R.C. Jain the test of “like nature” was
     adopted as the words “other authority” came
     after the words “Municipal Committee, District
     Board, Body of Port Commissioners”. Therefore,
     the words “other authority” in
Section 3(31)
took colour from the earlier words, namely,
     “Municipal Committee, District Board or Body of
     Port Commissioners”. This is how the functional
     test is evolved in R.C. Jain2. However, as
34
stated earlier, Parliament in its legislative
     wisdom has omitted the words “other authority”
     from the said Explanation to
Section 10(20)
of
     the 1961 Act. The said Explanation to
Section
     10(20)
provides a definition to the word “local
     authority”. It is an exhaustive definition.
It
     is not an inclusive definition. The words
     “other authority” do not find place in the said
     Explanation.    Even,     according      to    the
     appellant(s), AMC(s) is neither a Municipal
     Committee nor a District Board nor a Municipal
     Committee nor a panchayat. Therefore, in our
     view   functional   test   and    the    test   of
     incorporation as
laid down in
R.C. Jain2 is no
     more applicable to the Explanation to
Section
     10(20)
of the 1961 Act. Therefore, in our view
     the judgment of this Court in R.C. Jain2
     followed by judgments of various High Courts on
     the status and character of AMC(s) is no more
     applicable to the provisions of
Section 10(20)
after      the       insertion        of       the
     Explanation/definition     clause      to     that
     sub-section vide the
Finance Act, 2002
.”
38. This Court held that Agricultural Marketing Committee

is also not covered by the words “Municipal Committee,

District Board, Body of Port Commissioners” as used in

Explanation of
Section 10(20)
.
39.
In this context, we also refer to the judgment of

this Court in
Saij Gram Panchayat vs. State of Gujarat
an

others, 1999 (2) SCC 366. This Court had occasion to

consider
in
the above case
Gujarat Industrial Development

Act, 1962
, the provisions of
Article 243Q
and Gujarat

Municipalities Act, 1963.
35
40. This Court held that
Gujarat Industrial Development

Act
operates in a totally different sphere from Parts IX

and IXA of the Constitution and the Gujarat Panchayats

Act, 1961. In paragraph 16 of the judgment following was

held:
“
The Gujarat Industrial Development Act
operates in a totally different sphere from
        Parts IX and IX-A of the Constitution as well
        as the
Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961
and the
Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1962
— the latter
        being     provisions     dealing  with    local
        self-government, while the former being an Act
        for   industrial     development  and   orderly
        establishment and organisation of industries in
        a State.”
41. It is, however, true that
in
the above case
this

Court was not concerned with the issue which has arisen

in the present case and the Court was concerned with a

different controversy.
42. We, thus, conclude that authority constituted under

Act, 1976 with regard to which notification under proviso

to
Article 243Q(1)
dated 24.12.2001 has also been issued

is not akin to the Municipality constituted under
Article

243Q(1).
B.
Section 10(20)
as amended by the
Finance Act
, 2002
43. We have already noticed that by the
Finance Act, 2002
an Explanation has been added to
Section 10(20)
of the
36
I.T.    Act,     1961
and
Section      10(20A)
has       been      omitted.

Prior to Finance Act, 2002 there being no definition of

‘local authority’ under the
I.T. Act
, the provisions of
Section     3(31)
of    the    General      Clauses       Act,       1897    were

pressed into service while interpreting the extent and

meaning of local authority. The Explanation having now

contained the exhaustive definition of local authority,

the definition of local authority as contained in
Section

3(31)
of General Clauses Act, 1892 is no more applicable.
Section 3
of the General Clauses Act begins with the

words      “In   this        Act,    and     in     all    Central          Acts     and

Regulations        made      after    the    commencement            of    this    Act,

unless     there    is       anything      repugnant       in    the      subject     or

context,-.... The definition given of the local authority

under
Section 3(31)
does not now govern the field in view

of   the    express       omission      of    the    expression           “all     other

authority”.          This       Court    has      already       in
Agricultural

Produce     Market        Committee,         Narela
(supra),        held      that

definition under
Section 3(31)
of the General Clauses Act

is now no more applicable to interpret local authority

under
Section 10(20)
of the I.T. Act. Before we proceed

further it shall be useful to notice certain well settled

principles         of        statutory       interpretation               of     fiscal
37
statutes.
This Court in
A.V. Fernandez vs. The State of

Kerala
, AIR 1957 SC 657 laid following:
“(29) It is no doubt true that in
       construing fiscal statutes and in determining
       the liability of a subject to tax one must have
       regard to the strict letter of the law and n ot
       merely to the spirit of the statute or the
       substance of the law. If the Revenue satisfies
       the Court that the case falls strictly within
       the provisions of the law, the subject can be
       taxed. If on the other hand, the case is not
       covered   within  the   four  corners   of  the
       provisions of the taxing statute, no tax can be
       imposed by inference or by analogy or by trying
       to probe into the intentions of the legislature
       and by considering what was the substance of
       the matter. We must of necessity, therefore,
       have regard to the actual provisions of the Act
       and the rules made thereunder before we can
       come to the conclusion that the appellant was
       liable to assessment as contended by the Sales
       Tax Authorities.”
44. This Court in
Rajasthan Rajya Sahakari Spinning and

Ginning Mills Federation Limited vs. Deputy Commissioner

of Income Tax, Jaipur
, 2014(11) SCC 672 again reiterated

that   there   has     to    be   strict   interpretation        of   taxing

statutes and further the fact that one class of legal

entities   are    given      some   benefit   which   is    specifically

stated in the Act does not mean that the legal entities

not    referred   to    in    the   Act    would   also    get   the   same

benefit. Following was
laid down in
paragraph 23:
38
“23. We are also of the view that in all the
      tax matters one has to interpret the taxation
      statute strictly. Simply because one class of
      legal entities are given some benefit which is
      specifically stated in the Act does not mean
      that the legal entities not referred to in the
      Act would also get the same benefit. As stated
      by this Court on several occasions, there is no
      equity in matters of taxation. One cannot read
      into a section which has not been specifically
      provided for and therefore, we do not agree
      with the submissions of the learned counsel
      appearing for the appellant and we are not
      prepared to read something in the section which
      has not been provided for. The judgments
      referred to hereinabove support the view which
      we have expressed here.”
45. It shall be useful to refer to Explanatory Notes on

Finance     Act,    2002.     Explanatory   Notes    both      on
Section

10(20)
and
Section 10(20A)
are relevant and contained in

paragraph 12.2 to 12.4 and 13.1 to 13.4. Paragraphs 12.2.

to   12.4    under      the   heading:   Income     of   certain      Local

Authorities        to   become   taxable    are     to   the    following

effect:
“12.2
Through   Finance   Act,  2002
,   this
      exemption   has  been   restricted  to   the
      Panchayats and Municipalities as referred
      to in
Articles 243(d)
and
243(p)(e)
of the
      Constitution    of    India    respectively.
      Municipal Committees and District Boards,
      legally entitled to or entrusted by the
      Government with the control or management
      of a Municipal or a local fund and
      Cantonment Boards as defined under
section
      3
of the Cantonments Act, 1924.
39
12.3 The exemption under clause (20) of
section   10
would,   therefore,  not   be
        available    to    Agricultural    Marketing
        Societies    and    Agricultural   Marketing
        Boards, etc., despite the fact that they
        may be deemed to be treated as local
        authorities under any other Central or
        State Legislation. Exemption under this
        clause would not be available to port
        trusts also.
12.4 This amendment will take effect from
        1st April, 2003 and will, accordingly,
        apply in relation to the assessment year
        2003 2004 and subsequent assessment years.”
46. Further paragraphs 13.1 to 13.4 of the Explanatory

Notes    contained     heading:   “Income      of   certain    Housing

Boards    etc.   to   become   taxable”   on   deletion   of   Clause

(20A), are as stated below:
“13.1 Under    the    existing    provisions
        contained in clause (20A) of
section 10
,
        income of the Housing Boards or other
        statutory   authorities   set up   for   the
        purpose of dealing with or satisfying the
        need for housing accommodations or for the
        purpose   of   planning,    development   or
        improvement of cities, towns and villages
        is exempt from payment of income tax.
13.2
Through Finance Act, 2002
clause (20A)
        of
section 10
has been deleted so as to
        withdraw   exemption   available    to  the
        abovementioned   bodies.   The   income  of
        Housing Boards of the States and of
        Development Authorities would, therefore,
        also become taxable.
40
13.3 Under section 80G, donation made to
     housing authorities, etc. referred to in
     clause (20A) of
section 10
is eligible for
     50% deduction from total income in the
     hands of the donors. Since clause (20A) of
section 10
has been deleted, donation to
     the housing authorities etc. would not be
     eligible for deduction in the hands of the
     donors and this may result in drying up of
     donations. To continue the incentive to
     donation made to housing authorities etc.,
     section 80G has been amended so as to
     provide that 50% of the sum paid by an
     assessee to an authority constituted in
     India by or under any law enacted either
     for the purpose of dealing with and
     satisfying     the   need     for    housing
     accommodation    or for   the   purpose   of
     planning, development or improvement of
     cities, towns and villages, or for both,
     shall be deducted from the total income of
     such assessee.
13.4 These amendments will take effect from
     lst April, 2003 and will, accordingly,
     apply in relation to the assessment year
     2003 2004 and subsequent assessment years.”
47. The    explanatory         note   clearly   indicates       that   by
Finance Act, 2002
the exemption under
Section 10(20)
has

been restricted to the Panchayats and Municipalities as

referred to in
Articles 243P(d)
and
243P(e).
Further by

deletion   of    Clause   (20A),      the   income   of   the    Housing

Boards    of    the   States    and   of    Development   Authorities

became taxable.
41
48. On a writ petition filed by the appellant before the

Allahabad High Court where the notices issued in the year

1998    under
Section    142
of    the    Income      Tax   Act     was

challenged vide its judgment dated 14.02.2000 the High

Court    held   that   appellant’s      case   comes     squarely       under
Section    10(20A)
of   the    Income      Tax   Act,     hence,     the

appellant was liable to be exempted under the said Act,

although, the High Court did not express any opinion on

the question whether appellant was exempted under
Section

10(20)
in that judgment.
49. After       omission    of
Section    10(20A)
only     provision

under which a Body or Authority can claim exemption is
Section 10(20)
. Local authority having been exhaustively

defined in the Explanation to
Section 10(20)
an entity

has to fall under
Section 10(20)
to claim exemption. It

is also useful to notice that this Court
laid down in
State of Gujarat and others vs. ESSAR Oil Limited and

another
, 2012 (3) SCC 522,              that a person invoking an

exception or an exemption provision to relieve him of the

tax liability must establish clearly that he is covered

by the said provision. It is useful to extract paragraph

88 which is to the following effect:
“88. This Court in Novopan case, 1994 Supp (3)
        SCC 606, held that the principle that in case
42
of ambiguity, a taxing statute should be
     construed in favour of the assessee, does not
     apply to the construction of an exception or an
     exempting provision, as the same have to be
     construed strictly. Further this Court also
     held that a person invoking an exception or an
     exemption provision to relieve him of the tax
     liability must establish clearly that he is
     covered by the said provision and in case of
     doubt or ambiguity, benefit of it must go to
     the State.”
50. For    interpreting   an   explanation      this   Court   in    s.
Sundaram   Pillai   and   others   vs.   V.r.    Pattabiraman       and

others
, 1985 (1) SCC 591
,
laid down in
paragraphs 47 and

53 as follows:
“47.     Swarup     in    Legislation     and
     Interpretation very aptly sums up the scope and
     effect of an Explanation thus:
“Sometimes an Explanation is appended to
       stress    upon   a   particular   thing    which
       ordinarily would not appear clearly from the
       provisions    of   the  section.   The    proper
       function of an Explanation is to make plain
       or   elucidate    what   is  enacted    in   the
       substantive provision and not to add or
       subtract from it. Thus an Explanation does
       not either restrict or extend the enacting
       part; it does not enlarge or narrow down the
       scope of the original section that it is
       supposed to explain.... The Explanation must
       be interpreted according to its own tenor;
       that it is meant to explain and not vice
       versa.”     (pp. 297-98)
53.   Thus,   from  a  conspectus  of   the
     authorities
referred to above
, it is manifest
43
that the object of an                 Explanation     to   a
     statutory provision is—

             “(a) to explain the meaning and intendment
          of the Act itself,
(b) where there is any obscurity or
          vagueness in the main enactment, to clarify
          the same so as to make it consistent with the
          dominant object which it seems to subserve,
(c) to provide an additional support to the
          dominant object of the Act in order to make
          it meaningful and purposeful,
(d) an Explanation cannot in any way
          interfere with or change the enactment or any
          part thereof but where some gap is left which
          is    relevant  for   the    purpose   of  the
          Explanation,   in   order   to   suppress  the
          mischief and advance the object of the Act it
          can help or assist the Court in interpreting
          the true purport and intendment of the
          enactment, and
(e) it cannot, however, take away a
          statutory right with which any person under a
          statute has been clothed or set at naught the
          working of an Act by becoming an hindrance in
          the interpretation of the same.”
51. This Court in
Adityapur Industrial Area Development

Authority
(supra)   after   considering
Section   10(20)
as

amended    by    the
Finance    Act,   2002
and   consequences   of

deletion of
Section 10(20A)
has laid down following in

paragraph 13:
“13. Applying the above test to the facts
          of the present case it is clear that the
          benefit, conferred by
Section 10
(20-
A) of the
          Income Tax Act, 1961
on the assessee herein,
          has been expressly taken away. Moreover, the
          Explanation    added   to
Section   10(20)
44
enumerates the “local authorities” which do
          not cover the assessee herein. Therefore, we
          do not find any merit in the submission
          advanced on behalf of the assessee.”
52. It is also relevant to notice that this Court in
Gujarat       Industrial        Development        Corporation            vs.

Commissioner     of    Income     Tax
,    1997    (7)    SCC   17,     after

considering the provisions of
Section 10(20A)
of I.T. Act

held that Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation is

entitled for exemption under
Section 10(20A)
. The Gujarat

Industrial      Development       Corporation      was     held      to    be

entitled for exemption under
Section 10(20A)
at the time

when the provision was in existence in the statute book

and   after     its    deletion    from     the    statute     book       the

exemption is no more available. Now, reverting back to
Section 10(20)
as amended by
Finance Act, 2002
, the same

has   also    come    for   consideration      before    different        High

Courts.
A Division Bench of the Allahabad High court in
Krishi    Utpadan     Mandi    Samiti    vs.     Union   of    India      and

another
, (2004) 267 ITR 460 stated following:
“A bare perusal of the Explanation of
Section 10(20)
shows that now only four
      entities are local authorities for the purpose
      of
Section 10(20)
, namely, (i) Panchayat, (ii)
      Municipality; (iii) Municipal Committee and
      District Board; (iv) Cantonment Board Krishi
      Utpadan Mandi Samiti is not one of the entities
      mentioned in the Explanation to
Section 10(20)
.
45
It may be noted that the Explanation to
Section 10(20)
uses the word 'means' and not
     the word 'includes'. Hence, it is not possible
     for this Court to extend the definition of
     'local   authority'   as   contained   in   the
     Explanation   to
Section  10(20)
,   vide
P.
     Kasilingam v. P.S.G. College of Technology
, AIR
     1995 SC 1395 (para 19). It is also not possible
     to refer to the definitions in other Acts, as
     the
IT Act
now specifically defines 'local
     authority'.
It is well settled that in tax matters the
     literal rule of interpretation applies and it
     is not open to the Court to extend the language
     of a provision in the Act by relying on equity,
     inference, etc.

         It is the first principle of interpretation
     that a statute should be read in its ordinary,
     natural and grammatical sense as observed by
     the Supreme Court of India:
"In construing a statutory provision
         the first and foremost rule of construction
         is the literary construction. All that the
         Court has to see at the very outset is what
         does the provision say. If the provision is
         unambiguous and if from the provision the
         legislative intent is clear, the Court need
         not call into aid the other rules of
         construction of statutes. The other rules
         of construction are called into aid only
         when the legislative intent is not clear"
vide Hiralal Ratanlal v. STO, AIR 1973 SC
         1034;”
53. A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court also in
Agricultural Produce Market Committee vs. Commissioner of

Income-tax
, (2006)156 ITR 286 had occasion to consider
46
Section   10(20)
as   amended   w.e.f.   01.04.2003   where   the

High court in paragraph 8 has stated the following:
“8. The most striking feature of the
     Explanation is that the same provides an
     exhaustive meaning to the expression "local
     authority". The word "means" used in the
     Explanation leaves no scope for addition of any
     other entity as a 'local authority' to those
     enlisted in the Explanation. In other words,
     even    if    an    entity   constitutes   a   'local
     authority' for purposes of the
General Clauses
     Act, 1897
or for purposes of any other
     enactment for that matter, it would not be so
     construed for purposes of
section 10(20)
of the
     Act unless it answers the description of one of
     those entities enumerated in the Explanation.
     Mrs. Ahlawat did not make any attempt to bring
     her case under clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of
     the Explanation and in our opinion rightly so
     because the appellant committee cannot by any
     process     of    reasoning   be   construed   as   a
     Panchayat as referred to in clause (d) of
Art.
     243
of     the    Constitution    of   India,    a
     municipality in terms of clause (e) of Art.
243P of the Constitution of India or a
     Cantonment Board as defined under
section 3
of
     the Cantonments Act, 1924. What she argued was
     that looking to the nature of the functions
     enjoined upon the appellant committee, it must
     be deemed to be a municipal committee within
     the meaning of that expression in clause (iii)
     of the Explanation. We regret our inability to
     accept that submission. We say so for two
     distinct       reasons.     Firstly    because    the
     expression "municipal committee" appears in a
     taxing     statute     and   must,   Therefore,    be
     construed strictly. It is fairly well-settled
     by a long line of decisions rendered by the
     Supreme Court that while interpreting a taxing
     statute, one has simply to look to what is
     clearly stated therein. There is, in fiscal
     statutes, no room for any intendment nor is
     there any equity about the levy sanctioned
     under the same. The following passage from Cape
     Brandy Syndicate v. IRC 1921 (1) KB 64 has been
47
approved by the Apex Court in the decisions
       rendered by their Lordships.
"in a taxing Act one has to look merely at
            what is clearly said. There is no room for
            any intendment. There is no equity about a
            tax. There is no presumption as to a tax.
            Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be
            implied, One can only look fairly at the
            language used."
54. We fully endorse the views taken by the High Court in

the above two judgments.
55. Now, reverting back to Explanation to
Section 10(20)
,

these are entities which mean the local authority. The

submission       of    the    appellant        is   that    the   appellant      is

covered     by        Clause       (ii)    of       the     Explanation        i.e.

“Municipality as referred to in clause (e) of
Article

243P
of   the       Constitution”.       We,      while    discussing       above

provisions, have already held that the appellant is not

covered     by    the        word/expression          of    “Municipality”       in

clause (e) of
Article 243P.
Thus,                   the     appellant    is     not

clearly included in sub-clause (ii) of Explanation. It is

not even the case of the appellant that the appellant is

covered by
Section 10(20)
except clause (ii).
56. Thus,        we    are    of   the    considered        opinion     that   the

appellant    is       not     covered     by    the    definition       of    local

authority as contained in Explanation to
Section 10(20)
.
48
57. In view of what has been stated above, we dismiss

these appeals.
.....................J.
                                    ( A.K. SIKRI )



                               .....................J.
                                   ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )

NEW DELHI,
JULY 02, 2018.