[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hetal Chirag Patel vs The State Of Gujarat on 11 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 547
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
NON-REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS.6501-6523 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of S.L.P.(Civil)Nos.17045-17067 of 2018)


                   Hetal Chirag Patel and Ors.                             ...Appellants


                                                           Vs.


                   State of Gujarat and Ors.Etc.Etc.                       ...Respondents



                                                      O R D E R
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    Issue notice.     Learned counsel for the respondents

                         accepted the notice and made a statement that they do

                         not    wish to    file any      counter affidavit.       With   the

                         consent    of    all   the    parties,   the   matter   is   heard

                         finally.
2.    Leave granted.
3.    These appeals are filed against the common final

                         judgment and order dated 29.06.2018 passed by the High

                         Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Civil Application No.3
Signature Not Verified
of 2018 in F/LPA No.36 of 2018 in SCA No.11163 of 2012
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.07.12
17:10:31 IST
Reason:                  & other allied matters.
1
4.   By the impugned order, the Division Bench dismissed

the appeals filed by the appellants on the ground of

delay of 233 days in filing the appeals.                       In other

words, the Division Bench dismissed the applications

filed      by   the   appellants      under
Section    5
of    the

Limitation Act for condonation of delay in filing the

appeals holding inter alia that there was no sufficient

cause made out by the appellants in filing the appeals

which were delayed by 233 days.                 It is against this

order, the appellants have felt aggrieved and filed

these    appeals      by   way   of   special   leave     before     this

Court.
5.   Having heard learned senior counsel/learned counsel

for the parties and on perusal of the record of the

case, we are inclined to condone the delay in filing

the appeals by the appellants before the Division Bench

of the High Court.
6.   In our opinion, having regard to the facts and

circumstances of the case and further keeping in view

of   the    fact that the appellants were not made parties
2
to the original writ petitions and became aggrieved by

the order passed by the writ Court (Single Judge) in

the writ petitions, a case for condonation of delay in

filing the appeals was made out.            It was, in our view,

a sufficient cause for condonation of delay within the

meaning of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act.                The High

Court ought to have, in these circumstances, condoned

the delay and granted permission to file the appeals to

the appellants for being heard on merits.
7.   In the light of the foregoing discussion, these

appeals succeed and are hereby allowed.            Impugned order

is set aside. All the inter-court appeals, out of which

these appeals arise, are restored to their respective

files.
8.   Let   the   Division   bench     now   decide   the    appeals

finally in accordance with law.
9.   Let   the   appeals    be   listed     for   further    orders

preferably next week before the Division Bench.
10. Parties are at liberty to apply before the Division

Bench for appropriate orders, pending appeals.
3
11. We,   however,     make     it    clear       that       we    have    not

 expressed     any     opinion        on     the        merits        of    the

 controversy     and    confined          only     to     the       issue    of

 condonation     of    delay     in        filing       the        intra-court

 appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court

 against the writ court (Single Judge)order.
......................J.
                                                    [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]



                                                   ......................J.
                                                    [UDAY UMESH LALIT]

New Delhi;
July 11, 2018.
4