[Cites
15
, Cited by
82
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Ram Lakhan Sharma on 2 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4860, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 527, 2019 LAB IC 576, (2018) 159 FACLR 6, (2018) 2 CURLR 1047, (2018) 3 ESC 414, (2018) 3 JLJR 280, (2018) 3 LAB LN 19, (2018) 3 PAT LJR 319, (2018) 3 SCT 538, (2018) 4 JCR 11 (SC), (2018) 6 SERVLR 101, 2018 (7) SCC 670, 2018 (8) ADJ 80 NOC, (2018) 8 SCALE 387, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 624
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
Adarsh Kumar Goel
1


                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2608 OF 2012

         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              ... APPELLANTS

                                           VERSUS

         RAM LAKHAN SHARMA                                  ... RESPONDENT

         WITH
         CIVIL APPEAL NO.6745 OF 2013,
         CIVIL APPEAL NO.9373-9374 OF 2013 AND
         CIVIL APPEAL NO.1800 OF 2014.




                                         J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
These appeals have been filed by the Union of

         India questioning the judgments of the Gauhati High

         Court              by   which   writ   petitions   filed     by   the

         respondents challenging their orders of removal were

         allowed by setting aside the removal/dismissal orders

         and the respondents were directed to be reinstated.
Signature Not Verified
The High Court had allowed the writ petitions filed
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.07.02
16:07:44 IST
Reason:
by the respondents on more or less similar grounds,
2
hence, it shall be sufficient to notice the facts and

pleadings in detail in Civil Appeal No.2608 of 2012

for deciding this batch of appeals.
Civil Appeal No. 2608 of 2012
2.     The respondent- Ram Lakhan Sharma was appointed

as    constable    in    the    Central   Reserve     Police    Force

(hereinafter referred to as “CRPF”) on 10.04.1991. On

23.10.1999 while he was posted as constable 11 Bn.,

CRPF at Agartala, Tripura he went out from Guard duty

at 09.00 a.m. and returned back at 09.50 a.m. In the

afternoon, an allegation was made by one lady Smt.

Gita    Paul   making     allegation      of   rape    against    the

respondent        and    First      Information        Report     was

registered on 23.10.1999 at the Police Station under
Section 376
IPC.
3.     On   23.10.1999    the     appellant     was   placed    under

suspension. On 04.12.1999 chargesheet was issued to

the respondent containing articles of charges I and

II.    First   charge     was   that   the     appellant   remained

absent      without      proper     permission        of   competent

authority with consent of his Guard Commander from

his duty on 23.10.1999 from 0900 hrs. to 0930 hrs.
3
Second       charge        was    that     he   while      functioning       as

constable (Guard) has committed an act of misconduct

in his capacity as a member of the force in that he

tried       to    do     sexual   intercourse       with      a   woman   with

mutual       consent       by     giving    money    which        amounts    to

indiscipline/moral turpitude.
4.     The       disciplinary          authority    appointed       one    Shri

S.S. Bisht, Second-in-Command, 11 Bn CRPF as Inquiry

Officer. The Inquiry Officer recorded the prosecution

evidence. The Inquiry Report was submitted which was

also    supplied to             the delinquent       vide letter          dated

07.02.2000             asking    the    respondent       to   submit      reply

within 15 days. The Commandant, 11 Bn passed an order

on     19.03.2000          imposing       penalty     of      removal      from

service w.e.f. 19.03.2000 under
Section 11(1)
of the

Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 read with Rule

27 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955.
5.     On        the     basis     of     First     Information         Report

registered against the respondent a chargesheet was

submitted in the Court of Sessions Judge, Tripura,

Agartala. Learned Sessions Judge after completing the

trial       on    20.09.2001       acquitted       the    respondent       from
4
charges levelled against him. After acquittal from

criminal case the respondent filed a Writ Petition

No.6778    of    2000   in     the   High   Court    of     Allahabad

challenging his order of removal. The High Court by

order dated 20.05.2004 disposed of the writ petition

giving liberty to the respondent to file an appeal

under CRPF Rules, 1955 within two weeks. In pursuance

of the order of the High Court an appeal was filed

before D.I.G.R., CRPF, Patna. The Appellate Authority

rejected    the appeal        by its    order dated        22.07.2004

against which order a revision was filed before the

Inspector    General     of     Police,     CRPF    which    too    was

rejected    on   02.03.2005.         Challenging     the    order    of

removal    as    well   as     orders   passed     in    appeal     and

revision the respondent filed Writ Petition (C) No.14

of    2006. Learned     Single Judge        vide judgment        dated

12.04.2010 allowed the writ petition by setting aside

the removal order and directed for reinstatement of

the    respondent.      The     learned     Single       Judge     also

permitted the appellant to initiate the disciplinary

inquiry     afresh      from     the      stage     of     appointing

Presenting Officer. It was further directed that if
5
the departmental proceeding is required to be started

afresh,        the        respondent       shall     be        placed      under

suspension          and     during     the   period       of     suspension,

subsistence allowance should be paid. It was left to

the wisdom of the authority to decide on arrear pay

and allowances of the respondent.
6.     Union    of        India   filed      an    appeal       against     the

judgment       of    the     learned       Single    Judge       being     Writ

Appeal No.25 of 2010. The Division Bench of the High

Court by its judgment dated 10.01.2011 dismissed the

writ    appeal aggrieved             by which       order Civil         Appeal

No.2608 of 2012 has been filed by the Union of India.
7.     The facts and pleadings in other civil appeals

being    more       or    less    similar     they    need       to   be   only

briefly noted.
Civil Appeal No.6745 of 2013
8.     Union of India has filed this appeal challenging

the judgment of the Division Bench dated 18.01.2013

by which Writ Appeal No.1 of 2013 filed by the Union

of   India      questioning          the   judgment       of    the     learned

Single Judge was dismissed. The respondent, Shri T.

Lupheng while posted at Manipur on 24.03.2008 sought
6
permission from his senior during his duty hours for

going to the Bank to withdraw his salary. He was

allowed to go and directed to report back to his

duties.     On   his     return   he   was   found   under    the

influence of alcohol. On 07.04.2008 the personnel was

suspended. On four articles of charges inquiry was

held. The Inquiry Officer recorded the evidence of

prosecution. The inquiry was completed and report was

submitted on 19.06.2008. The disciplinary authority

vide     its     order    dated    05.07.2008     awarded      the

punishment of dismissal from service. An appeal was

filed which was dismissed by DIG, CRPF on 07.11.2008.

The revision was also dismissed by IGP-C/S, CRPF on

05.06.2009.       Writ Petition No.556 of 2009 was filed

in the Gauhati High Court which was allowed by the

learned Single Judge by judgment dated 04.08.2012. A

writ appeal was filed by the Union of India which was

dismissed by the Division Bench on 18.01.2013 against

which this appeal has been filed.
Civil Appeal Nos.9373-74 of 2013
9.     These appeals have been filed by the Union of

India     against   the    Division    Bench    judgment     dated
7
24.08.2012 by which the appeal filed by the Union of

India questioning the judgment dated 08.02.2012 has

been       dismissed.        The    respondent        was    serving       as

constable in F/27 Bn CRPF. It was alleged that on

13.04.2000       he     left       lines     without     seeking         prior

permission, consumed liquor and created nuisance in

the    market.        The    chargesheet       was      issued      to    the

respondent containing two articles of charges. The

Inquiry       Officer        was     appointed.
Inquiry      Officer

recorded the statement of 12 prosecution witnesses.

By    an    order     dated    30.08.2000       the     respondent        was

dismissed       from        services.      There      were    two        other

delinquents         apart     from     the     respondent        who      were

proceeded      with and        dismissed by        the common          order.

Learned Single Judge relying on an order of the High

Court in Writ Petition (C) No.297 of 2002 (
Sri Mutum

Shanti Kumar Singh vs. Union of India
) on 08.02.2012

set aside the order of the dismissal and directed

reinstatement of the respondent. Union of India filed

Writ Appeal No.32 of 2012 challenging the order of

Learned Single Judge before the Gauhati High Court.

The Division Bench of the High Court by order dated
8
24.08.2012 dismissed the writ appeal. Review petition

was   filed    by   the    Union      of   India       which    too    was

dismissed on 18.01.2013. Consequently, these appeals

have been filed by the Union of India.
Civil Appeal No.1800 of 2014
10. This appeal has been filed by the Union of India

against the Division Bench judgment of the High Court

dated 29.05.2013 by which writ petition filed by the

respondent    challenging       the    disciplinary       proceedings

for   dismissal     of    the   respondent        was    allowed.      The

respondent     while     serving      at   Chothegaon,         Bishnupur

(Manipur) on 12.03.2007 deserted from line without

permission of competent authority. Subsequently, an

FIR was lodged on 12.03.2007. A warrant was issued to

apprehend     him   on    29.07.2007       but    he    could    not   be

apprehended.        A Court of Inquiry was conducted and

the   respondent         was    declared         “DESERTER”      w.e.f.

12.03.2007      vide       order       dated        13.07.2007.          A

Departmental proceeding was initiated with articles

of charges on 12.11.2007. Since, the respondent had

not reported in the Unit, the inquiry proceeded ex

parte. Charges levelled against the respondent were
9
found proved. An order dated 20.05.2008 was passed

awarding dismissal from service to the respondent.

Thereafter, he submitted appeal before DIG, CRPF. A

writ petition was filed by the respondent. The writ

petition was disposed of on 29.05.2013 setting aside

the dismissal order and directing for reinstatement.

The   appeal      has   been    filed      against      the    above      said

judgment.
11. The     Gauhati      High      Court    had   allowed           the   writ

petition filed by the respondents on the ground that

in the disciplinary inquiry the principles of natural

justice were violated. The High Court found that no

Presenting     Officer       was    appointed         and     the    Inquiry

Officer     acted       as   prosecutor         which       violates        the

principles of natural justice and the entire inquiry

was set aside on the aforesaid ground with liberty to

the respondent to hold afresh inquiry from the stage

of appointing of the Presenting Officer.
12. All     the    appeals      filed      by   the    Union        of    India

raises almost similar question of law and facts and

the learned counsel for the Union of India has also

raised common submission in all the appeals.
10
13. Learned counsel for the appellant, Shri Vikramjit

Banerjee, Addl. Solicitor General contends that the

High    Court       committed      error        in    setting     aside    the

dismissal order on the ground of non-appointment of

Presenting Officer. It is submitted that Rule 27 of

CRPF     Rules,       1955    which       provides        for    holding    of

disciplinary inquiry does not provide for appointment

of Presenting Officer. The appellants have followed

the requirement of Rule 27 in holding disciplinary

inquiry       in    consonance       with       principles       of   natural

justice, hence, there was no occasion to set aside

the     dismissal         order.     It        is    submitted     that    the

respondents          were    given        full       opportunity      in   the

disciplinary         inquiry      including          serving    chargesheet,

giving    opportunity         to    cross-examine          the    witnesses,

opportunity to lead evidence and submit a reply to

the Inquiry Report.
14. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that

Rule     27        does     not    mandate          the   appointment       of

Presenting Officer to hold disciplinary inquiry. It

is further submitted that even if it is assumed that

while      non-appointment                of        Presenting        Officer,
11
principles      of    natural         justice    have     been    violated,

respondents      have      to     show    what    prejudice        has   been

caused    due    to       non-appointment          of     the    Presenting

Officer    in    the       department          enquiry.     No    prejudice

having been caused to any of the respondents, they

were not entitled for grant of relief as has been

granted by the High Court.
15. Learned      counsel         appearing       for     the     respondents

refuting the above submissions contends that the High

Court    has    rightly         set    aside    the     dismissal/removal

orders     of    the       respondents.          In     the      facts   and

circumstances        of    the     present      case,     appointment      of

Presenting Officer was necessary to ensure compliance

of    principles of            natural justice         which having      not

been     done    the       respondents          have     been     seriously

prejudiced.      It       is    submitted       that     Inquiry    Officer

himself acted as prosecutor by putting questions to

the    prosecution        witnesses.       Inquiry        Officer     having

become     prosecutor           with     entire        approach     towards

inquiry was tainted with bias and has rightly been

interfered by the High Court. It is submitted that
12
Inquiry   Officer   having    acted   as   a   prosecutor   no

further prejudice needs to be proved.
16. We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and perused the records.
17. Before    we    proceed    to     consider    the   rival

submissions of the learned counsel for the parties,

it is relevant to look into the reasons given by the

High Court for allowing the writ petitions filed by

the respondents.
18. In Civil Appeal No.2608 of 2012(leading appeal)

judgment of learned Single Judge allowing the writ

petition is dated 12.04.2010 which is filed at

Annexure P-7 to the appeal. After elaborately

considering the facts of the case, the nature of

charges and affidavit filed in the writ petition,

learned   Judge proceeded to decide the writ petition.

Learned Single Judge had directed to make available

the proceedings of the disciplinary inquiry and on

perusal of the proceedings of the disciplinary

inquiry Learned Single Judge came to the conclusion

that no Presenting Officer was appointed in the said

proceedings and the Enquiry Officer himself led the
13
examination in chief of the prosecution witness by

putting questions. The High Court further came to the

conclusion that Enquiry Officer acted himself as

prosecutor and Judge in the said disciplinary

enquiry. It is useful to extract paragraphs 9 and 10

of the judgment which are to the following effect:
“(9)    This Court directed the learned
     Asstt. S.G. appearing for the respondents
     to make available the proceedings of the
     disciplinary      enquiry    against     the
     petitioner. On perusal of the proceeding,
     it is crystal clear that no Presenting
     Officer   was    appointed   in   the   said
     proceedings and the Enquiry Officer himself
     led the examination in chief of the
     prosecution witness by putting questions.
     This fact is not disputed by the learned
     Asstt. S.G. appearing for the respondents,
     but his only submission is that all
     opportunities   were   given  to   the  writ
     petitioner to put up his defence case and
     also the writ petitioner had pleaded guilty
     for both the charges levelled against him.
(10)    It is, therefore, crystal clear
     that the Enquiry Officer acted himself as
     Prosecutor   and    Judge    in    the   said
     disciplinary   enquiry   against    the  writ
     petitioner. From this admitted fact, it may
     not be wrong to infer that there were no
     fair   procedures    in   the    disciplinary
     proceedings as a result of which principle
     of natural justice was undisputedly denied
     to the writ petitioner.”
14
19. The    Division    Bench      of    the    High    Court    in    writ

appeal against the aforesaid judgment also affirmed

the aforesaid view of the learned Single Judge                       while

dismissing the writ appeal.
20. As      noted     above       there       are     two      principal

submissions      raised    by    the   learned       counsel    for    the

appellant, they are: (i) The disciplinary inquiry is

required to be conducted under Rule 27 of 1955 Rules

which does not contemplate appointment of a Presenting

Officer.    Hence,     the       inquiry      proceedings      are     not

vitiated by the non-appointment of Presenting Officer.
(ii) The disciplinary inquiry has been held against

the respondents by complying with the principles of

natural justice. No principle of natural justice is

violated by non-appointment of Presenting Officer. No

prejudice    has    been     caused     to     the    respondents       by

non-appointment of Presenting Officer.
21. Rule    27   sub-rule       (c)    of   the     CRPF    Rules,    1955

provides     for     the        procedure      for     conducting        a

departmental enquiry which is as follows:
“Rule 27(c) The procedure for conducting
     a   departmental  enquiry   shall   be   as
     follows:-
15
(1) The substance of the accusation
shall be reduced to the form of a written
charge which should be as precise as
possible. The charge shall be read out to
the accused and a copy of it given to him
at least 48 hrs. before the commencement of
the enquiry.
(2) At the commencement of the enquiry
the accused shall be asked to enter a plea
of Guilty or Not Guilty after which
evidence necessary to establish the charge
shall be let in. The evidence shall be
material to the charge and may either be
oral or documentary, if oral:
(i)    it shall be direct:
(ii) it shall be recorded by the
   Officer conducting, the enquiry himself
   in the presence of the accused:
(iii) the accused shall be allowed
   to cross examine the witnesses.
(3) When documents are relied upon
   in support of the charge, they shall be
   put in evidence as exhibits and the
   accused shall, before he is called upon
   to make his defence be allowed to
   inspect such exhibits.
(4)  The  accused  shall   then  be
   examined and his statement recorded by
   the officer conducting the enquiry. If
   the accused has pleaded guilty and does
   not challenge the evidence on record,
   the proceedings shall be closed for
   orders. If he pleads "Not guilty", he
   shall be required to file a written
   statement and a list of such witnesses
   as he may wish to cite in his defence
   within such period, which shall in any
16
case be not less than a fortnight, as
the officer conducting enquiry may deem
reasonable in the circumstances of the
case. If he declines to file a written
statement, he shall again be examined by
the officer conducting the enquiry on
the expiry of the period allowed.
(5) If the accused refuses to cite
any witnesses or to produce any evidence
in his defence, the proceedings shall be
closed for orders. If he produces any
evidence the officer conducting the
enquiry shall proceed to record the
evidence. If the officer conducting the
enquiry considers that the evidence of
any witness or any document which the
accused wants to produce in his defence
is not material to the issues involved
in the case he may refuse to call such
witness or to allow such document to be
produced in evidence, but in all such
cases he must briefly record his reasons
for     considering      the      evidence
inadmissible. When all relevant evidence
has   been   brought   on    record,   the
proceedings shall be closed for orders.
(6) If the Commandant has himself
held the enquiry, he shall record his
findings and pass orders where he has
power to do so. If the enquiry has been
held by any officer other than the
Commandant, the officer conducting the
enquiry   shall   forward   his   report
together with the proceedings to the
Commandant who shall record his findings
and pass order where he has power to do
so.”
17
22. A perusal of the aforesaid Rule does not indicate

that     Rule    contemplates       appointment        of     Presenting

Officer. Service conditions including punishment and

appeal    procedure     of     an   employee         are    governed      by

statutory rules.
The CRPF Act, 1949
has been enacted

by the Parliament for the constitution and regulation

of an armed Central Reserve Police Force.
Section 18
of the Act empowers the Central Government to make

rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
23. The    disciplinary        proceedings      are        quasi-judicial

proceedings and Inquiry Officer is in the position of

an   independent      adjudicator         and   is    obliged       to   act

fairly,         impartially.        The     authority           exercises

quasi-judicial power has to act in good faith without

bias, in a fair and impartial manner.
24. Rules of natural justice have been recognised and

developed as principles of administrative law. Natural

justice has many facets. Its all facets are steps to

ensure justice and fair play. This Court in
Suresh

Koshy George vs. University of Kerala and others
, AIR

1969 SC 198 had occasion to consider the principles of

natural    justice     in    the    context      of    a     case    where
18
disciplinary action was taken against a student who

was    alleged   to   have    adopted      malpractice    in    the

examination. In paragraph 7 this Court held that the

question whether the requirements of natural justice

have been met by the procedure adopted in a given case

must   depend    to   a   great   extent    on    the   facts   and

circumstances of the case in point, the constitution

of Tribunal and the rules under which it functions.

Following was held in paragraphs 7 and 8:
“7....The rules of natural justice are
       not embodied rules. The question whether
       the requirements of natural justice have
       been met by the procedure adopted in a
       given case must depend to a great extent on
       the facts and circumstances of the case in
       point, the constitution of the Tribunal and
       the rules under which it functions.
8. In Russel v.          Duke     of    Norfolk,
       Tucker, L. J. observed:
"There are, in my view, no words which
       are of universal application to every kind
       of inquiry and every kind of domestic
       tribunal.   The  requirements  of   natural
       justice must depend on the circumstances of
       the case, the nature of the inquiry, the
       rules under which the tribunal is acting,
       the subject matter that is being dealt
       with, and so forth. Accordingly, I do not
       derive much assistance from the definitions
       of natural justice which have been from
       time to time used, but, whatever standard
       is adopted, one essential is that the
19
person concerned should have a reasonable
     opportunity of presenting his case."
25. A   Constitution      Bench    of   this     Court     has

elaborately considered and explained the principles of

natural justice in
A.K. Kraipak and others vs. Union

of India and others
, AIR 1970 SC 150. This Court held

that the aim of the rules of natural justice is to

secure justice or to put it negatively to prevent

miscarriage of justice. The concept of natural justice

has undergone a great deal of change in recent years.

Initially recognised as consisting of two principles

that is no one shall be a judge in his own cause and

no decision shall be given against a party without

affording   him   a   reasonable   hearing,    various   other

facets have been recognised. In paragraph 20 following

has been held:
“20. The aim of the rules of natural
     justice is to secure justice or to put it
     negatively   to   prevent  miscarriage   of
     justice. These rules can operate only in
     areas not covered by any law validly made.
     In other words they do not supplant the law
     of the land but supplement it. The concept
     of natural justice has undergone a great
     deal of change in recent years. In the past
     it was thought that it included just two
     rules namely (1) no one shall be a judge in
     his own case (Nemo debet esse judex propria
20
causa) and (2) no decision shall be given
       against a party without affording him a
       reasonable     hearing     (audi    alteram
       partem).Very soon thereafter a third rule
       was    envisaged    and   that   is    that
       quasi-judicial enquiries must be held in
       good    faith,   without   bias  and    not
       arbitrarily or unreasonably....”
26.
In
State of Uttar Pradesh and others vs. Saroj

Kumar Sinha
, 2010 (2) SCC 772, this Court had laid

down    that    inquiry   officer   is   a   quasi-judicial

authority, he has to act as independent adjudicator

and     he     is   not    a    representative    of    the

department/disciplinary        authority/Government.     In

paragraphs 28 and 30 following has been held:
“28. An inquiry officer acting in a
       quasi-judicial authority is in the position
       of an independent adjudicator. He is not
       supposed to be a representative of the
       department/disciplinary           authority/
       Government. His function is to examine the
       evidence presented by the Department, even
       in the absence of the delinquent official
       to see as to whether the unrebutted
       evidence is sufficient to hold that the
       charges are proved. In the present case the
       aforesaid procedure has not been observed.
       Since no oral evidence has been examined
       the documents have not been proved, and
       could    not   have     been   taken    into
       consideration to conclude that the charges
       have been proved against the respondents.
21
30.   When   a  departmental    enquiry   is
     conducted against the government servant it
     cannot be treated as a casual exercise. The
     enquiry     proceedings    also    cannot    be
     conducted with a closed mind. The inquiry
     officer has to be wholly unbiased. The
     rules of natural justice are required to be
     observed to ensure not only that justice is
     done but is manifestly seen to be done. The
     object of rules of natural justice is to
     ensure that a government servant is treated
     fairly in proceedings which may culminate
     in    imposition   of   punishment    including
     dismissal/removal from service.”
27. When     the     statutory      rule    does   not    contemplate

appointment          of       Presenting       Officer           whether

non-appointment          of   Presenting     Officer      ipso     facto

vitiates the inquiry?             We have noticed the statutory

provision of Rule 27 which does not indicate that

there is any statutory requirement of appointment of

Presenting Officer in the disciplinary inquiry. It is

thus clear that statutory provision does not mandate

appointment of Presenting Officer. When the statutory

provision does not require appointment of Presenting

Officer whether there can be any circumstances where

principles      of   natural      justice    can   be    held     to   be

violated   is      the    broad   question    which      needs    to   be

answered in this case. We have noticed above that the
22
High   Court    found    breach    of    principles    of   natural

justice in Inquiry Officer acting as the prosecutor

against the respondents. The Inquiry Officer who has

to   be   independent     and     not    representative     of   the

disciplinary authority if starts acting in any other

capacity and proceed to act in a manner as if he is

interested      in   eliciting      evidence     to    punish     an

employee,      the principle of bias comes into place.
28. Justice M. Rama Jois of the Karnataka High Court

had occasion to consider the above aspect in
Bharath

Electronics Ltd. vs. K. Kasi, ILR
1987 Karnataka 366.

In
the above case
the order of domestic inquiry was

challenged before the Labour and Industrial Tribunal.

The grounds taken were, that inquiry is vitiated since

Presenting     Officer    was     not    appointed    and   further

Inquiry Officer played the role of prosecutor. This

Court held that there is no legal compulsion that

Presenting     Officer   should     be   appointed    but   if   the

Inquiry Officer plays the role of Presenting Officer,

the inquiry would be invalid. Following was held in

paragraphs 8 and 9:
“8. One other ground on which the domestic
       inquiry   was   held  invalid   was   that
23
Presenting Officer was not appointed. This
view of the Tribunal is also patently
untenable. There is no legal compulsion
that    Presenting   Officer    should   be
appointed. Therefore, the mere fact that
the Presenting Officer was not appointed is
no ground to set aside the inquiry See :
Gopalakrishna Reddy v. State of Karnataka
(ILR 1980 Kar 575). It is true that in the
absence   of  Presenting   Officer  if  the
Inquiring Authority plays the role of the
Presenting Officer, the inquiry would be
invalid and this aspect arises out of the
next point raised for the petitioner, which
I shall consider immediately hereafter.
9. The third ground on which the Industrial
Tribunal held that the domestic inquiry was
invalid was that the Inquiry Officer had
played the role of the Presenting Officer.
The relevant part of the findings reads :
"The Learned Counsel for the workman
 further contended that the questions put
 by the Enquiry Officer to the Management's
 witnesses themselves suggest that he was
 biased and prejudiced against the workman.
 There has been no explanation as to why no
 Presenting Officer was appointed and as to
 why the Enquiry Officer took upon himself
 the burden of putting questions to the
 Management     witnesses.    The    enquiry
 proceedings at Ext. A-6 disclose that
 after   the    cross-examination   of   the
 Management's witnesses by the defence, the
 Enquiry Officer has further put certain
 questions by way of explanation, but from
 their nature an inference arises that they
 are directed to fill in the lacuna. The
 Learned    Counsel   for   the   Management
 contended that the Enquiry Officer has
 followed the principles of natural justice
24
and that the domestic enquiry is quite
      valid. I am of the view that the fact that
      the Enquiry Officer has himself taken up
      the role of the Presenting Officer for the
      management goes to the root of the matter
      and vitiates the enquiry,"
As far as position in law is concerned, it
     is common ground that if the Inquiring
     Authority plays the role of a Prosecutor
     and cross-examines defence witnesses or
     puts leading questions to the prosecution
     witnesses clearly exposing a biased state
     of mind, the inquiry would be opposed to
     principles of natural justice. But the
     question for consideration in this case
     is : Whether the Inquiry Officer did so ?
     It is also settled law that an Inquiring
     Authority is entitled to put questions to
     the witnesses for clarification wherever it
     becomes    necessary    and   so    long the
     delinquent    employee    is   permitted  to
     cross-examine    the   witnesses   after the
     Inquiring     Authority      questions   the
     witnesses, the inquiry proceedings cannot
     be impeached as unfair. See : Munchandani
     Electric and Radio Industries Ltd. v. Their
     Workman.”
29. This Court had occasion to observe in
Workmen of

Lambabari Tea Estate vs. Lambabari Tea Estate
, 1966

(2) LLJ 315, that if Inquiry Officer did not keep his

function as Inquiry Officer but becomes prosecutor,

the inquiry is vitiated. Following was observed:
“The inquiry which was held by the
     management on the first charge was presided
     over by the manager himself. It was
     conducted in the presence of the assistant
25
manager and two others. The enquiry was not
      correct in its procedure. The manager
      recorded the statements, cross-examined the
      labourers who were the offenders and made
      and recorded his own statements on facts
      and questioned the offending labourers
      about the truth of his own statements
      recorded by himself. The manager did not
      keep his function as the enquiring officer
      distinct but became witness, prosecutor and
      manager in turns. The record of the enquiry
      as    a     result    is    staccato    and
      unsatisfactory.”
30. A Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court

speaking through Justice R.V. Raveendran, CJ (as he

then was) had occasion to consider the question of

vitiation    of     the   inquiry    when   the   Inquiry   Officer

starts himself acting as prosecutor in Union of India

and ors. vs. Mohd. Naseem Siddiqui, ILR (2004) MP
821. In
the above case
the Court considered Rule 9(9)
(c)   of   the     Railway   Servants   (Discipline    &    Appeal)

Rules,     1968.    The   Division    Bench   while   elaborating

fundamental principles of natural justice enumerated

the seven well recognised facets in paragraph 7 of the

judgment which is to the following effect:
“7. One of the fundamental principles of
      natural justice is that no man shall be a
      judge in his own cause. This principle
      consists of seven well recognised facets:
(i) The adjudicator shall be impartial and
26
free from bias, (ii) The adjudicator shall
     not   be    the   prosecutor,   (iii)   The
     complainant shall not be an adjudicator,
(iv) A witness cannot be the Adjudicator,
(v) The Adjudicator must not import his
     personal knowledge of the facts of the case
     while inquiring into charges, (vi) The
     Adjudicator   shall  not   decide   on  the
     dictates of his Superiors or others, (vii)
     The Adjudicator shall decide the issue with
     reference to material on record and not
     reference to extraneous material or on
     extraneous considerations. If any one of
     these fundamental rules is breached, the
     inquiry will be vitiated.”
31. The Division
Bench further held
that where the

Inquiry Officer acts as Presenting Officer, bias can

be presumed. In paragraph 9 is as follows:
“9. A domestic inquiry must be held by an
     unbiased person who is unconnected with the
     incident so that he can be impartial and
     objective in deciding the subject matters
     of inquiry. He should have an open mind
     till the inquiry is completed and should
     neither   act   with   bias  nor  give   an
     impression of bias. Where the Inquiry
     Officer acts as the Presenting Officer,
     bias can be presumed. At all events, it
     clearly gives an impression of bias. An
     Inquiry Officer is in position of a Judge
     or Adjudicator. The Presenting Officer is
     in the position of a Prosecutor. If the
     Inquiry   Officer   acts  as  a  Presenting
     Officer, then it would amount to Judge
     acting as the prosecutor. When the Inquiry
     Officer conducts the examination-in- chief
     of the prosecution witnesses and leads them
     through the facts so as to present the case
     of the disciplinary authority against the
27
employee or cross- examines the delinquent
     employee or his witnesses to establish the
     case of the employer/disciplinary authority
     evidently, the Inquiry Officer cannot be
     said to have an open mind. The very fact
     that he presents the case of the employer
     and supports the case of the employer is
     sufficient to hold that the Inquiry Officer
     does not have an open mind.”
32. The Division Bench after elaborately considering

the issue summarised the principles in paragraph 16

which is to the following effect:
“16. We may summarise the principles thus:
(i) The Inquiry Officer, who is in the
        position of a Judge shall not act as a
        Presenting Officer, who is in the
        position of a prosecutor.
(ii) It is not necessary for the
        Disciplinary Authority to appoint a
        Presenting Officer in each and every
        inquiry.    Non-   appointment  of   a
        Presenting Officer, by itself will not
        vitiate the inquiry.
(iii) The Inquiry Officer, with a view
        to arrive at the truth or to obtain
        clarifications, can put questions to the
        prosecution   witnesses    as    also   the
        defence witnesses. In the absence of a
        Presenting   Officer,   if    the   Inquiry
        Officer puts any questions to the
        prosecution witnesses to elicit the
        facts, he should thereafter permit the
28
delinquent employee to cross-examine
        such witnesses on those clarifications.
(iv) If the Inquiry Officer conducts a
        regular examination-in-chief by leading
        the prosecution witnesses through the
        prosecution   case,   or  puts   leading
        questions to the departmental witnesses
        pregnant with answers, or cross-examines
        the defence witnesses or puts suggestive
        questions to establish the prosecution
        case employee, the Inquiry Officer acts
        as prosecutor thereby vitiating the
        inquiry.
(v) As absence of a Presenting Officer
        by itself will not vitiate the inquiry
        and it is recognised that the Inquiry
        Officer can put questions to any or all
        witnesses to elicit the truth, the
        question whether an Inquiry Officer
        acted as a Presenting Officer, will have
        to be decided with reference to the
        manner in which the evidence is let in
        and recorded in the inquiry.
Whether an Inquiry Officer has merely acted
    only as an Inquiry Officer or has also
    acted as a Presenting Officer depends on
    the facts of each case. To avoid any
    allegations of bias and running the risk of
    inquiry being declared as illegal and
    vitiated, the present trend appears to be
    to invariably appoint Presenting Officers,
    except in simple cases. Be that as it may.”
33. We fully endorse the   principles   as   enumerated

above, however, the principles have to be carefully
29
applied in facts situation of a particular case. There

is no requirement of appointment of Presenting Officer

in each and every case, whether statutory rules enable

the authorities to make an appointment or are silent.

When the statutory rules are silent with regard to the

applicability of any facet of principles of natural

justice the applicability of principles of natural

justice which are not specifically excluded in the

statutory scheme are not prohibited. When there is no

express exclusion of particular principle of natural

justice, the said principle shall be applicable in a

given case to advance the cause of justice.
In this

context reference is made of a case of this Court in
Punjab   National         Bank   and      others     vs.   Kunj   Behari

Misra
, 1998 (7) SCC 84. In
the above case
, this Court

had   occasion       to   consider       the   provisions    of   Punjab

National    Bank       Officer      Employees’        (Discipline      and

Appeal) Regulations, 1977.
Regulation 7
provides for

action     on    the      enquiry      report.
Regulation   7
as

extracted       in   paragraph      10    of   the    judgment    is   as

follows:
30
“7. Action on the enquiry report.—(1) The
     disciplinary authority, if it is not itself
     the enquiring authority, may, for reasons
     to be recorded by it in writing, remit the
     case to the enquiring authority for fresh
     or further enquiry and report and the
     enquiring authority shall thereupon proceed
     to hold the further enquiry according to
     the provisions of Regulation 6 as far as
     may be.
(2) The disciplinary authority shall, if
     it disagrees with the findings of the
     enquiring authority on any article of
     charge,   record   its  reasons  for   such
     disagreement and record its own findings on
     such charge, if the evidence on record is
     sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the disciplinary authority, having
     regard to its findings on all or any of the
     articles of charge, is of the opinion that
     any   of    the   penalties   specified   in
Regulation 4
should be imposed on the
     officer employee, it shall, notwithstanding
     anything contained in
Regulation 8
, make an
     order imposing such penalty.
(4) If the disciplinary authority having
     regard to its findings on all or any of the
     articles of charge, is of the opinion that
     no penalty is called for, it may pass an
     order exonerating the officer employee
     concerned.”
34. The question which was debated before this Court

was that since
Regulation 7(2)
does not contain any

provision for giving an opportunity to the delinquent

officer to represent before disciplinary authority who
31
reverses the findings which were in favour of the

delinquent employee, the rules of natural justice are

not applicable.      This Court held that principle of

natural justice has to be read in
Regulation 7(2)
even

though rule does not specifically require hearing of

delinquent    officer.   In   paragraph   19   following   was

held:
“19.   The    result   of   the   aforesaid
        discussion would be that the principles of
        natural justice have to be read into
Regulation 7(2)
. As a result thereof,
        whenever    the     disciplinary    authority
        disagrees with the enquiry authority on any
        article of charge, then before it records
        its own findings on such charge, it must
        record its tentative reasons for such
        disagreement and give to the delinquent
        officer an opportunity to represent before
        it records its findings. The report of the
        enquiry officer containing its findings
        will have to be conveyed and the delinquent
        officer   will    have  an   opportunity   to
        persuade the disciplinary authority to
        accept the favourable conclusion of the
        enquiry officer. The principles of natural
        justice, as we have already observed,
        require the authority which has to take a
        final decision and can impose a penalty, to
        give an opportunity to the officer charged
        of misconduct to file a representation
        before the disciplinary authority records
        its findings on the charges framed against
        the officer.”
32
35. Thus, the question as to whether Inquiry Officer

who is supposed to act independently in an inquiry has

acted as prosecutor or not is a question of fact which

has to be decided on the facts and proceedings of

particular case. In the present case we have noticed

that the High Court had summoned the entire inquiry

proceedings and after perusing the proceedings the

High Court came to the conclusion that Inquiry Officer

himself     led    the      examination     in      chief     of    the

prosecution witness by putting questions. The High
Court   further     held
that   the    Inquiry    Officer       acted

himself     as    prosecutor       and    Judge      in     the     said

disciplinary enquiry. The above conclusion of the High

Court has already been noticed from paragraphs 9 and

10 of the judgment of the High court giving rise to

Civil Appeal No.2608 of 2012.
36. The High Court having come to the conclusion that

Inquiry   Officer     has    acted   as    prosecutor       also,    the

capacity of independent adjudicator was lost which

adversely        affecting     his       independent        role      of

adjudicator. In the circumstances, the principle of

bias shall come into play and the High Court was right
33
in   setting   aside   the   dismissal    orders   by    giving

liberty   to   the   appellants   to   proceed   with   inquiry

afresh.    We make it clear that our observations as

made above are in the facts of the present cases.
37. In result, all the appeals are dismissed subject

to the liberty as granted by the High Court that it

shall be open for the appellants to proceed with the

inquiry afresh from the stage as directed by the High

Court and it shall be open for the appellant to decide

on arrear pay and allowances of the respondents.
.....................J.
                                    ( ADARSH KUMAR GOEL )



                                   .....................J.
                                       ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )

NEW DELHI,
JULY 02, 2018.