[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shanti Bhushan vs Supreme Court Of India Through Its ... on 6 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3287, 2018 (5) ABR 663, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2641, (2018) 6 MAD LJ 647, (2018) 8 SCALE 585, (2018) 6 ALL WC 5486, 2018 (8) SCC 396
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
A.K. Sikri
,
Ashok Bhushan
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.789 OF 2018
                                        (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 12405 OF 2018)


                      SHANTI BHUSHAN                                             .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                      SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      THROUGH ITS REGISTRAR AND ANOTHER                        .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                          JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
The name of respondent No.2 is deleted from the array of

                                parties, inasmuch as, having regard to the nature of submissions

                                made during hearing, which would be taken note of at the

                                appropriate place, respondent No.2 is not a necessary party.
2.     The petitioner herein, who is a senior advocate practicing in this

                                Court and enjoys credible reputation in the profession as well as

                                in public, has filed this writ petition under
Article 32
of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.07.06
Constitution of India. In this writ petition, he seeks this Court to
14:42:14 IST
Reason:
clarify the administrative authority of the Chief Justice of India (for
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 1 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       short, the ‘Chief Justice’) as the Master of Roster and for laying

       down the procedure and principles to be followed in preparing the

       Roster for allocation of cases.
3.     It may be mentioned at the outset that the petition acknowledges

       and accepts the legal principles that the Chief Justice is the

       “Master of Roster” and has the authority to allocate the cases to

       different Benches/Judges of the Supreme Court.               It is also

       conceded that adherence to this principle, namely, the Chief

       Justice is the Master of Roster, is essentially to maintain judicial

       discipline and decorum. It is also stated that the Chief Justice is

       first among equals, meaning thereby all Judges of the Supreme

       Court are equal with same judicial power, with Chief Justice as

       the senior most Judge. At the same time, it is contended that this

       power is not to be used to assert any superior authority by the

       Chief Justice and the power is to be exercised in a manner that is

       fair, just and transparent.         As the Master of Roster, it is also

       conceded that it is the Chief Justice who has to decide as to

       which Bench will hear a particular case.             The apprehension

       expressed is that keeping in view the predisposition of particular

       Judges, the Chief Justice may assign cases to those Judges to

       achieve a predetermined outcome.
This calls for, according to
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                Page 2 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       the petitioner, devising a more rational and transparent system of

       listing and re-allocation of the matters to avoid any such

       possibilities. As per the petitioner, the matters need to be listed

       by strictly following the provisions of the Supreme Court Rules,

       2013 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’). These Rules, no

       doubt, empower the Chief Justice to allocate certain cases by

       exercising his discretionary power. The petitioner submits that in

       order to ensure that such a discretion is exercised in a fair

       manner, the expression ‘Chief Justice’ should be interpreted to

       mean ‘Collegium’ of first five Judges of the Supreme Court, as

       held by this Court in Supreme Court
Advocates-On-Record

       Association and Others v. Union of India1
(famously known as

       the “Second Judges’ case”).              On the aforesaid edifice, the

       petitioner has prayed for the following directions:
“(a) That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ
                    of declaration or a writ in the nature of declaration or
                    any other appropriate writ, order or direction holding
                    and declaring that listing of matters must strictly
                    adhere to the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 and
                    Handbook on Practice and Procedure and Office
                    Procedure, subject to the following clarification:
i) The words ‘Chief Justice of India’ must be deemed
                        to mean a collegium of 5 senior judges of this
                        Hon’ble Court.
(b) That this Hon’ble court may be pleased to issue a writ
                   of declaration of a writ in the nature of declaration or
                   any other appropriate writ, order or direction holding
                   and declaring that the consultation by the Registry
1 (1993) 4 SCC 441
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                     Page 3 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
                     Officials for listing purposes, if any with the Hon’ble
                     Chief Justice of India must include consultation with
                     such number of senior-most judges as this Hon’ble
                     court may fix in the interest of justice.
(c)   That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ
                     of prohibition or a writ in the nature of prohibition or
                     any other appropriate writ, order or direction
                     prohibiting the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and
                     concerned respondents from listing any matter
                     contrary to the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 and
                     Handbook on Practice and Procedure and Office
                     Procedure or picking and choosing Benches for the
                     purpose of listing contrary thereto, with the above
                     modification of replacing ‘Chief Justice of India’ with
                     the collegium of 5 senior most judges of this Hon’ble
                     Court.
(d) That this Hon’ble Court may Clarify that when matters
                   are mentioned for urgent hearing/listing, only a
                   date/time of hearing would be fixed but the Bench to
                   hear the matter would be determined in accordance
                   with the Rules.
(e) That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to grant such
                   other and further relief as may be deemed fit in the
                   facts and circumstances of the case and as may be
                   required in the interests of justice.”
4.     Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel appearing for the

       petitioner, submitted that in certain cases, instances whereof are

       given in the writ petition, the manner in which matters are

       allocated to certain Benches reflect that either there was no strict

       adherence to the Rules or the transparency was lacking. He,

       however, at the outset, made it clear that the petitioner does not

       seek to question the validity of any judicial orders and/or

       judgments which have been rendered in those cases or in other
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                   Page 4 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       cases. The petition is confined to the scope and ambit of the

       powers of the Chief Justice in listing matters and to seek

       declaration that the power must be exercised lawfully and on

       objective consideration, thereby eschewing any subjective

       considerations.          The entire thrust of his submissions was,

       therefore, to suggest the ways and means for achieving the

       same. In this behalf, he advanced the following propositions:
(a)     Constitution of India expressly confers powers on the

       Supreme Court under
Article 145
to make Rules “for regulating

       generally the practice and procedure of the court” with the

       approval of the President. Such Rules may include, ‘rules as to

       the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters pertaining to

       appeals including the time within which appeals to the Courts are

       to be entered’. Sub-Articles (2) and (3) thereunder fix minimum

       number of judges to sit for any purpose including for deciding a

       case involving substantial question of law as to the interpretation

       of the Constitution or a Reference under
Article 143.
Article 124
establishes and constitutes the Supreme Court

       by providing, ‘there shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting

       of a Chief Justice and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger

       number of not more than seven other Judges (original)’.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                            Page 5 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               Thus, the expression ‘Supreme Court’ includes the Chief

       Justice and other Judges of the Court. The power to frame Rules

       under
Article 145
is, therefore, conferred upon the entire Court,

       which power includes power to frame the Roster and direct

       hearing/ listing of matters.
(b)     Thus, although the Chief Justice is the Master of the Roll

       under the convention, the Constitution has departed from the

       conventional Scheme to confer power upon the supreme Court.
(c)     The expression ‘Chief Justice’ has been interpreted by a

       Constitution Bench of this Court in
S.P. Gupta v. Union of India

       and Another2
(known as the “First Judges’ case”) to mean a

       ‘Collegium’.        This was done to ensure a guard against the

       absolute power being conferred upon the Chief Justice alone. It

       was observed in
the said judgment
as follows:
“31...We are all human beings with our own likes and
               dislikes, our own predelictions and prejudices and our mind
               is not so comprehensive as to be able to take in all aspects
               of a question at one time and moreover sometimes, the
               information on which we base our judgments may be
               incorrect or inadequate and our judgment may also
               sometimes be imperceptibly influenced by extraneous or
               irrelevant considerations. It may also be noticed that it is
               not difficult to find reasons to justify what our bias or
               predeliction or inclination impels us to do. It is for this
               reason that we think it is unwise to entrust power in any
               significant or sensitive area to a single individual,
               howsoever high or important may be the office which he is

2 (1981) Supp. SCC 87
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                 Page 6 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               occupying. There must be checks and controls in the
               exercise of every power, particularly when it is a power to
               make important and crucial appointments and it must be
               exercisable by plurality of hands rather than be vested in a
               single individual...”


               This principle has been subsequently followed by this Court

       in the Second and Third Judges’ case.
The interpretation so canvassed by this Court must equally

       apply in respect of the power, if any, exclusively claimed by the

       Chief Justice as the Master of the Roster. It is well settled that in

       a statute a particular expression must receive the same and

       consistent meaning.
(d)     Functions as ‘framing of Roster’ and ‘listing of important and

       sensitive matters’ are extremely crucial and cannot be left to the

       sole discretion of the Chief Justice as per the law laid down in the

       First Judges’ case. In any case, such exclusive discretion is

       anathema to the constitutional scheme.                It is, therefore,

       imperative that the expression ‘Chief Justice’ must mean the

       Supreme Court or, as held by this Court in series of judgments,

       the ‘Collegium’ of five senior most judges, to provide appropriate

       checks and balances against any possible abuse.
(e)     The Rules framed under
Article 145
of the Constitution

       confer powers on the Registrar under Order III Rules 7 and 8 to
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                 Page 7 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       deal with preparation of lists and fixing of hearings of petitions,

       which would include appropriate listings. The matters be listed

       strictly as per these Rules.
5.     To put it pithily, the submission is that once the Rules are framed,

       matters should be listed and fixed for hearing as per the

       provisions, particularly Order III Rules 7 and 8, thereof. Further,

       in any case, the expression ‘Chief Justice’ has to assign the

       meaning by reading it as a ‘Collegium’ so that important and

       sensitive matters are assigned to particular Benches by the

       Collegium of five senior most Judges, including the Chief Justice.
6.     Mr. Dave elaborated the aforesaid submissions by arguing that

       fairness in action was the hallmark of any administrative power

       and while exercising the power as a Master of Roster in allocating

       a Bench to hear particular kind of cases, the Chief Justice

       performs his function in an administrative capacity.        He also

       submitted that applicability of the principle of bias is to be judged

       by applying the test of reasonable apprehension of bias in the

       mind of a party, as held in the case of
Ranjit Thakur v. Union of

       India and Others3
. It was emphasised that the Constitution of

       India has created an independent judiciary which is vested with

3 (1987) 4 SCC 611
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                             Page 8 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       the power of judicial review to determine the legality of

       administrative actions and, thus, it becomes the solemn duty of

       the judiciary to keep the organs of the State within the limits of the

       power conferred by the Constitution by exercising the power of

       judicial review which is the sentinel on the qui vive. When such

       an important task is assigned to the judiciary, power of listing the

       cases has to be exercised in a fair and transparent manner so as

       to instill confidence in the public at large that the matter shall be

       decided by the Court (or for that matter, by a particular Bench)

       strictly on legal principles to ensure that Rule of Law, which is a

       part of the basic structure of the Constitution, prevails.
In this

       context, it was argued that the power to allocate the cases should

       not be with one individual and this could be taken care of by

       applying the principle
laid down in
the Second Judges’ case

       wherein, while laying down the foundation of the Collegium

       system for the appointment of Judges, it was held:
“427. It is, therefore, realistic that there has to be room for
               discretionary authority within the operation of the rule of
               law, even though it has to be reduced to the minimum
               extent necessary for proper governance; and within the
               area of discretionary authority, the existence of proper
               guidelines or norms of general application excludes any
               arbitrary exercise of discretionary authority. In such a
               situation, the exercise of discretionary authority in its
               application to individuals, according to proper guidelines or
               norms, further reduces the area of discretion; but to that
               extent discretionary authority has to be given to make the
               system workable. A further check in that limited sphere is
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                    Page 9 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               provided by the conferment of the discretionary authority
               not to one individual but to a body of men, requiring the
               final decision to be taken after full interaction and effective
               consultation between themselves, to ensure projection of
               all likely points of view and procuring the element of
               plurality in the final decision with the benefit of the
               collective wisdom of all those involved in the process. The
               conferment of this discretionary authority in the highest
               functionaries is a further check in the same direction. The
               constitutional scheme excludes the scope of absolute
               power in any one individual. Such a construction of the
               provisions also, therefore, matches the constitutional
               scheme and the constitutional purpose for which these
               provisions were enacted.
xx        xx           xx
450. It is obvious, that the provision for consultation with
               the Chief Justice of India and, in the case of the High
               Courts, with the Chief Justice of the High Court, was
               introduced because of the realisation that the Chief Justice
               is best equipped to know and assess the worth of the
               candidate, and his suitability for appointment as a superior
               Judge; and it was also necessary to eliminate political
               influence even at the stage of the initial appointment of a
               Judge, since the provisions for securing his independence
               after appointment were alone not sufficient for an
               independent judiciary. At the same time, the phraseology
               used indicated that giving absolute discretion or the power
               of veto to the Chief Justice of India as an individual in the
               matter of appointments was not considered desirable, so
               that there should remain some power with the executive to
               be exercised as a check, whenever necessary. The
               indication is, that in the choice of a candidate suitable for
               appointment, the opinion of the Chief Justice of India
               should have the greatest weight; the selection should be
               made as a result of a participatory consultative process in
               which the executive should have power to act as a mere
               check on the exercise of power by the Chief Justice of
               India, to achieve the constitutional purpose. Thus, the
               executive element in the appointment process is reduced
               to the minimum and any political influence is eliminated. It
               was for this reason that the word ‘consultation’ instead of
               ‘concurrence’ was used, but that was done merely to
               indicate that absolute discretion was not given to anyone,
               not even to the Chief Justice of India as an individual,
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                   Page 10 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               much less to the executive, which earlier had absolute
               discretion under the Government of India Acts.
xx        xx            xx
466. It has to be borne in mind that the principle of
               non-arbitrariness which is an essential attribute of the rule
               of law is all pervasive throughout the Constitution; and an
               adjunct of this principle is the absence of absolute power in
               one individual in any sphere of constitutional activity. The
               possibility of intrusion of arbitrariness has to be kept in
               view, and eschewed, in constitutional interpretation and,
               therefore, the meaning of the opinion of the Chief Justice of
               India, in the context of primacy, must be ascertained. A
               homogenous mixture, which accords with the constitutional
               purpose and its ethos, indicates that it is the opinion of the
               judiciary ‘symbolised by the view of the Chief Justice of
               India’ which is given greater significance or primacy in the
               matter of appointments. In other words, the view of the
               Chief Justice of India is to be expressed in the consultative
               process as truly reflective of the opinion of the judiciary,
               which means that it must necessarily have the element of
               plurality in its formation. In actual practice, this is how the
               Chief Justice of India does, and is expected to function so
               that the final opinion expressed by him is not merely his
               individual opinion, but the collective opinion formed after
               taking into account the views of some other Judges who
               are traditionally associated with this function.
xx        xx            xx
468. The rule of law envisages the area of discretion to be
               the minimum, requiring only the application of known
               principles or guidelines to ensure non-arbitrariness, but to
               that limited extent, discretion is a pragmatic need.
Conferring discretion upon high functionaries and,
               whenever feasible, introducing the element of plurality by
               requiring a collective decision, are further checks against
               arbitrariness. This is how idealism and pragmatism are
               reconciled and integrated, to make the system workable in
               a satisfactory manner. Entrustment of the task of
               appointment of superior judges to high constitutional
               functionaries; the greatest significance attached to the view
               of the Chief Justice of India, who is best equipped to
               assess the true worth of the candidates for adjudging their
               suitability; the opinion of the Chief Justice of India being the
               collective opinion formed after taking into account the
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                    Page 11 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               views of some of his colleagues; and the executive being
               permitted to prevent an appointment considered to be
               unsuitable, for strong reasons disclosed to the Chief
               Justice of India, provide the best method, in the
               constitutional scheme, to achieve the constitutional
               purpose without conferring absolute discretion or veto upon
               either the judiciary or the executive, much less in any
               individual, be he the Chief Justice of India or the Prime
               Minister.
xx        xx           xx
480. The primacy of the judiciary in the matter of
               appointments and its determinative nature in transfers
               introduces the judicial element in the process, and is itself
               a sufficient justification for the absence of the need for
               further judicial review of those decisions, which is ordinarily
               needed as a check against possible executive excess or
               arbitrariness. Plurality of judges in the formation of the
               opinion of the Chief Justice of India, as indicated, is
               another inbuilt check against the likelihood of arbitrariness
               or bias, even subconsciously, of any individual. The judicial
               element being predominant in the case of appointments,
               and decisive in transfers, as indicated, the need for further
               judicial review, as in other executive actions, is eliminated.
               The reduction of the area of discretion to the minimum, the
               element of plurality of judges in formation of the opinion of
               the Chief Justice of India, effective consultation in writing,
               and prevailing norms to regulate the area of discretion are
               sufficient checks against arbitrariness.”
7.     Mr. Dave also referred to the following observations of Justice

       J.S. Verma (as His Lordship then was) in that very judgment:
“478. This opinion has to be formed in a pragmatic manner
               and past practice based on convention is a safe guide. In
               matters relating to appointments in the Supreme Court, the
               opinion given by the Chief Justice of India in the
               consultative process has to be formed taking into account
               the views of the two seniormost Judges of the Supreme
               Court. The Chief Justice of India is also expected to
               ascertain the views of the senior-most Judge of the
               Supreme Court whose opinion is likely to be significant in
               adjudging the suitability of the candidate, by reason of the
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                   Page 12 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               fact that he has come from the same High Court, or
               otherwise.
Article 124(2)
is an indication that ascertainment
               of the views of some other Judges of the Supreme Court is
               requisite. The object underlying
Article 124(2)
is achieved
               in this manner as the Chief Justice of India consults them
               for the formation of his opinion. This provision in
Article
               124(2)
is the basis for the existing convention which
               requires the Chief Justice of India to consult some Judges
               of the Supreme Court before making his recommendation.
               This ensures that the opinion of the Chief Justice of India is
               not merely his individual opinion, but an opinion formed
               collectively by a body of men at the apex level in the
               judiciary...”
8.     Learned senior counsel also relied upon paragraph 44 of the

       judgment in Special Reference No. 1 of 1998 4 (popularly known

       as the “Third Judges’ case”) wherein the Court answered the

       questions under Reference by clarifying as follows:
“44. The questions posted by the Reference are now
               answered, but we should emphasise that the answers
               should be read in conjunction with the body of this opinion:
xx       xx           xx
3. The Chief Justice of India must make a
                  recommendation to appoint a Judge of the Supreme
                  Court and to transfer a Chief Justice or puisne Judge
                  of a High Court in consultation with the four
                  seniormost puisne Judges of the Supreme Court.
                  Insofar as an appointment to the High Court is
                  concerned, the recommendation must be made in
                  consultation with the two seniormost puisne Judges
                  of the Supreme Court.
4. The Chief Justice of India is not entitled to act
                  solely in his individual capacity, without consultation
                  with other Judges of the Supreme Court, in respect of
                  materials and information conveyed by the
                  Government of India for non-appointment of a Judge
                  recommended for appointment.”
4 (1998) 7 SCC 739
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                  Page 13 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
9.     Towing the aforesaid line, Mr. Dave proceeded to argue that the

       modern trend in all robust legal systems governed by democratic

       principles was to ensure that even administrative powers of the

       Chief Justice must be shared with other senior Judges so that the

       power is exercised properly and validly. In support, the learned

       senior counsel referred to the system that prevails in the United

       Kingdom Supreme Court, High Court of Australia (which is the

       apex court of that country), Supreme Court of Canada, German

       Federal Court and even European Court of Human Rights and

       European Court of Justice.
10.    Mr. Venugopal, learned Attorney General, in reply to the aforesaid

        arguments of the petitioner, submitted that the petitioner has

        virtually accepted the legal position to the effect that the Chief

        Justice is the ‘Master of Roster’ and in that capacity he also has

        the authority to allocate the cases to different Benches/Judges of

        the Supreme Court. Therefore, the grievance, essentially, of the

        petitioner was about the manner in which such a power is being

        exercised. However, at the same time, the petitioner had also

        made it clear that he was not questioning particular decisions

        rendered by particular Benches which were assigned some of the
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                          Page 14 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        important matters, pointed out the learned Attorney General. He

        submitted that the substance of the argument of the learned

        senior counsel for the petitioner was that in order to ensure that

        the cases are assigned in a fair and transparent manner, the term

        ‘Chief Justice’ should be interpreted to mean ‘Collegium’ of five

        senior most judges including the ‘Chief Justice’. Response of the

        learned Attorney General was that though such a mechanism, as

        a solution, was found out by this Court in the judgments popularly

        known as Three Judges’ case(s) for appointment of Judges in

        the High Court as well as in the Supreme Court, suggestion was

        totally impractical when it comes to discharge of administrative

        duties by the ‘Chief Justice’ in his capacity as the Master of

        Roster. Strongly refuting this suggestion, he argued that such an

        interpretation was not only impractical, it would even result in a

        chaos if day to day administrative work, including the task of

        constituting the Benches and allocating cases to the Benches, is

        allowed to be undertaken by the ‘Collegium’. His submission was

        that such matters of constituting the Benches and allocating

        cases to the respective Benches has to be left to the sole

        discretion of the ‘Chief Justice’ acting in his individual capacity, for

        the smooth functioning of the Court, by reposing faith and trust in
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 15 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        the ‘Chief Justice’ who occupies the highest constitutional

        position in the judiciary.
11.    We have bestowed serious consideration to the submissions

        made by the counsel on either sides. It may also be clarified at

        the outset that this matter has not been treated as adversarial in

        nature. This Court would also like to place on record that it does

        not dispute the bona fides of the person like the petitioner, who

        enjoys considerable respectability, in filing this petition.     This

        Court has considered the entire matter objectively and with great

        sense of responsibility. At the same time, it also becomes our

        duty to decide the matter in accord with the legal position that is

        contained in the Constitution and the Statutes and the legal

        principles engrafted in the precedents of this Court having binding

        effect.
ROLE OF THE ‘CHIEF JUSTICE’ AS THE MASTER OF ROSTER
12.    There is no dispute, as mentioned above, that ‘Chief Justice’ is

        the Maser of Roster and has the authority to allocate the cases to

        different Benches/Judges of the Supreme Court. The petitioner

        has been candid in conceding to this legal position. He himself

        has gone to the extent of stating in the petition that this principle

        that ‘Chief Justice’ is the Maser of Roster is essential to maintain
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                             Page 16 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        judicial discipline and decorum and also for the proper and

        efficient    functioning       of   the   Court.   Notwithstanding      this

        concession, it would be imperative to explain this legal position

        with little elaborations, also by referring to some of the judgments

        of this Court which spell out the scope and ambit of such a power.
13.    The petitioner has himself, in the petition, referred to a

        three-Judge Bench in
State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand &

        Ors.5
held that the Chief Justice of the High Court is the Maser of

        Roster and he alone has the prerogative to constitute the

        Benches of the Court and allocate cases to the Benches so

        constituted. The Court stated thus:
“59. From the preceding discussion the following broad
               conclusions emerge. This, of course, is not to be treated as
               a summary of our judgment and the conclusions should be
               read with the text of the judgment:
(1) That the administrative control of the High Court vests
               in the Chief Justice alone. On the judicial side, however, he
               is only the first amongst the equals.
(2) That the Chief Justice is the master of the roster. He
               alone has the prerogative to constitute benches of the court
               and allocate cases to the benches so constituted.
(3) That the puisne Judges can only do that work as is
               allotted to them by the Chief Justice or under his directions.
(4) That till any determination made by the Chief Justice
               lasts, no Judge who is to sit singly can sit in a Division
               Bench and no Division Bench can be split up by the
               Judges constituting the bench themselves and one or both
               the Judges constituting such bench sit singly and take up
5 (1998) 1 SCC 1
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                  Page 17 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               any other kind of judicial business not otherwise assigned
               to them by or under the directions of the Chief Justice.
(5) That the Chief Justice can take cognizance of an
               application laid before him under Rule 55 (supra) and refer
               a case to the larger bench for its disposal and he can
               exercise this jurisdiction even in relation to a part-heard
               case.
(6) That the puisne Judges cannot “pick and choose” any
               case pending in the High Court and assign the same to
               himself or themselves for disposal without appropriate
               orders of the Chief Justice.
(7) That no Judge or Judges can give directions to the
               Registry for listing any case before him or them which runs
               counter to the directions given by the Chief Justice.”
14.    The same principle in Prakash Chand’s case was applied as

        regards the power of the ‘Chief Justice’ and in the matter of

        Campaign for
Judicial Accountability and Reforms v. Union

        of India & Anr.6
five Judge Bench held:
“6. There can be no doubt that the Chief Justice of India is
               the first amongst the equals, but definitely, he exercises
               certain administrative powers and that is why in
Prakash
               Chand [State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand
, (1998) 1
               SCC 1] , it has been clearly stated that the administrative
               control of the High Court vests in the Chief Justice alone.
               The same principle must apply proprio vigore as regards
               the power of the Chief Justice of India. On the judicial side,
               he is only the first amongst the equals.
But, as far as the
               Roster is concerned, as has been stated by the
               three-Judge Bench in
Prakash Chand [State of Rajasthan
               v. Prakash Chand
, (1998) 1 SCC 1] , the Chief Justice is
               the Master of the Roster and he alone has the prerogative
               to constitute the Benches of the Court and allocate cases
               to the Benches so constituted.”

       Further, the Constitution Bench held:
6 (2018) 1 SCC 196
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                  Page 18 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
                “7. The aforesaid position though stated as regards the
                High Court, we are absolutely certain that the said principle
                is applicable to the Supreme Court. We are disposed to
                think so. Unless such a position is clearly stated, there will
                be utter confusion. Be it noted, this has been also the
                convention of this Court, and the convention has been so
                because of the law. We have to make it clear without any
                kind of hesitation that the convention is followed because
                of the principles of law and because of judicial discipline
                and decorum. Once the Chief Justice is stated to be the
                Master of the Roster, he alone has the prerogative to
                constitute Benches. Needless to say, neither a two-Judge
                Bench nor a three-Judge Bench can allocate the matter to
                themselves or direct the composition for constitution of a
                Bench. To elaborate, there cannot be any direction to the
                Chief Justice of India as to who shall be sitting on the
                Bench or who shall take up the matter as that touches the
                composition of the Bench. We reiterate such an order
                cannot be passed. It is not countenanced in law and not
                permissible.
8. An institution has to function within certain parameters
                and that is why there are precedents, rules and
                conventions. As far as the composition of Benches is
                concerned, we accept the principles stated in
Prakash
                Chand [State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand
, (1998) 1
                SCC 1] , which were stated in the context of the High
                Court, and clearly state that the same shall squarely apply
                to the Supreme Court and there cannot be any kind of
                command or order directing the Chief Justice of India to
                constitute a particular Bench.”
15.     There is a reiteration of this very legal position by another three

        Judge Bench judgment of this Court in Asok Pande v. Supreme

        Court of India through its Registrar and Ors.7


WHETHER THE EXPRESSION ‘CHIEF JUSTICE’ IN THE SUPREME
COURT RULES IS TO BE READ AS ‘COLLEGIUM’ OF FIRST FIVE
JUDGES?
7 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 147 of 2018 decided on April 11, 2018
Writ Petition (C) No.           of 2018                                 Page 19 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
16.    In this aforesaid backdrop, we have to consider the principal

        submission of the petitioner viz. whether the expression ‘Chief

        Justice’ in the Supreme Court Rules is to be read as ‘Collegium’

        of first five Judges? As a corollary, whether power of constituting

        the Benches and listing the cases be exercised by the Collegium

        and not the Chief Justice alone? That is the entire edifice on

        which the petitioner’s case is built upon. To begin with, we may

        remark that Asok Pande             covers this issue as well.    That

        judgment was rendered in a writ petition filed by the petitioner

        under
Article 32
of the Constitution wherein he had raised number

        of grievances. Apart from some personal grievances raised in the

        said writ petition pertaining to some proceedings in the Allahabad

        High Court, relief which he had sought was for issuance of writ of

        mandamus to the first respondent (Supreme Court of India) to

        evolve the set of procedure for constituting the Benches and

        allotment of jurisdiction to different Benches of the Supreme

        Court. In this behalf, he wanted that there should be a specific

        rule in the Rules to the effect that the three Judge Bench in the

        Chief Justice’s Court should consist of the Chief Justice and two

        senior-most Judges and also that Rules be made to the effect

        that the Constitution Bench shall consist of five senior-most

        Judges or three senior most Judges and two junior-most Judges.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                             Page 20 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        Similar mandamus was prayed for in respect of the Allahabad

        High Court to evolve identical set of Rules with respect to

        formation of Benches.
17.    While negating the aforesaid relief claimed by the said petitioner,

        the Court took note of the provisions of
Article 145
of the

        Constitution which empowers the Supreme Court to make Rules

        for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court,

        including the matters specifically mentioned in clause (I) of
Article

        145
of the Constitution, which Rules are to be made with the

        approval of the President of India. The Court also referred to

        Order VI of the Rules. This order deals with the constitution of

        division courts and powers of a Single Judge. Rule 1 thereof

        provides that it is the Chief Justice who is to nominate the Judges

        who would constitute a Bench to hear a case, appeal or matter.

        Where a reference is made to a larger Bench, the Bench making

        the reference is required to refer the matter to the Chief Justice

        who will constitute the Bench. Rule 1, thus, empowers the Chief

        Justice to constitute a Division Bench as well as a larger Bench.

        In case where the reference is made by a Bench to a larger

        Bench, again, which Judges will constitute the said Bench is left

        to the discretion of the Chief Justice. It nowhere says that the
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                             Page 21 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        members of the Bench making reference are to be the members

        of the larger Bench as well. Likewise, Order XXXVIII of the Rules

        deals with applications for enforcement of fundamental rights

        under
Article 32
of the Constitution. Rule 1 thereof mentions the

        manner in which a petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution is

        to be dealt with.         Likewise, Rule 12 deals with public interest

        litigation.
18.    After incorporating the aforesaid provisions, the Court referred to

        the three Judge Bench judgment in the case of
State of

        Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand and Others
8 as well as the

        Constitution       Bench      judgment   in   Campaign      for    Judicial

        Accountability and Reforms’s case, the relevant discussion in

        respect of which has already been elucidated above. On that

        basis, the relief claimed by the said writ petitioner was termed as

        ‘manifestly misconceived’ and the discussion that ensued in this

        behalf reads as under:
“11. In view of this binding elucidation of the authority of the
               Chief Justice of India, the relief which the petitioner seeks
               is manifestly misconceived. For one thing, it is a well
               settled principle that no mandamus can issue to direct a
               body or authority which is vested with a rule making power
               to make rules or to make them in a particular manner. The
               Supreme Court has been authorised under
Article 145
to
               frame rules of procedure. A mandamus of the nature
               sought cannot be issued. Similarly, the petitioner is not
               entitled to seek a direction that Benches of this Court

8 (1998) 1 SCC 1
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                     Page 22 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               should be constituted in a particular manner or, as he
               seeks, that there should be separate divisions of this Court.
The former lies exclusively in the domain of the prerogative
               powers of the Chief Justice.
12. Quite apart from the fact that the relief sought is
               contrary to legal and constitutional principle, there is a
               fundamental fallacy in the approach of the petitioner, which
               must be set at rest. The petitioner seeks the establishment
               of a binding precept under which a three judge Bench in
               the Court of the Chief Justice must consist of the Chief
               Justice and his two senior-most colleagues alone while the
               Constitution Bench should consist of five senior-most
               judges (or, as he suggests, three ‘senior-most’ and two
               ‘junior-most’ judges). There is no constitutional foundation
               on the basis of which such a suggestion can be accepted.
               For one thing, as we have noticed earlier, this would
               intrude into the exclusive duty and authority of the Chief
               Justice to constitute benches and to allocate cases to
               them. Moreover, the petitioner seems to harbour a
               misconception that certain categories of cases or certain
               courts must consist only of the senior-most in terms of
               appointment. Every Judge appointed to this Court under
Article 124
of the Constitution is invested with the equal
               duty of adjudicating cases which come to the Court and are
               assigned by the Chief Justice. Seniority in terms of
               appointment has no bearing on which cases a Judge
               should hear. It is a settled position that a judgment
               delivered by a Judge speaks for the court (except in the
               case of a concurring or dissenting opinion). The
               Constitution makes a stipulation in
Article 124(3)
for the
               appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court from the High
               Courts, from the Bar and from amongst distinguished
               jurists. Appointment to the Supreme Court is conditioned
               upon the fulfilment of the qualifications prescribed for the
               holding of that office under
Article 124(3).
Once appointed,
               every Judge of the Court is entitled to and in fact, duty
               bound, to hear such cases as are assigned by the Chief
               Justice. Judges drawn from the High Courts are appointed
               to this Court after long years of service. Members of the
               Bar who are elevated to this Court similarly are possessed
               of wide and diverse experience gathered during the course
               of the years of practise at the Bar. To suggest that any
               Judge would be more capable of deciding particular cases
               or that certain categories of cases should be assigned only
               to the senior-most among the Judges of the Supreme
               Court has no foundation in principle or precedent. To hold
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                 Page 23 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               otherwise would be to cast a reflection on the competence
               and ability of other judges to deal with all cases assigned
               by the Chief Justice notwithstanding the fact that they have
               fulfilled the qualifications mandated by the Constitution for
               appointment to the office.”
                                                          (emphasis added)
19.    On the aforesaid analogy, the Court also rejected the prayer of

        the said petitioner in regard to the constitution of Benches in the

        High Courts as well. Some of the discussion in this behalf, which

        may be relevant for our purposes as well, is reproduced below:
“14...The High Courts periodically publish a roster of work
               under the authority of the Chief Justice. The roster
               indicates the constitution of Benches, Division and Single.
               The roster will indicate the subject matter of the cases
               assigned to each bench. Different High Courts have their
               own traditions in regard to the period for which the
               published roster will continue, until a fresh roster is notified.
               Individual judges have their own strengths in terms of
               specialisation. The Chief Justice of the High Court has to
               bear in mind the area of specialisation of each judge, while
               deciding upon the allocation of work. However,
               specialisation is one of several aspects which weigh with
               the Chief Justice. A newly appointed judge may be rotated
               in a variety of assignments to enable the judge to acquire
               expertise in diverse branches of law. Together with the
               need for specialisation, there is a need for judges to have a
               broad-based understanding of diverse areas of law. In
               deciding upon the allocation of work and the constitution of
               benches, Chief Justices have to determine the number of
               benches which need to be assigned to a particular subject
               matter keeping in view the inflow of work and arrears. The
               Chief Justice of the High Court will have regard to factors
               such as the pendency of cases in a given area, the need to
               dispose of the oldest cases, prioritising criminal cases
               where the liberty of the subject is involved and the overall
               strength, in terms of numbers, of the court. Different High
               Courts have assigned priorities to certain categories of
               cases such as those involving senior citizens, convicts who
               are in jail and women litigants. These priorities are
               considered while preparing the roster. Impending
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                     Page 24 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
              retirements have to be borne in mind since the assignment
              given to a judge who is due to demit office would have to
              be entrusted to another Bench when the vacancy arises.
              These are some of the considerations which are borne in
              mind. The Chief Justice is guided by the need to ensure
              the orderly functioning of the court and the expeditious
              disposal of cases. The publication of the roster on the
              websites of the High Courts provides notice to litigants and
              lawyers about the distribution of judicial work under the
              authority of the Chief Justice. This Court was constituted in
              1950. In the preparation of the roster and in the distribution
              of judicial work, some of the conventions which are
              adopted in the High Courts are also relevant, subject to
              modifications having regard to institutional requirements.”
20.    The aforesaid judgment of the three Judges’ Bench is a binding

       precedent. This judgment, in no uncertain terms, holds that the

       ‘Chief Justice’ in his individual capacity is the Master of Roster

       and it cannot read as Collegium of first three or five Judges.

       Thus, it is his prerogative to constitute the Benches and allocate

       the subjects which would be dealt with by the respective

       Benches.
21.    The Constitution is silent on the role of the ‘Chief Justice’9. There

       is no specific provision relating thereto either in the Constitution

       or even in any other law. The legal position contained in the

       aforesaid judgments is based upon healthy practice and sound

       conventions which have been developed over a period of time

       and that stands engrafted in the Supreme Court Rules. In fact, it

9
Article 124
of the Constitution merely says that there shall be a Supreme Court of India
    consisting of Chief Justice of India and thirty other Judges.
Writ Petition (C) No.            of 2018                                       Page 25 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        is dominated by two stereo-types.           One, perpetuated by the

        common belief and widely endorsed and accepted by all the

        stakeholders, is that the ‘Chief Justice’ occupies the role of ‘first

        among equals’. The phrase ‘among equals’ is generally relatable

        to the judicial function designed to emphasise the fact that voices

        of the members of a particular Bench, which may include ‘Chief

        Justice’, are given equal weight and that in deciding cases, the

        opinion of the ‘Chief Justice’ also carries same weight and is no

        different from those of other Members of the Bench. Thus, in a

        given case, there is a possibility that the view of the ‘Chief

        Justice’ may be a minority view and in that eventuality, the

        outcome of case would be what majority decides. The word ‘first’

        in the aforesaid expression signifies only the fact that the ‘Chief

        Justice’ is the senior most Judge of the Court.
22.    The second stereotype is that being the ‘Chief Justice’ and senior

        most Judge of the Court, he is empowered to exercise

        ‘leadership’ on the Court.         In this role, the ‘Chief Justice’ is

        expected to be the spokesperson and representative of the

        judiciary in its dealings with the Executive, Government and the

        Community.         For this purpose, the ‘Chief Justice’ has a general

        responsibility to ensure that the Court promotes change and
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 26 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        reform as appropriate. The judicial reforms, which is a continuing

        process in order to ensure that there is real access to justice, also

        becomes the moral responsibility of the ‘Chief Justice’.                Such

        reforms in the administration of justice are not limited to the

        judicial aspects (i.e. how the cases need to be decided, case

        management and court management, speedy disposal etc.) but

        also include reforms on the administrative side of the legal

        system as well. Procedural reforms and implementation thereof

        is an integral part of the judicial reform. The ultimate purpose is

        to dispense justice, which is the highest and noblest virtue.

        Again, in this role, the ‘Chief Justice’ gets the authority and

        responsibility for the administration of the Court, which gives him

        the ultimate authority for determining the distribution of judicial

        work load.       In Indian context, this power was given statutory

        recognition by
Section 214(3)
of the Government of India Act,

        1935 which reads as under:
“(2) Rules made under this section may fix the minimum
               number of judges who are to sit for any purpose, so
               however that no case shall be decided by less than three
               judges:
Provided that, if the Federal Legislature makes such
               provision as is mentioned in this chapter for enlarging the
               appellate jurisdiction of the court, the rules shall provide for
               the constitution of a special division of the court for the
               purpose of deciding all cases which would have been
               within the jurisdiction of the court even if its jurisdiction had
               not been so enlarged.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                     Page 27 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               (3) Subject to the provisions of any rules of court, the
               Chief Justice of India shall determine what judges are to
               constitute any division of the court and what judges are to
               sit for any purpose.”
23.    Under the Constitution, the Supreme Court is given the authority

        to frame Rules for regulating generally the practice and

        procedure of the Court, including various subjects as enumerated

        in sub-Article (1) of
Article 145.
Supreme Court Rules, 2013

        which have been framed in exercise of such a power empowered

        the Chief Justice to constitute the Benches and list particular

        matters before such Benches.          Similar powers are conferred

        upon the Chief Justice of the High Courts in the Rules framed by

        respective High Courts for regulating its procedure.
24.    At the same time, the power of the ‘Chief Justice’ does not extend

        to regulate the functioning of a particular Bench to decide cases

        assigned to him once the cases are allocated to that Bench. A

        Bench comprising of puisne Judges exercise its judicial function

        without interference from others, including the ‘Chief Justice’, as it

        is supposed to act according to law. Therefore, when a particular

        matter is assigned to a particular Bench, that Bench acquires the

        complete dominion over the case.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 28 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
25.    From the aforesaid, it follows that the two most obvious functions

        of the ‘Chief Justice’ are to exercise judicial power as a Judge of

        the Court on equal footing as others, being ‘among equals’ and to

        assume responsibility of the administration of the Court.
26.    Keeping in mind these postulates and the ratio of the aforesaid

        binding judgments, it is difficult to accept the argument of the

        petitioner that the expression ‘Chief Justice’ is to be read as

        ‘Collegium’ consisting of five senior-most Judges, including the

        Chief Justice. The judgments cited by learned senior counsel

        appearing for the petitioner are in the context of
Article 124
of the

        Constitution wherein the expression ‘Chief Justice’ was read as

        Collegium, after examining the Constitutional Scheme and the

        objective behind such a provision meant for appointment of

        Judges. The rationale provided in that context cannot be adopted

        while interpreting
Article 145
of the Constitution, the purpose

        whereof is altogether different. We agree with the submission of

        the learned Attorney General that the task of constitution of

        Benches and allocation of specific cases to those Benches, can

        more smoothly be performed by the Chief Justice and discharge

        of such a function by the Collegium would be unworkable and

        also lead to many practical difficulties.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 29 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
27.    As already taken note of above, the basis of this argument is the

        judgment of this Court in Second Judges’ case which laid the

        foundation of the Collegium system for the appointment of

        Judges. The relevant passages from the said judgment, which

        are relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner,

        have already been extracted above. The Court accepted that

        there has to be room for discretionary authority within the

        operation of rule of law. At the same time, it was emphasised that

        such a discretion should be reduced to minimum extent

        necessary for proper governance, which can be achieved with the

        existence of proper guidelines or norms of general application. In

        this hue, the Court deemed it proper that conferment of the

        discretionary authority should not be with one individual but to a

        body of men and, thus, evolved the system of Collegium whereby

        the Chief Justice will have benefit of full interaction and effective

        consultation with other senior Judges, to ensure projection of all

        likely points and procuring the element of plurality in the final

        decision with the benefit of collective wisdom of all those involved

        in the process. However, it needs to be emphasised that the

        aforesaid resolution and concept of Collegium was innovated by

        judicial interpretation in the context of appointment of Judges in

        the constitutional Courts, i.e. the Supreme Court as well as the
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                             Page 30 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        High Courts. It is also to be borne in mind that as far as the

        Executive is concerned, it will have virtually no role in such

        appointments, except the minimalist role specifically delineated in

        the judgment.           This kind of system which is devised for

        appointment of Judges cannot be replicated when it comes to the

        role of the Chief Justice as Master of Roster. We have to keep in

        mind that the Chief Justice, as the head of the Supreme Court of

        India, and the Chief Justices of the High Courts, have to perform

        many other functions, on administrative side, in their capacities

        as Chief Justices. Framing of the Roster and constituting the

        Benches is one among them.           In case the expression ‘Chief

        Justice’ is to be interpreted as ‘Collegium’, it would be difficult to

        have smooth day to day functioning of the Supreme Court, or for

        that matter the High Courts. We have already reproduced above

        that part of the discussion from the judgment in Asok Pande

        which took note of various factors that are to be kept in mind for

        preparing the Roster and indicating the constitution of Benches.

        Moreover, when it comes to assigning the cases to a particular

        Bench, it has to be undertaken by the Chief Justice on daily basis

        in contrast with the meetings of the Collegium for the purpose of

        appointment of Judges, which is infrequent. Thus, meeting of
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                              Page 31 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        Collegium for the purpose of assigning the cases to a particular

        Bench on daily basis is clearly impracticable.
28.    It is trite that ratio of a judgment is what it decides and not what

        logically follows therefrom.        The observations in the three

        Judges’ case(s) are to be read in the context in which they are

        rendered. Once that is kept in mind, we arrive at a conclusion

        that the ratio of those judgments cannot be extended to read the

        expression ‘Chief Justice’, wherever it occurs, to mean the

        ‘Collegium’ of the senior Judges.
29.    The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that

        function such as ‘framing the Roster’ and ‘listing of important and

        sensitive matters’ are extremely crucial and cannot be left to the

        sole discretion of the Chief Justice is also met in Asok Pande, in

        the following manner:
“15. Underlying the submission that the constitution of
               Benches and the allocation of cases by the Chief Justice
               must be regulated by a procedure cast in iron is the
               apprehension that absent such a procedure the power will
               be exercised arbitrarily. In his capacity as a Judge, the
               Chief Justice is primus inter pares: the first among equals.
               In the discharge of his other functions, the Chief Justice of
               India occupies a position which is sui generis.
Article
               124(1)
postulates that the Supreme Court of India shall
               consist of a Chief Justice of India and other Judges.
Article
               146
reaffirms the position of the Chief Justice of India as
               the head of the institution. From an institutional perspective
               the Chief Justice is placed at the helm of the Supreme
               Court. In the allocation of cases and the constitution of
               benches the Chief Justice has an exclusive prerogative. As
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                  Page 32 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               a repository of constitutional trust, the Chief Justice is an
               institution in himself. The authority which is conferred upon
               the Chief Justice, it must be remembered, is vested in a
               high constitutional functionary. The authority is entrusted to
               the Chief Justice because such an entrustment of functions
               is necessary for the efficient transaction of the
               administrative and judicial work of the Court. The ultimate
               purpose behind the entrustment of authority to the Chief
               Justice is to ensure that the Supreme Court is able to fulfil
               and discharge the constitutional obligations which govern
               and provide the rationale for its existence. The entrustment
               of functions to the Chief Justice as the head of the
               institution, is with the purpose of securing the position of
               the Supreme Court as an independent safeguard for the
               preservation of personal liberty. There cannot be a
               presumption of mistrust. The oath of office demands
               nothing less.”
30.    In this entire scheme, it needs to be highlighted that the judiciary

        is assigned a pivotal role under the Constitution.
In a Constitution

        Bench judgment rendered only a day before 10 in the case of
Government of NCT of Delhi v. Union of India & Another
, the

        role of the Court as final arbiter of the Constitution and upholder

        of the rule of law is captured in the following words:
“4. This Court, being the final arbiter of the Constitution, in
               such a situation, has to enter into the process of
               interpretation with the new tools such as constitutional
               pragmatism having due regard for sanctity of objectivity,
               realization of the purpose in the truest sense by constantly
               reminding one and all about the sacrosanctity of
               democratic structure as envisaged by our Constitution,
               elevation of the precepts of constitutional trust and morality,
               and the solemn idea of decentralization of power and, we
               must say, the ideas knock at the door to be invited. The
               compulsive invitation is the warrant to sustain the values of
               democracy in the prescribed framework of law. The aim is
               to see that in the ultimate eventuate, the rule of law

10 Judgment dated July 4, 2018 in Civil Appeal No. 2357 of 2017 titled
Government of NCT of Delhi
    v. Union of India & Another
with other connected appeals.
Writ Petition (C) No.           of 2018                                             Page 33 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               prevails and the interpretative process allows the said idea
               its deserved space, for when the rule of law is conferred its
               due status in the sphere of democracy, it assumes
               significant credibility.
5. We would like to call such a method of understanding
               “confluence of the idea and spirit of the Constitution”, for it
               celebrates the grand idea behind the constitutional
               structure founded on the cherished values of democracy.”
31.    The Constitution makers, thus, reposed great trust in the judiciary

        by assigning it the powers of judicial review of not only the

        administrative acts of the Government/Executive but even the

        legislative acts of the Legislature.         In the process, judiciary

        discharges one of the most important functions, namely, the

        administration of justice. It does so by upholding the rule of law

        and, in the process, protecting the Constitution and the

        democracy. Our Constitution guarantees free speech, fair trials,

        personal freedom, personal privacy, equal treatment under the

        law, human dignity and liberal democratic values. This bundle of

        non-negotiable rights and freedoms has to be protected by the

        judiciary. For this reason, independence of judiciary is treated as

        one of the basic features of the Constitution. Here, we may point

        out four major aspects of judicial status or performance, which

        are: independence; impartiality; fairness; and competence.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                   Page 34 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
32.     Alexander M. Bickel had emphasised way back in 1962 11 that the

        judiciary is the least dangerous branch as it has neither the purse

        nor the sword, by reproducing following words of wisdom of

        Alexander Hamilton12:
“Whoever attentively considers the different departments of
                power must perceive, that, in a government in which they
                are separated from each other, the judiciary, from the
                nature of its functions, will always be the least dangerous
                to the political rights of the Constitution; because it will be
                least in a capacity to annoy or injure them. The Executive
                not only dispenses the honors, but holds the sword of the
                community. The legislature not only commands the purse,
                but prescribes the rules by which the duties and rights of
                every citizen are to be regulated. The judiciary, on the
                contrary, has no influence over either the sword or the
                purse; no direction either of the strength or of the wealth of
                the society; and can take no active resolution whatever. It
                may truly be said to have neither FORCE nor WILL, but
                merely judgment; and must ultimately depend upon the aid
                of the executive arm even for the efficacy of its judgments.”
33.     The judiciary even without the sword or the purse, remains the

        guardian of the Constitution. Its sole strength lies in the public

        confidence and the trust. A.S. Anand, J. (as His Lordship then

        was, later the Chief Justice of India) highlighted this aspect

        (though in the context of contempt jurisdiction of the Court) in
State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand & Ors.13
in the following

        words:
“The virtue of humility in the Judges and a constant
                awareness that investment of power in them is meant for

11 in his book ‘The Least Dangerous Branch’
12 in the 78th Federalist, “The Judges as Guardians of the Constitution”.
13 (1998) 1 SCC 1
Writ Petition (C) No.            of 2018                                    Page 35 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               use in public interest and to uphold the majesty of rule of
               law, would to a large extent ensure self restraint in
               discharge of all judicial functions and preserve the
               independence of judiciary. It needs no emphasis to say that
               all actions of a Judge must be judicious in character.
Erosion of credibility of the judiciary, in the public
               mind, for whatever reasons, is greatest threat to the
               independence of the judiciary. Eternal vigilance by the
               Judges to guard against any such latent internal danger is,
               therefore, necessary, lest we "suffer from self-inflicted
               mortal wounds". We must remember that the Constitution
               does not give unlimited powers to any one including the
               Judge of all levels. The societal perception of Judges as
               being detached and impartial referees is the greatest
               strength of the judiciary and every member of the
               judiciary must ensure that this perception does not
               receive a set back consciously or unconsciously.
               Authenticity of the judicial process rests on public
               confidence and public confidence rests on legitimacy of
               judicial process. Sources of legitimacy are in the
               impersonal application by the Judge of recognised
               objective principles which owe their existence to a system
               as distinguished from subjective moods, predilections,
               emotions and prejudices.”
34.    We may also quote the following passage from S.P. Gupta (per

        Pathak, J.):
“While the administration of justice draws its legal sanction
               from the Constitution, its credibility rests in the faith of the
               people. Indispensable to that faith is the independence of
               the judiciary. An Independent and impartial judiciary
               supplies the reason for the judicial institution, it also gives
               character and content to the constitutional milieu.”
35.    In the same decision, J.S. Verma, J. echoed the aforesaid

        sentiments with the following message:
“The role of the Judiciary under the Constitution is a pious
               trust reposed by the people. The Constitution and the
               democratic-polity thereunder shall not survive, the day
               Judiciary fails to justify the said trust. If the Judiciary fails,
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                     Page 36 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
               the Constitution fails and the people might opt for some
               other alternative.”
36.    Thus, the faith of the people is the bed-rock on which the edifice

        of judicial review and efficacy of the adjudication are founded.

        Erosion of credibility of the judiciary, in the public mind, for

        whatever reasons, is greatest threat to the independence of the

        judiciary. We live in an age of accountability. What is required of

        Judges is changing.                Judgments of the Courts are widely

        discussed, debated and even criticised. In this age of technology,

        open society and liberal democracy coupled with varied nature of

        cases raising complex issues which are decided by the Courts,

        including ‘hard cases’ any outcome whereof may be susceptible

        to criticism, as both views may appear to be equally strong. In

        that sense, judiciary walks the tightrope of independence. It has

        also become a regular feature that even laymen, who are

        constitutionally illiterate, enter such debate and evaluate the

        outcomes influenced by their emotions, rather than on legal or

        constitutional principles.
37.    The world is changing fast. However, the fundamental qualities

        which the public seek in a Judge have remained the same, as

        these are eternal verities, which will never change. These are

        wisdom, patience, a sense of practical reality, fairness and
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 37 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        balance, independence of mind and knowledge of law, moral

        courage or fortitude, and a total commitment that justice should

        be administered according to law. At the end of the day, it is the

        virtue of righteousness, impartiality, objectivity and scholarship

        which a Judge commands to ensure respectability to his

        judgment.
38.    In the aforesaid backdrop, role of the ‘Chief Justice’ as Master of

        Roster also assumes much significance.                       Each ‘Chief Justice’

        performs his role by consultation and consensus, after taking into

        account various factors including individual Judges’ interests and

        abilities, their specialisation in a particular area, their capacity to

        handle particular type of cases and many other relevant

        considerations.         However, the exercise of such a power with

        wisdom has to be left to the ‘Chief Justice’ who is given the

        prerogative of the ‘Master of the Roster’.
39.    Mr. Dave had referred to certain international practices, namely,

        the practices adopted by the Apex Courts in other jurisdictions.

        We may only record that the judicial systems in different countries

        have different styles of functioning and the practices have been

        developed in various countries keeping in view the structure of

        the Courts14. Even the procedural characteristics of litigation are

14 For example, in U.S., all Judge of the Supreme Court sit as a Court and not in Benches.
Writ Petition (C) No.          of 2018                                               Page 38 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
        different.     Therefore, system prevalent and developed in one

        jurisdiction cannot be mechanically adopted by judicial system in

        other countries. At the same time, there is no harm in adopting

        those healthy practices which have been developed in foreign

        jurisdictions and which can be easily adopted because of their

        universal application. After all, no system is fool-proof. There is

        always a scope for improvement. Reforms in the administration

        of justice, whether on judicial side or administratively, is a

        continuing process. We all learn from experiences and strive to

        do better.
40.    Of course, it goes without saying that the matters need to be

        listed and assigned to the Benches in accordance with the

        Supreme Court Rules, 2013 and Handbook of Practice and

        Procedure.
41.    Having regard to the aforesaid principles
laid down in
the binding

        precedents, it is difficult to accept the prayer of the petitioner that

        the expression ‘Chief Justice’ appearing in the Supreme Court

        Rules, 2013 be read as ‘Collegium’ of five senior most Judges

        for the purpose of allocating the matters. At the same time, we

        feel that debate generated as a result has served its purpose.

        While saying so, we have in mind the following words of Hon’ble
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                               Page 39 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
       Justice Tun Mohamed Dzaiddin Abdullah, the then Chief Justice

       of Malaysia15:
“As judges, we are used to hearing, marshalling and
               evaluating evidence.
In fact, when it comes down to brass tacks, that is just what
               we judges are perennially obliged to do throughout the
               better part of our life on the Bench. Every decision we
               make is momentous, for it touches the lives and fortunes of
               other people.
Thus it is good, therefore from time to time, like today, and
               the next three days, for us to take a hard look at ourselves
               so as to ensure that it is a responsibility which we are
               discharging.”
42.    We conclude by extracting following message conveying deep

       meaning, written in the ‘Introduction’ to the just released book

       authored by eminent lawyer Fali S. Nariman16:
“Second: Institutions created by our Constitution, like the
               Supreme Court, are, and will always remain, greater than
               the men and women for the time being in-charge. And this
               is why our Court will always remain ‘Hon’ble’ as is the
               nine-judge Bench of the-more-than-two-hundred-year-old
               Supreme Court of the United States, which is reminded by
               the Clerk of the Court on each day that it sits (proclaimed in
               a loud voice before the justices take their seats): “God save
               the United States and this Hon’ble Court”, and

               Third: As for the men and women on the Bench for the time
               being in-charge, one can almost hear them say (as
               Edmund Burke had said in an election speech way back in
               1780):
15 Taken from Welcoming Address given by him in a workshop on “judicial accountability”
    organised by Commonwealth Lawyers’ Association in Kuala Lumpur in April, 2002.
16 God Save the Hon’ble Supreme Court and Other Opinions.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                              Page 40 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
                  “Applaud us when we run; console us when we fall; cheer
                  us when we recover; but let us pass on-for God’s sake, let
                  us pass on”.
43.    We, thus, dispose of the writ petition without any further

        directions.
.............................................J.
                                                                              (A.K. SIKRI)




NEW DELHI;
JULY 06, 2018.
Writ Petition (C) No.         of 2018                                            Page 41 of 41
(arising out of Diary No. 12405 of 2018)
1
REPORTABLE


           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

         WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 789  OF 2018
      (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 12405 OF 2018)


SHANTI BHUSHAN                            … PETITIONER

                          VERSUS

SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
THROUGH ITS REGISTRAR & ANR.             … RESPONDENTS



                      JUDGMENT

ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
I have    advantage of going through the draft

 judgment of my esteemed brother Justice A.K. Sikri. I

 entirely agree with the opinion expressed by my brother,

 however, looking to the importance of the issues raised in

 the writ petition I also express my views on the subject.
2.    The petitioner, a senior advocate of this Court and

 former Law Minister has filed this writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution praying for following reliefs:-
2
“a) That this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
issue a writ of declaration or a writ in the
nature of declaration or any other appropriate
writ, order or direction holding and declaring
that listing of matters must strictly adhere to
the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 and Handbook
on Practice and Procedure and Office
Procedure,      subject   to   the     following
clarification:
i) The words 'Chief Justice of India'
     must be deemed to mean a collegium
     of 5 senior judges of this Hon'ble
     Court.
b)    That this Hon'ble Court may be pleased
to issue a writ of declaration or a writ in the na-
ture of declaration or any other appropriate
writ, order or direction holding and declaring
that the consultation by the Registry, Officials
for listing purposes, if any with the Hon'ble
Chief Justice of India must include consultation
with such number of senior-most judges as this
Hon'ble Court may fix in the interest of justice,.
c)     That this Hon'ble Court may be pleased
to issue a writ of prohibition or a writ in the na-
ture of prohibition or any other appropriate
writ, order or direction prohibiting the Hon'ble
Chief Justice of India and concerned respon-
dents from listing any matter contrary to the
Supreme Court Rules, 2013 and Handbook on
Practice and Procedure and Office Procedure or
picking and choosing Benches for the purpose
of listing contrary thereto, with the above mod-
3
ification of replacing `Chief Justice of India'
      with the collegium of 5 senior most judges of
      this Hon'ble Court.
d) That this Hon'ble Court may Clarify that
      when matters are mentioned for urgent hear-
      ing/listing, only a date/time of hearing would be
      fixed but the bench to hear the matter would
      be determined in accordance with the Rules.
e) That this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
      grant such other and further relief as may be
      deemed fit in the facts and circumstances of
      the case and as may be required in the inter-
ests of justice.”
3.     The petitioner in the writ petition pleads that

although the Chief Justice is the master of roster and has

the     authority    to   allocate    cases     to   different

benches/judges of the Supreme Court, but however the

power to exercise such authority cannot be used in such

a manner as to assert any superior authority by the Chief

Justice.    In this respect, it is relevant to reproduce the

pleading of the petitioner in Paragraph 4 and Paragraph 6

of the writ petition, which is to the following effect:-
“4. It is a principle that has been settled by
       judicial pronouncements and conventions of
       the Hon’ble Supreme Court that the Chief
4
Justice of India is the master of the roster and
      has the authority to allocate cases to different
      benches/judges of the Supreme Court.
Adherence to this principle is essential to
      maintain judicial discipline and decorum and
      for the proper and efficient functioning of the
      Court. However, the power to exercise such
      authority cannot be used in such a manner as
      to assert any superior authority by the Chief
      Justice. It is also a well settled principle of
      jurisprudence that the Chief Justice is only the
      first among equals.
6. A roster declares what work is assigned to
      High Court and Supreme Court Judges. ‘Master
      of the Roster’ refers to the privilege of the
      Chief Justice to constitute Benches to hear
      cases. It is a pre-requisite that this power
      must be exercised in a manner is that fair, just
      and transparent and in keeping with the high
      standards of integrity desired from the office
      of a Chief Justice of India.”
4.    The petitioner refers to a Three Judge Bench

judgment in
State of Rajasthan Vs. Prakash Chand &

Ors.
, (1998) 1 SCC 1, wherein it was held that the Chief

Justice of the High Court is the master of the roster and

he alone has the prerogative to constitute the benches of

the   court    and   allocate     cases   to   the   benches   so

constituted. It is further pleaded in the writ petition that

the   writ    petition   raises   questions    relating   to   the
5
functioning of the Registry of the Supreme Court and the

powers exercised by the Chief Justice of India, inter-alia,

in “listing matters” so as to list matters of general public

importance and/or of political sensitivity before only

certain Benches contrary to the Supreme Court Rules,

Handbook of procedure and conventions.            Petitioner,

however, specifically states in Paragraph 14 of the writ

petition that “present petition does not seek to question

any judicial orders and/or judgments”. The petitioner has

made reference to certain cases, which according to

petitioner reflects and establishes gross abuse of powers.

The petitioner in context of above pleading has prayed in

the writ petition that the word ‘Chief Justice of India’ must

be deemed to mean a collegium of five senior judges of

this Hon’ble Court, the relief claimed in the writ petition

as noted above, is to the above effect.
5.   Shri Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel assisted

by Shri Prashant Bhushan, appearing for the petitioner

submits that constitution of benches being a sensitive
6
matter, it should not be allowed to or such power should

not be entrusted only to the Chief Justice but as this

Court has held while interpreting
Article 124
that

recommendation for      appointment of judges for the

Supreme Court and the High Court should be made by a

collegium consisting of Chief Justice and four senior

judges, the same interpretation or principle should be

applied while finalizing the roster. Formulation of roster

should be entrusted to collegium consisting of Chief

Justice and four senior judges.      Learned senior counsel

submits that the petitioner is not making any allegation

and only endeavour is to devise a system so that there

be no    handpicking   of   cases.      This   Court     while

interpreting
Article 124
has relied on collective wisdom

while   making   recommendation        for   appointment     of

judges, the same interpretation should be applied in

exercise of power by Chief Justice while formulating the

roster. Alternatively, it is submitted that power to frame

roster be given to entire Court and the entire Court can

decide the principles for finalizing the roster.       Learned
7
senior counsel for the petitioner has also referred to

various international practices, which is adopted in

different countries in respect of allocation of cases to

different benches.
6.   Shri   K.K.   Venugopal,   learned   Attorney   General

opposing the writ petition submits that under the

Constitution and the Rules framed thereunder, it is the

Chief Justice, who is contemplated to take decision

regarding allocation of cases and constitution of benches.

It is submitted by learned Attorney General that the

exercise of allocation of cases and framing of roster is an

exercise, which cannot be taken by multiple persons. He

submits that there can be difference in members of

collegium regarding allocation of cases, which shall

hamper the smooth functioning of the Court. He submits

that exercise of roster is entirely different from exercise of

making recommendation for appointment of judges of this

Court. By participation of other judges, there is likelihood

that conflict of interest. Multiplicity of judges forming the
8
roster   will    lead   to    chaos,   hampering      the    smooth

functioning of the Court.          Learned Attorney General has

referred to various judgments of this Court for the

proposition that Chief Justice has been held to be master

of roster and it is sole prerogative of Chief Justice to

constitute      benches      and   allocate   cases   to    different

benches for smooth functioning of the Court.
Shri Dushyant Dave replying the submission of

learned Attorney General submits that the objective of

writ petition is to evolve a transparent and non-arbitrary

system for allocation of cases and formation of benches

to allay any criticism of functioning of this Court.             The

object of Writ Petition is not to make allegations against

anyone or to question any judgment of this Court; rather

the entire endeavour is to improve the judicial system to

strengthen the independence of judiciary.
7.   We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
8.   Before we consider the rival submissions raised by

the learned counsel for the parties, it is relevant to notice
9
the relevant constitutional provisions and the precedents

on the subject.      The Supreme Court of India is successor

of Federal Court, which was established in the British

India by the
Government of India Act, 1935
. For the first

time, the Chief Justice of India was contemplated by
Section 200
of the Government of India Act, 1935. Prior

to establishment of Federal Court, it was High Courts in

different   States    administering   Justice.   Against   the

decision of the High Court, appeal was contemplated

before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.        For

the purposes of this case, it is not necessary to trace the

judicial history of Courts in this country.
9.
Section 200(1)
of the 1935 Act, which provided for

establishment and constitution of Federal Court was to

the following effect:-
“200.-(1) There shall be a Federal Court
      consisting of a Chief Justice of India and such
      number of other judges as His Majesty may
      deem necessary, but unless and until an
      address has been presented by the Federal
      Legislature to the Governor-General for
      submission to His Majesty praying for an
      increase in the number of judges, the number
      of puisne judges shall not exceed six.”
10
10.
Section 214
of the 1935 Act provided for rules of the

Court etc., which was as follows:
“214.-(1) The Federal Court may from time to
      court,    with    the    approval     of   the
      Governor-General in his discretion, make
      rules of court for regulating generally the
      practice and procedure of the court, including
      rules as to the persons practising before the
      court, as to the time within which appeals to
      the court are to be entered, as to the costs of
      and incidental to any proceedings in the
      court, and as to the fees to be charged in
      respect of proceedings therein, and in
      particular may make rules providing for the
      summary determination of any appeal which
      appears to the court to be frivolous or
      vexatious or brought for the purpose of delay.
(2) Rules made under this section may fix the
      minimum number of judges who are to sit for
      any purpose, so however that no case shall
      be decided by less than three judges :
Provided that, if the Federal Legislature
      makes such provision as is mentioned in this
      chapter     for   enlarging    the    appellate
      jurisdiction of the court, the rules shall
      provide for the constitution of a special
      division of the court for the purpose of
      deciding all cases which would have been
      within the jurisdiction of the court even if its
      jurisdiction had not been so enlarged.
(3) Subject to the provisions of any rules of
      court, the Chief Justice of India shall
      determine what judges are to constitute any
      division of the court and what judges are to
11
sit for any purpose.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the
      Federal Court save in open court and with the
      concurrence of a majority of the judges
      present at the hearing of the case, but
      nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to
      prevent a judge who does not concur from
      delivering a dissenting judgment.
(5) All proceedings in the Federal Court shall
      be in the English language.”
11. Sub-section (3) of
Section 214
specifically provided;

that subject to the provisions of any rules of court, the

Chief Justice of India shall determine what judges are to

constitute any division of the court and what judges are to

sit for any purpose. The Chief Justice of India thus was

exercising jurisdiction of constituting any division of the

Court and nominating judges for sitting for different

purposes.
12. Part V Chapter IV of the Constitution of India deals

with the Union Judiciary.
Article 145
of the Constitution

provides for the rules of the Court.    Sub-article (1) of
Article 145
provides that subject to the provisions of any

law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may from
12
time to time, with the approval of the President, make

rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure

of the Court, including various subjects as enumerated in

sub-article (1).   In exercise of power under
Article 145
,

Supreme Court has framed rules from time to time. The

Supreme Court Rules, 1950, the Supreme Court Rules,

1966 and thereafter the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 have

been framed in exercise of power under
Article 145(1).
In

the Supreme Court Rules, 2013, Order VI deals with

constitution of Division Courts and Powers of the Single

Judge. Rules 1 and 2 of Order VI are as follows:-
“1. Subject to the other provisions of these
      rules every cause, appeal or matter shall be
      heard by a Bench consisting of not less than
      two Judges nominated by the Chief Justice.
2. Where in the course of the hearing of any
      cause, appeal or other proceeding, the Bench
      considers that the matter should be dealt
      with by a larger Bench, it shall refer the
      matter to the Chief Justice, who shall
      thereupon constitute such a Bench for the
      hearing of it.”
13. The Chief Justice of India of the erstwhile Federal

Court and the Chief Justice of India as per the Constitution
13
of India has been exercising the jurisdiction of formulating

the roster for convenient distribution of Court's business

and constituting the benches from time to time.
14. This Court had also occasion to consider time and

again the nature and extent of the powers of the Chief

Justice of India. For the purposes of this case, it is useful

to refer to few of the precedents in the above respect. A

Three Judge Bench of this Court in
State of Rajasthan

Vs. Prakash Chand and Others
, (1998) 1 SCC 1, which

judgment has also been referred to and relied on by the

petitioner, had    elaborately considered the subject in

issue. In regard to the power of the Chief Justice in regard

to constitution of benches, this Court after referring to

Para 44 of Rajasthan High Court Ordinance, 1949 as well

as Rule 54 of the Rules of the High Court of Judicature for

Rajasthan laid down following in Paragraph 10 :-
”10. A careful reading of the aforesaid provi-
      sions of the Ordinance and Rule 54 (supra)
      shows that the administrative control of the
      High Court vests in the Chief Justice of the
      High Court alone and that it is his prerogative
      to distribute business of the High Court both
14
judicial and administrative. He alone, has the
right and power to decide how the Benches of
the High Court are to be constituted: which
Judge is to sit alone and which cases he can
and is required to hear as also as to which
Judges shall constitute a Division Bench and
what work those Benches shall do. In other
words the Judges of the High Court can sit
alone or in Division Benches and do such
work only as may be allotted to them by an
order of or in accordance with the directions
of the Chief Justice. That necessarily means
that it is not within the competence or do-
main of any Single or Division Bench of the
Court to give any direction to the Registry in
that behalf which will run contrary to the di-
rections of the Chief Justice. Therefore in the
scheme of things judicial discipline demands
that in the event a Single Judge or a Division
Bench considers that a particular case re-
quires to be listed before it for valid reasons,
it should direct the Registry to obtain appro-
priate orders from the Chief Justice. The
puisne Judges are not expected to entertain
any request from the advocates of the parties
for listing of case which does not strictly fall
within the determined roster. In such cases, it
is appropriate to direct the counsel to make a
mention before the Chief Justice and obtain
appropriate orders. This is essential for
smooth functioning of the Court. Though, on
the judicial side the Chief Justice is only the
“first amongst the equals”, on the administra-
tive side in the matter of constitution of
Benches and making of roster, he alone is
vested with the necessary powers. That the
power to make roster exclusively vests in the
Chief Justice and that a daily cause list is to
be prepared under the directions of the Chief
15
Justice as is borne out from Rule 73, which
      reads thus:
“73. Daily Cause List.—The Registrar
          shall subject to such directions as the
          Chief Justice may give from time to
          time cause to be prepared for each
          day on which the Court sits, a list of
          cases which may be heard by the
          different Benches of the Court. The
          list shall also state the hour at which
          and the room in which each Bench
          shall sit. Such list shall be known as
          the Day’s List.”
15. This Court in the above case has also referred to

earlier judgments of this Court in
Inder Mani and

Others Vs. Matheshwari Prasad and Others
, (1996)

6 SCC 587 and different judgments rendered by different

High Courts reiterating the same principles after referring

to various judgments. After approving the view taken by

different High Courts in various cases, following was
laid

down in
Paragraph 23:-
“23. The above opinion appeals to us and we
      agree with it. Therefore, from a review of the
      statutory provisions and the cases on the
      subject as rightly decided by various High
      Courts, to which reference has been made by
      us, it follows that no Judge or a Bench of
16
Judges can assume jurisdiction in a case
      pending in the High Court unless the case is
      allotted to him or them by the Chief Justice.
      Strict adherence of this procedure is essential
      for maintaining judicial discipline and proper
      functioning of the Court. No departure from it
      can be permitted. If every Judge of a High
      Court starts picking and choosing cases for
      disposal by him, the discipline in the High
      Court would be the casualty and the adminis-
      tration of justice would suffer. No legal sys-
      tem can permit machinery of the Court to col-
      lapse…………………”
16. This Court has recorded its conclusion in Para 59,

which is to the following effect:-
“59. From the preceding discussion the fol-
      lowing broad CONCLUSIONS emerge. This, of
      course, is not to be treated as a summary of
      our judgment and the conclusions should be
      read with the text of the judgment:
(1) That the administrative control of the High
      Court vests in the Chief Justice alone. On the
      judicial side, however, he is only the first
      amongst the equals.
(2) That the Chief Justice is the master of the
      roster. He alone has the prerogative to consti-
tute benches of the court and allocate cases
      to the benches so constituted.
(3) That the puisne Judges can only do that
      work as is allotted to them by the Chief Jus-
tice or under his directions.
17
(4) That till any determination made by the
     Chief Justice lasts, no Judge who is to sit
     singly can sit in a Division Bench and no Divi-
     sion Bench can be split up by the Judges con-
stituting the bench themselves and one or
     both the Judges constituting such bench sit
     singly and take up any other kind of judicial
     business not otherwise assigned to them by
     or under the directions of the Chief Justice.

     (5) That the Chief Justice can take cognizance
     of an application laid before him under Rule
     55 (supra) and refer a case to the larger
     bench for its disposal and he can exercise
     this jurisdiction even in relation to a part-
     heard case.
(6) That the puisne Judges cannot “pick and
     choose” any case pending in the High Court
     and assign the same to himself or themselves
     for disposal without appropriate orders of the
     Chief Justice.
(7) That no Judge or Judges can give direc-
tions to the Registry for listing any case be-
     fore him or them which runs counter to the
     directions given by the Chief Justice.
Xxxxxxxxxxxx”
17. There are series of judgments reiterating the same

view as expressed by this Court in
State of Rajasthan
(supra).
In an earlier judgment,
Union of India and

Another Vs. Raghubir Singh (Dead) By LRs
. Etc.,
18
(1989) 2 SCC 754¸ a Constitution Bench of this Court

noticed   that   as   a   general     rule   of   practice   and

convenience, the Court should sit in Divisions and each

Division being constituted of Judges whose number may

be determined by the exigencies of judicial need, by the

nature of the case including any statutory mandate

relative thereto, and by such other considerations which

the Chief Justice, in whom such authority devolves by

convention.      In   Paragraph     27,   following   has    been

observed:-
“…………………………..It cannot be doubted
     that in order to promote consistency and cer-
     tainty in the law
laid down by
a superior
     Court, the ideal condition would be that the
     entire Court should sit in all cases to decide
     questions of law, and for that reason the
     Supreme Court of the United States does so.
     But having regard to the volume of work de-
     manding the attention of the Court, it has
     been found necessary in India as a general
     rule of practice and convenience that the
     Court should sit in Divisions, each Division be-
     ing constituted of Judges whose number may
     be determined by the exigencies of judicial
     need, by the nature of the case including any
     statutory mandate relative thereto, and by
     such other considerations which the Chief Jus-
     tice, in whom such authority devolves by con-
vention,         may           find        most
     appropriate……………………………”
19
18. In D.C. Saxena Vs. Hon’ble The Chief Justice of

India, (1996) 5 SCC 216, this Court held that it is the

Chief Justice's prerogative to constitute benches and

assign the judicial work and the judicial business would

not hinge on the whim of a litigant.    In Paragraph 26,

following has been laid down:-
“26. ………………………….The Chief Justice’s
       prerogative to constitute benches and assign-
       ment of judicial business would not hinge on
       the whim of a litigant.”
19. This Court further in
State of Uttar Pradesh and

Others Vs. Neeraj Chaubey and Others
, (2010) 10

SCC 320 held that power of Chief Justice of allocation of

business of the High Court flows not only from the

provisions contained in sub-section (3) of
Section 51
of

the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but inheres in him in

the very nature of things. Following was observed in Para

9 :-
“9. ………………If the Judges were free to
       choose their jurisdiction or any choice was
       given to them to do whatever case they may
20
like to hear and decide, the machinery of the
         Court would collapse and the judicial work of
         the Court would cease by generation of inter-
         nal strife on account of hankering for a partic-
ular      jurisdiction   or    a     particular
         case………………………”
20.      It was further cautioned
in
the above case
that in

event the distribution is not done by the Chief Justice of

India, it may generate internal strife on account of

hankering for a particular jurisdiction or a particular case.
The law
laid down by
this Court as is clear from

precedents noted above, is that allocation of business of

Court by the Chief Justice not only flows from the

Constitutional provisions but is held to be prerogative of

the Chief Justice and which is a convention followed from

the very beginning. Apart from above, as noted above,

the power of the Chief Justice to allocate cases flows from

rules framed under
Article 145
of the Constitution of

India.
21. Now, we come to the submission which has been put

forth by Shri Dushyant Dave forcefully that Chief Justice of
21
India while allocating cases and forming benches for

disposal of business of the Court should be read as

collegium.   Shri Dave in support of his above argument

takes sustenance from the Constitution Bench judgment

of this Court.
In Judges case i.e.
S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of

India
, (1981) Supp.
SC 87, which was subsequently

elaborated and clarified by second Judges case i.e.

Supreme Court Advocates on
Record Association

and Others Vs. Union of India
, (1993) 4 SCC 441 and

third Judges case i.e. Special Reference No. 1 of 1998,

(1998) 7 SCC 739. He submits that when Chief Justice

has   been   read   as   collegium   in   exercise   of   his

constitutional functions of making recommendation for

appointment of judges, the same interpretation be put on

the word “Chief Justice” while he exercises power of

allocating business of the Court.
It is useful to refer to

judgment of Seven Judges Bench of this Court in
S.P.

Gupta
(supra) to recapitulate the law as
laid down in
the

above cases. This Court had occasion to consider
Article

124(2)
of the Constitution, which contains provision for
22
appointment of judges of the Supreme Court and of the

High Courts.
Article 124(2)
is as follows:-
124(2). Every Judge of the Supreme Court
      shall be appointed by the President by war-
      rant under his hand and seal after consulta-
      tion with such of the Judges of the Supreme
      Court and of the High Courts in the States as
      the President may deem necessary for the
      purpose and shall hold office until he attains
      the age of sixty five years:
Provided that in the case of appointment
      of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the
      Chief Justice of India shall always be con-
      sulted:
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
      addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in
      the manner provided in clause (4).
22. Justice Bhagwati, speaking for majority in S.P.

Gupta’s case (supra) while interpreting
Article 124(2)
laid down following in Paragraph 31:-
“31.     ……………The petitioners contended
      that the Central Government may, if it thinks
      fit, consult one or more of the Judges of the
      Supreme Court and of the High Courts or it
      may not consult any and where it does not,
      the Chief Justice of India will be the only con-
      stitutional functionary required to be con-
      sulted and in such a case the Central Govern-
      ment must accept the opinion of the Chief
23
Justice of India as binding upon it. We do not
think this argument is well founded. In the
first place it is not justified by the plain lan-
guage of clause (2) of
Article 124.
This clause
clearly provides for consultation as a manda-
tory exercise and the only matter which is left
to the discretion of the Central Government is
the choice of the Judge of the Supreme Court
and the High Courts who may be consulted.
The words “as the President may deem nec-
essary” qualify only the preceding words
“such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and
of the High Courts in the States.” Which of
the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the
High Courts should be consulted is left to the
discretion of the Central Government but con-
sultation there must be with one or more of
the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the
High Courts. The Central Government must
consult at least one Judge out of the Judges of
the Supreme Court and of the High Courts be-
fore exercising the power of appointment
conferred by clause (2) of
Article 124.
This re-
quirement is prescribed obviously because
the Constitution-makers did not think it desir-
able that one person alone, howsoever high
and eminent he may be, should have a pre-
dominant voice in the appointment of a Judge
of the Supreme Court. But it seems that this
requirement is not complied with in making
appointments on the Supreme Court Bench
presumably under a misconception that it is
not a mandatory but only an optional provi-
sion. The result is that the Chief Justice of In-
dia alone is consulted in the matter of ap-
pointment of a Supreme Court Judge and
largely as a result of a healthy practice fol-
lowed through the years, the recommenda-
tion of the Chief Justice of India is ordinarily
accepted by the Central Government, the
24
consequence being that in a highly important
matter like the appointment of a Supreme
Court Judge, it is the decision of the Chief Jus-
tice of India which is ordinarily, for all practi-
cal purposes final. But, as it happens, there
are no criteria laid down or evolved to guide
the Chief Justice in this respect nor is there
any consultation with wider interests. This is,
to our mind, not a very satisfactory mode of
appointment, because wisdom and experi-
ence demand that no power should be vested
in a single individual howsoever high and
great he may be and howsoever honest and
well meaning. We are all human beings with
our own likes and dislikes, our own predelic-
tions and prejudices and our mind is not so
comprehensive as to be able to take in all as-
pects of a question at one time and moreover
sometimes, the information on which we base
our judgments may be incorrect or inade-
quate and our judgment may also sometimes
be imperceptibly influenced by extraneous or
irrelevant considerations. It may also be no-
ticed that it is not difficult to find reasons to
justify what our bias or predeliction or inclina-
tion impels us to do. It is for this reason that
we think it is unwise to entrust power in any
significant or sensitive area to a single indi-
vidual, howsoever high or important may be
the office which he is occupying. There must
be checks and controls in the exercise of ev-
ery power, particularly when it is a power to
make important and crucial appointments
and it must be exercisable by plurality of
hands rather than be vested in a single indi-
vidual. That is perhaps the reason why the
Constitution-makers introduced the require-
ment in clause (2) of
Article 124
that one or
more Judges out of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts should
25
be consulted in making appointment of a
        Supreme Court Judge. But even with this pro-
        vision, we do not think that the safeguard is
        adequate because it is left to the Central
        Government to select any one or more of the
        Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High
        Courts for the purpose of consultation. We
        would rather suggest that there must be a
        collegium to make recommendation to the
        President in regard to appointment of a
        Supreme Court or High Court Judge. The rec-
        ommending authority should be more broad
        based and there should be consultation with
        wider interests. If the collegium is composed
        of persons who are expected to have knowl-
        edge of the persons who may be fit for ap-
        pointment on the Bench and of qualities re-
        quired for appointment and this last require-
        ment is absolutely essential — it would go a
        long way towards securing the right kind of
        Judges, who would be truly independent in
        the sense we have indicated above and who
        would invest the judicial process with signifi-
        cance and meaning for the deprived and ex-
ploited                sections             of
        humanity…………………………”
23.
In Second Judges case, i.e. Advocates on
Record

Association
case (supra), Justice J.S. Verma, speaking

for majority laid down following in Paragraph 427 and

478:-
“427. …………………………….A further check
        in that limited sphere is provided by the con-
        ferment of the discretionary authority not to
        one individual but to a body of men, requiring
26
the final decision to be taken after full inter-
action and effective consultation between
themselves, to ensure projection of all likely
points of view and procuring the element of
plurality in the final decision with the benefit
of the collective wisdom of all those involved
in the process. The conferment of this discre-
tionary authority in the highest functionaries
is a further check in the same direction. The
constitutional scheme excludes the scope of
absolute power in any one individual. Such a
construction of the provisions also, therefore,
matches the constitutional scheme and the
constitutional purpose for which these provi-
sions were enacted.
478. This opinion has to be formed in a prag-
matic manner and past practice based on
convention is a safe guide. In matters relating
to appointments in the Supreme Court, the
opinion given by the Chief Justice of India in
the consultative process has to be formed
taking into account the views of the two se-
niormost Judges of the Supreme Court. The
Chief Justice of India is also expected to as-
certain the views of the senior-most Judge of
the Supreme Court whose opinion is likely to
be significant in adjudging the suitability of
the candidate, by reason of the fact that he
has come from the same High Court, or oth-
erwise.
Article 124(2)
is an indication that as-
certainment of the views of some other
Judges of the Supreme Court is requisite. The
object underlying
Article 124(2)
is achieved in
this manner as the Chief Justice of India con-
sults them for the formation of his opinion.
This provision in
Article 124(2)
is the basis for
the existing convention which requires the
Chief Justice of India to consult some Judges
27
of the Supreme Court before making his rec-
ommendation. This ensures that the opinion
      of the Chief Justice of India is not merely his
      individual opinion, but an opinion formed col-
      lectively by a body of men at the apex level
      in the judiciary.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx”
24. In Third Judges case, Special Reference No. 1 of

1998, (1998) 7 SCC 739, approving the construction as

was put by this Court in Second Judges case, Justice S.P.

Bharucha, as he then was, in Para 160 held that

collegium should consist of the Chief Justice of India and

four senior most puisne judges of the Supreme Court. In

Para 44, following answers were recorded:-
“44. The questions posed by the Reference
      are now answered, but we should emphasise
      that the answers should be read in conjunc-
      tion with the body of this opinion:
1. The expression “consultation with the Chief
      Justice of India” in
Articles 217(1)
and
222(1)
of the Constitution of India requires consulta-
tion with a plurality of Judges in the formation
      of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India.
      The sole individual opinion of the Chief Justice
      of India does not constitute “consultation”
      within the meaning of the said articles.
28
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
3. The Chief Justice of India must make a rec-
     ommendation to appoint a Judge of the
     Supreme Court and to transfer a Chief Justice
     or puisne Judge of a High Court in consulta-
tion with the four seniormost puisne Judges of
     the Supreme Court. Insofar as an appoint-
ment to the High Court is concerned, the rec-
     ommendation must be made in consultation
     with the two seniormost puisne Judges of the
     Supreme Court.
4. The Chief Justice of India is not entitled to
     act solely in his individual capacity, without
     consultation with other Judges of the
     Supreme Court, in respect of materials and
     information conveyed by the Government of
     India for non-appointment of a Judge recom-
     mended for appointment.”
25. The word “Chief Justice” in
Article 124
was read as

collegium in Second and Third Judges case looking to the

constitutional scheme and constitutional objective as

perceived   by   the    above     provision.
Article   124(2)
expresses constitutional provision of consultation by the

President in such of judges of Supreme Court and the

High Courts, as the President may deem necessary.
26. The     proviso    contains     specific   requirement    of
29
consultation with the Chief Justice of India in case of

appointment of judges other than the Chief Justice.
Article 124
reveals thus two necessary ingredients

regarding consultation, i.e. (i) Chief Justice of India shall

always be consulted in case of appointment of judges

other than the Chief Justice; (ii) the President shall make

appointment after consultation with such of the judges of

the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as

the President may deem necessary. In addition to

consultation with the Chief Justice of India, consultation

with other judges was specifically made part of the

Constitutional scheme. This Court in Second Judges case

and   Third    Judges   Case   taking   note   of   the   above

constitutional scheme has read the word "Chief Justice" as

collegium. Thus, the reason for reading the word "Chief

Justice" as collegium in
Article 124
has constitutional

basis as elaborated in Second Judges case and Third

Judges Case.
27. With regard to procedure and practice of Supreme

Court,
Article 145
empowers the Supreme Court to frame
30
rules with the approval of the President.        The word

practice and procedure of the Court are wide enough to

include practice and procedure relating to preparation of

roster and allocation of cases.      The Rules framed by

Supreme Court under
Article 145
specifically refers the

Chief Justice in Chapter VI as noted above, the Chief

Justice, who is to nominate the bench for hearing every

case, appeal or matter. There is no indication in any of the

constitutional provisions or rules framed thereunder that

for allocation of cases and formation of benches, Chief

Justice should be read as collegium.     For reading Chief

Justice as collegium, under
Article 124
, there was a

constitutional basis as observed above.     This Court had

also on several occasions, noticed and expressed reasons

for holding that it is the only prerogative of the Chief

Justice to allocate cases and nominate the bench.      This

Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh and others Vs.

Neeraj   Chaubey     and    Others
(supra)   has   made

following weighty observations:-
“9. ………………If the Judges were free to
     choose their jurisdiction or any choice was
31
given to them to do whatever case they may
      like to hear and decide, the machinery of the
      Court would collapse and the judicial work of
      the Court would cease by generation of inter-
      nal strife on account of hankering for a partic-
ular      jurisdiction   or    a     particular
      case………………………”
28. The submission of learned Attorney General is that

allocation of cases and constitution of benches, if it is

given in the multiple hands, there shall be differences and

hurdles in smooth distribution of work. We entirely agree

with the above submission of learned Attorney General.
We are thus unable to accept the submission of learned

senior counsel for the petitioner that in allocating cases

and formulating benches of the Supreme Court, the word

"Chief Justice" should be read as collegium, which

submission is unfounded and is rejected.
29. It is submitted by Shri Dave that in the Constitution

whereas     Chief    Justice   was     to   exercise    any    power

individually,    said     provisions   have     been    specifically

included.   He      has    referred    to
Article    130
of   the

Constitution which provides:
"130. Seat of Supreme Court.- The
32
Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in
          such other place or places, as the
          Chief Justice of India may, with the
          approval of the President, from time to
          time, appoint.”


     He has further referred to
Article 146
which provides

that the appointments of officers and servants of the

Supreme Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of India

or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may

direct. He has referred to sub-clause (2) of
Article 146
,

which empowered the Chief Justice of India or some other

Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief

Justice of India to make rules regarding conditions of

service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court

subject to provision of any law made by the President.
There is no doubt that above provision of the Constitution

provides for the Chief Justice to exercise particular

powers.
30. The    submission    that   Constitution   does   not

specifically mention Chief Justice to exercise power of

allocation of cases and constitution of Benches, hence,

Chief Justice is not empowered to do the same, is not a
33
valid submission.     Under   the   constitutional     scheme

itself as contained in
Article 145
, the practice and

procedure of the Supreme Court is to be regulated by the

rules made by the Supreme Court with approval of the

President.
31. As noted above, rules framed under
Article 145
specifically empower the Chief Justice to nominate

Benches for hearing cases or appeal. Non-containing of

any specific provision in the Constitution empowering the

Chief Justice to frame the roster to allocate the cases is

inconsequential since the entire subject was to be

covered by rules made under
Article 145.
32. In considering the submissions raised in this case,

we are reminded of prophetic words of Mr. Justice Holmes

in Northern Securities Co. v. United States, 48

LAWYERS' EDITION U.
S. 196 (1903)
. Holmes, J. said:
"Great cases, like hard cases, make
             bad law. For great cases are called
             great, not by reason of their real
             importance in shaping the law of the
             future, but because of some accident of
             immediate      overwhelming    interest
             which appeals to the feelings and
             distorts    the    judgment.     These
34
immediate interests exercise a kind of
          hydraulic pressure which makes what
          previously was clear seem doubtful,
          and before which even well settled
          principles of law will bend.”
33. Our views as expressed above are fortified by a

recent Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in

Campaign for
Judicial Accountability and Reforms v. Union

of India & Anr.
, (2018) 1 SCC 196 and three Judge Bench

judgment of this Court dated 11.04.2018 in Writ Petition

(C) No.147 of 2018, Asok Pv. ande Supreme Court India

through its Registrar and Ors., (2018) 5 SCC Scale 481.
34. Shri Dave also raised an alternate submission; that

allocation of cases and constitution of benches should be

undertaken by the entire Court. He submitted that all the

Judges can sit together and formulate the procedure for

constitution of Benches. The rules framed by the

Supreme Court under
Article 145
are the rules made by

the Court and when the rules made by the Court

specifically empowers the Chief Justice to nominate

Benches for hearing a cause or appeal or matter, which

has been conventionally the prerogative of the Chief
35
Justice. The submission, that full Court should allocate

cases and constitute the Benches,         run counter to the

constitutional scheme read           with rules framed under
Article   145.
We,   thus,   are   not impressed by    the

submission of Shri Dave that the roster should be

prepared by the entire Court.
35. In so far as submission made by Shri Dave that in

allocation and listing of cases the Supreme Court Rules,

2013 have to be followed, no exception can be taken to

the above submission. When the statutory rules are

framed the entire business of the Court which is covered

by the Rules has to be dealt accordingly.
36. Law settled by this Court in large number of cases

as noticed above as well as judgments of three-Judge

Bench      and Constitution Benches noted above are

binding on us and settled law cannot be unsettled on the

premise on which the entire writ petition is founded.
37. Shri Dave during his submission has also referred to

the handbook on “practice and procedure and office

procedure (2017)”. The handbook is a compilation of
36
practice and procedure and office procedure for guidance

of Registry. He has referred to Chapter V – Powers, Duties

and Functions    of the Registrar, Chapter VI – Roster,

Chapter XIII – Listing of Cases. The above handbook is a

written guide for smooth transaction of the business of

the Court. Various instructions enumerated in different

Chapters provide for the conduct and business of the

Court in orderly manner with certainty, there cannot be

any dispute that when a procedure is laid down to be

followed by officials of the Supreme Court, all business is

to be transacted in the said manner. As noted above, for

the purposes of this case, we need not dwell into listing

of some cases as enumerated in the writ petition.

Learned counsel for the petitioner candidly submitted

that petitioner is not questioning any order or judgment

referred to in the writ petition. The endeavour of the writ

petitioner is to find out an appropriate procedure for

proper and fair distribution of cases and constitution of

Benches.
38. Learned counsel for the petitioner has also referred
37
to and relied on various international practices. During

the submission he has referred to practices pertaining to

case assignment in United Kingdom Supreme Court, High

Court of Australia, Supreme Court of Canada and the

practice in United States Supreme Court. The practices

and function of each Court are different which has been

evolved by time looking to particular background and set

of facts. The practice of a Court ripens into a convention

by passage of time and rich heritage of conventions are

time tested which is followed by different Courts. The

conventions and practice of the Supreme Court are time

tested which practice and conventions of this Court have

ripened with time which need not to be tinkered with or

imitated from different international practices of different

Courts. As noted above, the law
laid down by
this Court is

that; the power of framing roster which inheres in the

Chief Justice has constitutional and statutory backing and

by convention it is treated as prerogative of the Chief

Justice.   We,   thus,   cannot   import   the   international

practices in the constitutional and statutory scheme of
38
this Court.
39. Much emphasis is
laid down by
the learned counsel

for the petitioner that the procedure and manner of

allocation of cases and formulation of Benches should be

one which is accessible to public and there should be

objective criteria of exercise of the power by the Chief

Justice. Manner and procedure for exercising the power

should be put in public domain to allay any kind of

misapprehension and to instill confidence in public in

general. We have already noticed above that the manner

and procedure for transaction of Court work is elaborately

dealt with Supreme Court Rules, 2013.
40. Further, handbook on practice and procedure and

office procedure also laid down sufficient guidelines and

elaboration of the procedure which is to be followed in

this Court. Thus, for transaction of business of the Court,

there are elaborate rules and procedure and it cannot be

said that procedure and practice of the Court is unguided

and without any criteria.
41. We are, however, not unconscious of the fact that
39
working of any system is a continuous process and each

and every organisation endeavours to improve the

working of its system suitable to circumstances and the

need. Improvement of functioning is always a goal of

every system and all organisations endeavour to improve

the system, which is always a welcome steps. The

Supreme Court cannot be an                 exception     to    above

objective and goal.
42. Before we close, we remind ourselves of following

weighty words of Venkataramiah, J. in Judges' case:
"1268. ........We are made to realise
          that we are all mortals with all the
          human frailties and that only a few
          know in this world the truth behind the
          following statement of Michel De
          Montaigne: “Were I not to follow the
          straight road for its straightness, I
          should follow it for having found by
          experience that in the end it is
          commonly the happiest and the most
          useful track”. .............................But if
          the    judiciary    should         be       really
          independent      something            more      is
          necessary and that we have to seek in
          the Judge himself and not outside. A
          Judge should be independent of
          himself. A Judge is a human being who
          is a bundle of passions and prejudices,
40
likes and dislikes, affection and ill will,
hatred and contempt and fear and
recklessness. In order to be a
successful Judge these elements
should be curbed and kept under
restraint and that is possible only by
education, training, continued practice
and cultivation of a sense of humility
and dedication to duty. These curbs
can neither be bought in the market
nor injected into human system by the
written or unwritten laws. If these
things are there even if any of the
protective measures provided by the
Constitution and the laws go the
independence of the judiciary will not
suffer. But with all these measures
being there still a Judge may not be
independent. It is the inner strength of
Judges alone that can save the
judiciary. The life of a Judge does not
really    call   for   great   acts     of
self-sacrifice; but it does insist upon
small acts of self-denial almost every
day. The following sloka explains the
true traits of men with discretion which
all Judges should possess:
ननिन्दन्ततु निनीनतननिपतुणणा यनद वणा स्ततुवन्ततु
              लक्ष्मनीमीः समणानवशततु गच्छततु वणा यथथेष्टम
       अदद्यैव वणा मरणमस्ततु यतुगणान्तरथे वणा
              न्यणाययणात्पथमीः प्रनवचलनन्त पददं नि धनीरणामीः
41
[Let men trained in ethics or morality,
          insult or praise; let lakshmi (wealth)
          accumulate or vanish as she likes; let
          death come today itself or at the end
          of a yuga (millennium), men with
          discretion will not deflect from the
          path of rectitude.)”
43. The writ petition is disposed of with the observations

as made above.
…..............................J.
NEW DELHI,                      ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
JULY 06, 2018.