[Cites
0
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Parakh Vanijya Private Limited vs Baroma Agro Product on 12 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3334, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2896, (2018) 3 RECCIVR 840, (2018) 8 SCALE 725, (2018) 4 CAL HN 124, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 430 (SC)
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
R. Banumathi
,
Navin Sinha
REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6642 OF 2018
                                      (Arising out of SLP(C) No.17445 of 2017)


                         PARAKH VANIJYA PRIVATE LIMITED                            …Appellant


                                                        Versus


                         BAROMA AGRO PRODUCT AND OTHERS                        ...Respondents



                                                    JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises out of the order dated 01.03.2017 passed by

                         the High Court of Calcutta in AOPT No.349 of 2016 affirming the order

                         of the Single Judge in and by which it was held that the respondent-

                         defendant is entitled to use the word ‘MALABAR’ in conjunction with

                         the mark ‘BAROMA’ for selling its product - Biryani Rice. By the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
impugned order, the Division Bench has also affirmed the findings of
Date: 2018.07.12
16:41:34 IST
Reason:
1
the Single Judge that subject to the outcome of the suit, the

respondents can pursue their application for registration of their label.
3.    Appellant-plaintiff claims to have been using the mark

‘MALABAR’ for selling Biryani Rice from 2001. The appellant filed the

suit CS No.27 of 2012 for infringement and passing off special Biryani

Rice under the mark “MALABAR GOLD” or other mark/trade name

which is identical with and/or deceptively similar to the appellant’s

trade mark ‘MALABAR’. On consideration of various features of the

respondent’s then mark and other materials, the learned Single Judge

vide order dated 02.07.2012 granted interim injunction observing that

there was similarity between the two labels/marks and restrained the

respondents/defendants from using the label mark ‘MALABAR’. The

Division Bench declined to interfere with the said order by its order

dated 14.09.2012.
4.    While the suit and application for temporary injunction was

pending before the Single Judge, the respondents/defendants filed

application for vacating the order dated 02.07.2012 inter alia on

various grounds contending that the appellant is relying upon

fabricated documents and that the appellant cannot claim exclusive

right over the mark ‘MALABAR’ and therefore, the interim order of
2
injunction has to be vacated. The learned Single Judge by its order

dated 05.07.2016 which was passed with the consent of the parties

gave liberty to the respondents to file a supplementary affidavit to

clearly indicate the device/mark that the respondents proposed to use.

The respondents filed application indicating the proposed modification

in their label by changing the get-up. After hearing the parties, the

interim order of injunction initially passed, was modified vide order

dated 08.08.2016 to the effect that the respondents shall be entitled to

use the word ‘MALABAR’ in conjunction with ‘BAROMA’ where all the

words and letters must be in the same font but the word ‘MALABAR’

may be increased with font size of not more than 25% than the rest of

the words or letters. Being aggrieved, the appellant-plaintiff has

preferred appeal before the Division Bench. The Division Bench

dismissed the appeal by the impugned order holding that the Single

Judge has passed the order balancing the interest of the parties who

are having a substantial turn over in their respective business.
5.    We have heard Mr. Shyam Diwan, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Gourab K. Banerji,

learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and
3
perused the impugned order and considered the materials placed on

record.
6.    The appellant is the registered owner of the label mark in

Class-30 in respect of rice, flour and preparations made from cereals,

bread, cakes, biscuits, pastry and spices. The appellant sells Biryani

Rice and the most prominent feature of its label mark is the word

‘MALABAR’. The appellant-plaintiff is granted registration in Class-30

for its products. Class-30 of the classification of goods and services

under the statute covers diverse spices and other edible materials as

wheat, rice, coffee, tea etc. In the registration under Class-30, there is

a disclaimer for the word ‘MALABAR’. The disclaimer is worded thus:-
“Condition & Limitation: REGISTRATION OF THIS TRADE MARK
      SHALL GIVE NO RIGHT TO THE EXCLUSIVE USE OF WORD
      ‘MALABAR’ AND ALL OTHER DESCRIPTIVE MATTERS”
7.    The appellant though claims exclusive right over the word

‘MALABAR’ since there is a disclaimer to the exclusive use of the word

‘MALABAR’, the appellant has no right over the exclusive use of the

word ‘MALABAR’. The respondents have also inter alia brought on

record the materials to show the registration of other goods under

Class-30 with the word ‘MALABAR MONSOON’ granted in favour of

Amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading Company Limited for Coffee
4
Cream, Coffee included in Class-30. The registration of the mark

‘MALABAR MONSOON’ under Class-30 also contains similar

disclaimer of the word ‘MALABAR’. Likewise, the label ‘MALABAR

COAST’ has been registered in Class-30 for Coffee, Tea, Cocoa, Sugar

etc. in favour of Tropical Retreats Private Limited which again contains

a similar disclaimer for the exclusive use of the word ‘MALABAR

COAST’. Having regard to the materials placed on record, we are of

the view that the High Court rightly held that the appellant cannot claim

exclusive right over the use of the word ‘MALABAR’.
8.    Insofar as the label mark used by the parties, we have perused

the label mark of the appellant selling Biryani Rice with word

‘MALABAR’ and also the modified label mark of the respondents. The

label of the respondents containing the words “BAROMA”,

“MALABAR”, “GOLD” are circled having a different get-up from that of

the appellant. By comparison of the two label marks, in our view, both

appear to be substantially different. There appears to be no similarity

between both the labels, more so, deceptive similarity. Keeping in view

the interest of the respective parties who are said to be having

substantial turn-over in their respective business, the High Court rightly

held that the respondents would be entitled to use the word
5
‘MALABAR’ in conjunction with ‘BAROMA’ with the different get-up as

approved by the High Court. We do not find any serious infirmity

warranting interference with the impugned order.
9.    Having regard to the various contentions raised by the parties,

the High Court rightly held that subject to the outcome of the suit, the

respondent can pursue their application for registration of the device.

Both parties have inter alia raised various contentions. Since the suit

and the respondent’s application for registration of its label with the

marks thereon under Class-30 is pending, we are not inclined to go

into the merits of those contentions. Lest, it would prejudicially affect

the rights of the parties in the pending suit and proceedings.
10.   In the result, the appeal is dismissed. All the contentious issues

raised by the parties are left open to be resolved in the suit. No costs.
.…….…………...………J.
                                                   [RANJAN GOGOI]


                                                  …………….……………
                                                                  J.
                                                   [R. BANUMATHI]
New Delhi;
July 12, 2018
6