[Cites
22
, Cited by
21
]
Supreme Court of India
Chintpurni Medical College And ... vs The State Of Punjab on 3 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3119, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 406 (SC) 2018 (8) ADJ 79 NOC, 2018 (8) ADJ 79 NOC
Author:
S.A. Bobde
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 89 of 2018


                         CHINTPURNI MEDICAL COLLEGE
                         AND HOSPITAL & ANR.                              ... PETITIONER (S)

                                                       Versus

                         STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                           ... RESPONDENT(S)



                                                   JUDGMENT
S.A. BOBDE, J.
1.          Chintpurni Medical College started in the year 2011 in the

                         State of Punjab. This college is affiliated to Baba Farid University. It

                         made an application to the Medical Council of India (hereinafter

                         referred to as ‘MCI’) under
Section 10(A)
of the Indian Medical Council

                         Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
IMC Act
’) for establishing a

                         new Medical College. The permission for the first batch was granted in

                         the year 2011-12 on 30.06.2011. For the subsequent academic years

                         i.e. 2012-13 and 2013-14, no renewal of permission was granted to the
Signature Not Verified   petitioner college, since the petitioner college was found to be
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
deficient in the inspections carried out by the MCI. For the academic
Date: 2018.07.03
16:31:52 IST
Reason:
year 2014-15, petitioner was granted Letter of Permission (LOP) under
1
the orders of this court passed in W.P (Civil) No.469 of 2014.
Thereafter, no renewal of permission was granted to the petitioner for

         the academic year 2015-16. Petitioner college applied for the grant of

         recognition under
section 11
of the IMC Act in the year 2015. MCI in

         order to determine whether the petitioner college fulfills the minimum

         eligibility requirements for grant of recognition under
section 11
of the

         IMC Act, conducted three inspections. The First inspection was carried

         out on 16.12.2015 followed by second inspection on 25/26.02.2016

         and the third one on 16.03.2016.
2.            In all the three inspections carried out by the MCI,

         petitioner college was found to be deficient. The MCI concluded the

         college was deficient to the extent of 100%.        The MCI, therefore,

         recommended to the Central Government, not to issue recognition to

         the petitioner college under
Section 11
of the IMC Act. The MCI also

         made similar recommendations in respect of other colleges.        Those

         Medical Colleges approached this Court by way of filing a batch of Writ

         Petitions.    This Court directed the matters to be examined by the

         Oversight Committee constituted under the judgment of this Court

         delivered by the Constitution Bench in the case of
Modern Dental

         College and Research Centre v. State of Madhya Pradesh1
. Finally, the

         Oversight Committee directed the MCI to conduct inspections and

         further directed that if the Medical Colleges were found deficient, they
1
(2016) 7 SCC 353
2
would be banned for a period of two years. Such a direction was also

given in respect of the petitioner college. MCI conducted fresh

inspection of the petitioner college on 07.03.2017 & again found the

petitioner college deficient & accordingly recommended to the Central

Government to debar the petitioner college from admitting students

against the allowed intake for two academic years i.e. 2017-18 and

2018-19. The Central Government by its order dated 31.05.2017

debarred the petitioner college for a period of two academic years i.e.

2017-18 and 2018-19. This order was questioned by the petitioner in

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 423 of 2017. By order dated 10.5.2018, this

Court dismissed the Writ Petition (Civil) No.423 of 2017.
3.          The present writ petition questions the withdrawal of the

Essentiality Certificate dated 07.12.2010 and 15.02.2011 issued to the

petitioner college by Respondent No. 1 under
Section 10A
of the IMC

Act read with the Establishment of Medical College Regulations, 1999

(Hereinafter referred to as “Regulations”) framed under the Act.

Regulations lay down the qualifying criteria for making an application

to open a Medical College. One of the essential qualifications is that a

person should obtain an Essentiality Certificate from the State

Government where the college is proposed to be located in Form 2.
4.          On 13.07.2017, MCI making an unusual request wrote a

letter to the Secretary, Government of Punjab stating that it will take
3
action only if the concerned college is closed down and the Essentiality

Certificate is withdrawn by the State Government. The Government of

Punjab by letter dated 24.7.2017 submitted that they are not in a

position to withdraw the Essentiality Certificate for several reasons.

The State Government stated that the doctor – patient ratio in the

State of Punjab is 1:1440 approximately whereas the required ratio as

per MCI norms is 1:1000.       They said that they are committed to

opening five new medical colleges in the State, it was not possible in

these circumstances to conclude that there is lack of essentiality. They

further said that it would not be possible to absorb the students from

the petitioner college and this will adversely affect the interest of

students.   They requested for permission to facilitate shifting of the

students to medical colleges in the other states without insisting on the

withdrawal of Essentiality Certificate.    The State thus declined to

withdraw the Essentiality Certificate.
5.          However, for reasons which are not clear, the State relied

on proceedings of an earlier show cause notice dated 03.05.2017

calling upon the petitioner to show cause as to why the Essentiality

Certificate should not be withdrawn, to do just the opposite.       They

passed an order dated 01.11.2017 and held that the college had made

hollow claims for removing deficiencies and had failed to show cause

why the Essentiality Certificate should not be withdrawn.        Though

several opportunities of personal hearing were afforded, the college
4
had failed to rebut the findings of the inspection reports. Having found

persistent deficiencies, the State Government directed the withdrawal

of the Essentiality Certificate.
6.          At this juncture, we might make it clear that no fault can be

found with the orders of the State Government in observing the

deficiencies in the functioning of the petitioner college.            These

deficiencies have resulted in the Central Government order dated

31.05.2017 debarring the petitioner college from taking any fresh

intake for two years. As stated above, this Court has declined to

interfere with such an order and accordingly, Writ Petition (Civil)

No.423 of 2017 has been dismissed.
7.          Shri   Mukul    Rohtagi,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the

petitioner, however contended that the State does not have the power

to withdraw the Essentiality Certificate once granted. According to the

learned senior counsel, the Essentiality Certificate is issued for the

specific purpose of certifying the need for opening a new medical

college in a State.   Once such a need is certified and the college is

established, there is no power conferred by the
IMC Act
or the

Regulations to withdraw such a certificate except on the ground of

fraud.
8.          Before going into the merits of the submission, it is

important to note that the State Government appears to have
5
withdrawn the Essentiality Certificate acting under dictation of the MCI.
This is obvious from the letter dated 13.07.2017
referred to above
.
This by itself would vitiate the withdrawal of the Essentiality Certificate

         by the State, vide
Anirudhsinhji Karansinhji Jadeja v. State of Gujarat
2

         and
Dipak Babaria v. State of Gujarat.3           The
following passage from

         Wade and Forsyth in Administrative Law, 10 th Edition at p. 269

         succinctly states the vice in such an action:
“Closely akin to delegation, and scarcely
                        distinguishable from it in some cases, is any
                        arrangement by which a power conferred upon
                        one authority is in substance exercised by
                        another. The proper authority may share its
                        power with someone else, or may allow
                        someone else to dictate to it by declining to
                        act without their consent or by submitting to
                        their wishes or instructions. The effect then is
                        that the discretion conferred by Parliament is
                        exercised, at least in part, by the wrong
                        authority, and the resulting decision is ultra
                        vires and void. So strict are the courts in
                        applying this principle that they condemn
                        some administrative arrangements which must
                        seem quite natural and proper to those who
                        make them.”
9.             The issue which arises in the present W.P is:
whether the State Government has the power to withdraw

         an Essentiality Certificate once granted, and whether the power to do

         so is ultra-vires the Act and the Regulations framed thereunder.
This issue needs to be decided since power assumed by

         the    State   to   withdraw   an       Essentiality   Certificate   has   drastic
2
(1995) 5 SCC 302
3
(2014) 3 SCC 502
6
consequences on Medical Education in a State, which can only be

controlled by and under the
IMC Act
.
Essentiality Certificate
10.         It would, therefore, be necessary to see the origin of the

requirement that a College must have an Essentiality Certificate before

it receives permission for its establishment.   The Legislative scheme

that imposes the requirement of an Essentiality Certificate is as

follows:-
7
Section 10A4
of the IMC Act requires the previous

        permission of the Central Government for establishing a Medical

        College or opening a new course of study or training. Every person or

        Medical College must submit to the Central Government a scheme as

        prescribed.       The Central Government then refers the scheme to the

        MCI for its recommendations.                    The Medical Council is required to
4
10.A PERMISSION FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW COURSE OF
STUDY -
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force:-
(a) no person shall establish a medical college or
(b) no medical college shall:-
(i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including a postgraduate course
of study                   or training) which would enable a student of such course or training to qualify
himself for the            award of any recognised medical qualification; or
(ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including a
postgraduate               course of study or training),
         except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with
the      provisions of this section.
Explanation 1-. For the purposes of this section, "person" includes any University or a trust
but does not include the Central Government.
Explanation 2.- For the purposes of this section "admission capacity" in relation to any course
of study or training (including postgraduate course of study or training) in a medical college, means
the maximum number of students that may be fixed by the Council from time to time for being
admitted to such course or training.
(2) (a) Every person or medical college shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under
sub-section       (1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of
clause (b) and the         central Government shall refer the scheme to the Council for its
recommendations.
(b) The Scheme referred to in clause (a) shall be in such form and contain such particulars
and be preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) On receipt of a scheme by the Council under sub-section (2) the Council may obtain such
other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the medical college
concerned, and thereafter, it may –
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any necessary particulars, give a
reasonable        opportunity to the person or college concerned for making a written representation
and it shall be open to such person or medical college to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the
Council.
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (7) and submit
the      scheme together with its recommendations thereon to the Central Government.
(4) The Central Govt. may after considering the scheme and the recommendations of the
Council under sub-section (3) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be
considered necessary by it from the person or college concerned, and having regard to the factors
referred to in sub-section (7), either approve 4 (with such conditions, if any, as it may consider
necessary ) or disapprove the scheme, and any such approval shall be a permission under sub-section
(1):
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving
the person or college concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard;
Provided further that nothing in this sub section shall prevent any person or medical college
whose scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the
provisions of this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme has been submitted for the
first time under subsection (1).
8
consider the scheme and satisfy itself by obtaining any particulars as

        are necessary and after having the defects if any removed, make its

        recommendations             to    the     Central      Government.              The      Central

        Government, may on receipt of the scheme, approve it conditionally or

        disapprove the scheme.                Approval constitutes permission vide sub-
section (4) of
Section 10A
of the IMC Act.
11.             The power to permit the establishment of a Medical College

        is thus conferred on the Central Government by the
IMC Act
. The

        regulations
referred to above
, framed in the exercise of powers

        conferred under Section 10A read with
Section 33
of the IMC Act

        (5) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the
Central Government under sub-section (1), no order passed by the Central Government has been
communicated to the person or college submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to
have been approved by the Central Government in the form in which it had been submitted, and
accordingly, the permission of the Central Government required under sub-section (1) shall also be
deemed to have been granted.
(6) In computing the time-limit specified in sub-section (5), the time taken by the person or
college concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Council, or by
the Central Government, shall be excluded.
(7) The Council, while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub-section (3) and
the Central Government, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under
sub-section (4), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:-
(a) whether the proposed medical college or the existing medical college seeking to open a
new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of
medical           education as prescribed by the Council under section 19A or, as the case may be
under
section 20
in       the case of postgraduate medical education.
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical college or the existing medical college
seeking           to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase it admission
capacity has adequate financial resources;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and
other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical college or conducting the new course or
study or          training or accommodating the increased admission capacity, have been provided or
would be          provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme.
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number or students likely to
attend such       medical college or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission
capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme;
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training
to      students likely to attend such medical college or course of study or training by persons having
the     recognised medical qualifications;
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of medicine; and
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.
(8) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a
scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or college
concerned.
9
prescribe the qualifying criteria. These criteria lay down the eligibility

       to apply for permission to establish a Medical College. One of the

       criteria is that the person who is desirous of establishing a medical

       college should obtain an Essentiality Certificate as prescribed in Form 2

       of the Regulations, certifying that the State Government/Union Territory

       Administration have no objection for the establishment of the proposed

       Medical College at the proposed site and availability of adequate

       clinical material5.
12.             Form 2 in which the Essentiality Certificate must be

       obtained indicates the facts which are considered relevant for

       determining whether the establishment of a proposed college is

       justified. These factors are:-
(1)     Number of institutions already existing in the State.
                        (2)     Number of seats available or No. of doctors being
                                produced annually.
(3)     Number of doctors registered with the State Medical
                                Council.
(4)     Number of doctors in Government Service.
                        (5)     Number of Government posts vacant and those in
                                rural/difficult areas.
                        (6)     Number of doctors registered with Employment
                                Exchange.
                        (7)     Doctor population ratio in the State.
                        (8)     How the establishment of the college would resolve
                              the     problem of deficiencies of qualified medical
5
(3) that Essentiality Certificate in Form 2 regarding No objection of the State Government/Union
Territory Administration for the establishment of the proposed medical college at the proposed site
and availability of adequate clinical material as per the council regulations, have been obtained by
the person from the concerned State Government/Union Territory Administration.
10
personnel in the State and improve the availability of
                   such medical manpower in the State.
(9)     The restrictions imposed by the State Government,
                   if any,   on students who are not domiciled in the State
                   from      obtaining   admissions   in   the   State,   be
                specified.
(10) Full justification for opening of the proposed college.
             (11) Doctor-patient ratio proposed to be achieved.
13.         The concerned State Government is required to certify that

it has decided to issue an Essentiality Certificate for the establishment

of a Medical College with a specified number of seats in public interest,

and further that such establishment is feasible. Importantly, the State

Government is required to certify that if the applicant fails to create an

infrastructure for the Medical College as per the MCI norms and fresh

admissions are stopped by the Central Government, the State

Government shall take over the responsibility of those seats that

already admitted in the College with the permission of the Central

Government.        An amendment to the notification also requires a

declaration that the applicant owns and possesses adequate land on

which non-agricultural use of the land is permitted and on which a

Medical College can be established. It further requires a declaration to

the effect that the Hospital and Medical College have been granted

completion certificate / building use certificate.
14.        The Essentiality Certificate thus certifies that it is essential

having regard to specified factors that the opening of the proposed

college is essential in the State, in public interest. Further, that the
11
applicant has the necessary land and building for running it. What is

significant to note is that the law requires that an applicant must

possess an Essentiality Certificate from the State Government

mentioning therein that it is essential to have a Medical College as

proposed    by    him.    The   purpose   is   interalia   to   prevent   the

establishment of a college where none is required or to prevent

unhealthy competition between too many Medical Colleges.
15.        Thus, the Legislative scheme for permission to establish a

Medical College prescribes, as a qualifying criterion, that the applicant

must have an Essentiality Certificate issued by the State Government.

The State Government certifies the justification for establishing a

proposed Medical College as a part of the Legislative scheme under the

Act.   It does not do so under any other law including a State

enactment.       The only purpose of the Essentiality Certificate is to

enable the Central Government acting under Section 10A to take an

informed decision for permitting the opening or establishment of a new

Medical College. Once the college is established, its functioning and

performance and even the de-recognition of its courses is controlled

only by the provisions of the
IMC Act
and not any other law.
The IMC

Act
, which is a Legislation under Entry 66 of List-I of Seventh Schedule

of the Constitution of India is a complete code which governs the

establishment, functioning, including maintenance of standards of

education                    and                    even

de-recognition of Medical Colleges vide
Section 19
of the Act.            The
12
States are denuded of the Legislative Power to legislate on medical

         education under Entry 25 of the Concurrent List since Parliament has

         exercised its power under Entry 66 and enacted the
IMC Act
vide
Dr.

         Preeti Srivastava v. State of Madhya Pradesh6
.
16.          It would be impermissible to allow any authority including a

         State Government which merely issues an Essentiality Certificate, to

         exercise any power which could have the effect of terminating the

         existence of a Medical College permitted to be established by the

         Central Government.       This the State Government may not do either

         directly or indirectly.    Moreover, the purpose of the Essentiality

         Certificate is limited to certifying to the Central Government that it is

         essential to establish a Medical College. It does not go beyond this. In

         other words, once the State Government has certified that the

         establishment of a Medical College is justified, it cannot at a later stage

         say that there was no justification for the establishment of the College.

         Surely, a person who establishes a Medical College upon an assurance

         of a State Government that such establishment is justified cannot be

         told at a later stage that there was no justification for allowing him to

         do so. Moreover, it appears that the power to issue an Essentiality

         Certificate is a power that must be treated as exhausted once it is

         exercised, except of course in cases of fraud. The rules of equity and

         fairness and promissory estoppel do not permit this Court to take a

         contrary view.
6
(1999) 7 SCC 120
13
17.         In this case, the reasons given by the State for rescinding

the Essentiality Certificate are not relevant or germane to the

establishment of a Medical College. They refer to the deficiencies in

the   functioning   of   a   Medical   College   for   a   particular   period.

Deficiencies by their nature are curable and can be removed. To allow

the State Government to withdraw an Essentiality Certificate and say

that it is no more essential that there should be a college at all, would

lead to gross arbitrariness since logically the existence of the Medical

College would again be justified if the deficiencies are removed. The

question of justified existence of a college and the irregular/illegal

functioning of an existing college belong to a different order of things

and cannot be mixed up. A certificate constitutes a solemn statement

by an authority certifying certain conditions of things. Persons acting

on such certificates are entitled to assume that the certificate will

ensure and not be pulled out from under their feet for extraneous

reasons.   We find that none of the reasons for withdrawing the

Essentiality Certificate pertain to factors which are certified as true in

the prescribed Form 2, reproduced above.
Challenge to Conditions Introduced in Form 2 by the State
18.         It is argued mainly on behalf of the State Government that

the specified conditions which are imposed in the Essentiality

Certificate empower the State Government to withdraw an Essentiality

Certificate and the certificate has been withdrawn in exercise of the
14
powers reserved under following conditions incorporated in Essentiality

          Certificate dated 07.12.2010:-
“vii. The inspection of the institute shall be
                       carried out on yearly basis upto the completion
                       of the study of first batch of the students.
Thereafter, the inspection shall be periodical
                       after three years.
……
                       xi. The Punjab Government will have the right
                       to withdraw the Essentiality Certificate/No
                       objection        Certificate        if      the
                       trust/society/applicant failed to meet any of
                       the conditions contained therein…..7”
19.             Shri    Rohtagi,       learned   senior   counsel   submitted   that

          Condition Nos. (VII) and (XI) reproduced (supra) have been introduced

          by the State Government on their own; they are not in Form 2

          prescribed under the Regulations. In other words, the
MCI Act
and the

          Regulations do not confer any power on the State Government to carry

          out the inspection of the medical college or to withdraw the

          Essentiality Certificate, and the State has attempted to arrogate these

          powers to itself.           According to the learned senior counsel, these

          conditions are ultra-vires the provisions of the Act and the Regulations.
20.             Relying on the Condition No.(VII), the learned counsel for

          the State of Punjab, Ms. Uttara Babbar submitted that the State

          Government has the power to carry out inspections, since it is

          responsible for the students of the college which is shut down by the

          MCI or otherwise. If such inspections reveal any deficiencies, the State
7
Essentiality Certificate dated 07.12.2010.
15
is entitled to withdraw the Essentiality Certificate.                     This submission

        cannot be accepted, the
IMC Act
and the Regulations under which the

        State Government has purported to issue Essentiality Certificate

        confers the power of inspection on any medical institution, college or

        hospital where any medical education is given, on Visitors/Inspectors

        appointed by MCI under
Sections 178
and
189
of IMC Act.
21.             The learned counsel for the State has not pointed out any

        power of inspection which is conferred on a State Government/Union

        Territory Administration either by the Act or by the Regulations. The

        State Government is designated by the Regulations only for the

        purpose       of    issuing     an     Essentiality       Certificate      to    justify    the

        establishment of a medical college within its territories and that too

        when approached by a person seeking to establish a medical college.

        There is no direct conferral of any power of general inspection on the

        State and neither can such a power be read into the Regulations nor be
8
17. INSPECTION OF EXAMINATIONS (1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical institution, college, hospital or other
institution where medical education is given, or to attend any examination held by any University or
medical institution for the propose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of
medical qualifications granted by the University or medical institution.
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination,
but shall report to the committee on the adequacy of the standards of medical education including
staff, equipment, accommodation, training facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the
sufficiency of every examination which they attend.
(3) ……
9
18. VISITORS AT EXAMINATIONS (1) The Council may appoint such number of visitors as it may deem
requisite to inspect any medical institution, college, hospital or other institution where medical
education is given, or to attend any examination held by any University or medical institution for the
purpose of granting recognised medical qualifications.
(2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Council or not may be appointed as a visitor
under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under
section 17
for any inspection
or examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.
(3) …..
(4) ..…
16
implied as necessary to carry out an expressly conferred power which

doesn’t exist. In fact, it might be difficult to even construe that the
IMC

Act
has delegated any powers to the State Government including that

of issuing of an Essentiality Certificate.
The IMC Act
merely requires an

applicant   to   obtain   an   Essentiality   Certificate   from   the   State

Government to justify the establishment of a medical college.

However, the Act prescribes the form in which such a certificate must

be obtained from the State.       Significantly, the form does not confer

any power of inspection. The mere requirement of an Essentiality

Certificate by the State as a qualifying criterion cannot imply the

delegation of a power which must be express and clear. It is, therefore,

clear that such power has been arrogated by the State without any

justification and is likely to lead to a conflict with the power meant to

be exercised by the Central Government and potentially, result in

conflicting inspection reports.     The condition imposed by the State

Government is therefore ultra-vires the
IMC Act
and the Regulations.
22.         It was submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the

State of Punjab that since the Essentiality Certificate requires the State

Government to assume responsibility of the students in case the

college closes down, the State must be held to have an inherent right

to withdraw the Essentiality Certificate.         This argument must be

rejected as fallacious since the consequence of withdrawing the

Essentiality Certificate can only be that the college closes down, and
17
the State must bear the burden of accommodating the students in

another institution.
23.         The learned counsel for the State of Punjab submitted that

since the Essentiality Certificate certifies the availability of adequate

clinical material for the proposed Medical College, as per the

Regulations, the State has the necessary power of inspection of the

college even after its establishment to ensure that there is adequate

clinical material. This submission must also be rejected since the State

is enjoined to certify adequate clinical material only at the time of

proposal of the Medical College and not after it is established. But we

find from the submissions that the State has misinterpreted the term

‘adequate clinical material’ completely.       According to the State,

“adequate clinical material” means “people” i.e. doctors, patients, staff

etc. Whereas, the term is understood in the field of Medical Education

to mean data about number of admissions, number of discharges,

number of deaths, number of surgeries, number of procedures, X-rays

and laboratories investigations.     Thus, what the State is required to

certify is the data available in the region to justify the establishment of

the proposed Medical College. Obviously, for the purpose of justifying

the existence of a Medical College, the State’s claim that it must have

the right to inspect a college after it is established to see whether

there are adequate numbers of doctors, patients etc. to justify it’s

continued existence is completely hollow and unfounded.
18
Condition No. XI
24.           It was further contended by the learned counsel for the

          State that the power to issue a certificate carries a power to withdraw

          the same in a like manner as contemplated by
Section 21
of The

          General Clauses Act, 1987.
Section 21
of the said Act reads as

          follows:-
“21. Power to issue, to include power to add to,
                        amend, vary or rescind notifications, orders,
                        rules or bye-laws. – Where, by any [Central
                        Act] or Regulations a power to [issue
                        notifications] orders, rules or bye-laws is
                        conferred, then that power includes a power,
                        exercisable in the like manner and subject to
                        the like sanction and conditions (if any), to add
                        to, amend, vary or rescind any [notifications]
                        orders, rules or bye-laws so [issued].”
25.
Section 21
has no application to a certificate since a

          certificate is neither a notification, nor an order, or rule or bye- law as

          contemplated by that Section.          This Court has on several occasions

          held that where a statutory authority is enjoined to perform a quasi

          judicial function such as that of grant of registration to a political party

          or issue a certificate under the
Income Tax Act
,
Section 21
has no

          application and confers no power to review such an Act because the

          party has violated a provision of the constitution of law, vide
Indian

          National Congress (I) vs. Institute of Social Welfare
10 and
Industrial
10
(2002) 5 SCC 685
19
Infrastructure        Development   Corporation   (Gwalior)   M.P.   Ltd.   vs.

          Commissioner of Income Tax, Gwalior11
.
26.           In the Indian National Congress (I) case (supra), this Court

          held that where the law requires that an authority before arriving at a

          decision must make an enquiry, such a requirement of law makes the

          authority a quasi judicial authority. Also when the authority is required

          to act according to rules and not dictated by policy or expediency, the

          authority performs the quasi judicial function and not an administrative

          function.
27.           On the above test, the function of the State Government in

          granting an Essentiality Certificate must be construed as a quasi

          judicial function.      The Government is required to, while issuing the

          certificate in Form 2, to determine the justification and feasibility of

          opening the proposed college in the State. Towards this purpose, it is

          bound to enquire and determine the existence of several factors such

          as the number of existing institutions, the number of doctors becoming

          qualified annually, the number of doctors registered with the State

          Medical Council and employed in Government Service, registered with

          employment exchange etc.             It must also determine the doctor

          population in the State, the doctor - patient ratio to be achieved and

          the impact of the proposed college on the availability of medical

          manpower in the State. The issuance of certificate must therefore be
11
(2018) SCC Online SC 126
20
construed to be a quasi judicial act. The upshot is that such an act is

not liable to be construed as an “order” contemplated by
Section 21
of

the General Clauses Act. Not being an order, and certainly not being a

notification, rule or bye-law,
Section 21
has no application whatsoever.
28.         Moreover, no provision of the
IMC Act
confers any power on

the State Government or Union Territory Administration to issue an

Essentiality Certificate. What the Regulations do, as discussed above,

is lay down that an Essentiality Certificate is the qualifying criterion for

making an application for opening a medical college. In that sense, the

provision recognizes an Essentiality Certificate issued by the State

Government.      It is nobody’s case that the State Government is

conferred with the power or duty to issue such a certificate under any

State law. In any case, in view of the fact that the field is occupied by

a parliamentary law i.e.
IMC Act, 1956
, a State law even if already

existing would have no efficacy in the field.     As a consequence, the

executive power of the State under
Article 162
cannot be invoked.
29.           The Essentiality Certificate, therefore, must be taken to

have been issued under the
IMC Act
read with Regulations and not in

exercise of any independent power of the State. Significantly, where

no power to issue certificate is shown to have been conferred by the
IMC Act
or the Regulations, it would be futile to enquire if a

corresponding power to withdraw the same has been conferred on the
21
State. Even assuming that a power to issue such a certificate has been

          impliedly conferred by the Regulations under the Act, certainly, no

          power to withdraw the same has been so conferred.                Such a power

          cannot be arrogated relying on
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act.
30.           A   similar   question   arose   in
Industrial   Infrastructure

          Development
case (supra) where the Commissioner of Income Tax

          cancelled a registration certificate because it contained an error

          apparent from the record.
This Court held that the certificate was

          issued as a result of the quasi judicial order and could have been

          withdrawn only when an express power is vested in the authority to do

          so.   In that case, this Court noted two earlier decisions in
Ghaurul

          Hasan vs. State of Rajasthan12
and
Hari Shanker Jain vs. Sonia

          Gandhi13
, where it was held that a certificate of registration of

          citizenship issued under
Section 5(1)(c)
of the Citizenship Act, 1955

          cannot be cancelled by the authority granting registration by taking

          recourse to
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act.
31.
In
Government of Andhra Pradesh vs. Y.S. Vivekanand

          Reddy14
, the High Court was called upon to consider whether the

          consent given by the State Government to the lessee to enter into sub-

          leases could be withdrawn by invoking
Section 21
of General Clauses

          Act. A full bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, per S.S.M. Quadri, J
12
AIR 1967 SC 107
13
(2001) 8 SCC 233
14
AIR 1995 AP 1
22
(as His Lordship then was) held that the power to withdraw the consent

could have been exercised only as long as it was capable of being

rescinded since this exercise had to be subject to like conditions, as

contemplated by
Section 21
.        Therefore, the Court held since the

lessee, acting on consent had executed a sub-lease and the sub-lessee

had already commenced mining operations, the consent had worked

itself out and cannot be withdrawn at that stage as the conditions

existing at the time of giving consent have changed.
32.         We are of the view that the case before us presents a

similar situation where the petitioner college has acted on the

Essentiality Certificate and has established a college which has

functioned; may be deficiently.        The conditions having changed since

the grant of the Essentiality Certificate,
Section 21
is not available in

the absence of any power to withdraw conferred by the
IMC Act
.
33.         In view of the above, we find that Condition No.(XI) is ultra-

vires the provisions of the
IMC Act
and Regulations. In the result, the

order dated 01.11.2017, issued by Respondent No. 1- State of Punjab,

withdrawing the Essentiality Certificate is quashed and set aside and

Condition Nos.(VII) and (XI) are declared illegal.
34.         Accordingly, the Writ Petition is allowed.
35.         We may not be understood to be laying down that under

no circumstances can an Essentiality Certificate be withdrawn.        The
23
State Government would be entitled to withdraw such certificate where

  it is obtained by playing fraud on it or any circumstances where the

  very substratum on which the Essentiality Certificate was granted

  disappears or any other reason of like nature.
….………………………………..J.
                                                    [S.A. BOBDE]


                                            ….………………………………..J.
                                               [L. NAGESWARA RAO]


NEW DELHI

JULY 03, 2018
24