[Cites
4
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Lydia Prem Vardhan And Ors. on 24 February, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1996ACJ972
Author:
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
Bench:
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
JUDGMENT
 

Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J.
1. In this appeal filed by the insurance company against the order of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal at Secunderabad, dated 8.10.1986 made in O.P. No. 31 of 1984, the only point which is pressed before me is that the liability of the insurance company is limited to only Rs. 50,0007-the policy being the Act policy and that the Tribunal erred in making the insurance company liable for the entire amount of compensation awarded to the claimants.
2. To appreciate the contention raised before me it is necessary to refer to the facts giving rise to this appeal. One Satish Prem Vardhan, hereinafter referred to as late Mr. Vardhan, was going on a motor cycle bearing No. ADB 9753 near the Grammar School, Abid Road, Hyderabad, on 29.8.1983 at 10.50 a.m. A bus bearing No. AAT 9502, which was coming from opposite direction and was being driven in a rash and negligent manner, dashed against the abovesaid motor cycle and caused injuries to the said Vardhan and the pillion rider and that the said Vardhan succumbed to the injuries on the very same night in Osmania General Hospital where he was admitted immediately after the accident. The wife and children of late Mr. Vardhan laid a claim of Rs. 3,50,000. The Tribunal, however, awarded a sum of Rs. 2,00,0007- to the claimants together with interest at the rate of 9 per cent per annum from the date of the petition till payment and proportionate costs.
3. In the counter filed by the insurance company it is denied that the bus involved in the accident was insured with their insurance company or that respondent No. 1 was the owner of the said bus. The other defences raised by the insurance company were ignored by the Tribunal as being beyond the scope of
Section 96(2)
of the Motor Vehicles Act. After considering the evidence placed on record by both sides, as already stated above, Claims Tribunal awarded Rs. 2,00,0007- to respondent Nos. 1 to 6 herein. As there was no issue with regard to the extent of the liability of the insurance company, the Tribunal did not consider the question of liability. The relevant issue framed and decided by the Tribunal was, "whether the bus No. AAT 9502 was not insured with the respondent No. 2 at the relevant time?" On that issue the Tribunal recorded the finding that the appellant insurance company was the insurer of the abovesaid vehicle. The Tribunal also noted, at the end of the discussion under the abovesaid issue, that the insurance company (respondent No. 2 herein) filed a copy of the policy, at the conclusion of the trial, which was marked as Exh. C-1 and which shows that the respondent No. 2 has given up the above plea and admitted that the bus was insured with it at the relevant time. The Tribunal, however, noted in para 9 of the judgment that there was no plea regarding the limit of the liability being Rs. 50,000/-. It was further observed by the Tribunal in that very same para that he (the learned Presiding Officer of the Tribunal) had also pointed out this aspect in the order dated 23.8.1986 made in LA. No. 863 of 1986 and that in spite of that no steps were taken to amend the pleadings.
4. Mr. Hanumaiah, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant insurance company, however, placed before me a copy of the counter filed by the insurance company in the Tribunal. Para 11 of the said counter reads as follows:
(11) The maximum liability of this respondent is limited to an extent as provided under the
Motor Vehicles Act
only in case all the allegations set up are proved.
Referring to the abovesaid para the learned Counsel submits that there is an express contention in the counter regarding the limit of the liability of the insurance company. I am afraid I cannot accept his contention. The said plea, taken in the counter, is a general plea and it cannot be read in isolation. Para 12 which immediately follows the para quoted above reads as follows:
(12) This respondent submits as stated above he is not aware as to whether the private bus involved in the alleged accident was insured with the respondent. This respondent reserves the right to file additional counter as and when the details of accident and full particulars of insurance are made known and verified by this respondent.
Thus, if paras 11 and 12, quoted above, are read together, it becomes clear that at the time the counter was filed the respondent insurance company was not even sure whether the bus involved in the accident was insured with the company or not, and it reserved its right to file an additional counter. When the appellant insurance company came to know that the said bus was insured, it ought to have filed an additional counter the right to file which was specifically reserved by it. It failed to do so. Even when the Tribunal pointed out the same in the order mentioned in para 9 of its judgment, neither the pleadings were amended nor an additional counter was filed.
5. It may be pointed out that admittedly the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
are applicable to the proceedings in question. The provisions of Order 8, Rule 4 read with
Order 6, Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure
make it obligatory on the defendant to state the plea of limit of liability of Rs. 50,000/- in clear terms. However, Mr. Hanumaiah, the learned Counsel for the appellant insurance company, relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jugal Kishore
1988 ACJ 270 (SC), contends that filing of the policy was enough for the insurance company to satisfy that the liability of the insurance company was limited. In that judgment, their Lordships of the Supreme Court deprecated the attitude of the insurance company in not filing a copy of the insurance policy. The Supreme Court pointed out that the claimants for compensation under the
Motor Vehicles Act
would not be possessed of either the policy or a copy thereof and that it was the duty of the party which was in possession of the document to produce the same or a copy thereof and that this duty was greater in the case of instrumentalities of the State, such as the appellant insurance company. It was emphasized that in all cases where the insurance company concerned intended to take a defence in a claim petition that its liability was not in excess of the statutory liability it should file a copy of the insurance policy along with its defence. In my view this judgment does not lay down that in the absence of any specific pleading regarding the limit of liability of the insurance company, by the mere filing of the policy the liability should be limited. On the contrary, it is settled law that no amount of evidence can be looked into in the absence of a plea, to support a contention. In this view of the matter, I am unable to accept the contention of the learned Counsel, Mr. Hanumaiah, that the liability of the insurance company should be limited to Rs. 50,0007- as the same was evident from the policy.
6. In the result, I find no merit in the C.M.A. It is accordingly dismissed, but having regard to the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.