[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Northern Coalfields Ltd. vs State Of M.P. on 21 September, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE


2023INSC865
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS 84-85 OF 2016


        South Eastern Coalfields Ltd                                                      … Appellant

                                                            Versus

        State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors                                                     … Respondents

                                                             WITH

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS 91-92 OF 2016

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS 89-90 OF 2016

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO 86 OF 2016

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS 87-88 OF 2016

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO 93 OF 2016




                                                           ORDER
1                   This batch of appeals arises from a judgment dated 21 July 2010 by a Division

                            Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in a set of petitions under
Article

                            226
of the Constitution.
2
Section 132
of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act 1956 provides for

                            “taxes to be imposed under this Act”.        Sub-
section 6(n)
empowers the

                            Corporation to levy “a terminal tax” on goods and animals exported from the

                            limits of the Corporation. A corresponding provision is contained in the Madhya
Signature Not Verified   Pradesh Municipalities Act 1961;
Section 127(6)(n)
empowers the Municipal
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Council to imposed “a terminal tax on goods or animals exported from the limits
   Date: 2023.10.03
   12:29:33 IST
   Reason:
2
of the Council”.   In exercise of the statutory powers conferred by the two

    statutes, the Terminal Tax (Assessment and Collection) on the Goods Exported

    from Madhya Pradesh Municipal Limits Rules 1996 have been framed.
Section

    2(c)
defines the expression “terminal tax” in the following terms :
“(c) "Terminal tax" means the terminal tax on goods exported
            from the Municipal limit in accordance with the sanction of
            State Government under clause (o) of sub-section (2) of
Section 132
of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation
            Act, 1956 and the tax described in clause (xvi) of sub-section
            (1) of
Section 127
of the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act,
            1961.”
3   The appellant is a company registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
and owns

    the coal mines of Jamuna & Kotma Colliery. The appellant moved the High Court

    under
Article 226
of the Constitution seeking to challenge the levy of terminal

    tax within the limits of the Municipal Council. The plea was rejected by the High

    Court on the ground that the land from where the appellant was carrying out its

    coal mining operations fell within the limits of the Municipal Council which has

    levied the terminal tax. The High Court held that the power of imposing tax was

    granted by a State statute which was enacted with due legislative competence.

    It was observed that no exceptions have been notified to the powers of the

    Municipal Council under any provision of the Constitution. The judgment has

    been carried in appeal.
4
Article 244
of the Constitution provides that the provisions of the Fifth Schedule

    shall apply to the administration and control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled

    Tribes. A notification was issued on 29 February 2003 by the Union Ministry of

    Law and Justice, in exercise of the powers conferred by Paragraph 6(2) of the

    Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India, by which the Scheduled Areas (States
3
of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh) Order, 2003 was promulgated.

    The areas specified in the notification were redefined to be the Scheduled Areas

    within the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh.


5   Part IXA of the Constitution of India which was inserted by the 74 th amendment

    provides for the Municipalities.
Article 243-ZC
stipulates that nothing contained

    in the Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the

    tribal areas referred to in clause (2) of
Article 244.
6   Mr N Venkataraman, Additional Solicitor General, appears on behalf of the

    appellant in support of the appeals. The first submission which has been urged

    is that
Article 243X
empowers the Legislature of a State by law to authorise the

    Municipalities to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees. Since

    Part IXA does not apply to Scheduled Areas, it was urged that power under
Article 243X
is not available in relation to a Scheduled Area.           As regards

    Scheduled Areas, it was urged that by virtue of Paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule

    to the Constitution of India, the Governor is entrusted with the power to direct

    that any particular Act of Parliament or the Legislature of the State shall not

    apply to a Scheduled Area or shall apply subject to such exceptions and

    modifications as may be specified.         On this foundation, it was urged that the

    provisions of the two municipal laws which have been noticed above, would have

    no application and hence, the levy of a terminal tax was ultra vires.


7   The second submission which has been urged by the Additional Solicitor General

    is that Entry 89 of List I of the Seventh Schedule empowers Parliament to levy

    terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, sea or air; and taxes

    on railway fares and freights. Entry 56 of List II empowers the State Legislature
4
to levy taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways.

     Entry 52 of List II, as it stood at the material time, provided for taxes on the

     entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein.          The

     submission is that while the expression ‘terminal’ used in Entry 89 of List I, Entry

     56 of List II does not use that expression and hence the Rules in the present case

     and the levy of a terminal tax would be ultra vires.
8    We will deal with the two submissions independently.


9
Article 244(1)
of the Constitution provides as follows :
“244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.—
              (1) The provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the
              administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and
              Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the State of Assam
              Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.”
10   Part IX of the Constitution dealing with the Panchayats was inserted by the 73 rd

     Constitutional Amendment. Part IXA dealing with the Municipalities was inserted

     by the 74th Amendment.
Article 243-ZC(1)
indicates that nothing contained in

     Part IXA would apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1) of Article
244.   However, clause (3) of
Article 244
enables Parliament to extend the

     provisions of Part IXA to the Scheduled Areas subject to such exceptions and

     modifications as may be specified in such law.
11   The Fifth Schedule contains provisions for the administration and control of

     Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes. Paragraph 3 of the Fifth Schedule, inter

     alia, provides that the Governor of each State having Scheduled Areas shall

     annually or whenever so required by the President make a report to the

     President regarding the administration of the Scheduled Areas in the State and
5
the executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to the

State as to the administration of the said areas. Paragraph 5 of the Fifth

Schedule is in the following terms :
“5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas.—(1) Notwithstanding
        anything in this Constitution, the Governor may by public
        notification direct that any particular Act of Parliament or of
        the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled
        Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a
        Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to
        such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the
        notification and any direction given under this sub-
        paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and
        good government of any area in a State which is for the time
        being a Scheduled Area.
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
        foregoing power, such regulations may—
(a)     prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among
                members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;
(b)     regulate the allotment of land to members of the
                Scheduled Tribes in such area;
(c)     regulate the carrying on of business as money-lender
                by persons who lend money to members of the
                Scheduled Tribes in such area.
(3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub-
        paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Governor may repeal or
        amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the
        State or any existing law which is for the time being
        applicable to the area in question.
(4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be
        submitted forthwith to the President and, until assented to
        by him, shall have no effect.
(5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless
        the Governor making the regulation has, in the case where
        there is a Tribes Advisory Council for the State, consulted
        such Council.”
6
12   Paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule commences with a non obstante provision. It

     empowers the Governor to direct that any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature

     of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or a part of it in the State. The

     second component of clause (1) of Paragraph 5 empowers the Governor to direct

     that an Act of Parliament or of the State Legislature shall apply to a Scheduled

     Area or any part in the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as he

     may specify in the notification.
13   The High Court in the present case has observed that the appellant did not

     produce any notification indicating that the statutes in question would not apply

     to the Scheduled Areas in the State of Madhya Pradesh or that their provisions

     would apply with exceptions and modifications disabling the power of the

     municipality to levy a tax. Even before this Court, no such notification has been

     produced. The consequence of paragraph 5(1) of the Fifth Schedule is that it

     enables the Governor to direct either that a parliamentary or state law shall not

     apply to a Scheduled Area in the State or that it would apply subject to

     exceptions and modifications. Therefore, unless a notification has been issued

     by the Governor indicating that (I) a parliamentary or state law shall have no

     application to the Scheduled Area; or (ii) the parliamentary or state legislation

     would apply subject to exceptions or modifications, there would be no hindrance

     in the application of the law to the State.
14   The alternate submission of the Additional Solicitor General is that since
Article

     243ZC
provides that Part IXA would have no application to a Scheduled Area, the

     power which is conferred on the legislature of a State to authorise the

     municipality to levy, collect and appropriate taxes would similarly have no

     application.
7
15
Article 243-X
is in the following terms :
“243-X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the
              Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate
                  such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such
                  procedure and subject to such limits;
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees
                  levied and collected by the State Government for such
                  purposes and subject to such conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the
                  Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State;
and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all
                  moneys received, respectively, by or on behalf of the
                  Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of such
                  moneys therefrom,

              as may be specified in the law.”


16   The impact of
Article 243-ZC
is that Part IXA has no application to a Scheduled

     Area. The inapplicability of
article 243X
did not denude the state legislature to

     enact legislation for the State. A Scheduled Area governed by
Article 244
of the

     Constitution is subject to the provisions contained in the Fifth Schedule which

     govern the administration and control of Scheduled Areas or Scheduled Tribes.

     Paragraph 5 confers a power on the Governor, as noted above, to direct either

     that parliamentary or state law shall not apply in the Schedule Area or that it

     would apply subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified. As

     the High Court noted, no such notification has been produced and none, we may

     add, has been produced before this Court other than the notification dated 29

     February 2003 specifying the Scheduled Areas. In this view of the matter, the

     conclusion of the High Court cannot be faulted.
8
17    On the second aspect, it needs to be noted that the Additional Solicitor General

      has fairly drawn the attention of this Court to the judgment of the Constitution

      Bench in
Central India Spinning and Weaving & Manufacturing Co. Ltd.

      The Empress Mills, Nagpur v. The Municipal Committee, Wardha
1,

      (particularly paragraph 33). Since he fairly concedes that the issue which was

      sought to be raised has been concluded in
the above decision
of the Constitution

      Bench, no further submissions have been urged in that regard.


18    For the above reasons, we are of the view that only two issues which have been

      raised in the course of the present appeals are lacking in substance.


19    The appeals shall accordingly stand dismissed.
20    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…...…...….......………………....…CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                   …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                   [J B Pardiwala]



                                                   …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                   [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
September 21, 2023
GKA




1 1958 SCR 1102