[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
First Global Stockbroking Pvt. Ltd. vs Anil Rishiraj on 21 September, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC845


                                                                                  Reportable
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2151 OF 2011


                            First Global Stockbroking
                            Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.                                    … Appellants



                                                        versus



                            Anil Rishiraj & Anr.                           … Respondents

                                                    JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
(for short,
                            ‘FEMA’) was brought into force with effect from 1 st June 2000.
                            By virtue of sub­section (1) of
Section 49
of FEMA, the Foreign
                            Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (for short, ‘FERA’) stood
                            repealed. On 11th February 2002, the first respondent, who
                            was an Enforcement Officer appointed under clause (e) of
Section 3
of FERA, filed a complaint in the Court of the
                            learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Esplanade, Mumbai,
                            against the appellants for various offences punishable under
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.09.21
FERA    and   Section   120­B   of   the
Indian   Penal   Code
.
   16:57:34 IST
   Reason:
Cognizance was taken by the learned Additional Chief
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                     Page 1 of 17
Metropolitan Magistrate, 3rd Court, Esplanade, Mumbai, on
          the said complaint on 11th February 2002 by passing an order
          of issue of process.
2.      The       appellants   made   separate   applications   for
          discharge, but the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan
          Magistrate rejected the applications.       A revision application
          preferred against the order of rejection, was also dismissed.
          Being aggrieved by the said order, an application under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
          short, ‘
Cr.PC
’) was filed by the appellants which has been
          dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 3 rd February
          2010 by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of
          Bombay.
SUBMISSIONS
3.      Mr. Siddhartha Dave, the learned senior counsel
          appearing for the appellants has taken us through the
          relevant provisions of the FERA and the FEMA. As the High
          Court has not dealt with the merits of the complaint, even the
          learned senior counsel has not made submissions on the
          merits of the complaint. He submitted that under clause (ii)
          of sub­section (2) of Section 61 of FERA, cognizance of the
          offence punishable under Sections 56 and 57 could be taken
          by a Court only on a complaint in writing made by an officer
          specified under sub­clauses (a) to (c) of clause (ii) of sub­
          section (2) of Section 61 of FERA. He submitted that under
          sub­clause (b) of clause (ii) of sub­section (2) of Section 61,
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                 Page 2 of 17
only an officer authorised in writing on this behalf by the
          Director of Enforcement or the Central Government was
          empowered to file a complaint.         The learned senior counsel
          pointed out that
Section 3
of FERA provided for the
          appointment of different classes/categories of officers of
          Enforcement. He submitted that the appointment of officers
          made under
Section 3
of FERA has not been saved by
Section
          49
, which is a saving and repealing provision under FEMA.
          He submitted that the first respondent­Enforcement Officer
          was appointed under clause (e) of
Section 3
of FERA and
          thus, with effect from 1st June 2000, the said officer is not
          empowered to exercise powers of an Enforcement Officer
          under FERA as the said powers have not been saved.              The
          learned       senior    counsel   submitted   that   assuming   that
          cognizance is taken within the sunset period provided under
          sub­section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA, in view of clause (ii) of
          sub­section (2) of Section 61 of FERA, only an authorised
          officer could have filed the complaint and in the facts of the
          case, the Enforcement Officer who may have been authorised
          earlier, cannot perform duties of his office as from 1 st June
          2000, he ceased to be an Enforcement Officer.            He would,
          therefore, submit that the Court was powerless to take
          cognizance of the complaint which was filed by an officer who
          was not authorised.
4.      Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned Additional Solicitor
          General appearing for the respondents, submitted that sub­
          section (4) of
Section 49
of FEMA is a complete answer to the
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                  Page 3 of 17
submissions made by the learned senior counsel appearing
          for the appellants.       She submitted that the Enforcement
          Officer appointed under FERA continued to have the authority
          or competence to file a complaint for the offences punishable
          under FERA before the expiry of the sunset period provided in
          sub­section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5.      As can be seen from the statement of objects and
          reasons of FEMA, the legislature noticed that after 1993,
          there were significant developments, such as a substantial
          increase in foreign exchange reserves of our country, growth
          in foreign trade, rationalisation of tariffs, liberalisation of
          Indian investment abroad, increased access to external
          commercial borrowings by Indian corporates and participation
          of foreign investors in the stock market. Keeping in view the
          entirely changed environment, by repealing FERA, FEMA was
          brought on the Statute book with the objective of facilitating
          external trade and payments and promoting the orderly
          development and maintenance of the foreign exchange market
          in India.       A perusal of the provisions of FEMA shows that
          there is a difference between its scheme and the scheme of
          FERA.         There are elaborate provisions for penalty under
          Chapter IV of FEMA, and the penal provision is confined to
          sub­section (1C) of
Section 13
of FEMA. Whereas Section 56
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                             Page 4 of 17
and Section 57 of FERA were more stringent in the sense that
          they covered a very large category of violations.
6.      The procedure for taking cognisance of the offences
          punishable under Sections 56 and 57 was provided in Section
          61 of FERA. Section 61 reads thus:
“61. Cognizance of offences.–
                          (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 29
of the Code of Criminal
                          Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be
                          lawful for any metropolitan magistrate
                          and for any magistrate of the first class to
                          pass a sentence of imprisonment for a
                          term exceeding three years or of fine
                          exceeding five thousand rupees on any
                          person convicted of an offence punishable
                          under section 56.]

                          (2) No court shall take cognizance–
(i) of any offence punishable under
                              sub­section (2) of
section 44
or
                              subsection (1) of section 58,­
(a) where the offence is alleged to
                                  have been committed by an officer of
                                  Enforcement not lower in rank than
                                  an Assistant Director of Enforcement,
                                  except with the previous sanction of
                                  the Central Government;
(b) where the offence is alleged to
                                  have been committed by an officer of
                                  Enforcement lower in rank than an
                                  Assistant Director of Enforcement,
                                  except with the previous sanction of
                                  the Director of Enforcement; or
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                           Page 5 of 17
(ii) of any offence punishable under
                              section 56 or section 57, except upon
                              complaint in writing made by­
(a) the Director of Enforcement; or
(b) any officer authorised in writing
                                  in this behalf by the Director of
                                  Enforcement      or    the    Central
                                  Government; or
(c) any officer of the Reserve Bank
                                  authorised by the Reserve Bank by
                                  a general or special order:
Provided that where any such offence
                           is the contravention of any of the
                           provisions of this Act or of any rule,
                           direction or order made thereunder which
                           prohibits the doing of an act without
                           permission, no such complaint shall be
                           made unless the person accused of the
                           offence has been given an opportunity of
                           showing that he had such permission.”
                                                  (emphasis added)
7.      A criminal Court was empowered to take cognisance of
          the offences punishable under Sections 56 and 57 of FERA
          only on a complaint in writing made by an officer of the
          categories covered by sub­clauses (a) to (c) of clause (ii) of
          sub­section (2) of Section 61. The Enforcement Officers were
          appointed under clause (e) of
Section 3
of FERA.                By a
          notification dated 24th September 1993, issued under sub­
          clause (b) of clause (ii) of sub­section (2) of Section 61 of
          FERA, various officers, including all the enforcement officers,
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                  Page 6 of 17
were authorised to file a complaint in respect of the offences
          punishable under Sections 56 and 57 of FERA.
8.      Now, we turn to
Section 49
of FEMA under the heading
          “Repeal and Saving”.                 As noted earlier, sub­section (1) of
Section 49
repealed the provisions of FERA. Sub­sections (3)
          to (5) deal with ‘savings’, which read thus:
“49. Repeal and saving.–
                              (1) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
                              (2) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(3)     Notwithstanding      anything
                              contained in any other law for the
                              time being in force, no court shall
                              take cognizance of an offence under
                              the repealed Act and no adjudicating
                              officer shall take notice of any
                              contravention under section 51 of
                              the repealed Act after the expiry of a
                              period of two years from the date of
                              the commencement of this Act.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub­
                              section (3) all offences committed
                              under the repealed Act shall continue
                              to be governed by the provisions of
                              the repealed Act as if that Act had
                              not been repealed.
(5) Notwithstanding such repeal,–
(a) anything done or any action
                                    taken or purported to have been
                                    done or taken including any rule,
                                    notification, inspection, order or
                                    notice made or issued or any
                                    appointment,     confirmation   or
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                       Page 7 of 17
declaration made or any license,
                                  permission,      authorization     or
                                  exemption      granted     or     any
                                  document or instrument executed
                                  or any direction given under the Act
                                  hereby repealed shall, in so far as it
                                  is not inconsistent with the
                                  provisions of this Act, be deemed to
                                  have been done or taken under the
                                  corresponding provisions of this
                                  Act;
(b) any appeal preferred to the
                                  Appellate Board under sub­section
                                  (2) of section 52 of the repealed Act
                                  but not disposed of before the
                                  commencement of this Act shall
                                  stand transferred to and shall
                                  disposed of by the Appellate
                                  Tribunal constituted under this
                                  Act;
(c) every appeal from any decision
                                  or order of the Appellate Board
                                  under sub­section (3) or sub­
                                  section (4) of section 52 of the
                                  repealed Act shall, if not filed before
                                  the commencement of this Act, be
                                  filled before the High Court within a
                                  period of sixty days of such
                                  commencement:
Provided that the High Court may
                              entertain such appeal after the expiry of
                              the said period of sixty days if it is
                              satisfied that the appellant was
                              prevented by sufficient cause from filing
                              the appeal with the said period.”
                                                     (emphasis added)
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                             Page 8 of 17
9.      From the impugned judgment, it appears that the
          submissions were made on behalf of the appellants that the
          word “and” in sub­section (3) must be read as “or”, and
          therefore, there is a bar on taking cognizance of the offence
          under FERA after the repeal of FERA. The High Court has
          elaborately and eruditely dealt with this argument. However,
          that need not detain us as the submissions made before this
          Court proceed on the footing that there is a sunset period
          available of two years as provided in sub­section (3) of
Section
          49
of FEMA for filing complaints alleging the commission of
          offences punishable under Sections 56 and 57 of FERA and
          for taking cognizance thereof.
10.     In the facts of the case, the cognizance was taken by the
          learned Magistrate within the sunset period of two years
          provided under sub­section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA.
11.     We have perused the complaint filed by the first
          respondent.             The complaint has been filed by the first
          respondent, who was, at the relevant time, an Enforcement
          Officer appointed under clause (e) of
Section 3
of FERA. As
          noted earlier, the power under sub­clause (b) of clause (ii) of
          sub­section (2) of Section 61 was exercised by the Central
          Government and all the Enforcement Officers were authorised
          to file complaints regarding the offences punishable under
          Sections 56 and 57 of FERA. Thus, there is no difficulty in
          holding that the first respondent–Enforcement Officer, was
          authorised to file a complaint as provided in clause (ii) of sub­
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                               Page 9 of 17
section (2) of Section 61 of FERA. What is material here is
          sub­section (4) of
Section 49
of FEMA, which provides that
          subject to the provisions of sub­section (3), all offences
          committed under the repealed Act shall continue to be
          governed by the provisions of the repealed Act as if that Act
          had not been repealed. Sub­section (3) of
Section 49
saves
          the prosecution for the offences punishable under Sections 56
          and 57, which have been committed prior to the repeal of
          FERA, provided the competent Court takes its cognizance
          within two years from the date of coming into force of FEMA.
In view of sub­section (4) of
Section 49
, for the purposes of
          the prosecution of offences punishable under Sections 56 and
          57 of FERA, by a legal fiction, the provisions of the repealed
          Act will continue to apply. However, the same will continue to
          apply only for the purposes of prosecution of the offences
          which are saved by sub­section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA.
          That is how the complaint filed by the Enforcement Officer,
          duly authorised under clause (ii) of sub­section (2) of Section
          61 of FEMA, will continue to be valid, inasmuch as by virtue
          of the legal fiction incorporated in sub­section (4) of
Section
          49
, the prosecution will continue to be governed by the
          provisions of FERA as if the same had not been repealed.
          Therefore, during the sunset period, the authorisation of the
          Enforcement Officers to file the complaints continues to be
          valid for the limited purposes of sub­section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA.
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                             Page 10 of 17
12.     If the arguments of the appellants are accepted, the
          officer nominated under sub­clause (b) of clause (ii) of sub­
          section (2) of Section 61 of FERA will not be empowered to file
          complaints for the offences punishable under FERA even
          within the sunset period of two years.        Such interpretation
          will prevent the Court from taking cognizance after the repeal
          of FERA on a complaint filed after the repeal of FERA by an
          officer authorised under sub­clause (b) of clause (ii) of sub­
          section (2) of Section 61 of FERA. Thus, no complaint can be
          filed during the sunset period of two years provided in sub­
          section (3) of
Section 49
of FEMA.           A Statute cannot be
          interpreted in such a manner that any provision thereof is
          rendered otiose.          Therefore, we are unable to accept the
          submissions made by the learned senior counsel appearing
          for the appellants.        Any construction which will defeat the
          plain intention of the legislature must be rejected. The Court
          must adopt the interpretation which makes the provisions of
          a Statute workable.
13.
By FERA, the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
(for short, ‘FERA, 1947’) was repealed.            The repealing
          provision is provided under sub­section (1) of Section 81 of
          FERA.        This Court, in the case of M/s.
P.V. Mohammad
          Barmay Sons v. Director of Enforcement1
, interpreted
          clause (a) of sub­section (2) of Section 81 of FERA. Clause (a)
          of sub­section (2) of Section 81 of FERA reads thus:
“81.Repeal and saving–
          1 1993 Supp (2) SCC 724
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                               Page 11 of 17
(1) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal­
(a) anything done or any action
                                   taken or purported to have been
                                   done or taken (including any rule,
                                   notification, inspection, order or
                                   notice made or issued, or any
                                   appointment,     confirmation    or
                                   declaration made or any licence,
                                   permission,     authorisation    or
                                   exemption granted or any document
                                   or instrument executed or any
                                   direction given or any proceedings
                                   taken or any confiscation adjudged
                                   or any penalty or fine imposed)
                                   under the Act hereby repealed shall,
                                   in so far as it is not inconsistent
                                   with the provisions of this Act, be
                                   deemed to have been done or taken
                                   under the corresponding provisions
                                   of this Act;
(b) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..;
(c) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..;
(d) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..:
(3) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..”

          The issue before this Court was about the power of the
          authorities under FERA to investigate and enforce liability
          and penalty incurred under FERA, 1947, after its repeal. In
          paragraphs 7 to 9 of the aforesaid decision, this Court held
          thus:
“7. Shri Tulsi, the learned Additional
                            Solicitor General placing reliance on
O.
                            Abdul      Aziz v. Addl
.
Director    of
                            Enforcement [AIR 1983 Mad 59:(
1982) 2
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                        Page 12 of 17
MLJ 359] and A.K.L. Labbai Thambi
                            Maraicar v. Govt. of India, Enforcement
                            Directorate
[AIR 1983 Mad 102:(1982) 2
                            MLJ 59] contended that in view of
Section 81(2)
of the Act read with
Section
                            6
of the General Clauses Act, the power
                            of the respondents to investigate and
                            enforce the liability or penalty incurred
                            under the
Repealed Act
is saved, though
                            the Act 7 of 1947 has been repealed
                            under sub­section (2) of
Section 81
of the
                            Act. The contention of the respondent
                            is that the
Repealed Act
, after the Act
                            had come into force in 1973, is a dead
                            corpse and no life into it could be
                            blown with the aid of
Section 81(2)
of
                            the Act or
Section 6
of the General
                            Clauses Act. We find no force in the
                            contention. The effect of the repealed
                            Act by operation of clause (e) of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act
                            read with sub­section (2) of Section 81
                            is that, though the Act obliterates the
                            operation of Act 7 of 1947, despite its
                            repeal, the penalty, liability, forfeiture
                            or prosecution for acts done while the
                            repealed Act was in force were kept
                            alive, though no action thereunder
                            was taken when the
Repealed Act
was
                            in force. The rights acquired or
                            accrued or the liabilities incurred or
                            any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
                            incurred during its operation are kept
                            alive. Investigations to be made or any
                            remedy which may have been available
                            before the repeal be enforced are also
                            preserved. Such rights, liabilities,
                            penalty, forfeiture or punishment, due
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                          Page 13 of 17
to repeal “shall not lapse”. The saving
                            clause, thus, aimed to preserve the
                            legal effect and consequences of
                            things done though those effects and
                            consequences projected to post­repeal
                            period. The things done adumbrated
                            in Section 81(2) or
Section 6
of the
                            General Clauses Act or penalty or
                            punishment incurred would envisage
                            that the things already done or
                            liabilities, penalty punishment or
                            forfeiture incurred, though happened
                            before the Act came into force,
Section 81(2)
of the Act empowers to
                            effectuate the liabilities, penalties,
                            etc. as if they have been in existence
                            and amenable to be pursued under the
                            Act or under the
Repealed Act
by
                            operation of
Section 6
of General
                            Clauses Act. What is unaffected by the
                            repeal of the Act 7 of 1947 is a right
                            accrued, etc. There is a distinction
                            between a legal proceeding for enforcing
                            a right acquired or accrued or liability,
                            penalty, forfeiture, punishment incurred
                            and the legal proceedings for acquisition
                            of a right, the former is saved whereas
                            the latter is not. In spite of repeal the
                            right to investigation or to take legal
                            proceedings remain unaffected and
                            preserved as if the old Act continues
                            to be operative. What remains to be
                            done, after the Act came into force, is
                            the quantification, if necessary, after
                            due       investigation     and     legal
                            proceedings and if proved to impose
                            the penalty, forfeiture or punishment.
The Court takes cognizance of the
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                         Page 14 of 17
offence and not the offender or the
                            acts done. What the Court is to
                            enquire into is whether the Act is
                            incompatible with the repealed Act
                            and whether it manifested any
                            contrary intentions to the
Repealed
                            Act
. Unless a different intention has
                            been manifested in the
Act, the
                            Repealed Act
would continue to be
                            operative. Even in a case of bare repeal
                            accompanied by a fresh legislation on the
                            same subject, the provisions of the new
                            Act will have to be looked into to find
                            where and how far the new Act envisages
                            a contrary intention affecting the
                            operation of
Section 6
of the General
                            Clauses Act. Unless such contrary
                            intention    is   manifested,   liabilities,
                            penalties, forfeiture or punishment
                            under the
Repealed Act
will continue to
                            exist and remain in force by operation of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act.
8. We have already seen that the Act did
                            not evince any contrary intention. It
                            merely    reiterated    the    earlier  law
                            operating in the field. Therefore, clause
(d) of
Section 6
of the General Clauses
                            Act gets attracted to the acts done or
                            the    penalties     of     forfeiture   or
                            punishment for any offence which had
                            already been committed before the
                            repeal of the enactment, though no
                            criminal     proceedings       have    been
                            actually initiated under repealed
                            enactment before its repeal.
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                            Page 15 of 17
9.
In
Tiwari Kanhaiyalal v. CIT
[(1975) 4
                            SCC 101 : 1975 SCC (Tax) 214:1975 SCC
                            (Cri) 312] where prosecution was laid
                            after the repeal of the
Income Tax Act,
                            1922
, the contention raised was that
                            saving clauses in Section 297 of 1961
Income Tax Act
did not save the
                            punishment incurred under the
Repealed
                            Act
, therefore, recourse to
Section 6
of
                            General Clauses Act cannot be had, was
                            negatived by this Court and it held that
                            the repeal had not affected the liability
                            incurred under
Section 52
of the Income
                            Tax Act, 1922 and it continued even after
                            its repeal. The same view was reiterated
                            in CIT v. M/s Shah Sadiq & Sons [(1987)
                            3 SCC 516, 524:1987 SCC (Tax) 270].
Accordingly, we hold that despite repeal
                            of Act 7 of 1947 by operation of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act read with
                            Section 81(2), the penalty incurred by
                            the appellant continued to subsist and
                            the respondents are entitled to institute
                            the proceedings, conduct investigation or
                            enquiry and impose such penalty.”
                                                   (emphasis added)
14.     Hence, the view taken by us in earlier paragraphs is
          fortified by
the above decision
.
15.     The      appeal      fails,   and   the   same   is,   accordingly,
          dismissed.              As the complaint remained stayed from 7 th
          January 2011, we direct the Trial Court to give necessary out­
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                                         Page 16 of 17
of­turn priority to the disposal of the complaint bearing
          CC.No.14/CW/2002, which is the subject matter of this
          appeal.
….…………………….J.
                                               (Abhay S. Oka)


                                               …..…………………...J.
                                               (Sanjay Karol)
          New Delhi;
September 21, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.2151 of 2011                                       Page 17 of 17