[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajendra Prasad vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh Thr Principal ... on 4 September, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC792


                                                                           Non-Reportable

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.5610 OF 2023
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.17151 of 2019)


                            Rajendra Prasad & Ors.                           … Appellants


                                                        versus


                            State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.                  … Respondents



                                                   JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.   In this case, we are concerned with the recruitment to the
                            ministerial Group “C” posts in the subordinate offices in
                            accordance with the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Offices
                            Ministerial Group “C” Posts of the Lowest Grade (Recruitment
                            by Promotion) Rules, 2001 (for short, ‘the said Rules’). The said
                            Rules have been framed in the exercise of powers conferred by
                            the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India. Rule 5
                            of the said Rules provides that recruitment to 20% of the
Signature Not Verified   vacancies of the ministerial Group “C” posts of the lowest grade
Digitally signed by
shall be made by promotion through the Selection Committee
   Deepak Singh
   Date: 2023.09.04
   17:25:41 IST
   Reason:
from those who have been substantively appointed in Group
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                                Page 1 of 6
“D” posts.       Out of the 20%, 15% quota is for Group “D”
          employees who have passed the High School examination from
          the Board of High School and Intermediate Education, Uttar
          Pradesh, or any other examination equivalent thereto, subject
          to a condition that the candidate must have completed five
          years of service on the first day of the year of recruitment. The
          remaining 5% quota is for Group “D” employees who have
          passed the Intermediate examination from the Board of High
          School and Intermediate Education, Uttar Pradesh, or any
          other equivalent examination.
3.     In the year 2010, the Promotion Committee prepared a
          seniority list of Group “D” employees working in the
          Collectorate, Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh for promotion to Group “C”
          posts in terms of the said Rules. On 4th December 2014, the
          District Magistrate, Sitapur promoted respondent nos.5 to 11.
          The contention of the appellants is that though they were
          senior to some of the selected candidates, they were not
          selected. A representation was made by the appellants about
          the denial of promotion to them.       Initially, the appellants
          approached the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,
          Lucknow Bench, Lucknow by way of a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The High Court did not
          entertain the writ petition on the ground that the remedy of
          approaching the Uttar Pradesh State Public Services Tribunal,
          Lucknow (for short, ‘the Tribunal’) was available. The Tribunal
          found irregularities in the process.   Thereafter, there was a
          remand by the High Court and ultimately, the prayer of the
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                      Page 2 of 6
appellants was rejected. Being aggrieved by the rejection, a
          writ petition was filed by the appellants before the High Court.
          By the impugned judgment, the writ petition was dismissed on
          the ground that Rule 5 of the said Rules only prescribes the
          source of recruitment and the criteria and procedure for
          promotion have been prescribed by Rule 8 of the said Rules.
          The High Court held that those who obtained higher marks
          were promoted.
4.     On 29th July 2019, this case came up before this Court
          and following was the order passed on that day:
“Application for deletion of respondent
                          no.13 is allowed.
Mr. Pradeep Kant, learned Senior
                          Counsel appearing on behalf of the
                          petitioners submitted that under Rule 5
                          of the Rules of 2001 (Exhibit P-1), there
                          is a promotional quota in making
                          appointments to the clerical grade in
                          Group ‘Gha’ which comprises of: (i)15%
                          from amongst employees who have
                          passed the High School Examination;
                          and (ii)5% from employees who have
                          passed the Intermediate Examination.
In the present case, it has been
                          submitted that a combined list has
                          been prepared as a result of which the
                          15% quota earmarked for those who
                          had    passed    the     High     School
                          Examination is effectively obliterated.
Issue notice, returnable in six weeks.”
5.     After this case was fully heard on 25th April 2023, this
          Court passed the following order:
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                         Page 3 of 6
“The submissions are fully heard.
We     direct    the     respondent-State
                          Government to file an affidavit giving
                          details of the promotion granted to the
                          ministerial group ‘C’ posts of the lowest
                          grade in subordinate office in terms of
                          Rule 5 of         the Uttar        Pradesh
                          Subordinate Offices Ministerial Group
                          ‘C’ Posts of the Lowest Grade
                          (Recruitment of Promotion) Rules,
                          2001. The details of the processes
                          conducted from 2015 till date shall be
                          incorporated.     The     affidavit   shall
                          specifically state that how many
                          candidates belonging to category of 15%
                          specified in Rule 5(1) were appointed.
                          The affidavit to be filed within ten days.
Needless to add that the State will have
                          to bring on record total number of
                          vacancies in Group ‘C’ posts of the
                          lowest grade so that the number of
                          posts against 20% can be determined.
List the matter on 9th May, 2023 as
                          part-heard.”
6.     Pursuant to the aforesaid order dated 25th April 2023, an
          affidavit has been filed by Mr Gaurav Ranjan Srivastava, an
          Officer of the first respondent–State of U.P. The said affidavit
          discloses the following factual details:
i. In the year 2014, there were five posts under the 15%
                      quota for the candidates who had passed the High
                      School examination and two posts under the quota for
                      those candidates who had passed the Intermediate
                      examination;
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                           Page 4 of 6
ii. Those employees who ranked from serial nos.1 to 7
                      i.e. respondent nos.5 to 11 were promoted but the
                      appellants were not promoted;
iii. After the year 2015, the Selection Committee was not
                      constituted for granting promotion in respect of the
                      20% quota as per Rule 5 of the said Rules; and

                iv. At present, 19 posts are vacant.
7.     Thus, the posts available for the 20% quota are 3.8,
          which can be rounded off to 4. Therefore, three candidates who
          hold the qualification of the High School examination and one
          candidate who holds the qualification of the Intermediate
          examination can be considered against the said four posts
          forming part of the 20% quota. The process of promotion has
          not been conducted from 2015.
8.     The provision regarding promotion, as contained in Rule
          5 of the said Rules, ensures that Group “D” employees who
          possess basic educational qualifications have some incentive
          for performing well.     A promotional avenue has been made
          available to the Group “D” employees. Now, for the last eight
          years, though there are vacancies, Group “C” posts have not
          been filled from the source of recruitment as provided in Rule
          5 of the said Rules. In the bargain, the case of the appellants
          and other similarly situated persons has not been considered.
9.     This is a fit case to exercise our jurisdiction under
Article
          142
of the Constitution of India by directing the respondents to
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                         Page 5 of 6
grant promotion to four candidates (three having the High
          School      examination   qualification   and   one   having   the
          qualification of passing the Intermediate examination) who are
          immediately below the candidates promoted in the process of
          2014 in the merit list. Those who are appointed pursuant to
          this direction shall be treated as promoted on the date on which
          the order of promotion is issued. They will get seniority on the
          basis of their actual date of appointment. We make it clear that
          the selected four candidates will not be entitled to any
          monetary relief except payment of salary and other perquisites
          as admissible to Group “D” posts from the date on which the
          appellants or any other candidates, as the case may be, are
          appointed in terms of this judgment.
10.    Necessary action shall be taken by respondent no.1–State
          of Uttar Pradesh within a period of two months from today.
11.    We make it clear that as this direction is issued under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, this decision shall not
          be treated as a precedent. The Appeal is accordingly allowed.
          There will be no order as to costs.
….…………………….J.
                                                      (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                      …..…………………...J.
                                                      (Rajesh Bindal)
          New Delhi;
September 04, 2023.
C.A.@SLP (C) No.17151 of 2019                                       Page 6 of 6