[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hemavathi vs V. Hombegowda on 11 September, 2023
Author:
B.V. Nagarathna
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
REPORTABLE
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
2023INSC848
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5780-5781/2023
                                       (@ SLP (C) No(s). 19975-19976/2022)


        HEMAVATHI & ORS.                                                      APPELLANT(S)


                                                         VERSUS

        V. HOMBEGOWDA & ANR.                                                 RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    J U D G M E N T
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
These are two more appeals which arise from the High Court of

        Karnataka within a short period of time wherein, without framing

        the substantial question of law, Regular Second Appeal filed under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (For short the

        “
CPC
”) is allowed. Additionally notice to respondent Nos. 1, 3 and

        4 may not have been issued and served as the Second Appeal was

        allowed at the stage of admission and if notice had been issued and

        served no counsel for the said respondents had been heard. It is on

        the basis of the aforesaid two grounds alone, the appeals would

        have to be allowed and the impugned order(s) of the High Court

        passed in RSA No.291/2022 disposed of on 13.04.2022 and in Review

        Petition No.536/2022 disposed on 23.06.2022 would have to be set

        aside.
Signature Not Verified
Briefly stated the facts are that the appellants herein had
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2023.09.21
17:04:34 IST
Reason:
filed Original Suit No.552/2003 before the Court of II Additional
1
Senior Civil Judge, Bengaluru Rural District, Bengaluru, Karnataka

seeking the relief of partition and separate possession of their

respective shares in the suit schedule property. By judgment and

decree dated 07.02.2012, the suit was decreed granting ¼ share to

each of the plaintiffs (appellants herein).

    Being aggrieved, the defendants in the said suit preferred

Regular Appeal No. 1/2021 before the II Additional Senior Civil

Judge, Bengaluru Rural District at Bengaluru seeking condonation of

delay    of     2945   days   in    filing       the   appeal.       By    order      dated

07.02.2022,      the    application     seeking        condonation    of      delay     was

dismissed and consequently the appeal also stood dismissed and as a

result    the     judgment    and   decree       of    the   Trial    Court     was     not

interfered with.
Being aggrieved by the dismissal of the Regular Appeal, the

defendants preferred the RSA No.291/2022. By the impugned judgment

dated 13.04.2022, the appeal filed by the defendant No.1 has been

allowed by condoning the delay of 2945                 days in filing the Regular

Appeal but the matter has been remanded to the Trial Court for a

fresh adjudication reserving liberty to file additional written

statement and directing the Trial Court to frame additional issues,

if necessary, and to take on record the evidence of plaintiffs well

as the defendant No.1 within a period of six months and to dispose

of the suit within a period of six months thereafter. Further

during the pendency of the suit, the parties were directed to

maintain status-quo in respect of the suit property as regards

possession and alienation while reserving all contentions to be

kept open to be urged before the Trial Court. At this stage itself,
2
it may be pointed out that the learned Judge of the High Court also

lost sight of the fact that the first appellate court had not

considered the Regular Appeal on merits but the matter has been

remanded to the trial court by passing the first appellate court.

    Being     aggrieved   by    the   judgment   dated    13.04.2022     the

appellants herein, who were plaintiffs in the suit which had been

decreed,   preferred   Review   Petition   No.536/2022.   By   order   dated

23.06.2022, the review petition has been dismissed. Hence, these

appeals.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and learned

senior counsel for the contesting respondent No.1.

    Learned counsel for respondent No.2 submitted that respondent

No.2 Venkataramanappa died during the pendency of the matter(s)

before this Court on 12.01.2023 and his legal representatives have

not been brought on record. He further submitted that the said

Venkataramanappa had preferred R.A. No.62/2012 but had withdrawn

the same and the said appeal(s) was dismissed as withdrawn on

10.08.2018.
In the circumstances, in view of our proposed judgment, we do

not think at this stage the matter(s) would require the legal

representatives of the deceased-respondent No.2 to be brought on

record.
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that there are

two main serious errors in the impugned judgment: firstly, the

Regular Second Appeal has been allowed at the stage of admission

without framing a substantial question of law which is contrary to

the mandate of
Section 100
of the CPC; Secondly, it was submitted
3
that all respondents before the High Court were not heard in the

matter(s) and this is evident on a reading of the cause title of

the impugned judgment wherein only respondent No.2 was represented

by a counsel as a caveator. Therefore, in the absence of hearing

respondent Nos.1, 3 and 4 before the High Court, the Second Appeal

could not have been allowed. Thirdly, it was contended that the

High Court was not right in condoning the delay of 2945 days in

filing Regular Appeal No.1/2021 inasmuch as the first appellate

court by a detailed order had dismissed the said appeal on the

ground of delay and laches. Therefore, the impugned order/judgment

of the High Court dated 13.04.2022 as well as the order passed in

the Review Petition dated 23.06.2022 may be set aside.

    Per contra, learned senior counsel appearing for the first

respondent who is the contesting respondent and appellant in R.A.

No.1/2021 supported the impugned order and submitted that since the

matter(s)   was   being     remanded   to   the   Trial   Court   reserving   all

contentions to be left open and by giving additional opportunity to

all parties the non-framing of the substantial question of law and

non-hearing of some of the respondents before the High Court, is

immaterial. She further submitted that ultimately pursuant to the

remand made by the High Court full opportunity will be given to all

parties and therefore, the impugned judgment and impugned order of

the High Court may not be interfered with.
Learned       counsel     appearing     for    deceased-respondent        No.2

submitted that in the event this Court is to remand these matters

to the High Court for fresh consideration then an opportunity may

be given to the legal representatives of deceased Respondent No.2
4
to come on record so as to contest the appeals in accordance with

law.
The aforesaid narration of facts and contentions would not

require reiteration. Learned counsel for the appellants has brought

to our notice the following three serious lacunae in the impugned

judgment as well as the order passed in the review petition by the

High Court:
(i) In the absence of framing any substantial questions of law, the

Regular Second Appeal has been allowed. This is in breach of the

mandate under
Section 100
of the CPC;
(ii) That the impugned judgment does not indicate that respondent

Nos.1, 3 and 4 were heard by the High Court inasmuch as the cause

title indicates that only the second respondent as caveator was

heard and in the absence of the said respondents being heard, the

order and judgment passed by the first appellate court in their

favour has been set aside.
(iii)   That   a   delay   of   2945   days   has   been   condoned   which   has

compounded the aforesaid serious infirmity in the impugned judgment

of the High Court.
(iv) We may also add that the matter has been remanded to the trial

court for a fresh consideration when the first appellate court had

not considered the Regular Appeal on merits. If the High Court

thought it fit to condone the delay in filing the Regular Appeal

then the matter had to be remanded to the first appellate court to

consider the Regular Appeal on merits and not just set aside the

trial court decree and remand the case to the trial court for a

fresh adjudication.
5
The   jurisdiction      of   the   High    Court   to   entertain    a    Second

Appeal is well-known. It is a unique jurisdiction of the High Court

where the High Court can entertain a Regular Second Appeal purely

on a “substantial” question of law not even a question of law or a

question of fact. It is a settled law that the first appellate

court is the final Court insofar as the question of facts are

concerned and it is only when substantial questions of law would

arise in a case that the High Court can entertain a Regular Second

Appeal and if at the stage of admission such substantial questions

of law are discerned by the High Court the same would have to be

framed and the appeal(s) would have to be admitted. It is only

thereafter that the parties have to be heard on the substantial

questions of law that are framed by the High Court at the stage of

admission.
However,
the   CPC
gives      power   to   the   High   Court   to   frame

additional substantial questions of law or to mould the substantial

questions of law already framed on hearing the parties at the time

of final hearing of a Second Appeal. In the event the respondents

before the High Court are on record even at the stage of admission

of a Regular Second Appeal and the same is to be disposed of

finally even at this stage substantial questions of law must be

framed and answered before the Regular Second Appeal is admitted

and disposed.
On a perusal of the impugned order, we find that the same has

not been framed. The said error is compounded by the learned Judge

stating in the order passed in the review petition that no such

substantial question of law arose in the appeal(s). In fact, it is
6
necessary to highlight this aspect by quoting the learned judge by

what he has stated in paragraph ‘3’ of the order passed in the

review petition as under:
“3. A perusal of the Judgment dated 13.04.2022 in RSA
     No.291/2022 shows that the respondent No.2 had
     entered Caveat.    When the appeal was listed for
     admission, this Court held that the explanation
     offered by the appellant in not filing the written
     statement was not completely acceptable but was
     probable.   This Court also found that the appeal
     filed by the appellant before the First Appellate
     Court was dismissed as barred by time.     Hence this
     Court felt that the appellant was deprived of an
     opportunity to defend the action brought by the
     respondents therein.   Hence cost of Rs.50,000/- was
     imposed and the case was remitted for disposal within
     six months. This Court did not express any opinion
     on the merits of the case. This Court was aware of
     the requirement to frame the substantial question of
     law before disposing a second appeal, as declared by
     the Hon’ble Apex Court in the decisions cited by the
     learned counsel. However, this was not a case where
     any substantial question was involved, as the Trial
     Court did not adjudicate question was involved, as
     the Trial Court did not adjudicate the dispute on
     merits.”

    The aforesaid paragraph would speak for itself vis-a-vis the

infirmities in the impugned judgment and order of the High Court.

If no substantial question of law arose in the case then the appeal

could not have been entertained and ought to have been dismissed at

the stage of admission. But on the other hand, in the absence of

framing   any   substantial   question   of   law   the   appeal   has   been

allowed, that too, at the stage of admission, without issuance of

notice to the other respondents Nos.1, 3 and 4 and by hearing only

learned counsel for the respondent No.2 before the High Court who

was on caveat. The aforesaid errors are compounded by the fact that

a sum of Rs.50,000/-(Rupees fifty thousand only) cost was awarded
7
to the successful plaintiffs who were respondents before the High

Court in lieu of any notice being issued to them! The aforesaid

infirmities cannot be overlooked and compensated by ordering a sum

of Rs.50,000/- to be paid by the first respondent herein (appellant

in the Second Appeal before the High Court) to the respondent-

plaintiff(s).
In this context, the law on the practice to be followed while

considering   a   regular    second   appeal,      has   been   re-iterated   by

this Court in C.A. No. 4935 of 2023 in Bhagyashree Anant Gaonkar

vs. Narendra @ Nagesh Bharma Holkar and Anr. dated 07.08.2023,

and the relevant extracts in this regard are exposited as under:
a)   Roop Singh   v.   Ram   Singh
,   (2000)   3   SCC   708, as   relied   upon

in
C.A. Sulaiman vs. State Bank of Travancore, Alwayee
(2006) 6 SCC

392:
“7. It is to be reiterated that under
Section 100
CPC juris-
     diction of the High Court to entertain a second appeal is
     confined only to such appeals which involve a substantial
     question of law and it does not confer any jurisdiction on
     the High Court to interfere with pure questions of fact
     while exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 100
CPC.”
b) State Bank of India vs. S.N. Goyal
(2008) 8 SCC 9215:
“15. It is a matter of concern that the scope of second ap-
     peals and as also the procedural aspects of second appeals
     are often ignored by the High Courts. Some of the oft-re-
     peated errors are:
(a) Admitting a second appeal when it does not give rise to a
     substantial question of law.
(b) Admitting second appeals without formulating substantial
     question of law.
8
(c) Admitting second appeals by formulating a standard or
     mechanical question such as “whether on the facts and circum-
stances the judgment of the first appellate court calls for
     interference” as the substantial question of law.
(d) Failing to consider and formulate relevant and appropri-
     ate substantial question(s) of law involved in the second ap-
     peal.
(e) Rejecting second appeals on the ground that the case does
     not involve any substantial question of law, when the case in
     fact involves substantial questions of law.
(f) Reformulating the substantial question of law after the
     conclusion of the hearing, while preparing the judgment,
     thereby denying an opportunity to the parties to make submis-
     sions on the reformulated substantial question of law.
(g) Deciding second appeals by reappreciating evidence and
     interfering with findings of fact, ignoring the questions of
     law.
These lapses or technical errors lead to injustice and also
     give rise to avoidable further appeals to this Court and re-
     mands by this Court, thereby prolonging the period of litiga-
     tion. Care should be taken to ensure that the cases not in-
     volving substantial questions of law are not entertained, and
     at the same time ensure that cases involving substantial
     questions of law are not rejected as not involving substan-
     tial questions of law.”
c)    Municipal   Committee,   Hoshiarpur   v.   Punjab   SEB,   (2010)   13

SCC 216:
“16 A second appeal cannot be decided merely on equitable
     grounds as it lies only on a substantial question of law,
     which is something distinct from a substantial question of
     fact. The court cannot entertain a second appeal unless
     a substantial question of law is involved, as the second ap-
     peal does not lie on the ground of erroneous findings of fact
     based on an appreciation of the relevant evidence. The exist-
     ence of a substantial question of law is a condition preced-
     ent for entertaining the second appeal; on failure to do so,
9
the judgment cannot be maintained. The existence of a sub-
stantial question of law is a sine qua non for the exercise
     of jurisdiction under the provisions of
Section 100
CPC. It
     is the obligation on the court to further clear the intent of
     the legislature and not to frustrate it by ignoring the
     same.”
d)   Umerkhan v. Bismillabi
, (2011) 9 SCC 684:
“11. In our view, the very jurisdiction of the High Court in
     hearing a second appeal is founded on the formulation of a
     substantial question of law. The judgment of the High Court
     is rendered patently illegal, if a second appeal is heard and
     judgment and decree appealed against is reversed without for-
     mulating a substantial question of law. The second appellate
     jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 100
is not akin
     to the appellate jurisdiction under
Section 96
of the Code;
     it is restricted to such substantial question or questions of
     law that may arise from the judgment and decree appealed
     against. As a matter of law, a second appeal is entertainable
     by the High Court only upon its satisfaction that a substan-
     tial question of law is involved in the matter and its formu-
     lation thereof.
Section 100
of the Code provides that the
     second appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated.
     It is, however, open to the High Court to reframe substantial
     question of law or frame substantial question of law afresh
     or hold that no substantial question of law is involved at
     the time of hearing the second appeal but reversal of the
     judgment and decree passed in appeal by a court subordinate
     to it in exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 100
of the
     Code is impermissible without formulating substantial ques-
     tion of law and a decision on such question.”
e) Raghavendra Swamy Mutt v. Uttaradi Mutt
, (2016) 11 SCC 235

     “18. In the instant case, the High Court has not yet admitted
     the matter. It is not in dispute that no substantial question
     of law has been formulated as it could not have been when the
     appeal has not been admitted. We say so, as appeal under Sec-
tion 100
CPC
is required to be admitted only on substantial
     question/questions of law. It cannot be formal admission like
     an appeal under
Section 96
CPC. That is the fundamental imper-
     ative. It is peremptory in character, and that makes the prin-
     ciple absolutely cardinal.”
10
In the circumstances, the impugned judgment dated 13.04.2022

and impugned order dated 23.06.2022 passed in the Regular Second

Appeal as well as the Review Petition are set aside. The matters

are remanded to the High Court to consider the same in accordance

with law and by being mindful of the aforementioned flaws in the

impugned judgment and order.
Since the parties are before the High Court, it is necessary

to ensure that the legal representatives of the deceased-Respondent

No.2 herein are brought on record (R-4 before the High court) by

the first respondent herein who was the appellant in the High court

by filing the necessary applications so as to bring his legal

representatives on record and thereafter to dispose of the Regular

Second Appeal in accordance with law.
Appeals are allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

    No costs.
It is needless to observe that with the cooperation of the

learned counsel for respective parties, the Regular Second Appeal

shall be disposed of expeditiously.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.......................J.
                                           ( B.V. NAGARATHNA )



                                          .......................J.
                                            ( UJJAL BHUYAN )


NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 11, 2023
11
ITEM NO.48                COURT NO.15                     SECTION IV-A

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)     Nos.19975-19976/2022
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 23-06-2022
in RP No. 536/2022 13-04-2022 in RSA No. 291/2022 passed by the
High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru)

HEMAVATHI & ORS.                                       Petitioner(s)

                                  VERSUS

V. HOMBEGOWDA & ANR.                                   Respondent(s)

Date : 11-09-2023 These petitions were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE B.V. NAGARATHNA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE UJJAL BHUYAN


For Petitioner(s)    M/S. Nuli & Nuli, AOR
                     Mr. Anand Sanjay M Nuli, Adv.
Mr. Agam Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Dharm Singh, Adv.
Mr. Shiva Swaroop, Adv.
For Respondent(s)   Ms. V. Mohana, Sr. Adv
.
Mr. Shanthakumar V. Mahale, Adv.
Mr. Harisha S.R., AOR

                     Mr. Rajesh Mahale, AOR

            UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

    Leave granted.
Civil Appeals are allowed in terms of the signed reportable

judgment.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(RADHA SHARMA)                                  (MALEKAR NAGARAJ)
COURT MASTER (SH)                               COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed Reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
12