[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Purushottam Bagh Sahkari Awas Samiti ... vs Sri Shobhan Pal Singh And Anr Etc. on 4 September, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
1


 2023INSC789                                                           NON-REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5380-5382 OF 2015

          PURUSHOTTAM BAGH SAHKARI
          AWAS SAMITI LTD.                                                   …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS


          SRI SHOBHAN PAL SINGH AND ANR. ETC.                             …RESPONDENTS


                                              JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              The challenge in these appeals is to the common judgment and

                         order dated 17.07.2023 passed by the learned Single Judge of

                         the High Court allowing three writ petitions based on similar

                         and identical facts whereunder writ petition no.18933 of 2011

                         was treated as a leading case and the facts of the same were

                         narrated in the impugned order.
2.              In view of the above, as the writ petition was decided on the

                         basis of the facts of one of the writ petitions, we also consider it
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
appropriate to narrate the facts of the same only while
Date: 2023.09.04
17:25:41 IST
Reason:
2
adjudicating upon the correctness of the judgment and order of

     the writ court.
3.   A society with the name Purushottam Bagh (residential) Sahkari

     Awas Samiti Ltd., Dayal Bagh, Agra, was formed in accordance

     with the provisions of the
U.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1965
.

     In the said society, late Krishna Pal Singh, the predecessor-in-

     interest of the present respondents was one of the members.

     The said society developed a residential colony wherein a plot

     No. B-1, measuring 933 sq. meters was allotted in favour of

     Krishna Pal Singh and a sale deed in his favour was executed

     on 14.07.1983. It may not be out of place to mention here that

     under the bye-laws of the society, a residential plot could be

     allotted to a member only if he lives or wishes to live in the area

     of operation of the society provided he or his family member

     does not own any building or plot in the area of operation of the

     society.   The ‘family’ of such a member under the bye-laws

     means husband, wife and dependent minor children.
4.   It appears that Krishna Pal Singh gave an undertaking on an

     affidavit that he does not possess any building or plot in the
3
area of operation of the society and probably in light of such an

     undertaking, the aforesaid plot was allotted to him and the sale

     deed was executed.
5.   After about 26 years, the society vide order dated 19.03.2010

     referred the matter to the sole arbitrator, i.e. cooperative officer

     (resident) Agra with regard to the price of the land sold by sale

     deed dated 14.07.1983. The society in its plaint alleged that

     Krishna Pal Singh had a personal house wherein he resided and

     that he does not require the plot in question and that he has

     purchased the same from the society in order to sell it to third

     party on higher rate. This plot of land was obtained by him by

     furnishing a false affidavit. It was also alleged that Krishna Pal

     Singh had not constructed a house or the boundary wall of the

     said plot within the time permitted.
6.   It is worth noting that the aforesaid Krishna Pal Singh died in

     1992 and was succeeded by his two sons, Lt. Col. Upendra Pal

     Singh and Shobhan Pal Singh, whose names were duly mutated

     in the records of the society as the owners of the said plot on

     the death of their father. The successors of Krishna Pal Singh
4
contested the arbitration proceedings alleging that the reference

     to the arbitrator was not maintainable as it does not fall within

     the ambit of
Section 70
of the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act,

     1965. Their father had raised a boundary wall on the said plot

     after the building plan was sanctioned by the society and that

     they had deposited even the development charges with the

     society. Their father never had any house or building within the

     area of operation of the society. Therefore, the allotment and

     the sale deed of the said plot was not liable to be cancelled.
7.   Notwithstanding the maintainability of the reference to the

     arbitrator or that the sale deed could not have been cancelled

     by him, an Award was made on 12.08.2010 declaring the sale

     deed dated 14.07.1983 to be null and void.        The arbitrator

     observed that when Krishna Pal Singh had purchased the said

     plot, he had given his address of Kamla Nagar where even his

     successors are residing till date, and that he had not raised any

     construction over the said plot despite sanction of the building

     plan.
5
8.   An appeal was preferred against the aforesaid Award and the

     same too was dismissed vide order dated 24.02.2011.
9.   In the background of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the

     successors of Krishna Pal Singh, assailed the Award dated

     12.08.2010 and the appellate order dated 24.02.2011 declaring

     the sale deed dated 14.07.1983 to be null and void by invoking

     the writ jurisdiction of the High Court. The said writ petition

     after contest was allowed vide judgment and order dated

     17.07.2013 with the clear finding that the society had failed to

     bring on record any material to prove that Krishna Pal Singh at

     the time of the purchase of the property was residing in his own

     house or that he was having any residential property in the area

     of operation of the society. No evidence was brought before the

     arbitrator about ownership of any other land by the said

     Krishna Pal Singh or that no construction was raised on the plot

     in question. Accordingly, the order of the appellate court and

     the award were both set aside and it was held that the sale deed

     dated 14.07.1983 cannot be declared to be null and void.
6
10. It is the aforesaid judgment and order of the writ court which

     has been assailed by the society in these appeals.
11. The contention of Shri D.S. Naidu, learned Senior Counsel for

     the society is that Krishna Pal Singh obtained the allotment and

     the sale deed of the plot in question by submitting a wrong

     affidavit that he does not own and possess any property in the

     area of operation of the society which is in violation of clause

     5(1) of the bye-laws of the society and that he failed to construct

     anything on it within a reasonable time.
12. It would be appropriate for this Court to refer to clause 5(1) and

     clause 3(10) of the bye-laws of the society so as to deal with the

     submission made by the learned counsel on behalf of the

     society. Clauses 5(1) and 3(10) of the bye-laws of the society

     reads as under:
“Clause 5 (1)-
5. Subject to anything contrary contained
                in the bye law or the regulations, a person
                be entitled to become of the member of the
                Society if he is of sound mind, bears good
                character and above 18 years of age and
                who
                (1) Lives or wishes to live in the area of
                operation of the society and who himself
7
or his family member does not own any
                building or plot in the area of operation of
                the society and who is not the member of
                any other cooperative residential society
                having its area of operation in the same
                area. Those persons would also be
                entitled whose land has been acquired by
                the Society.
Clause 3(10)-
3(10) Family means husband, wife and
                dependent/minor children”.
13. A simple reading of the aforesaid provision reveals that family

     of a member of the society means husband, wife and dependent

     minor children and that no member of the society is entitled to

     allotment of any plot if he himself or his family member owns

     any building or plot in the area of the operation of the society.

     In view of the above, Krishna Pal Singh would not have been

     entitled for allotment and purchase of any plot under the society

     if he or his family members had any building or plot in the area

     of operation of the society.
14. The appellant is alleging violation of the Bye Laws as aforesaid

     therefore it is upon it to prove the same. In this context, the

     writ court has returned a specific finding that the society had

     failed to furnish any evidence before the arbitrator to
8
substantiate its allegation that the petitioners are having land

     or a house in Agra and that Krishna Pal Singh or his successors

     have violated any of the conditions of the sale deed or of the bye-

     laws of the society.
15. For ready reference, the relevant finding of the writ court is

     reproduced hereinbelow:
“The basic dispute raised in all the writ
                petitions is, that the member has given a
                false declaration and that the said member
                owns another land or a residential house
                in his or her name in the city of Agra. The
                Court is constrained to observe that the
                Society has failed to furnish any
                documentary proof before the Arbitrator
                with regard to this allegation against the
                petitioners having a land or a house in his
                or her name in Agra and has further failed
                to file any evidence with regard to violation
                of any of the conditions of the sale-deed or
                of the bye-laws of the Society”.
16. It may also be pertinent to mention here that on perusal of the

     Award of the arbitrator and the order of the appellate authority,

     it is evident that the arbitrator had not recorded any finding that

     Krishna Pal Singh had given a false affidavit or that he owned a

     house or a plot in the area of operation of the society. The only

     finding recorded by the arbitrator is that at the time of allotment
9
he had given his address to be F150 Kamla Nagar, Agra where

     even now his successors are residing. However, such finding

     falls short of saying that the address at which he was living was

     a house which belonged to him or his family members as defined

     under the bye-laws or that his successors are the owners of the

     said house in their own capacity.     Mere living in a particular

     house by itself would not mean that the said house is under

     ownership of the person living therein in his individual capacity

     or even that it is within the area of operation of the society.
17. In the light of the aforesaid and the finding returned by the writ

     court, we find no substance in the submission made on behalf

     of the society and as such, in our opinion, the appeals lack merit

     and are dismissed with no orders as to costs.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)


                                                ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 04, 2023.