[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Paul Rubber Industries Private ... vs Amit Chand Mitra on 25 September, 2023
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Aniruddha Bose
2023INSC854                                                             REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO……………………. OF 2023
                                (Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to
                                       Appeal (Civil) No.15774/2022)


             M/S PAUL RUBBER INDUSTRIES
             PRIVATE LIMITED                                        …APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

             AMIT CHAND MITRA & ANR.                              …RESPONDENT(S)

                                              JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The main point which we have to address in this appeal is


             as to what extent the Court can take cognizance of a clause


             relating to purpose for which a lease is granted contained in an


             unregistered deed of lease for immovable property stipulating its


             duration for a period of five years. In the judgment under appeal,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2023.09.25
opinion of a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court is that
   16:49:31 IST
   Reason:
1
such deed cannot be received as evidence of any transaction


affecting the property over which the lease is executed.               On


27.03.2003, a document captioned “Tenancy Agreement” was


executed by and between one Sabita Mitra (the landlady, since


deceased), now represented before us by her legal heirs being the


two respondents and an incorporated company, Paul Rubber


Industries Private Limited.      The latter is the appellant in this


proceeding. In this judgment, we shall refer to the landlady and


her legal representatives as the respondents interchangeably and


the appellant Paul Rubber Industries Pvt. Ltd. shall be described


as   defendant.    The   property      in    question     comprises    of


approximately     16   cottahs    (one      cottah   is   equivalent   to


approximately 720 sq. ft.) of land situated at Radha Madhab


Dutta Garden Lane, within the city of Kolkata. The tenure of the


agreement, as stipulated therein was for a period of five years


with provision for renewal for further five years.             There is


stipulation for further renewal for such period and on such terms
2
and conditions as might have been agreed upon by the parties.
This is contained in clause 2 of the agreement. But no such


renewal was effected. First five years of the tenancy stood


completed on 31.10.2007, and a letter was sent by the landlady


on 07.11.2007 seeking enhancement of rent. It does not appear


that the defendant had paid rent thereafter. It had, however,


raised a plea that such rent used to be collected on behalf of the


landlady on due date, but this was stopped after October 2007.
Thereafter, on 06.03.2008, the landlady served a notice requiring


the defendant to vacate the subject-premises with effect from


31.03.2008. In this letter of 06.03.2008, the defendant was


addressed as monthly tenant. Default in payment of monthly rent


was highlighted in this letter. It was also specified therein that


the landlady needed the said premises for her own use and


occupation and for business purpose of her family members.
This letter is being projected by the respondents as notice for
3
fifteen days, as per stipulation of
Section 106
of the Transfer of


Property Act, 1882 (herein after “1882 Act”).
3.   The tenant had not delivered vacant possession as a result


of which the suit, which gives rise to the present appeal, was


instituted by the landlady on 04.09.2008 before the Civil Judge,


Senior Division at Sealdah, having jurisdiction over the suit


property. The original plaintiff (i.e. the landlady) claimed, inter-
alia, recovery of possession as also decree for mesne profit.
Various defences were set up by the defendant in its written


statement. One of them was that since it was an agreement for


lease under which it was inducted as a tenant and the same was


unregistered, the suit was not maintainable. Another plea of the


defendant was that the subject property stood vested in the State


under the thika tenancy law. This is a special type of tenancy


prevalent in the Kolkata region involving multiple-tier of tenancy


and ownership structure. The defendant claimed to have filed


certain returns before the Thika Controller. This issue was not
4
raised before the High Court and is not in lis before us also. The


defendant in the written statement, denied expiry of tenancy on


31.01.2007.    As regards default in payment of rent, we have


already referred to the defendant’s stand. Altogether, five issues


were framed by the Trial Court. The first two issues framed by


the Trial Court related to maintainability of the suit in the form it


was framed and subsistence of cause of action. These two issues


had not been pressed during trial and the Trial Court found that


the suit was maintainable. The other three issues related to the


question as to whether the plaintiff was entitled to the reliefs


claimed or not.
4.   The defendant, in its written statement, referred to the said


agreement of 27.3.2003. In paragraphs 6,8 and 10 of the written


statement, main defence of the defendant was disclosed.         Plea


was also taken denying default and vesting of the property in the


State under the thika tenancy law. Before us, arguments have


been advanced mainly on legal position of the unregistered
5
agreement and the consequences thereof. Rest of the written


statement contained broad denial of the plaintiff’s claims. We


quote below the said three paragraphs of the written statement:-
“6. As a matter of fact, the plaintiff by representating
        herself to be the Owner/Landlady of the suit premises
        inducted the defendant therein as a lessee as would be
        evident from the Agreement dated 27.3.2003. The plaintiff
        has not sought any leave from this Learned Court to rely
        upon the said Agreement neither a copy of which has been
        filed. However this defendant craves leave of this Ld. Court
        to rely upon the said Agreement at the time of hearing.
            The aforesaid Agreement on the face of it was an
        Agreement of Lease not registered under the statute and
        accordingly the suit is not maintainable.
8. It is denied that the tenancy if at all, expired on
        31.01.2007 as the defendant was assured of a renewal by
        the plaintiff and the defendant was willing to renew the
        same which was known to the plaintiff.
10. The notice of the plaintiff served upon the defendant is
        defective. Admittedly the defendant was a Lessee under
        the plaintiff on the strength of the aforesaid Agreement and
        on expiry of the initial period of five years was subject to a
        renewal. The plaintiff never denied the fact of renewal to
        the defendant and is therefore put to the strictest proof
        thereof.”


     Main argument before the Trial Court centred around


legality of the notice. The defendant’s case was that the premises


was let out for manufacturing purpose and in terms of
Section


106
of the 1882 Act, a clear six months’ notice was required to be


given. The Trial Court on analysis of evidence found that the suit
6
property was not let out for agricultural or manufacturing


purpose.
5.   The Trial Court held:-
“I have no hesitation to hold that the tenancy of the
        defendant was month by month governed under the
T.P.
        Act
and after expiry of terms of the lease, the said tenancy
        was not extended by the parties with mutual consent as
        per provision of the agreement dated 27.03.03. It is the
        case of the plaintiff that the defendant is also a defaulter
        and he did not pay the rent of the suit premises from
        October, 2007. Such contention of the plaintiff is also
        admitted by the plaintiff that the rent, municipal charges
        and maintenance charges of the suit premises were not
        paid by the defendant from October, 2007 but pleaded that
        the plaintiff never sent her representative to the defendant
        for collection of rent which was the usual practice. From
        Ext. 7 which is the notice issued upon the defendant, it
        appears that a 15 days clear notice was duly served upon
        the defendant by the plaintiff asking him to quit and
        vacate the suit premises on and from 31.03.08. It is further
        appears from the case record hat during the trial, the
        defendant has filed a return before the reasonable office of
        Thika Controller for determination of right title interest
        under the
Thika Tenancy Act
along with others which was
        registered as Misc. Case 79 & 80 of 2007. From Ext. 8
        filed by the plaintiff, it appears that upon hearing the
        parties, the Ld. Thika Controller was pleased to hold that
        the plaintiff is the recorded owner of the suit premises.
           So, from the overall discussion, evidence and materials
        on record, I am of view that the suit premises was let out to
        the defendant for other purposes other than agricultural or
        manufacturing purposes and such tenancy of the
        defendant deemed to be a lease from month to month
        terminable on the part of either lessor or lessee by 15 days
        notice and after expiry of the term of the lease i.e. on
        31.10.07, a clear 15 days notice was served upon the
        defendant requesting him to quit and vacate the suit
        premises and hand over the peaceful possession of the
        same to the plaintiff. As such, the plaintiff is entitled to get
        relief as prayed for. Hence, the above issues are also
        decided in favour of the plaintiff.”
7
(quoted verbatim from the paperbook)
6.   The Trial Court found that the tenancy of the defendant was


month by month governed under the 1882 Act and after the


expiry of the lease, the said tenancy was not renewed by the


parties on mutual consent as per the terms and provisions of the


agreement dated 27.03.2003. On the question of Thika tenancy,

the Trial Court recorded that the Thika Controller had already


held that the plaintiff was the owner of the suit premises.
7.   The appeal of the defendant was examined by the Division


Bench of the High Court and on considering a large body of


authorities, the High Court found no reason to interfere with the

judgment of the Trial Court. The appeal was dismissed. It was


the view of the High Court that the agreement being unregistered,


the same could not be looked into for determining the rights and


liabilities of the parties and for its duration. On the question as


to whether the purpose of the lease was “manufacturing” or not,


the High Court held that it was for the appellant to establish that
8
factor. The appellant not having adduced any evidence in that


regard, the High Court drew adverse inference on that count and


the Trial Court judgment was not interfered with.
8.    For the purpose of adjudicating the present appeal, we need


to look into the provisions of
Sections 105
,
106
and 107 of the


1882 Act and the provisions of
Sections 17
and
49
of the


Registration   Act,   1908     (hereinafter     “1908     Act”).   The   said


provisions of the 1882 Act stipulate:-
“105. Lease defined.—A lease of immoveable property is
        a transfer of a right to enjoy such property, made for a
        certain time, express or implied, or in perpetuity, in
        consideration of a price paid or promised, or of money, a
        share of crops, service or any other thing of value, to be
        rendered periodically or on specified occasions to the
        transferor by the transferee, who accepts the transfer on
        such terms.
Lessor, lessee, premium and rent defined.—The
        transferor is called the lessor, the transferee is called the
        lessee, the price is called the premium, and the money,
        share, service or other thing to be so rendered is called the
        rent.
[106. Duration of certain leases in absence of written
        contract or local usage.—(1) In the absence of a contract
        or local law or usage to the contrary, a lease of immovable
        property for agricultural or manufacturing purposes shall
        be deemed to be a lease from year to year, terminable, on
        the part of either lessor or lessee, by six months’ notice;
        and a lease of immovable property for any other purpose
        shall be deemed to be a lease from month to month,
        terminable, on the part of either lessor or lessee, by fifteen
        days’ notice.
9
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
        for the time being in force, the period mentioned in sub-
section (1) shall commence from the date of receipt of
        notice.
(3) A notice under sub-section (1) shall not be deemed to be
        invalid merely because the period mentioned therein falls
        short of the period specified under that sub-section, where
        a suit or proceeding is filed after the expiry of the period
        mentioned in that sub-section.
(4) Every notice under sub-section (1) must be in writing,
        signed by or on behalf of the person giving it, and either be
        sent by post to the party who is intended to be bound by it
        or be tendered or delivered personally to such party, or to
        one of his family or servants at his residence, or (if such
        tender or delivery is not practicable) affixed to a
        conspicuous part of the property.]
107. Leases how made.—A lease of immoveable
        property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one
        year, or reserving a yearly rent, can be made only by a
        registered instrument.
[All other leases of immoveable property may be made
        either by a registered instrument or by oral agreement
        accompanied by delivery of possession.
[Where a lease of immoveable property is made by a
        registered instrument, such instrument or, where there are
        more instruments than one, each such instrument shall be
        executed by both the lessor and the lessee:]
           Provided that the State Government may from time to
        time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
        leases of immoveable property, other than leases from year
        to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a
        yearly rent, or any class of such leases, may be made by
        unregistered instrument or by oral agreement without
        delivery of possession.]”
Sections 17
and
49
of the 1908 Act read:-
“17. Documents of which registration is compulsory.
        — (1) The following documents shall be registered, if the
        property to which they relate is situate in a district in
        which, and if they have been executed on or after the date
        on which, Act No. XVI of 1864, or the
Indian Registration
        Act, 1866
, or the
Indian Registration Act, 1871
, or the
10
Indian Registration Act, 1877
, or this Act came or comes
into force, namely:—
(a) instruments of gift of immovable property;
(b) other non-testamentary instruments which purport or
operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish,
whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest,
whether vested or contingent, of the value of one hundred
rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property;
(c) non-testamentary instruments which acknowledge the
receipt or payment of any consideration on account of the
creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of
any such right, title or interest; and
(d) leases of immovable property from year to year, or for
any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent;
[(e) non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning
any decree or order of a Court or any award when such
decree or order or award purports or operates to create,
declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or
in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or
contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and
upwards, to or in immovable property:]
Provided that the [State Government] may, by order
published in the [Official Gazette], exempt from the
operation of this sub-section any lease executed in any
district, or part of a district, the terms granted by which do
not exceed five years and the annual rents reserved by
which do not exceed fifty rupees.
[(1A) The documents containing contracts to transfer for
consideration, any immovable property for the purpose of
section 53A
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of
1882) shall be registered if they have been executed on or
after the commencement of the Registration and Other
Related laws
(Amendment) Act, 2001
and if such
documents are not registered on or after such
commencement, then, they shall have no effect for the
purposes of the said
section 53A
.]
(2) Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) applies
to—
(i) any composition deed; or
(ii) any instrument relating to shares in a joint stock
Company, notwithstanding that the assets of such
Company consist in whole or in part of immovable
property; or
11
(iii) any debenture issued by any such Company and not
creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any
right, title or interest, to or in immovable property except in
so far as it entitles the holder to the security afforded by a
registered instrument whereby the Company has
mortgaged, conveyed or otherwise transferred the whole or
part of its immovable property or any interest therein to
trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders of such
debentures; or
(iv) any endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture
issued by any such Company; or
(v) [any document other than the documents specified in
sub-section (1A)] not itself creating, declaring, assigning,
limiting or extinguishing any right, title or interest of the
value of one hundred rupees and upwards to or in
immovable property, but merely creating a right to obtain
another document which will, when executed, create,
declare, assign, limit or extinguish any such right, title or
interest; or
(vi) any decree or order of a Court [except a decree or order
expressed to be made on a compromise and comprising
immovable property other than that which is the subject-
matter of the suit or proceeding]; or
(vii) any grant of immovable property by [Government]; or
(viii) any instrument of partition made by a Revenue-
Officer; or
(ix) any order granting a loan or instrument of collateral
security granted under the Land Improvement Act, 1871,
or the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883; or
(x) any order granting a loan under the Agriculturists,
Loans Act, 1884, or instrument for securing the repayment
of a loan made under that Act; or
(xa) any order made under the Charitable Endowments
Act, 1890 (6 of 1890), vesting any property in a Treasurer
of Charitable Endowments or divesting any such Treasurer
of any property; or]
(xi) any endorsement on a mortgage-deed acknowledging
the payment of the whole or any part of the mortgage-
money, and any other receipt for payment of money due
under a mortgage when the receipt does not purport to
extinguish the mortgage; or
12
(xii) any certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any
       property sold by public auction by a Civil or Revenue-
       Officer.
[Explanation.—A document purporting or operating to
       effect a contract for the sale of immovable property shall
       not be deemed to require or ever to have required
       registration by reason only of the fact that such document
       contains a recital of the payment of any earnest money or
       of the whole or any part of the purchase money.]
       (3) Authorities to adopt a son, executed after the 1st day of
       January, 1872, and not conferred by a will, shall also be
       registered.”
       ……
       “49. Effect of non-registration of documents required
       to be registered.— No document required by
section 17
[or by any provision of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4
       of 1882)], to be registered shall—
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting
         such property or conferring such power,
       unless it has been registered:
[Provided that an unregistered document affecting
       immovable property and required by this Act or the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(4 of 1882), to be registered
       may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for
       specific performance under Chapter II of the Specific Relief
       Act, 1877 (3 of 1877), or as evidence of any collateral
       transaction not required to be effected by registered
       instrument.]”
9.   The aforesaid provisions were analysed by this Court in the


case of Anthony -vs- K.C. Ittoop & Sons and Others [(2000) 6


SCC 394], and this authority was also cited before the High


Court. This was a case in which the respondent was inducted
13
into possession of a premises under a lease deed for a period of


five years, but the deed was not registered. It has been held in


this judgment:-
“11. The resultant position is insurmountable that so far as
        the instrument of lease is concerned there is no scope for
        holding that the appellant is a lessee by virtue of the said
        instrument. The Court is disabled from using the
        instrument as evidence and hence it goes out of
        consideration in this case, hook, line and sinker
        (vide
Shantabai v. State of Bombay
[AIR 1958 SC 532 :
        1959 SCR 265] , Satish Chand Makhan v. Govardhan Das
        Byas [(
1984) 1 SCC 369] and Bajaj Auto Ltd. v. Behari Lal
        Kohli
[(1989) 4 SCC 39 : AIR 1989 SC 1806] .
12. But the above finding does not exhaust the scope of the
        issue whether the appellant is a lessee of the building. A
        lease of immovable property is defined in
Section 105
of
        the TP Act. A transfer of a right to enjoy a property in
        consideration of a price paid or promised to be rendered
        periodically or on specified occasions is the basic fabric for
        a valid lease. The provision says that such a transfer can
        be made expressly or by implication. Once there is such a
        transfer of right to enjoy the property a lease stands
        created. What is mentioned in the three paragraphs of the
        first part of
Section 107
of the TP Act are only the different
        modes of how leases are created. The first para has been
        extracted above and it deals with the mode of creating the
        particular kinds of leases mentioned therein. The third
        para can be read along with the above as it contains a
        condition to be complied with if the parties choose to create
        a lease as per a registered instrument mentioned therein.
All other leases, if created, necessarily fall within the ambit
        of the second para. Thus, dehors the instrument parties
        can create a lease as envisaged in the second para of
        Section 107 which reads thus:
“All other leases of immovable property may be made
        either by a registered instrument or by oral agreement
        accompanied by delivery of possession.”
13. When lease is a transfer of a right to enjoy the property
        and such transfer can be made expressly or by implication,
        the mere fact that an unregistered instrument came into
        existence would not stand in the way of the court to
14
determine whether there was in fact a lease otherwise
         than through such deed.”
10. The same view was broadly reflected in the cases of Shri


Janki Devi Bhagat Trust, Agra -vs- Ram Swarup Jain (Dead)


by Lrs. [(1995) 5 SCC 314] and Satish Chand Makhan and


Others     -vs- Govardhan Das Byas and Others [(1984) 1 SCC


369]. Section 107 of the 1882 Act which we have quoted above


stipulates that a lease of immovable property from year to year or


for any term exceeding one year can be made only by a registered


instrument.     So far as
Section 106
of the said statute is


concerned, in which distinction is made between lease of

immovable property for agricultural or manufacturing purpose


and lease of immovable property for any other purpose, the same


provides that a lease of immovable property for agricultural or


manufacturing purpose shall be deemed to be a lease from year-
to-year terminable by six months’ notice.           In other cases,


termination would require fifteen days’ notice.          The subject
15
agreement had a duration of five years with a provision for


renewal for a further period of five years. Hence under the first


part of Section 107, for the said lease agreement to be


admissible, registration of the same would have been necessary.
The deeming provision of sub-section (1) of
Section 106
so far the


same related to lease for agriculture or manufacturing purpose


would not be applicable as the deed was not registered. The


appellant has argued that the Trial Court had admitted the lease


agreement in evidence, and for determining the purpose of lease,


we can examine the deed. But this argument is flawed. This


provision contemplates lease for manufacturing purpose, in


absence of contract or local law to the contrary, shall be deemed


to be year to year lease. In that case, it would require six months’


notice for termination. But here, the agreement itself provides a


five year duration, and hence ex-facie becomes a document that


requires compulsory registration. That is the mandate of Section


107 of the 1882 Act and
Sections 17
and
49
of the 1908 Act. The
16
Court cannot admit it in evidence, as per the judgment in the


case of Anthony (supra). A coordinate Bench in the case of


Shyam Narayan Prasad -vs- V. Krishna Prasad and Ors. [(2018)


7 SCC 646] has re-affirmed this view, referring to
Section 49
of


the Registration Act. This is a prohibition for the Court to


implement and even if the Trial Court has taken it in evidence,


the same cannot confer legitimacy to that document for being


taken as evidence at the appellate stage. The parties cannot by


implied consent confer upon such document its admissibility. It


is not in dispute in this case that the period between service of


notice and institution of the suit fell short by four days of


completion of six months.    In any case, we do not consider it


necessary to address this question as in our opinion, the


requirement to give six months’ notice does not arise in this case.
That point has not been raised before us.
11. The fault line in the defendant’s case also lies on the point


as to whether the lease was for manufacturing purpose or not,
17
which was examined by the High Court and decided against the


appellant. The defendant tried to establish from the clause of the


lease agreement, statement made in the plaint as also his


evidence   before   the   Trial   Court   that   the   lease   was   for


manufacturing purpose.      All these materials no doubt point to


the fact that the lease was given for commercial purpose (as


pleaded in the plaint). In cross-examination, DW-1 had stated


that he was doing business of rubber.             In the case of G.


Mackertich -vs- Steuart and Co. Ltd. [(1971) 3 SCC 39], it has


been held that burden of proving that the lease was for


manufacturing purpose lies on the party who claims it to be so.
In the present appeal, it would have been for the defendant


(appellant before us) to discharge this burden, as held by the


High Court. In the case of Shivaji Balaram Haibatti -vs-
Avinash Maruthi Pawar [(2018) 11 SCC 652] as also in a


judgment of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Messrs Shree


Nursing Timber Works and Messrs. Shree Nursing Electric
18
Stores -vs- Sm. Amala Bala Dassi [1973 CWN 522], it has been


held that on this ground, there must be pleading supported by


evidence to prove that the lease was for manufacturing purpose.
12. On behalf of the appellant, however, it was urged, referring


to the provisions of
Section 49
of the Registration Act that for


establishing   nature   and     purpose   of    possession,    even   an


unregistered document could be looked into as that would come


within the ambit of collateral purpose. On this point, judgment


of this Court in the case of Sevoke Properties Ltd. -vs- West


Bengal   State    Electricity     Distribution    Company      Limited


[(2020) 11 SCC 782] has been relied upon. In the case of Sevoke


Properties (supra) a coordinate Bench opined that as the


agreement for lease in that case was unregistered, contents of the


instrument were inadmissible in evidence. There was admission


in the written statement of respondent in the case of Sevoke


Properties     (supra) by   the    defendants    that   they   were in
19
occupation under the lease agreement (in controversy in that


case) for a period of fifteen years with effect from 1981 and that


period of lease had expired on 24.05.1996. The issue decided in


that case was whether the lease stood determined by efflux of


time and once it did, what would be the position of the lessee?
The coordinate Bench found that the position of the lessee would


be that of a tenant at sufferance. In that context, it was held that


there was no necessity to terminate the lease under
Section 106
of 1882 Act. That case was decided on the basis of admission in


written statement and has no application to the facts of the


present case.    The observation made in the case of Sevoke


Properties (supra) that only purpose for which the lease can be


looked at for assessing nature and character of the possession


was in that context and that judgment proceeded on the basis


that the period of lease had expired on a certain date.        This


decision is not an authority for the proposition that nature and


character of the possession in an unregistered lease deed could
20
always constitute collateral purpose so that the Court could


examine the deed for that reason. The purpose for which lease is


granted forms an integral part of the lease deed in this case and


this very issue forms one of the main disputes. The expression


“collateral purpose” has been employed in proviso to
Section 49
of


the Registration Act to imply that content of such a document


can be used for purpose other than for which it has been


executed or entered into by the parties or for a purpose remote to


the main transaction. This view was taken by this Court in an


earlier decision, in the case of K.B. Saha and Sons Private


Limited -vs- Development Consultant Limited [(2008) 8 SCC


564]. The position of law on this point has been summarized in


paragraph 34 (of the report) in this judgment:-
“34*. From the principles laid down in the various
        decisions of this Court and the High Courts, as referred to
        hereinabove, it is evident that:
1. A document required to be registered, if unregistered is
        not admissible into evidence under
Section 49
of the
        Registration Act.
21
2. Such unregistered document can however be used as an
        evidence of collateral purpose as provided in the proviso to
Section 49
of the Registration Act.
3. A collateral transaction must be independent of, or
        divisible from, the transaction to effect which the law
        required registration.
4. A collateral transaction must be a transaction not itself
        required to be effected by a registered document, that is, a
        transaction creating, etc. any right, title or interest in
        immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees
        and upwards.
5. If a document is inadmissible in evidence for want of
        registration, none of its terms can be admitted in evidence
        and that to use a document for the purpose of proving an
        important clause would not be using it as a collateral
        purpose.”
13. In the case of Rai Chand Jain -vs- Miss Chandra Kanta


Khosla [(1991) 1 SCC 422], dispute arose as to whether certain


premises were let out for residential purpose or as to whether


there was an oral agreement of letting out the premises to the


tenant, for running a press. It was in that perspective, it was held


in the said case that a lease deed though unregistered, could be


considered for collateral purposes to show the purpose for which


the premises was leased out. Thus, the lease deed was referred to


for the sole purpose to defeat the claim of subsistence of an oral


agreement. The ratio of this authority has been considered in the
22
case of
K.B. Saha and Sons Private Limited
(supra) and we


follow that ratio.
In the case of Satish Chand Makhan (supra),


another coordinate Bench of this Court declined to accept


admissibility of an unregistered lease agreement for determining


duration of the lease (9 years in that case) on the reasoning that


terms of lease would not constitute collateral purpose. It was

observed in this judgment that “nature and character of


possession” could constitute collateral purpose but that was not


the point which was directly in lis before this Court. In our


opinion, nature and character of possession contained in a flawed


document (being unregistered) in terms Section 107 of the 1882


Act and
Sections 17
and
49
of the Registration Act can form


collateral purpose when the “nature and character of possession”


is not the main term of the lease and does not constitute the


main dispute for adjudication by the Court. In this case, the


nature and character of possession constitutes the primary


dispute and hence the Court is excluded by law from examining
23
the unregistered deed for that purpose. In respect of the suit out


of which this appeal arises, purpose of lease is the main lis, not a


collateral incident.
14. We, however, need not further dilate on this question. The


lease was for use by the predecessor of the appellants “for the


purpose of his business and/or factory.” The property was


described in the schedule to be estimated 16 cottahs of land


“with a factory shed/godown space”. Such description would not


be sufficient to establish that the same was for manufacturing


purpose. In the decision of this Court in Allenbury Engineers


Pvt. Ltd. -vs- Ramkrishna Dalmia and Others [(1973) 1 SCC 7],


the expression ‘manufacturing purpose’ as employed in Section


106 of the 1882 Act was explained to mean:-
“8…The expression “manufacturing purposes” in Section
        106, thus, means purposes for making or fabricating
        articles or materials by physical labour, or skill, or by
        mechanical power, vendible and useful as such. Such
        making or fabricating does not mean merely a change in
        an already existing article or material, but transforming it
        into a different article or material having a distinctive
        name, character or use or fabricating a previously known
        article by a noval process.”
24
15. In Park Street Properties Private Limited -vs- Dipak


Kumar Singh and Another [(2016) 9 SCC 268], which was cited


in the case of Sevoke Properties (supra), it was observed that in


the absence of a registered instrument, the courts are not


precluded from determining the factum of tenancy from other


evidence on record as well as the purpose of tenancy. In this


case, factum of creation of tenancy has been established. But the


purpose of tenancy, so as to attract the six months’ notice period


under Section 106 of the 1882 Act cannot be established by such


evidence as in such a situation, registration of the deed would


have been mandatory. The onus would be on the defendant to


establish the fact that manufacturing activity was being carried


on from the demised premises. A mere statement by the DW-1 to


which we have referred earlier or the purpose of lease as specified


in the lease agreement would not be sufficient to demonstrate the


purpose of lease to be for manufacturing. This could be proved by


explaining what kind of work was being carried on in the factory
25
shed. In such a situation also, the registration of the deed would


have been necessary. In absence of such registration, tenancy


would have been of “month to month” character. For these


reasons, we do not think the High Court erred in law in


dismissing the defendant’s appeal. The present appeal shall stand


dismissed on the same rationale.
15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
16. There shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………….J.
                                         (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)



                                      ……………………………….J.
                                           (VIKRAM NATH)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 25th, 2023.
26