[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sunil vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 21 September, 2023
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
2023INSC840



                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.688 OF 2011

                            SUNIL                                        … Appellant

                                                             VERSUS

                            STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                        … Respondent


                                                                  WITH

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.689 OF 2011

                            RAVINDER                                     … Appellant

                                                             VERSUS

                            STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                        … Respondent


                                                                  AND

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.785 OF 2011

                            SHRI KRISHAN                                 … Appellant

                                                             VERSUS

   Signature Not Verified
                            STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                        … Respondent
   Digitally signed by
   CHETAN KUMAR
   Date: 2023.09.21
   13:56:44 IST
   Reason:




                            Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.              Page 1 of 44
                          JUDGMENT


MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.       These three appeals are against the judgment
and order of the High Court of Delhi (in short “the High
Court”) dated 28.07.2009 passed in Criminal Appeal
Nos. 962 of 2004; 977 of 2004; 981 of 2004; 14 of
2005; and 61 of 2005, by which Criminal Appeal Nos.
962 of 2004; 977 of 2004; 981 of 2004; and 61 of 2005,
preferred by Sunil (appellant in Criminal Appeal
No.688 of 2011), Shri Krishna (appellant in Criminal
Appeal No.785 of 2011), Ravinder (appellant in
Criminal Appeal No.689 of 2011) and Babu Ram @
Fauji    (co-accused),           respectively,   were    dismissed
whereas Criminal Appeal No.14 of 2005 of co-accused
Vijay was allowed. The net result of the impugned
judgment and order is that the order of the trial court
(i.e., Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi), dated
08.11.2004, in Sessions Trial No.42 of 1999, arising
out of FIR No.561 of 1998, P.S. Jahangir Puri,
convicting and sentencing Babu Ram @ Fauji, Sunil,
Shri     Krishan          and         Ravinder   under
Sections
302
/
307
/
34
of the Indian Penal Code (in short, “the
I.P.C
.”) has been affirmed whereas conviction of
co-accused Vijay has been set aside. It be noted that
Babu Ram @ Fauji was also sentenced under Section
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                      Page 2 of 44
27 of the
Arms Act
, which has also been affirmed by
the High Court. The sentence awarded to the
appellants, namely, Sunil, Shri Krishan and Ravinder,
which is impugned in these appeals, is as under:
(i)   Imprisonment for life with fine of Rs.
2000/-, coupled with a default sentence
           of six months R.I., under Section 302/34
           I.P.C.; and
(ii) Five years R.I. with fine of Rs. 1000/-,
           coupled with a default sentence of three
           months, under Section 307/34 I.P.C.
Introductory Facts
2.         This    is     a    case   where,   on   account          of
indiscriminate firing by Babu Ram @ Fauji (non-
appellant) from his licensed single barrel gun, two
persons, namely, Anil Kumar and Vijay, suffered gun-
shot injuries and died; and 26 others received pellet
injuries, some of them being grievous in nature.
3.         Babu Ram, who fired the gun shots from his
licensed gun, handed over his gun to the police along
with 16 used and 4 live cartridges while setting up a
plea of self-defence. The appellants before us and Vijay
(who has been acquitted by the High Court) were roped
in with the aid of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. as persons
who exhorted Babu Ram to fire gunshots.
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 3 of 44
4.       According          to        the   prosecution   case,      on
11.11.1998, there was tension in the locality as boys
from the accused side had teased daughter of Lala
Satpal. Giving vent to that tension, at about 3.00 pm,
an altercation took place between Satpal and Shri
Krishan whose son Sunil was present. Anil Kumar
(one of the two deceased) i.e., brother of Mangat Ram
(PW-2) took side of Satpal. Babu Ram (non-appellant)
and his son Ravinder joined the altercation taking side
of Shri Krishan. Thereafter, Shri Krishan, his son
Sunil, Babu Ram and Babu Ram’s son Ravinder left
the place while extending threats that they would
teach Satpal and his supporters a lesson. Soon
thereafter, Babu Ram, Shri Krishan, Ravinder and
Sunil appeared on the roof of PW-2’s house and from
there, on the instigation of Shri Krishan, Sunil and
Ravinder, Babu Ram fired shots at the supporters of
Satpal resulting in death of two persons and injuries
to as many as 26 persons.
5.       As, according to the prosecution, genesis of the
incident was a dispute between two families on
account of young male members of one family (i.e., of
Sri Krishan) teasing female members of the other (i.e.,
family of Satpal), the relationship of accused persons
inter se assumes importance, which is as below:
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                       Page 4 of 44
(i)    Shri Krishan is the husband of Babu
            Ram’s sister;
(ii) Sunil is son of Shri Krishan;
(iii) Ravinder is son of Babu Ram; and
(iv) Vijay (already acquitted) is a distant
          relative of Shri Krishan.
6.         To prove its case, the prosecution examined 56
witnesses.       On      the     other   hand,   the   appellants
including Babu Ram examined 15 defence witnesses.
As Babu Ram took the plea of self-defence, the trial
court as well as the High Court examined his defence
plea in detail. The defence plea taken by Babu Ram
was that a mob had surrounded his house and
threatened to torch it. Therefore, to disburse the mob,
shots were fired. This defence was carefully examined
by the trial court as well as the High Court with
reference to the site plan and the evidence led. After
examining the same, it was found that persons who
died including those who received injuries were on
Street No. 300 whereas the house of Babu Ram had
no opening on Street No. 300. Rather, its opening was
on Street No. 400. The High Court noticed that even
the back wall of the house of Babu Ram did not abut
Street No. 300 where the incident occurred. Not only
that, the evidence brought on record established that
gunshots were fired from the roof-top of Mangat Ram’s
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                    Page 5 of 44
house (i.e. House No.354) upon persons who were
standing or moving on Street No.300. In this scenario,
the defence plea was found unacceptable and was
therefore discarded by the trial court as well the High
Court. Detailed reasons in that regard can be found
in paragraphs 45 to 57 of High Court’s judgment,
extracted below:
“45. In our opinion there is hardly much scope for
    raising a dispute pertaining to the defence of Babu
    Ram of having acted in self-defence. The defence is a
    sham.
46. The site plan, Ex.PW-56/A, prepared by Inspector
    Sajan Singh and the site plan to scale Ex.PVJ-7/A
    prepared by Tirath Raj Singh PW-7, to which we have
    made a detailed reference in para 11 above, show that
    deceased Vijay and Anil were shot dead at street
    No.300. Mangat Ram PW-2 also was shot at in street
    No.300. PW-8, PW-9, PW-13, PW-14, PW-15 and PW-
    27 have categorically stated that they received the
    gunshot injuries when they were in street No.300.
These witnesses may be related to the two young boys
    who were shot dead as also to Mangat Ram, the
    complainant, but said fact alone would not render
    suspect their testimonies. The said six witnesses are
    all residents of block-D and have their houses on gali
    No.300 and thus their presence at the spot is natural.
    That all of them received gunshot wounds itself
    establishes their presence at the spot. A related
    witness is not an interested witness on account of
    being the relation of the complainant. An interested
    witness is one who has a motive to secure the false
    conviction of the accused and to achieve the same
    deposes falsely. As held in the decision reported as
State of Rajasthan v. Smt Kalki & Anr
(1981) 2 SCC
    752:-
"As mentioned above, the High Court has
           declined to rely on the evidence of P.W.I on two
           grounds: (1) she was a "highly interested"
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                 Page 6 of 44
witness because she "is the wife of the deceased",
           and (2) there were discrepancies in her evidence.
           With respect, in our opinion, both the grounds
           are invalid. For, in the circumstances of the case,
           she was the only and most natural witness; she
           was the only person present in the hut with the
           deceased at the time of the occurrence, and the
           only person who saw the occurrence. True, it is
           she is the wife of the deceased; but she cannot
           be called an 'interested' witness. She is related to
           the deceased. 'Related' is not equivalent to
           'interested'. A witness may be called 'interested'
           only when he or she derives some benefit from
           the result of a litigation; in the decree in a civil
           case, or in seeing an accused person punished.
           A witness who is a natural one and is the only
           possible eye witness in the circumstances of a
           case cannot be said to be 'interested'. In the
           instant case P.W. 1 had no interest in protecting
           the real culprit, and falsely implicating the
           respondents."
47. Besides, the other prosecution witnesses namely
    PW-17, PW-23, PW-29, PW-30, PW-33, PW-34, PW-
    35, PW-36, PW-37, PW-38, PW-39, PW-40, PW-41.
    PW-42, PW-43, PW-44 · and PW-46 are not related to
    the deceased or Mangat Ram. Said witnesses have
    deposed that they received gunshot wounds on
    11.11.1998 at around 3/3:30 PM. Out of said 17
    witnesses, PW-23, PW-29, PW-33, PW-37, PW-38,
    PW-39, PW-40, PW-41, PW-42, PW-43, PW-44 and
    PW-46 have categorically deposed that they were
    present at Gali No.300 when they received the
    gunshot wounds. The other witnesses have not stated
    as to where they were standing when they received
    the gunshot wounds. PW-23, PW-29, PW-33, PW-37,
    PW-38, PW-39, PW-40, PW-41, PW-42, PW-43, PW-44
    and PW-46 are not related to each other or to the
    deceased or to any other witness of the prosecution,
    They would have no motive to falsely depose. The
    testimony of said witnesses establishes that the firing
    was directed towards people who were on street
    No.300. The house of Babu Ram is abutting street
    No.400, which as noted in para 11 above, runs
    parallel to street No.300 and the two streets are
    separated by a row of houses constructed back to
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                    Page 7 of 44
back. In no way can an unruly crowd which has
    assembled on street No.300 set on fire any house
    which is on street No.400. Further, the falsity in the
    testimony of the defence witnesses who claim that
    Babu Ram, acting in defence of his house and himself
    and his family members, fired from the roof of his
    house is apparent from the fact that standing on the
    roof of house No.366 which is the house of Babu Ram,
    it is just not possible to hit anybody standing on street
    No.300. A little bit of geometry would show the same.
    Standing on any point at the roof of the house of Babu
    Ram, the straight line connecting the said spot from
    any portion of his roof to any spot on street No.300
    would pass through the roof· and the walls of house
    No. D-355, D-356 and D-357 abutting street No.300
    on its northern boundary.
48. Besides, there is no evidence of any kerosene oil
    or petrol being detected outside the house of Babu
    Ram. This also falsifies the defence version that the
    riotous mob was threatening to burn down the house
    of Babu Ram.
49. No doubt, FIR Ex.PW-19/D-3 has indeed been
    registered at 9:10 PM which evidences rioting in D-
    Block, Jahangir Puri, but therefrom it does not stand
    proved that the defence version is correct. It is also
    true that photographs of the house of Babu Ram show
    that the door of his house has been broken and brick
    bats have been thrown towards his house.
50. What has happened is evident. After Babu Ram
    fired indiscriminately and shot dead two persons on
    the street and injured 26 more on the street i.e. street
    No.300, it was apparent that the crowd retaliated. The
    site plan Ex.PW-7/A shows that the houses on the
    streets of D-Block Jahangir Puri have a front of 10'
    and a depth of 23'.10". Jahangir Puri is a resettlement
    colony where slum dwellers have been relocated. Tiny
    plots ad measuring 10' x 23'.10" have been allotted to
    the rehabilitated slum dwellers by the government.
    The population density in the colony is extremely
    heavy. Huge crowds can gather in densely populated
    areas within seconds. It is apparent that the angry
    crowd sought vengeance against Babu Ram after
    Babu Ram had created mayhem in the area. That 16
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                  Page 8 of 44
rounds were fired by Babu Ram is not disputed by
    him. By no stretch of imagination can firing of 16
    rounds be belittled. If a man fires 16 rounds on a
    crowd causing death of 2 and injuring 26 others, the
    crowd is bound to retaliate.
51. From the evidence of the witnesses of the
    prosecution it is apparent that some quarrel
    regarding eve teasing had taken place on street
    No.300 involving the families of Satpal and accused
    Shri Kishan who is the brother-in-law of Babu Ram.
    Even the defence witnesses have spoken of an 'eve-
    teasing incident. The difference is, as per the defence
    witnesses the victim of the eve teasing incident was
    Seema, the daughter of Shri Kishan and as per the
    prosecution witnesses the aggressors were the family
    members of Shri Kishan. There is commonality in the
    testimony of both sets of witnesses that Babu Ram
    left street No.300 taking along with him his sister
    Sushila and Seema. The difference in the two versions
    is regarding the presence of the co-accused. As per
    the witnesses of the prosecution, some of them have
    spoken of all co-accused being present at street
    No.300, with some excluding the presence of co-
    accused Vijay. It is thus apparent that whatever be
    the cause of the spat on the public street, Babu Ram
    retrieved himself safely from the street and reached
    his house.
52. We have already discounted the defence version,
    in view of evidence on record, of the crowd following
    Babu Ram and surrounding his house. We have
    already held that the evidence establishes
    indiscriminate firing by Babu Ram on the persons in
    street No.300 and the fact that his house abuts street
    No.400 evidences that the firing was not to scare the
    crowd which had surrounded the house of Babu Ram.
    We have already held that for anyone to be standing
    on street No.300 it is just not possible to set on fire
    any house on street No.400. We have already held
    that by standing on any spot on the roof of Babu
    Ram's house it was just not possible to shoot any
    person on street No.300.
53. The inevitable conclusion is, that as claimed
    by the witnesses of the prosecution, Babu Ram
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                 Page 9 of 44
jumped from the roof of his house on to the roof
    of House No.D-354 of Mangat Ram and standing at
    the roof of Mangat Ram's house at the spot
    marked '4' on the site plan Ex.PW-7/A,
    indiscriminately fired 16 shots, all directed
    downwards on the persons in street No.300, with
    specific targets being Mangat Ram and his family
    members against whom Babu Ram had a grievance
    of being the sympathizers of Lala Satpal.
54. Besides, the right of self-defence is a self-limiting
    right and authorizes the person acting in self-defence
    to use only such force which is reasonable and
    commensurate with the danger to body or to property.
    No doubt, defence of a dwelling house stands on a
    different footing and law has always looked with
    special indulgence on a man who is defending his
    dwelling against those who try to unlawfully evict
    him, for: the house of everyone is to him as his castle
    and fortress.
55. The indiscriminate firing by Babu Ram cannot be
    justified under any circumstances.
56. The testimony of the witnesses of the prosecution
    and the defence, though with a difference qua the
    origin of a spat on the public street, establishes a
    public spat on a public street involving the families of
    Sri Krishan and Lala Satpal. The evidence, as held
    above, establishes that Babu Ram fired from the roof
    of the house of Mangat Ram and targeted people on
    street No.300 where the spat between the family
    members of Shri Krishan and Lala Satpal took place.
    It is apparent that Babu Ram was led into firing
    because he learnt of the quarrel going on in street
    No.300. It is obvious that Babu Ram had come to aid
    of his sister and his brother-in-law. It is obvious that
    Babu Ram has acted with vengeance and not to
    protect himself or his house. It is not the case of Babu
    Ram that his sister's house or the family members of
    his sister who were on street No.300 were in danger
    and he did the firing to protect them.
57. Looked from any angle whatsoever, Babu Ram
    cannot escape the consequence of his acts.”
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                  Page 10 of 44
7.        As far as co-accused Vijay is concerned, the
High Court allowed his appeal by giving him the
benefit of doubt as only one witness had alleged about
his participation.
8.        In respect of the appellants Sunil, Shri Krishan
and Ravinder, the High Court observed that Mangat
Ram (PW-2), Ashok Kumar (PW-8), Kashmere Lal (PW-
9), Darshana (PW-13), Raj Kumar (PW-14) and Sushil
Kumar (PW-15), who were all injured in the firing, have
categorically deposed that those accused were present
with Babu Ram at the time of altercation and they all
left simultaneously with Babu Ram and were noticed
at the roof top exhorting Babu Ram to fire. The High
Court observed that though there had been minor
variations in the testimony of witnesses as to which
accused did what, but such minor variations were
natural as memory fades with passage of time and it
is difficult for anyone to remember each and every
minute aspect of the incident. Consequently, by
relying on their testimony, all appeals were dismissed.
9.        We have heard Sri Sudarshan Rajan, learned
counsel for the appellants and Shri Jayant K. Sud,
learned Additional Solicitor General, for the State (NCT
of Delhi).
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.           Page 11 of 44
Submissions on behalf of appellants
10.       The      learned        counsel     for   the   appellants
submitted that it is a case where the principal
accused, namely, Babu Ram, had admitted that he
opened fire at the mob from his licensed weapon. Once
such is the position, the court was required to
carefully consider whether the appellants, who were
part of the family, were implicated due to general
animosity, by assigning role of exhortation to them.
Further, as per prosecution case, gunshots were fired
from the roof-top at people who were on the street. It
would thus be difficult for the witnesses present on the
street to gauge as to who was exhorting and who was
not, particularly, when there were more than three
persons at the roof-top. Moreover, it is well settled that
mere presence with the assailant is not enough to
assume that all of them share common intention with
the principal accused and that the criminal act has
been done in furtherance of the common intention of
all. Otherwise also, the prosecution evidence is not
clear whether the gunshots fired at the two deceased
i.e., Anil and Vijay were in furtherance of the common
intention of all the accused. Therefore, even if it is
assumed that at some stage the appellants had
exhorted Babu Ram to fire shots, in absence of clear
and      cogent         evidence       that    Babu       Ram      was
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                      Page 12 of 44
instigated/exhorted to fire shots at the two deceased,
the appellants cannot be convicted for the offence
punishable under Section 302 with the aid of
Section
34
of the IPC. Thus, in a worst-case scenario, the
appellants can only be convicted under Section
307/34 of the I.P.C. It was argued that since each of
the three appellants have already served more than
five years of sentence, which they were awarded for
offence punishable under Section 307/34 of the I.P.C.,
their appeals be allowed and their sentence be reduced
to the period of sentence already undergone for the
offence punishable under Section 307/34 of the I.P.C.
11.      In addition to above, the learned counsel for
the appellants submitted that the trial of the
appellants        suffers       from   a    fundamental       defect
inasmuch as the incriminating circumstance about
the appellants exhorting/instigating Babu Ram to fire
shots at the two deceased/public/injured, was never
put to the appellants while recording their statements
under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (in short, “the
Cr.P.C
.”). Hence, the incriminating
circumstance           appearing       in   the    evidence     qua
exhortation/instigation of the main accused by the
appellants        would        have    to   be    eschewed     from
consideration.
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                    Page 13 of 44
12.          The learned counsel for the appellants cited
number of decisions on two broad propositions,
namely,
        (A) As to when, based on the role of
            exhortation, conviction can be sustained
            with the aid of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. The
            decisions cited were:
(i)    Balu Alias Bala Subramaniam &
                      Another v. State (UT of Pondicherry)1;
(ii)   Kulwant Singh alias Kulbansh Singh v.
State of Bihar2,
(
iii) Jainul Haque v. State of Bihar3
;
(iv) Hardev Singh & Another v. The State of
                    Punjab4;
(v)    Mewa Ram            &   Another   v.   State   of
                      Rajasthan5;
(
vi) Mohan Singh & Another v. State of M.P.6
;
(vii) Zahoor & Others v. State of Uttar
                     Pradesh7;
(
viii) Bishnupada Sarkar & Another v. State
                      of West Bengal8
.
(B) Incriminating circumstances not put to the
            accused while recording his statement under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C. must be eschewed
            from consideration. The decisions cited were:
1
(2016) 15 SCC 471
2
(2007) 15 SCC 670
3
(1974) 3 SCC 543
4
(1975) 3 SCC 731
5
(2017) 11 SCC 272
6
(1999) 2 SCC 428
7
(2011) 15 SCC 218
8
(2012) 11 SCC 597
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                        Page 14 of 44
(
i)    Hate Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat9
;
(ii)   Sujeet Biswas v. State of Assam10;
(
iii) Sharad Birdichand              Sharda   v.    State      of
                     Maharashtra11
;
(iv) Samsul Haque v. State of Assam12; and
(v)    Maheshwar Tigga v. State of Rajasthan13.
Submissions on behalf of the State
13.          On behalf of the State (NCT of Delhi) it was
submitted that, as per the evidence, after the
altercation, Babu Ram left the place with the
appellants while extending threats that they shall
teach a lesson to the other side and their supporters.
Soon thereafter, they all appeared at the roof top and
the appellants were noticed exhorting Babu Ram to
attack the other side and their supporters. Gunshots
were fired in furtherance thereof, causing death of two
persons              and   injuries       to   26    others.      In     such
circumstances, all the accused exhibited common
intention to cause such bodily injury to persons which
they knew it is likely to cause death of the person to
whom it is caused. Further, multiple gunshots were
fired. Therefore, it is a clear case that the appellants
9
AIR 1953 SC 468
10
(2013) 12 SCC 406
11
(1984) 4 SCC 116
12
(2019) 18 SCC 161
13
(2020) 10 SCC 108
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                           Page 15 of 44
who exhorted the assailant had shared common
intention with him.
14.      Regarding the incriminating circumstance of
exhortation being not put to the accused appellants
while recording their statements under
Section 313
CrPC, it was submitted that even if it was not put to
them, they suffered no prejudice, which is clear from
the following circumstances: (a) the appellants were
throughout represented by their counsel; (b) the
statement of witnesses was recorded in presence of the
appellants/their counsel; (c) their counsel specifically
cross-examined the witnesses in respect of their
statement qua exhortation by the appellants; and (d)
the FIR of the incident, which disclosed their role as
that of an instigator, was put to them. It could,
therefore, be taken that they were fully aware of the
incriminating circumstances appearing against them
in the prosecution evidence. Yet, they took no plea
before the trial court or the High Court of any kind of
prejudice caused to them. Thus, this plea, raised for
the first time before this Court, ought not be
entertained.
15.      In support of his submissions, the learned
counsel for the State cited decisions on two broad
propositions, namely,
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.          Page 16 of 44
(a) Conviction with the aid of
Section 34
of the
          I.P.C can be recorded for the role of
          exhortation. The decisions cited were:
(i)    Gulab v. State of Uttar Pradesh14; and
(
ii)   Sandeep v. State of Haryana15
(b) Unless prejudice is shown to have been
          caused to the accused, failure to put any
          incriminating circumstance, by itself, would
          not vitiate the trial. The decisions cited were:
(i)    Nar Singh v. State of Haryana16;

            (ii)   Alister Anthony Pareira         v.   State       of
                   Maharashtra17; and
(iii) Satyavir Singh Rathi, ACP & Others v.
State18.
Discussion and Analysis
16.       We have considered the rival submissions and
have perused the record carefully. Before we deal with
the submissions, it would be useful to recapitulate
facts which have been found proved, and regarding
which there is no serious dispute, namely,
(a) The incident had its genesis in an
            altercation between two families i.e, Sri
            Krishan’s family on one side and Satpal’s
            family on the other. The reason for the
14
(2022) 12 SCC 677
15
2021 SCC Online SC 642
16
(2015) 1 SCC 496
17
(2012) 2 SCC 648
18
(2011) 6 SCC 1
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                    Page 17 of 44
altercation was one family accusing the
           other of their girls being teased by other
           family’s boys.
(b) All gunshots which caused injuries to the
           two deceased as well as to twenty-six
           others, were fired by Babu Ram (non-
appellant) who has been convicted and
           sentenced under Section 302 of the I.P.C.
(c) The gun which Babu Ram used to fire
           shots was licensed to him.
(d) Babu Ram was present at the time when
           altercation between the two sides took
           place.
(e) Babu Ram is brother-in-law of Shri
           Krishan.
(f)    Babu Ram’s house opens on Street No.
           400 whereas Satpal’s house opens on
           Street No.300. Though exact location of
           Shri Krishan’s house is not disclosed in
           the site plan prepared in connection with
           the case, however, from his address,
           which is disclosed as D-291, Jahangir
           Puri, Delhi, it appears that his house is
           near Satpal’s house (which is D-294), and
           on same Street No.300.
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.            Page 18 of 44
17.      The place where the incident took place is a
congested colony. The location of the two Streets i.e.,
Nos. 300 and 400 and the houses in between them has
been described in detail in paragraph 11 of the High
Court’s judgment, the correctness of which has not
been seriously challenged. Thus, to have a clear
picture of the spot, we deem it appropriate to extract
paragraph 11 of the impugned judgment below:
“11. As per the two site plans, street No.400 and
      street No.300 in D Block Jahangir Puri, run parallel
      to each other along the west-eastern directions. Street
      No.400 is towards the north and street No.300 is
      towards the south. The width of street No.400 is
      16‟.6". The width of street No.300 is 15‟.10". The dis-
      tance between the two streets is 47‟.8". This distance
      between the two streets is not an empty space but
      consists of a row of houses having a depth of 23‟.10".
      To make it clear, one row of houses being House
      No.361 to 368 have a depth of 23‟.10" and these
      houses abut street No.400. Back to back to these
houses are a row of houses bearing No.353 to 359
with each house having a depth of 23‟.10". These
      houses open towards street No.300. Opposite to the
      row of houses bearing No.353 to 359 on street No.300
      are house Nos.298 to 293. It is apparent that the
      doors of house No.353 to 359 open in the southern
      direction on to street No.300 and the doors of house
      Nos.298 to 293 open towards the northern direction
      on to street No.300. On the site plan, the spots where
      Anil and Vijay were shot at have been marked 1 and
2. They are at a distance of 3‟.6" and 3‟ respectively
      from the boundary wall of house No.295 and house
      No.294. Spot where Mangat Ram was shot at is shown
      at point No.3 which is also at a distance of about 3‟
      from the boundary wall of house No.297. The spot
      wherefrom Babu Ram is stated to have fired is shown
      as spot No.4 and is on the roof of house No.354
      belonging to Mangat Ram. The site plan shows that
      house No.366 of Babu Ram is back to back with
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 19 of 44
house No.355 of Ramesh Chand and house No.354 of
      Mangat Ram is adjacent to the house of Ramesh
      Chand towards the west of house of Ramesh Chand.
… ”.
18.      From the observations of the High Court
extracted above, what transpires is that in between
Street Nos.300 and 400 there are two rows of houses,
back to back. One row of houses have their opening
towards north on Street No.400, whereas the other
have their opening towards south on Street No.300.
The third row of houses, south of Street No. 300, have
their opening towards north on Street No.300.
Satpal’s house is in that row, whereas Babu Ram’s
house is towards north, opening on Street No.400.
19.      As per the evidence, altercation preceding the
incident of firing took place on Street No.300. After
the altercation, Babu Ram left that place, went to his
house on Street No.400, fetched his gun and fired
shots at the public present on Street No.300 from roof
of one of the row houses, which, according to the
prosecution, is house of Mangat Ram. A close scrutiny
of the site plan would suggest that the place where
gunshot injuries were suffered could not have been
targeted if gunshots had been fired from the roof top
of Babu Ram’s house. Therefore, both the courts below
disbelieved Babu Ram’s plea that he fired gunshots in
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.             Page 20 of 44
self-defence       to     disburse    the   crowd   which     had
surrounded his house.
Role of the Appellants
20.      Now, we shall examine the evidence as
regards the role of the appellants. Before we do that,
it would be pertinent to note that the two deceased,
namely, Anil and Vijay, are not related to Satpal, the
person with whom Shri Krishan and his family (i.e.,
the accused side) had an altercation. Therefore, to
show that all the accused had a common intention to
cause bodily harm to persons who suffered injuries
including the ones who succumbed to the injuries,
prosecution has used a word Himayati (i.e., supporter)
of Satpal to describe the victims. And to bring home
the charge against the appellants, the prosecution
case is that all the accused persons exhibited common
intention as they simultaneously left the place where
altercation was taking place to go to Babu Ram’s
residence to pick up the gun. Not only that, they
appeared together at the roof-top when shots were
fired on Satpal’s supporters.
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                  Page 21 of 44
Some of the testimonies in respect of appellants’
role
21.       PW-2 (Mangat Ram), brother of deceased Anil,
stated that Shri Krishan, his son Sunil, Babu Ram and
his son Ravinder after altercation left the spot threat-
ening Lala Satpal and his supporters that they would
be taught a lesson; soon thereafter, all of them came
to the roof of Babu Ram’s house and then jumped on
to the roof of PW-2’s house, which shares back wall
with Babu Ram’s house; and from there, Babu Ram
opened fire while appellants were exhorting him not to
spare Satpal or anyone who had supported him.
22.       PW-9, Kashmere Lal, gives a more lucid
account of the incident. He states that on 11.11.1998,
at about 3 pm, while he was in his house, altercation
started between Satpal and Shri Krishan over some
incident relating to teasing of Satpal’s daughter. In the
meantime, Sunil came and so did Babu Ram and his
son. They started shouting that they would not spare
the people of the Gali (street) as they have harassed
Shri Krishan.              Thereafter, all four accused left
extending threats. Soon thereafter, they appeared at
the roof of Babu Ram’s house. Then Babu Ram started
firing. The first shot hit Anil. Second shot hit right leg
of    Mangat         Ram.       Thereafter,   Babu   Ram      fired
indiscriminately, and many people received pellet
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                  Page 22 of 44
injuries. When Babu Ram was firing indiscriminately,
the other accused, namely, Sunil, Shri Krishan and
son of Babu Ram, were instigating Babu Ram not to
spare any of Satpal’s Himayati (supporter).
23.       PW-8 Ashok Kumar, father of deceased Vijay,
tried to be specific about the sequence of events. He
stated that accused Fauji @ Babu Ram first fired a
shot in the air from his gun; then accused shouted
that they would not spare anyone; thereafter, Shri
Krishan and Sunil told Fauji to fire at persons whom
they point at; Ravinder and Vijay also shouted that no
one should be spared; simultaneously other accused
also told Fauji to fire at persons whom they point at,
so that no madadgar (i.e., supporter) of Satpal is
spared; then Fauji fired, a bullet hit Anil @ Kala, the
deceased, as also Mangat Ram; thereafter, accused
Sunil and Ravinder pointed towards PW-8’s son Vijay
and exhorted Fauji to fire at him; in consequence,
Fauji fired at PW-8’s son, the shot hit him and he died;
whereafter,         Fauji      started   firing   indiscriminately
resulting in injuries to several persons.
24.       During cross-examination, Ashok Kumar (PW-
8) stated that,-- he had witnessed the altercation; after
the accused left, he went behind them; he, however,
did not notice if any of his relatives were near the place
of altercation; the accused went towards Babu Ram’s
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                    Page 23 of 44
house whereas he went to his own house; after
reaching his house, he put on his shoes, then, after
4/5 minutes, he heard gun shots; he immediately
came out of his house to notice people running helter-
skelter; the firing continued for about 20/25 minutes;
he did not sustain any injury and no pellet came
towards his house; he had no enmity with the accused
prior to the incident, rather they had been attending
each other’s functions; accused had cordial relations
with the deceased Vijay; he had never appeared as a
witness against the accused in any other case nor
made any complaint against them; he and his family
never favoured Satpal; his elder son, besides the
deceased Vijay, was in the house at that time.
25.      At this stage, we may observe that Mangat Ram
(PW-2) (i.e. brother of the deceased Anil) too, was not
aware of any kind of animosity between any of the
accused and Anil. There is no clarity in PW-2’s
statement about Anil taking side of Satpal while he
was in an altercation with Shri Krishan.         In fact,
during cross-examination, PW-2 stated that,-- the
altercation took place at a distance of about 10-12
paces from the place where he was lying on his cot; at
that time, Sushil (his other brother) and Anil (the
deceased) were inside the house; at the time of
altercation between Lala and Shri Krishan, Ravinder,
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.          Page 24 of 44
Vijay and Babu were not there; Babu Ram arrived at
the place of altercation at about 2.45 pm and stayed
for about 10 minutes; he cannot say as to how many
persons came there; he cannot tell as to how many
persons remained with Satpal, when Babu Ram left.
PW-2 specifically added that neither he nor his brother
Anil were supporter of anyone. He, however, clarified
that he saw accused standing on the roof, five minutes
after they left the place of altercation. He also added
that from the place where he was lying on the cot,
Babu Ram could not be seen. Further, he could not
tell as to how many minutes the firing continued as
he, and his brother, sustained injuries and were
removed to the Hospital. In respect of the role played
by the appellants, PW-2 stated that his brother Anil
was coming from the other side, when Babu Ram was
instigated to fire at him. PW-2 clarified that neither he
nor Anil had any previous enmity with Babu Ram or
any other accused person and that neither he nor his
brother ever supported Lala Satpal.
26.      A close examination of the statement of these
witnesses would reveal that, though they disclose the
presence of the accused-appellants with Babu Ram at
the roof-top as also that they were instigating Babu
Ram not to spare the supporters of Satpal, they are
not specific and consistent about the two deceased
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.           Page 25 of 44
(i.e., Anil and Vijay) being targeted by Babu Ram at the
instigation of the present appellants. Absence of co-
gent evidence that Babu Ram was instigated/exhorted
to fire shots at the two deceased assumes importance
as, from the testimony of these witnesses, neither Vi-
jay nor Anil was a supporter of the rival faction i.e.,
Satpal with whom the accused party had animosity. In
such           circumstances, the question that would arise
is whether for the murder of the two deceased, namely,
Vijay and Anil, could it be said that the appellants
shared a          common intention with the assailant Babu
Ram so as to warrant their conviction under Section
302 I.P.C. with the aid of section 34 I.P.C.
Whether based on the evidence led, the appellants
could be convicted for the offence of murder of Anil
and Vijay with the aid of Section 34 I.P.C. or only
for the offence punishable under Section 307 I.P.C.
read with 34 I.P.C.
27.          Before we dwell on the aforesaid issue, it would
be useful to examine the law as to when conviction
with the aid of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. could be made.
In
Pandurang, Tukia and Bhillia v. State of
Hyderabad19
, this Court observed:
“33. Now in the case of
Section 34
we think it is well
        established that a common intention presupposes
        prior concert. It requires a pre-arranged plan because
        before a man can be vicariously convicted for
        the criminal act of another, the act must have been
19
AIR 1955 SC 216
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 26 of 44
done in furtherance of the common intention of them
    all:
Mahbub Shah v. King-Emperor
. Accordingly there
    must have been a prior meeting of minds. Several
    persons can simultaneously attack a man and each
    can have the same intention, namely the intention to
    kill, and each can individually inflict a separate fatal
    blow and yet none would have the common intention
    required by the section because there was no prior
    meeting of minds to form a pre-arranged plan.
In a
    case like that, each would be individually liable for
    whatever injury he caused but none could be
    vicariously convicted for the act of any of the others;
    and if the prosecution cannot prove that his separate
    blow was a fatal one he cannot be convicted of the
    murder however clearly an intention to kill could be
    proved in his case:
Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. King-
    Emperor
and
Mahbub Shah v. King-Emperor
. As their
    Lordships say in the latter case, "the partition which
    divides their bounds is often very thin: nevertheless,
    the distinction is real and substantial, and if over-
    looked will result in miscarriage of justice.
34. The plan need not be elaborate, nor is a long
    interval of time required. It could arise and be formed
    suddenly, as for example, when one man calls on
    bystanders to help him kill a given individual and
    they, either by their words or their acts, indicate their
    assent to him and join him in the assault. There is
    then the necessary meeting of the minds. There is a
    pre-arranged plan however hastily formed and rudely
    conceived. But pre-arrangement there must be and
    premeditated concert. It is not enough, as in the
    latter Privy Council case, to have the same
    intention independently of each other, e.g., the
    intention to rescue another and, if necessary, to
    kill those who oppose.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
28. In Balu alias Bala Subramaniam1, this Court
held:
“11. To invoke
Section 34
IPC, it must be established
    that the criminal act was done by more than one
    person in furtherance of common intention of all. It
    must, therefore, be proved that: (i) there was common
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                  Page 27 of 44
intention on the part of several persons to commit a
      particular crime, and (ii) the crime was actually
      committed by them in furtherance of that common
      intention. The essence of liability under
Section
      34
IPC is simultaneous conscious mind of persons
      participating in the criminal action to bring about a
      particular result. Minds regarding the sharing of
      common intention gets satisfied when an overt act is
      established qua each of the accused. Common
      intention implies pre-arranged plan and acting in
      concert pursuant to the pre-arranged plan.
Common intention is an intention to commit the
      crime actually committed and each accused
      person can be convicted of that crime, only if he
      has participated in that common intention.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)

      After observing as above, in paragraph 15, it
      was observed:
“15. Under
Section 34
IPC, a pre-concert in the sense
      of a distinct previous plan is not necessary to be
      proved. The common intention to bring about a
      particular result may well develop on the spot as
      between a number of persons, with reference to the
      facts of the case and circumstances of the situation.
      The question whether there was any common
      intention or not depends upon the inference to be
      drawn from the proven facts and circumstances of
      each case. The totality of the circumstances must
      be taken into consideration in arriving at the con-
      clusion whether the accused had a common
      intention to commit an offence with which they
      could be convicted.”
                                      (Emphasis Supplied)
29.       What is clear from the decisions noticed above
is, that to fasten liability with the aid of
Section 34
of
the I.P.C. what must necessarily be proved is a
common intention to commit the crime actually
committed and each accused person can be convicted
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                Page 28 of 44
of that crime, only if it is in furtherance of common
intention of all. Common intention pre-supposes a
prior concert, though pre-concert in the sense of a
distinct previous plan is not necessary as common
intention to bring about a particular result may
develop on the spot. The question whether there was
any common intention or not depends upon the
inference to be drawn from the proven facts and
circumstances of each case. The totality of the
circumstances must be taken into consideration in
arriving at the conclusion whether the accused had a
common intention to commit an offence with which
they could be convicted.
30.      In Mewa Ram & Another5, the accused
appellant had exhorted to kill the complainant, but the
person killed was someone else. There was no evidence
to indicate that the accused-appellant had stated
anything about killing the deceased. In that backdrop,
this Court while holding that the accused-appellant
could not be convicted with the aid of
Section 34
of the
I.P.C., by placing reliance on earlier decisions of this
Court, observed:
“12. What is to be noticed from the aforesaid is that
      exhortation given by appellant Mohan Lal was to kill
      complainant Harbans Singh. There is no evidence,
      apart from the said exhortation which has been
      produced by the prosecution to show that the
      appellant Mohan Lal had stated anything about the
      killing of the deceased Deputy Singh. This is the
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                 Page 29 of 44
fundamental mistake committed by the Trial Court
      and repeated by the High Court in using the said
      exhortation on the part of Mohan Lal insofar as killing
      of Deputy Singh is concerned. Under what
      circumstances, Deputy Singh was shot at by Mewa
      Lal is not discernible from the record when the
      dispute was between the two brothers (appellants-
      herein) on the one hand and complainant Harbans
      Singh on the other. On these facts, it cannot at all be
      said that there was any common intention of the
      accused persons to kill Deputy Singh.
13. It is noticed that there is fundamental difference
      between common intention and joint intention.
Section 34
of the I.P.C. talks of common intention
      which is an intention to commit the crime actually
      committed and each accused person can be convicted
      of that crime, only if he has participated in that
      common intention and to fasten with the same
      liability as that of the main accused who was
      perpetrator of the crime.”
31.      Reverting to the case at hand, when we
examine the facts of this case, we notice that the two
deceased were Anil and Vijay. The accused party had
no animosity or grudge qua them (i.e., the two
deceased). The prosecution evidence is that all the four
accused left together from the place where altercation
had occurred and soon all of them were seen at the
roof-top of PW-2’s house from where Babu Ram
opened fire with a view to teach a lesson to those who
had supported the rival faction. Neither PW-2 nor PW-
8, whose brother and son, respectively, had died,
stated that the two deceased had supported Satpal
(i.e., the rival group). Rather, according to them, the
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 30 of 44
two deceased had no enmity with any of the accused
persons. Further, statements of witnesses are not
consistent as to establish beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellants had exhorted Babu Ram to fire
shots at Anil or Vijay i.e., the two deceased. The
evidence, which is consistent, is about exhorting Babu
Ram not to spare Satpal’s supporters. But there is no
evidence       that     the     two   deceased   were     Satpal’s
supporters. In our view, that general exhortation is not
sufficient to fasten them with vicarious liability for
shots fired by Babu Ram at the two deceased,
particularly, when the testimony of witnesses is not
consistent whether the two deceased were shot before
or after the exhortation made by the appellants.
However, what is certain from the evidence is, that the
assailant Babu Ram had the gun as well as motive to
use it, inasmuch as his relative Shri Krishan was
insulted during altercation. Moreover, Babu Ram had
taken a vow to teach supporters of the other side a
lesson. In that kind of a scenario, even if Babu Ram
had not been instigated by any of the other accused,
he might have fired from his weapon to stamp his
authority and, therefore, killing of the two deceased
could be his own individual act for which he alone
would be liable. In these circumstances, to clinch a
conviction of the appellants for the murder of the two
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                     Page 31 of 44
deceased with the aid of
Section 34
of the I.P.C., the
prosecution was required to lead clear and cogent
evidence that the shots fired by Babu Ram at the two
deceased were in furtherance of common intention of
all. In absence whereof, as is in the case at hand, in
our considered view, it would be extremely unsafe to
convict the appellants with the aid of
Section 34
of the
I.P.C. for the offence of murder.
32.          Now,         the        question            that        falls        for      our
consideration is whether the appellants could escape
their liability for the offence punishable under Section
307 with the aid of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. In our view,
the answer to it would depend on whether the
appellants including Babu Ram committed any one or
more of the acts specified in
Section 300
of the I.P.C.20
20
“300. Murder.- Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if
the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or-
Secondly.-If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows
to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or-
Thirdly.-If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily
injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or-
Fourthly.-If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it
must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and
commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid.
Illustrations
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause his death,
strikes him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A
is guilty of murder, although the blow might not have been sufficient in the ordinary course
of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that
Z is labouring under any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course
of nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he may intend to cause
bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or such bodily injury
as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                                            Page 32 of 44
in furtherance of common intention of all, had the
person(s) injured succumbed to their injuries.
33.         The evidence in the instant case is that
indiscriminate firing continued for long, some say for
20 to 25 minutes. As many as twenty-six persons on
Street No.300 received pellet injuries. Notably, 16
empty cartridges were seized from Babu Ram.
Evidence is that the appellants were with the accused
Babu Ram, exhorting him not to spare Satpal’s
supporters, and pointing at targets. Though, evidence
might not be specific as to who in particular was
targeted at the behest of the appellants but the very
fact that indiscriminate firing continued for long, say
20-25 minutes and the appellants were found present
and exhorting Babu Ram to fire, in our view, it could
be said with certainty that the appellants had
knowledge that the act which Babu Ram was exhorted
to commit was so imminently dangerous that it must,
in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death of a person (See
Section 300
(Fourthly)
of the I.P.C along with illustration (d)
thereto). Therefore, the gunshots fired by Babu Ram
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of a man
in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here, A is guilty of murder, although
he may not have intended to cause Z’s death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one of them.
A is guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any
particular individual.”
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                                         Page 33 of 44
at several by-standers/supporters of Satpal, if not all,
could be said to be a criminal act done by several
persons in furtherance of the common intention of all.
A fortiori, even though it might not be safe to hold the
appellants vicariously liable for the offence of murder
of the two deceased persons for the reasons already
detailed above, but looking at the nature of the
incident, the number of persons injured and the role
attributed to the appellants, we are of the considered
view that the appellants are liable to be convicted for
the offence punishable under Section 307 with the aid
of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. Thus, in our considered
view, the finding of the courts below to that extent does
not call for any interference.
Effect   of   not   putting  the   incriminating
circumstance of exhortation to the appellants
while recording their statements under
Section
313
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
34.      The       question           that   now   falls    for     our
consideration is whether, on account of not putting
the incriminating circumstance of exhortation to the
appellants while recording their statements under
Section 313
CrPC, appellants’ conviction with the aid
of
Section 34
of the I.P.C. stood vitiated.
35.      A perusal of the record would reflect that all the
accused including the appellants were charged by a
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                        Page 34 of 44
common charge framing order dated 17.01.2001,
which reads as under:
“I, R. K. Sharma, Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi do
      hereby charge Babu Ram @ Fauji son of Raghuveer
      Dayal; Shri Krishan son of Jwala Prasad, Sunil son of
      Shri Krishan; Vijay son of Lala Ram and Ravinder son
      of Babu Ram as under:
That on 11.11.1998 at 3 pm at Gali D-300 near House
      No. 286, Jahangir Puri, Delhi within the jurisdiction
      of P.S. Jahangir Puri, Delhi you all in furtherance of
      your common intention did commit murder of
      deceased Anil Kumar @ Kala and Vijay by
      intentionally killing them and thus committed an
      offence punishable under Section 302/34 I.P.C.
Secondly, on the said date, time and place, you all in
      furtherance of common intention caused injuries to
      26 persons, namely, Smt. Sateshwari, Mangat Ram,
      Anju, Pradeep, Sunny, Ramdev, Marium, Naim,
      Zafar, Matluf Ali, Saleem, Zubeda, Raj Kumar, Tarun,
      Bundu, Darshana, Mohd. Shahid, Vasudev, Priya
      Sanjay, Chander Kala, Mohini Devi, Anwari, Gulsher,
      Hamid Mohd. and Shahid Ahmed with such intention
      and under such circumstances that if by the said
      injuries the accused appellants had caused the death
      of said persons, you would have been guilty of murder
      and thus committed an offence punishable under
Section 307
/
34
I.P.C. and within my cognizance.
And I hereby direct that you all be tried by this court
      for the said offence.
Signed
                                                  ASJ, Delhi
                                         Dated 17.01.2001”
36.      As exemplars, some of the questions that were
put to the accused appellants to elicit their response,
under
Section 313
CrPC, to the incriminating
circumstances           appearing      against   them      in     the
prosecution evidence, are being extracted below:
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                     Page 35 of 44
“(i)   It is in evidence against you that on 11.11.98 a
           statement was made by one Mangat Ram,
           collectively contained in ruqqa Ex. PW2/A on
           which formal FIR was recorded, carbon copy of
           which is Ex.PW19/E. What have you to say?
(ii)   It is further in evidence against you that on
           11.11.1998 at about 3 pm at Gali No.D-300 wali,
           near House No. 286, Jahangir Puri, you along
           with other co-accused in furtherance of common
           intention did commit the murder of Anil Kumar
           @ Kala and Vijay by intentionally killing them.
What have you to say?
(iii) It is further in evidence against you that on the
          said date, time and place, you along with your
          co-accused in furtherance of common intention
          caused injuries to 26 persons, namely, Smt.
          Sateshwari, Mangat Ram, Anju, Pradeep, Sunny,
          Ramdev, Marium, Naim, Zafar, Mutluf Ali,
          Salma, Zubeda, Raj Kumar, Tarun, Bundu,
          Darshana, Mohd. Shahid, Vasudev, Priya
          Sanjay, Chander Kala, Mohini Devi, Anwar,
          Gulshan, Hamid Mohd. and Shahid Ahmed with
          such intention and under such circumstances
          that if by the said injuries you had caused the
          death of said person, you would have been guilty
          of murder and thus committed an offence under
Section 307
/
34
I.P.C. What have you to say?
(iv) It is further in evidence against you that on the
         said date, time and place, co-accused Babu Ram
         used a firearm while committing the offences
         punishable under
Section 302
/
307
/
34
I.P.C and
         thus committed an offence
u/s 27
of Arms Act.
         What have you to say?”

           Apart from the incriminating circumstances
extracted above, various other pieces of evidence such
as injury reports, recovery memorandums, autopsy/
medical reports, etc. were put to the accused
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                 Page 36 of 44
appellants while recording their statements under
Section 313
CrPC.
37.          The      appellants         denied   the   incriminating
circumstances and stated that, - they were not present
at the spot; they have been falsely implicated in this
case because of being relatives of Sushil and Babu
Ram; there was commotion in the locality, therefore
they went to the house of their relatives to know the
truth; there they were detained by the police and
falsely implicated at the instance of the complainant.
38.          On perusal of the records pertaining to
recording of statement under
Section 313
CrPC, we
find that the gist of the testimony of various witnesses
delineating the exact role played by the appellants was
not put to the appellants for the purposes of recording
their statement. However, whether this by itself would
vitiate their conviction is a question which needs
determination.
39.
In
Tara Singh v. State21
, this Court had the
occasion to deal with the object of
Section 342
of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 which is in pari
materia
Section 313
CrPC. In that context, speaking
for the Bench, Vivian Bose, J. observed:
“38. The whole object of the section is to afford the
        accused a fair and proper opportunity of explaining
        circumstances which appear against him. The
21
AIR 1951 SC 441: 1951 SCC Online SC 49
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                       Page 37 of 44
questioning must therefore be fair and must be
        couched in a form which an ignorant or illiterate
        person will be able to appreciate and understand.
        Even when an accused person is not illiterate, his
        mind is apt to be perturbed when he is facing a charge
        of murder. He is therefore in no fit position to
        understand the significance of a complex question.
        Fairness therefore requires that each material
        circumstance should be put simply and separately in
        a way that an illiterate mind, or one which is
        perturbed or confused, can readily appreciate and
        understand. I do not suggest that every error or
        omission in this behalf would necessarily vitiate a
        trial because I am of opinion that errors of this type
        fall within the category of curable irregularities.
        Therefore, the question in each case depends upon
        the degree of the error and upon whether prejudice
        has been occasioned or is likely to have been
        occasioned.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
40.
In
Alister Anthony Pareira v. State of
Maharashtra
22 , summarising the law relating to
examination of an accused under
Section 313
CrPC,
this Court observed:
“61. From the above, the legal position appears to be
        this: the accused must be apprised of incriminating
        evidence and materials brought in by the prosecution
        against him to enable him to explain and respond to
        such evidence and material. Failure in not drawing
        the attention of the accused to the incriminating
        evidence and inculpatory materials brought in by
        prosecution specifically, distinctly and separately
        may not by itself render the trial against the accused
        void and bad in law; firstly, if having regard to all the
        questions put to him, he was afforded an opportunity
        to explain what he wanted to say in respect of
        prosecution case against him and secondly, such
        omission has not caused prejudice to him resulting in
        failure of justice. The burden is on the accused to
22
(2012) 2 SCC 648
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                     Page 38 of 44
establish that by not apprising him of the
      incriminating evidence and the inculpatory materials
      that had come in the prosecution evidence against
      him, a prejudice has been caused resulting in
      miscarriage of justice.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
41.      In Nar Singh16, this Court had the occasion to
review a series of decisions and summarise the law as
to the courses available whenever a plea is raised
before an appellate court that there has been a failure
in putting certain incriminating circumstances to the
accused while recording his statement under
Section
313
CrPC. In that context, it was observed:
“30. Whenever a plea of omission to put a question to
      the accused on vital piece of evidence is raised in the
      appellate court, courses available to the appellate
      court can be briefly summarised as under:
30.1 Whenever a plea of non-compliance of
Section
      313
CrPC is raised, it is within the powers of the
      appellate court to examine and further examine the
      convict or the counsel appearing for the accused and
      the said answers shall be taken into consideration for
      deciding the matter. If the accused is unable to offer
      the appellate court any reasonable explanation of
      such circumstance, the court may assume that the
      accused has no acceptable explanation to offer.
      30.2 In the facts and circumstances of the case, if the
      appellate court comes to the conclusion that no
      prejudice was caused or no failure of justice was
      occasioned, the appellate court will hear and decide
      the matter upon merits.
30.3 If the appellate court is of the opinion that non-
compliance with the provisions of
Section 313
CrPC
      has occasioned or is likely to have occasioned
      prejudice to the accused, the appellate court may
      direct retrial from the stage of recording the
      statements of the accused from the point where the
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 39 of 44
irregularity occurred, that is, from the stage of
        questioning the accused under
Section 313
CrPC and
        the trial Judge may be directed to examine the
        accused afresh and defence witness, if any, and
        dispose of the matter afresh.
30.4 The appellate court may decline to remit the
        matter to the trial court for retrial on account of long
        time already spent in the trial of the case and the
        period of sentence already undergone by the convict
        and in the facts and circumstances of the case, may
        decide the appeal on its own merits, keeping in view
        the prejudice caused to the accused.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
42.
In
Shobhit Chamar & Another v. State of
Bihar
23 , this Court, after examining a series of
decisions, held that a challenge to the conviction
based on non-compliance of
Section 313
CrPC first
time in the appeal before the Supreme Court cannot
be entertained unless the appellants demonstrate that
prejudice has been caused to them. The relevant
observations, as contained in paragraph 24, are
extracted below:
“24. We have perused all these reported decisions
        relied upon by the learned advocates for the parties
        and we see no hesitation in concluding that the
        challenge to the conviction based on non-compliance
        of
Section 313
CrPC first time in this appeal cannot
        be entertained unless the appellants demonstrate
        that the prejudice has been caused to them. In the
        present case as indicated earlier, the prosecution
        strongly relied upon the ocular evidence of the
        eyewitnesses and relevant questions with reference to
        this evidence were put to the appellants. If the
        evidence of these witnesses is found acceptable, the
        conviction can be sustained unless it is shown by the
23
(1998) 3 SCC 455
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                     Page 40 of 44
appellants that a prejudice has been caused to them.
No such prejudice was demonstrated before us and,
      therefore, we are unable to accept the contention
      raised on behalf of the appellants.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
43.      Building on the observations of this Court in
Shobhit Chamar22, which have been extracted above,
in Satyavir Singh Rathi, ACP & Others18, it was
observed:
“77. … These observations proceed on the principle
      that if an objection as to the Section 313 statement is
      taken at the earliest stage, the court can make good
      the defect and record an additional statement as that
      would be in the interest of all but if the matter is
      allowed to linger on and the objections are taken
      belatedly it would be a difficult situation for the
      prosecution as well as the accused.
78. In the case before us, as already indicated, the
      objection as to the defective 313 statements had not
      been raised in the trial court. We must assume
      therefore that no prejudice had been felt by the
      appellants even assuming that some incriminating
      circumstances in the prosecution story had been left
      out. We also accept that most of the fifteen questions
      that have been put before us by Mr. Sharan, are
      inferences drawn by the trial court on the evidence.
The challenge on this aspect made by the learned
      counsel for the appellants, is also repelled.”
                                        (Emphasis supplied)
44.      From the decisions noticed above, the legal
position that emerges, inter-alia, is that to enable an
accused to explain the circumstances appearing in the
evidence        against        him,   all   the   incriminating
circumstances appearing against him in the evidence
must be put to him. But where there has been a failure
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                   Page 41 of 44
in putting those circumstances to the accused, the
same would not ipso facto vitiate the trial unless it is
shown that its non-compliance has prejudiced the
accused. Where there is a delay in raising the plea, or
the plea is raised for the first time in this Court, it
could be assumed that no prejudice had been felt by
the accused.
45.      In the instant case, though we could not find
that the incriminating circumstance pertaining to
appellants exhorting the main accused Babu Ram was
specifically put to the appellants, they were aware of
the prosecution case against them as, vide question
no.(i), they were apprised of the FIR lodged by PW-2
which delineated their role as the ones who exhorted
the main accused Babu Ram to fire gunshots. Further,
vide question no.(iv) it was clarified that gunshots were
fired by Babu Ram. And questions (ii) and (iii)
indicated that the appellants were being proceeded
against as they had participated in the crime by
sharing common intention with the main accused.
Taking the above into account as also that the
appellants were throughout represented by their
counsel and had cross-examined the prosecution
witnesses, yet they raised no such plea, either before
the trial court or the High Court, it can safely be
assumed that the appellants had suffered no prejudice
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.           Page 42 of 44
on that count. More so, when the case of the
appellants was of complete denial i.e., that they were
not present at the time of occurrence, which was
disbelieved by the trial court as well as the High Court.
We are therefore of the considered view that the
conviction of the appellants is not vitiated for alleged
non-compliance of the provisions of
Section 313
CrPC.
Conclusion
46.      In view of our discussion above, though we find
the conviction of the appellants under Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the I.P.C. unsustainable, we
uphold the conviction of the appellants under Section
307 read with
Section 34
of the I.P.C. and hereby
affirm the sentence awarded to the appellants for the
offence punishable under
Section 307
/
34
of the I.P.C.
Consequently, the appeals are partly allowed. The
conviction and sentence of the appellants under
Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the I.P.C. is set
aside and the appellants are acquitted of the said
charge. However, their conviction and sentence under
Section 307 read with
Section 34
of the I.P.C. as
awarded by the trial court and affirmed by the High
Court is maintained and hereby affirmed. The
appellants are reported to be on bail. Their bail bonds
are cancelled. They shall surrender forthwith to serve
out the remaining sentence, if any, as awarded by the
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.           Page 43 of 44
trial court under
Section 307
/
34
of the I.P.C. If the
appellants have already served out the sentence
awarded to them under
Section 307
/
34
I.P.C., they
need not be taken into custody, after verification of the
records/custody certificates.
47.      With the aforesaid directions, all the three
appeals stand disposed of.
...................................J.
                                      (Hrishikesh Roy)



                                      ...................................J.
                                      (Manoj Misra)
New Delhi;
September 21, 2023
Criminal Appeal No.688 of 2011 Etc.                         Page 44 of 44