[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Meena Pradhan vs Kamla Pradhan on 21 September, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC847
                                                                          NON­REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C) NO.17115/2010)




        MEENA PRADHAN & ORS.                                              ...APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS


        KAMLA PRADHAN & ANR.                                              …RESPONDENT(S)




                                             JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
1.                  The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as

     under: There was one Bahadur Pradhan who married Meena

     Pradhan (Defendant­2/Appellant No.1 herein) with whom he had
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.09.21
two children namely, Ravi Kumar (Defendant­3/ Appellant No.2
   16:57:33 IST
   Reason:
1­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
herein) and Ku. Sushma (Defendant­4/Appellant No.3 herein).

Allegedly, he divorced his first wife and solemnised another

marriage with Kamla Pradhan (Plaintiff­1/Respondent No.1 herein)

who gave birth to a child namely Ku. Ritu (Plaintiff­2/Respondent

No.2 herein). Bahadur Pradhan (hereinafter referred to as ‘testator’),

seven days before his death (07.08.1992), executed a Will on

30.07.1992 in the presence of two witnesses namely Lok Bahadur

Thapa (not examined) and Suraj Bahadur Limboo (PW­2).
2.   After the death of the testator, the Plaintiffs filed a case for

receiving the testator’s dues wherein a succession certificate was

issued in favour of Respondent No.1 by VI Additional District

Judge, Jabalpur vide order dated 05.07.1995. Proceedings stood

concluded with the reversal of such an order by the High Court of

Madhya Pradesh in terms of order dated 17.11.1995, quashing the

entire proceedings, observing the authenticity and genuineness of

the Will, in existence to be adjudicated in appropriate proceedings.
3.   Pursuant to this order of the High Court, proceedings under
Section 276
of the Indian Succession Act 1925 (hereinafter referred

to as ‘the
Succession Act
’) for a grant of Probate or Letter of

Administration were initiated by both the Plaintiffs. The Defendants


                     2­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
challenged the execution of the Will in favour of the Plaintiffs, also

raising an objection about the testator having married Plaintiff

No.1.
4.      The Civil Court, Jabalpur, MP vide order dated 11.12.2001, in

Succession Case No. 22/98 while relying on the testimony of an

attesting witness, namely, Suraj Bahadur Limboo (PW2) upheld the

validity of the Will in favour of the beneficiaries and accordingly

issued Letter(s) of Administration. The said order was challenged

by the Defendants. The High Court in repelling the Defendant’s

contention of the Will being a forged document, by discussing the

relevant statutory provisions and decisions of this Court, affirmed

the order of the Civil Court.
5.      Hence, the instant Appeal against the final judgment dated

25.03.2010 in Misc. Appeal No. 382 of 2002 passed by the High

Court of Madhya Pradesh, confirming the order of the Civil Court in

Succession Case No.22/98 wherein it upheld the validity of the Will

and issued Letters of Administration.
6.      The issue that arises for our consideration is whether there

are sufficient grounds that warrant interference with the concurrent

findings of the fact, upholding validity of a Will.
3­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
7.   Before delving into the facts of the case, it is pertinent to

reproduce the relevant provisions dealing with the validity and

execution of the Will.
“
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
        Execution of unprivileged wills­ Every testator, not being a
        soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in actual warfare,
        or an airman so employed or engaged, or a mariner at sea, shall
        execute his Will according to the following rules:­
(a) The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the Will, or it
        shall be signed by some other person in his presence and by his
        direction.
(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the
        person signing for him, shall be so placed that it shall appear
        that it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a Will.
(c) The Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of
        whom has seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the Will or
        has seen some other person sign the Will, in the presence and by
        the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator a
        personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or the
        signature of such other person; and each of the witnesses shall
        sign the Will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not be
        necessary that more than one witness be present at the same
        time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.
Section 68
of Indian Evidence Act 1872

        Proof of Execution of document required by law to be
        attested­ If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall
        not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has
        been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
        attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court
        and capable of giving evidence: xxx”
8.   Thus, a bare reading of the above­mentioned provisions would

show that the requirements enshrined under
Section 63
of the

Succession Act have to be categorially complied with for the




                         4­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
execution of the Will to be proven in terms of
Section 68
of the

Evidence Act.
9.    A Will is an instrument of testamentary disposition of

property. It is a legally acknowledged mode of bequeathing a

testator’s property during his lifetime to be acted upon on his/her

death and carries with it an element of sanctity. It speaks from the

death of the testator. Since the testator/testatrix, at the time of

testing the document for its validity, would not be available for

deposing as to the circumstances in which the Will came to be

executed, stringent requisites for the proof thereof have been

statutorily enjoined to rule out the possibility of any manipulation.
10.   Relying on
H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma
,

1959 Supp (1) SCR 426 (3­Judge Bench), Bhagwan Kaur v.

Kartar Kaur, (
1994) 5 SCC 135 (3­Judge Bench), Janki Narayan

Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam
, (
2003) 2 SCC 91(2­Judge

Bench)   Yumnam      Ongbi     Tampha      Ibema        Devi   v.   Yumnam

Joykumar Singh
, (2009) 4 SCC 780 (3­Judge Bench) and

Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa, (2021) 11 SCC 277 (3­Judge

Bench), we can deduce/infer the following principles required for

proving the validity and execution of the Will:
5­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
i.      The court has to consider two aspects: firstly, that the

        Will is executed by the testator, and secondly, that it was

        the last Will executed by him;
ii.      It is not required to be proved with mathematical

         accuracy, but the test of satisfaction of the prudent

         mind has to be applied.
iii.    A Will is required to fulfil all the formalities required

         under
Section 63
of the Succession Act, that is to say:
(a) The testator shall sign or affix his mark to the Will or

         it shall be signed by some other person in his presence

         and by his direction and the said signature or affixation

         shall show that it was intended to give effect to the

         writing as a Will;
(b) It is mandatory to get it attested by two or more

         witnesses, though no particular form of attestation is

         necessary;
(c) Each of the attesting witnesses must have seen the

         testator sign or affix his mark to the Will or has seen

         some other person sign the Will, in the presence and by



                   6­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
       the direction of the testator, or has received from the

       testator a personal acknowledgment of such signatures;
(d) Each of the attesting witnesses shall sign the Will in

       the presence of the testator, however, the presence of all

       witnesses at the same time is not required;
iv.    For the purpose of proving the execution of the Will, at

       least one of the attesting witnesses, who is alive, subject

       to the process of court, and capable of giving evidence,

       shall be examined;
v.    The attesting witness should speak not only about the

       testator’s signatures but also that each of the witnesses

       had signed the will in the presence of the testator;

vi.    If one attesting witness can prove the execution of the

       Will, the examination of other attesting witnesses can be

       dispensed with;
vii.   Where one attesting witness examined to prove the Will

       fails to prove its due execution, then the other available

       attesting witness has to be called to supplement his

       evidence;
7­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
viii.   Whenever there exists any suspicion as to the execution

        of the Will, it is the responsibility of the propounder to

        remove all legitimate suspicions before it can be

        accepted as the testator's last Will. In such cases, the

        initial onus on the propounder becomes heavier.

 ix.    The test of judicial conscience has been evolved for

        dealing with those cases where the execution of the Will

        is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. It requires

        to consider factors such as awareness of the testator as

        to the content as well as the consequences, nature and

        effect of the dispositions in the Will; sound, certain and

        disposing state of mind and memory of the testator at

        the time of execution; testator executed the Will while

        acting on his own free Will;
x.     One who alleges fraud, fabrication, undue influence et

        cetera has to prove the same. However, even in the

        absence of such allegations, if there are circumstances

        giving rise to doubt, then it becomes the duty of the

        propounder to dispel such suspicious circumstances by

        giving a cogent and convincing explanation.
8­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
      xi.     Suspicious circumstances must be ‘real, germane and

              valid’ and not merely ‘the fantasy of the doubting mind’ 1.

              Whether      a        particular    feature       would   qualify    as

              ‘suspicious’         would     depend        on     the   facts     and

              circumstances of each case. Any circumstance raising

              suspicion legitimate in nature would qualify as a

              suspicious           circumstance      for    example,      a     shaky

              signature,       a    feeble   mind,    an    unfair      and     unjust

              disposition of property, the propounder himself taking a

              leading part in the making of the Will under which he

              receives a substantial benefit, etc.
11.   In short, apart from statutory compliance, broadly it has to be

proved that (a) the testator signed the Will out of his own free Will,
(b) at the time of execution he had a sound state of mind, (c) he was

aware of the nature and effect thereof and (d) the Will was not

executed under any suspicious circumstances.
12.   Coming to the facts of the case, a careful perusal of the

relevant material on record and applying the provisions and the

case laws it is evident that the Will was duly executed by the

testator in the presence of witnesses out of his free Will in a sound
1 Shivakumar (supra)

                        9­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
disposing state of mind and the same stands proven through the

testimony of one of the attesting witnesses, namely, Suraj Bahadur

Limboo who was examined as PW­2 by the Civil Court. This witness

categorically states that the testator executed the Will in question

and, both he and the testator signed the Will in the presence of

each other.
13.   As far as allegations made by the defendants are concerned,

we are of the opinion that there is no evidence on record to

conclude that the deceased was not in a fit or stable mental

condition at the time of execution of a Will, or that a Will was

executed under suspicious circumstances, or the presence of any

element of undue influence.
14.      Thus, in the case at hand, we are of the opinion that both the

courts below have rightly noted that the relevant provisions were

complied with, and given the well­reasoned order upholding the

validity of the Will, the same does not warrant interference of this

court.
15.   As far as the allegations of second marriage and bigamy are

concerned, we refrain from entertaining such submissions as the



                       10­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014
same is not a relevant factor in deciding the main lis, which is

confined to the validity of the Will.
16.   This Appeal is bereft of any merit and hence dismissed. Since

the validity of the Will stands proven according to settled principles

of law, consequential benefits be disbursed accordingly.
17.   Interlocutory Application(s) if any, stand disposed of. No order

as to costs.
……..……………..J.
                                                          (ABHAY S. OKA)




                                                         …………………….J.
                                                         (SANJAY KAROL)


 Date : 21st September, 2023;
Place: New Delhi.
11­ CIVIL APPEAL NO.3351 OF 2014