[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Paka Saroja vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 21 September, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Bela M. Trivedi
2023INSC844                                                              REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2173 OF 2011


          P. SARANGAPANI (DEAD)

          THROUGH LR PAKA SAROJA                                 …APPELLANT(S)


                                                VERSUS


          STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH                               …RESPONDENT(S)



                                          J U D G M E N T
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             The   original   appellant   P.    Sarangapani    son   of

                         Laxmaiah (accused no.1) having expired pending the

                         present Appeal, his wife Paka Saroja was permitted

                         to proceed further with the Appeal as per the order

                         passed by the court on 31st August, 2023.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2.             The instant Appeal is directed against the judgment
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2023.09.21
16:37:25 IST
Reason:
and order dated 21st March, 2011 passed by the High
1
Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in Criminal

Appeal No.54 of 2005, whereby the High Court had

dismissed the Appeal filed by the appellant-accused

no.1    and     confirmed    the       judgment    and    order     dated

06.01.2005 passed by the Principal Special Judge for

SPE and ACB Cases-cum-IV Additional Chief Judge City

Civil Court Hyderabad (hereinafter referred to as

the Trial Court) in CC No.08 of 1994. The Trial

Court     had    convicted    the        appellant       accused    no.1

P.Sarangapani for the offences under Section 7 and

Section       13(1)(d)r/w    13(2)        of     the
Prevention     of

Corruption Act, 1988
(for short, the
PC Act
) and

sentenced him to imprisonment for one year and pay a

fine    of    Rs.1,000/-     in       default,    to   suffer      Simple

Imprisonment for three months for the offence under
Section 7
and to suffer Rigorous Imprisonment for

two years and pay a fine of Rs.2,000/- in default,

to suffer Simple Imprisonment for six months for the

offence under
Section 13(1)(d)
r/w 13(2) of the
P.C.

Act
.
2
3.   The chargesheet for the alleged offences was laid by

     the Investigating Officer, Deputy Superintendent of

     Police     Shri    P.L.       Raju,     Anti-Corruption         Bureau,

     Warangal     Range,      Warangal       against       the     appellant

     accused no.1 P.Sarangapani and one another accused

     P.Vasudev     son       of    Mallaiah.       The     said     accused

     P.Vasudev     having          expired       pending     trial,       the

     appellant    accused         alone    was    tried    by     the   Trial

     Court. The defacto-complainant Sri Immadi Laxmaiah

     also had expired prior to commencement of the trial

     and   therefore     he       could    not   be    examined      by   the

     prosecution.
4.   The case of prosecution in nutshell was that the

     appellant accused Sri Sarangapani while discharging

     his duty as the Sub Registrar, Cooperative Societies

     had demanded and accepted a sum of Rs.1500/- as

     gratification other then legal remuneration from the

     defacto-complainant            Sri       Immadi       Laxmaiah        on

     27.03.1993, for himself and for the accused no.2

     P.Vasudev,        the        Deputy     Registrar           Cooperative
3
Societies in the office of Divisional Cooperative

     Khammam,   as    a    motive    or    reward         for    showing    an

     official   favour,      in   allowing          the    complainant     to

     continue   as    the    President         of    the    Society,       and

     thereby both the accused had committed the offence

     under
Section 7
and
Section 13(1)(d)
r/w 13(2) of the
PC Act
.
5.   To prove the charges levelled against the appellant-
accused, the prosecution had examined PW-1 Shri Dana

     Pullaiah to prove the contents of the RC No.1496/92-

     C. The PW-2 Sri M. Laxmi Narsu, one of the mediators

     (panch witness) working as Agricultural Officer, in

     the office of Joint Director Agriculture Khammam was

     examined   to    prove       the     pre-trap         and    post-trap

     proceedings. The PW-3 Sri K.L.N. Krishna Kumar was

     examined to prove the Sanction orders relating to

     the   accused,   accorded       by    the      then    Secretary      of

     Agriculture Cooperative – II Department. The PW-4

     was Sri B. Pulla Reddy, working as the President of

     Lachannagudem        Village,       who    succeeded         the   Vice
4
President    of    the   society,       on    the     previous    Vice

     President B. Pulla Reddy having been suspended. The

     PW-5 was Sri V. Vengalaiah, Inspector of Police ACB,

     a member of raiding party; and lastly PW-6 Sri P.L.

     Raju, the then DSP Warangal Range, was examined as

     he was the trap laying officer cum investigating

     officer.     The      prosecution            had      also     adduced

     documentary evidence in support of its case.
6.   On   the    closure      of    prosecution           evidence,        the

     appellant-accused P.Sarangapani was examined under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C, wherein he had denied the

     allegations levelled against him and had stated that

     he   was   falsely    implicated.       He     also    had     filed    a

     written    statement     contending          inter    alia    that     he

     never      demanded      and       accepted           any      illegal

     gratification from the complainant as alleged. The

     appellant    accused     had   also     examined       DW-1     Sri    K.

     Venkateshwarlu,       resident     of   Chintakani           Mandal    of

     Khammam District, to substantiate his defence.
5
7.   The Trial Court after appreciating the oral as well

     as    the     documentary       evidence       adduced     by   the

     prosecution, held that the prosecution had proved

     the charges levelled against the appellant/ accused

     beyond reasonable doubt. Accordingly, the appellant

     was convicted and sentenced as stated hereinabove.

     In the Appeal preferred by the appellant before the

     High Court, against the said judgment of conviction

     and   sentence,       the   High     Court     reappreciated    the

     evidence on record and confirmed the conviction and

     sentence recorded by the Trial Court.
8.   The   learned    counsel     for     the    appellant    vehemently

     submitted that both the courts had committed gross

     error of law in misappreciating evidence on record

     and in holding the appellant guilty of the alleged

     charges, though the prosecution had miserably failed

     to    prove     the    demand       of     illegal   gratification

     allegedly made by the appellant. Placing reliance on

     the decision of this Court in case of
B. Jayaraj v.

     State of Andhra Pradesh1
, he submitted that it was
1 (2014)   13 SCC 55
6
required    to     be    proved       by    the   prosecutor    beyond

reasonable doubt that the accused had voluntarily

accepted the money knowing it to be a bribe, and in

absence      of     proof         of        demand    for      illegal

gratification, presumption under
Section 20
could

not be drawn against the accused. According to him

in the instant case, the complainant having expired

before    the     commencement         of    trial,   could    not   be

examined and hence the very allegation of demand of

money as bribe was not proved by the prosecution.

The   learned      counsel        for       the   appellant    placed

reliance on the statement of complainant recorded

before     the    Additional          I-Class     Magistrate       under
Section     164
of     Cr.P.C.          to    submit    that     the

complainant himself had stated therein that he had

paid the amount to the accused towards the Audit

fees of the society and that the accused was falsely

implicated by the former President of the society

Pulla Reddy, who had a grudge against the accused.
7
9.   In our opinion, there is no substance in any of the

     submissions      made   by    the    learned    counsel    for     the

     appellant. It is well settled proposition of law

     that     the    death    of        the    complainant      or     non-

     availability of the complainant at the time of trial

     could    be     said    to    be     fatal     to   the    case    of

     prosecution, nor could it be said to be a ground to

     acquit    the    accused.     It     is   always    open   for    the

     prosecution to prove the contents of the complaint

     and other facts in issue by leading other oral or

     documentary evidence, in case of death of or non-

     availability       of   the    complainant.         Recently,      the

     Constitution Bench in case of
Neeraj Dutta vs. State

     (Government of NCT of Delhi
)2, has held that: -
“88.6. (f) In the event the complainant
              turns “hostile”, or has died or is
              unavailable to let in his evidence
              during   trial,    demand   of   illegal
              gratification can be proved by letting
              in the evidence of any other witness who
              can again let in evidence, either orally
              or by documentary evidence or the
              prosecution can prove the case by
              circumstantial evidence. The trial does
2 (2023)    4 SCC 731
8
not abate nor does it result in an order
           of acquittal of the accused public
           servant.”
10. In the instant case the appellant/ accused in his

   explanation      under       Section       313    had     accepted         the

   receipt of alleged amount. The court therefore was

   required    to    appreciate         the   evidence       laid        by   the

   prosecution in the light of the said explanation and

   to consider as to whether the said amount was an

   illegal     gratification            other        than         the      legal

   remuneration or not. It cannot be gainsaid that if

   the     accused         offers       reasonable          and         probable

   explanation based on the evidence that the money was

   accepted by him other than as illegal gratification,

   the   benefit      of    doubt   should          be   granted         to   the

   accused. It is also true that the accused is not

   required to establish his defence beyond reasonable

   doubt as the prosecution, and can establish the same

   on the preponderance of probability. However, the

   court     cannot        be    oblivious          to     the      statutory

   presumption permissible to be raised under
Section
9
20
of    PC   Act   with    regard   to   the    motive    of   the

   accused.
Section 20
reads as under: -
“20. Presumption where public servant
              accepts any undue advantage. —
              Where, in any trial of an offence
              punishable under
section 7
or under
section 11
, it is proved that a public
              servant accused of an offence has
              accepted or obtained or attempted to
              obtain for himself, or for any other
              person, any undue advantage from any
              person, it shall be presumed, unless the
              contrary is proved, that he accepted or
              obtained or attempted to obtain that
              undue advantage, as a motive or reward
              under
section 7
for performing or to
              cause performance of a public duty
              improperly or dishonestly either by
              himself or by another public servant or,
              as the case may be, any undue advantage
              without    consideration   or   for    a
              consideration which he knows to be
              inadequate under
section 11
.”
11. In view of the above, once the undue advantage i.e.,

   any    gratification      whatever,     other      than    the    legal

   remuneration is proved to have been accepted by the

   accused,         the   Court    is   entitled       to    raise     the

   presumption under
Section 20
that he accepted the

   undue advantage as a motive or reward under
Section

   7
for performing or to cause performance of a public

   duty       improperly    or    dishonestly.        No    doubt,    such
10
presumption is rebuttable. The Constitution Bench in
Neeraj Dutta
(supra), also had dealt with the issue

   of presumption under
Section 20
of the Act and held

   as under: -
“88.7. (g) Insofar as
Section 7
of the
           Act is concerned, on the proof of the
           facts in issue,
Section 20
mandates the
           court to raise a presumption that the
           illegal   gratification   was   for  the
           purpose of a motive or reward as
           mentioned in the said Section. The said
           presumption has to be raised by the
           court as a legal presumption or a
           presumption in law. Of course, the said
           presumption is also subject to rebuttal.
Section 20
does not apply to
Sections
           13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act.”
12. In   the   instant    case     the    pre-trap    and   post-trap

   proceedings were duly proved by the prosecution by

   examining      the   concerned        witnesses,   who   had    duly

   supported the case of prosecution. Both the courts

   below       have     recorded        the   findings      that    the

   prosecution had proved beyond reasonable doubt the

   conscious acceptance of the tainted currency by the

   accused and also the recovery of tainted currency

   from    the    appellant.       Therefore,     the    burden     had

   shifted on the appellant to dispel the statutory
11
presumption under
Section 20
of the said Act, and

   prove that it was not accepted as a motive or reward

   for the performance of his public duty, which the

   appellant    had    failed    to       dispel.   The     explanation

   offered by the appellant did not tally with the

   statement of the complainant recorded under
Section

   164
of Cr.P.C. The High Court had also recorded that

   the    defence     taken     by    the       appellant    that   the

   acceptance of tainted currency by him was towards

   the Audit fees of the Society was not proved by him

   in as much as there was nothing on record to show

   that   the   amount    paid       by   the    complainant     Immadi

   Laxmaiah to the appellant was out of the funds of

   the Society.
13. Both the courts have appreciated the evidence on

   record threadbare in the right perspective and have

   found the appellant guilty for the offence under
Section 7
and
Section 13(1)(d)
r/w 13(2) of the
PC

   Act
. We do not see any valid ground to interfere
12
with the well considered findings recorded by both

   the courts below.
14. In that view of the matter, the criminal appeal

   being devoid of merits is dismissed.
.…………………………………………. J.
[BELA M. TRIVEDI]




                                 …………………………………………. J.
[DIPANKAR DATTA]
NEW DELHI;
September 21st, 2023
13