[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pallavi vs Union Of India on 1 September, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
2023INSC782                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 642 OF 2023



             PALLAVI                                                             …APPELLANT(S)

                                                         VERSUS

             UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                              …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                    JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.             The petitioner has approached this Court seeking relief under
Article 32
of
             the Constitution aggrieved by the rejection of candidature to a Post Graduate
             medical seat; the respondent rejected her application after she was allowed to
             appear in the written examination and the results were declared for the NEET
             (PG) and the INI-CET/2023 (hereafter called “NEET” collectively).
2.             The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), the Nodal Agency
             for the NEET test/examination, called for applications from eligible candidates
             by publishing a prospectus for NEET process on 07.03.2023. The petitioner
             applied and was issued the examination admit card on 01.05.2023.                      She
             participated and appeared in the NEET examination on 07.05.2023.                     The
             petitioner holds an Overseas Citizen of India card (hereafter called the “OCI card
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
holder”). She is a U.S. National and was born on 22.02.1999.
   NEETA SAPRA
   Date: 2023.09.01
   16:56:16 IST
   Reason:
1
3.    The prospectus published by the respondents stipulated the eligibility
conditions which indicated that the candidate should possess a Medical or Dental
Degree and must have completed the required period of 12 months training and
should possess a certificate of grading system from the concerned
universities/institutions to determine the value of grading in percentage and the
minimum marks in aggregate in MBBS/BDS professional examinations was to
be 55% aggregate or equivalent. In addition, for Foreign Nationals, No Objection
Certificate was also deemed essential. This was to be issued by the Ministry of
External Affairs, Government of India. The stipulation for OCI candidates and
the relevant requirements for admission into PG courses for Indian Nationals as
well as sponsored and Foreign Nationals, reads as follows:
“Overseas Citizen of India (OCI): Overseas Citizen of India
         candidates can apply against Foreign National Seats. OCI candidates
         are not required to obtained NOC, however must upload the scan copy
         of OCI card on or before date(s) mentioned in Important Dates Section
         of Prospectus Part-A.
         Section V: Seats available for admission into postgraduate courses for
         July 2023 Session of various INIs
         The seats available for admission into postgraduate courses in
         participating INIs for July 2023 session are of two types
1. Seats available for all Indian Nationals (excluding sponsored &
         Foreign National seats)
         A consolidated list of seats available for admission into postgraduate
         courses in participating INIs for July 2023 session of various INIs will
         be prepared and published by Examination section, AIIMS, New Delhi
         on the basis of official information received from respective INIs. The
         INI-wise list received from various INIs shall be accessible from Seats
         Available Tab of the INI-CET portal. These lists are subjected to change
         as per the decision of respective INIs and shall be updated as per
         information received by the Examination Section, AIIMS, New Delhi.
The list of seats available shall not be changed after the declaration of
         the results. The updated consolidated list of available postgraduate
         seats for seat allocation (INI-wise and specialty-wise) for July 2023
         session shall be published before the declaration of results.
2. Seats available for Sponsored & Foreign National
         The list of INI-wise and Specialty-wise available seats for Sponsored &
         Foreign Nationals will be accessible through Seats Available Tab on or
         before starting of “completion of application” as per mentioned in the
         “Important dates Tab”.
2
4.         The petitioner’s application listed her as the OCI candidate, and she
appeared in the examination in that capacity; the results declared on 13.05.2023
showed that she had secured 96.73 percentile, and her overall rank was 1902. It
is asserted that this list also recognized her in OCI category. Her roll number was
mentioned in the provisionally qualified list of candidates published on
13.05.2023.
5.         The communication dated 25.05.20231 provided information for the first
and second round of online seat allocation by institution and subject wise. The
AIIMS issued a schedule for online seat allocation for admission to PG courses
(Notice No. 97/2023) on 10.06.2023. On the same day, the petitioner was
informed that she would be treated as a Foreign National as she had disclosed her
status to be as OCI Candidate2. She was informed that the mock round of
application process had begun on 11.06.2023 and would end on 13.06.2023.
6.         On 15.06.2023, the result of online mock round was announced. The
petitioner was allotted the ‘pediatrics’ discipline in AIIMS. This is evident from
the announcement of online mock seat allocation before the first round published
on 15.06.2023. In light of these developments, suddenly on 19.06.2023, she was
informed that, she would no longer be treated as OCI candidate, but would be
considered in the category of “Indian National”. This was published by virtue of
a public notice No. 119/2023; an e-mail communication was received by the
petitioner to that effect on 19.06.2023 itself.
7.         As the first-round of counselling was about to commence on 23.06.2023,
the petitioner was informed and alleges that she had no choice but to opt for status
of an Indian National which she did, under protest and participated in the first
counselling round. Therefore, she approached this Court immediately thereafter,
on 21.06.2023, contending that despite completion of entire process and there
1
No. F. AIIMS/EXAM.SEC. /4-5/(INI-CET-PG-June-2023)/2023.
2
(The eligibility criteria for candidates holding OCI Card was dated 10.06.2023).
3
being no error or mistake on her part, the change of her status had reduced the
chances of her securing admission in the PG Medical Course considerably. It is
contended by her that the change of status presumably on the basis of a Central
Government notification dated 04.03.2021 is unfair given that she has in all
senses of the term burnt or foreclosed her options.
8.         It is contended that for all practical purposes, from the year 2005 and
especially her higher education trajectory made her eligible for admission as a
foreign national having an OCI card. The apparent decision of AIIMS to treat the
petitioner as Indian national is unfair and arbitrary.
9.         It is contended by Mr. Vinay Navare, Ld. Senior Counsel, on behalf of the
petitioner that the basis for this change of stand appears to be the Ministry of
Home Affairs Notification dated 04.03.20213, under the head (Parity with Non-
Resident Indians in the matter of admission to NEET) indicated an exception that
OCI card holder are ineligible for admissions to seats exclusively reserved for
Indian citizens.
10.        Mr. Navare argued that the notification was the subject matter of a
judgment of this court in
Anushka Rengunthwar & Ors. V. Union of India &
Ors4
. It was submitted that this court recognized that the Central government
could issue the notification of the kind which it did on 04.03.2021 in regard to the
matters, enumerated or provided for. Yet at the same time, the Court categorically
ruled that retrospective effect could not be given to that notification and that
despite it seemingly on its application it did have an element of retroactive
application. The court ruled that the OCI card holder status meant that persons
like petitioner are treated as overseas citizens of India and
Sections 7A
to
7D
of
the Citizenship Act, 1955, (hereafter “the 1955 Act”) enacted the procedure for
their registration and cancellation, keeping in mind that the earlier notification
dated 11.04.2005, 05.01.2007 and 05.01.2009 had enabled such OCI cardholders
3
Issued under
Section 7B
of the Citizenship Act, 1955.
4
2023 SCC Online SC 102.
4
to apply for educational institutions in India and the state could not deny them
such benefits abruptly. It was emphasized that the Court, therefore, declared that
the operation of notification which provided for supersession of earlier
notifications and clause 4 (ii) and its proviso and explanation could operate only
prospectively in respect of OCI Card holder who have secured admission
consequently on 04.03.2021.It was submitted that in the present case the OCI card
was issued to the petitioner prior to that date, i.e., on 02.11.2015.
11.   Mr. Atul Kumar, learned counsel relied upon the notification dated
04.03.2021 and submitted that this Court in
Anushka
(supra) clearly held that it
had prospective effect. This meant that for all subsequent years i.e., after 2021-
22, the notification was applicable. It was contended that in any event since the
petitioner was born much prior to 04.03.2021, the application of the notification
(04.03.2021) operated with effect from the date of the judgment i.e., 03.02.2023.
12.   AIIMS finds fault with the petitioner for not disclosing that she was an
OCI Card holder prior to 04.03.2021, which had to be viewed as a special factor
regard upon had to the law declared in
Anushka
(supra).
Analysis and Conclusions
13.   The judgment in
Anushka
(supra) analyzed the position with respect to
various provisions of the
Foreigners Act, 1946
and the
Citizenship Act, 1955
,
especially
Sections 7A
to
7D
and the notifications prior to the one in question,
i.e., dated 11.04.2005, 05.01.2007 and 05.01.2009 which also were issued under
Section 7B
of the 1955 Act. Each of the notifications had declared that OCI Card
holder are to be treated and granted status at par with Non Resident Indians
(NRIs) and Indian Nationals, including appearing in All India Pre-medical Test
and all such other tests to render them eligible for admission pursuant to
provisions of the relevant Act.
5
The notification dated 04.03.2021 pertinently states as follows:
“ MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS NOTIFICATION
                           New Delhi, the 4th March, 2021
         “S.O. 1050(E) – In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1)
         of
section 7B
of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) and in
         supersession of the notification of the Government of India in the
         Ministry of Home Affairs published in the Official Gazette vide number
         S.O. 542(E), dated the 11th April, 2005 and the notifications of the
         Government of India in the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
         published in the Official Gazette vide numbers S.O. 12(E), dated the 5th
         January, 2007 and S.O. 36(E), dated the 5th January, 2009, except as
         respect things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the
         Central Government hereby specifies the following rights to which an
         Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder (hereinafter referred to as the
         OCI cardholder) shall be entitled, with effect from the date of
         publication of this notification in the Official Gazette, namely;-
(4) parity with Non-Resident Indians in the matter of: -
(ii) appearing for the all India entrance tests such as National
         Eligibility cum Entrance Test, Joint Entrance Examination (Mains),
         Joint Entrance Examination (Advanced) or such other tests to make
         them eligible for admission only against any Non-Resident Indian seat
         or any supernumerary seat;
Provided that the OCI cardholder shall not be eligible for admission
         against any seat reserved exclusively for Indian citizens.”
14.   The facts in this case are not disputed; undoubtedly the petitioner was
treated as a foreign national and allowed to appear in the NEET mains- as OCI
cardholder; she even secured a fairly high rank. She was allowed to participate in
the mock rounds of allocations which led to an indication that she would be
offered PG in Paediatrics in AIIMS and just before the first round of counselling
she was informed that her status would no longer be as a foreign national and that
she would be treated as an Indian national.
15.   A plain reading of the notification undoubtedly leads one to conclude that
it withdraws the eligibility or privileges which had been hitherto conferred upon
OCI Card holders regarding their parity with Indian nationals for appearing in All
India examinations such as NEET. This meant that after the date of issuance of
6
that notification, i.e. 04.03.2021, such OCI card holders could not claim the
privilege of eligibility for admission in any competitive entrance examination
“any seat reserved exclusively for Indian citizens” was an abrupt notifications all
these notifications were somewhat softened by of the retroactive application
facially was that all OCI Card holders who had planned their academic careers
based upon pre-existing notifications dated 11.04.2005, 05.01.2007 and
05.01.2009 were held to be eligible to continue with that privilege in terms of the
judgment in
Anushka
(supra).
The relevant portions of the judgment in
Anushka
(supra) are extracted below:
“45. However, what is necessary to be taken note is that the right which
         was bestowed through the notification dated 11.04.2005 and 05.01.2009
         insofar as the educational parity, including in the matter of appearing
         for the All-India Pre-Medical Test or such other tests to make them
         eligible for admission has been completely altered. Though the
         notification ex facie may not specify retrospective application, the effect
         of superseding the earlier notifications and the proviso introduced to
         clause 4(ii) would make the impugned notification dated 04.03.2021
         ‘retroactive’ insofar as taking away the assured right based on which
         the petitioners and similarly placed persons have altered their position
         and have adjusted the life's trajectory with the hope of furthering their
         career in professional education.
46. The learned senior counsel for the petitioners would in that context
         contend that since sub-section (2) to
Section 7B
of Act, 1955 does not
         exclude the right under Article 14of the Constitution, it is available to
         be invoked and such discrimination contemplated in the notification to
         exclude the OCI Cardholders should be struck down.
Article 14
of
         the Constitution can be invoked and contend discrimination only when
         persons similarly placed are treated differently and in that view the
         OCI Cardholders being a class by themselves cannot claim parity with
         the Indian citizens, except for making an attempt to save the limited
         statutory right bestowed. To that extent certainly the fairness in the
         procedure adopted has a nexus with the object for which change is made
         and the application of mind by the Respondent No. 1, before issuing the
         impugned notification requires examination.
47. As noted, the right of the OCI Cardholders is a midway right in the
         absence of dual citizenship. When a statutory right was conferred and
         such right is being withdrawn through a notification, the process for
         withdrawal is required to demonstrate that the action taken is
         reasonable and has nexus to the purpose. It should not be arbitrary,
         without basis and exercise of such power cannot be exercised unmindful
         of consequences merely because it is a sovereign power. To examine this
         aspect, in addition to the contentions urged by the learned Additional
7
Solicitor General we have also taken note of the objection statement
filed with the writ petition. Though detailed contentions are urged with
regard to the status of a citizen and the sovereign power of the State, as
already noted, in these petitions the sovereign power has not been
questioned but the manner in which it is exercised in the present
circumstance is objected. The contention of learned Additional Solicitor
General is that the intention from the beginning was to grant parity to
OCI Cardholders only with NRIs. On that aspect as already noted above
we have seen the nature of the benefit that had been extended to the
petitioners and the similarly placed petitioners under the notifications
of the year 2005, 2007 and 2009. The further contention insofar as
equating the OCI Cardholders to compete only for the seats which are
reserved for NRIs and to exclude the OCI Cardholders for
admission against any seat reserved exclusively for the Indian citizens,
across the board, even to the persons who were bestowed the right
earlier, it is stated that the rationale is to protect the rights of the Indian
citizens in such matters where State may give preference to its citizens
vis-à-vis foreigners holding OCI Cards. It is further averred in the
counter that number of seats available for medical and engineering
courses in India are very limited and that it does not fully cater to the
requirement of even the Indian citizens. It is therefore contended that
the right to admission to such seats should primarily be available to the
Indian citizens instead of foreigners, including OCI Cardholders.
48. Except for the bare statement in the objection statement, there is no
material with regard to the actual exercise undertaken to arrive at a
conclusion that the participation of OCI Cardholders in the selection
process has denied the opportunity of professional education to the
Indian citizens. There are no details made available about the
consideration made as to, over the years how many OCI cardholders
have succeeded in getting a seat after competing in the selection process
by which there was denial of seats to Indian Citizens though they were
similar merit-wise.
******************                                 ********************
52. Therefore it is evident that the object of providing the right in the
year 2005 for issue of OCI cards was in response to the demand for dual
citizenship and as such, as an alternative to dual citizenship which was
not recognised, the OCI card benefit was extended. If in that light, the
details of the first petitioner taken note hereinabove is analysed in that
context, though the option of getting the petitioner No. 1 registered as a
citizen under
Section 4
of Act, 1955 by seeking citizenship by descent
soon after her birth or even by registration of the citizenship as provided
under
Section 5
of Act, 1955, was available in the instant facts to her
parents, when immediately after the birth of petitioner No. 1 the
provision for issue of OCI cards was statutorily recognised and under
the notification the right to education was also provided, the need for
parents of petitioner No. 1 to make a choice to acquire the citizenship
by descent or to renounce the citizenship of the foreign country and seek
registration of the Citizenship of India did not arise to be made, since as
8
an alternative to dual citizenship the benefit had been granted and was
available to petitioner No. 1 and the entire future was planned on that
basis and that situation continued till the year 2021.
53. Further, as on the year 2021 when the impugned notification was
issued the petitioner No. 1 was just about 18 years i.e., full age and even
if at that stage, the petitioner was to renounce and seek for citizenship
of India as provided under
Section 5(1)(f)(g)
, the duration for such
process would disentitle her the benefit of the entire education course
from pre-school stage pursued by her in India and the benefit for
appearing for the Pre-Medical Test which was available to her will be
erased in one stroke. Neither would she get any special benefit in the
country where she was born. Therefore in that circumstance when there
was an assurance from a sovereign State to persons like that of the
petitioner No. 1 in view of the right provided through the notification
issued under
Section 7B(1)
of Act, 1955 and all ‘things were done’ by
such Overseas Citizens of India to take benefit of it and when it was the
stage of maturing into the benefit of competing for the seat, all ‘such
things done’ should not have been undone and nullified with the issue of
the impugned notification by superseding the earlier notifications so as
to take away even the benefit that was held out to them.
54. Therefore, on the face of it the impugned notification not saving such
accrued rights would indicate non application of mind and arbitrariness
in the action. Further in such circumstance when the stated object was
to make available more seats for the Indian Citizens and it is
demonstrated that seats have remained vacant, the object for which such
notification was issued even without saving the rights and excluding the
petitioners and similarly placed OCI Cardholders with the other
students is to be classified as one without nexus to the object. As taken
note earlier during the course this order, the right which was granted to
the OCI cardholders in parity with the NRIs was to appear for the Pre-
Medical Entrance Test along with all other similar candidates i.e. the
Indian citizens. In a situation where it has been demonstrated that the
petitioner No. 1 being born in the year 2003, has been residing in India
since 2006 and has received her education in India, such student who
has pursued her education by having the same ‘advantages’ and
‘disadvantages’ like that of any other students who is a citizen of India,
the participation in the Pre-Medical Entrance Test or such other
Entrance Examination would be on an even keel and there is no greater
advantage to the petitioner No. 1 merely because she was born in
California, USA. Therefore, the right which had been conferred and
existed had not affected Indian citizens so as to abruptly deny all such
rights. The right was only to compete. It could have been regulated for
the future, if it is the policy of the Sovereign State. No thought having
gone into all these aspects is crystal clear from the manner in which it
has been done.
55. In the above circumstance, keeping in view, the object with which
the Act, 1955 was amended so as to provide the benefit to Overseas
Citizen of India and in that context when rights were given to the OCI
9
cardholders through the notifications issued from time to time, based on
which the OCI cardholders had adopted to the same and had done things
so as to position themselves for the future, the right which had accrued
in such process could not have been taken away in the present manner,
which would act as a ‘retroactive’ notification. Therefore, though the
notification ex-facie does not specify retrospective operation, since it
retroactively destroys the rights which were available, it is to be ensured
that such of those beneficiaries of the right should not be affected by
such notification. Though the rule against retrospective construction is
not applicable to statutes merely because a part of the requisite for its
action is drawn from a time antecedent to its passing, in the instant case
the rights were conferred under the notification and such rights are
being affected by subsequent notification, which is detrimental and the
same should be avoided to that extent and be allowed to operate without
such retroactivity.
56. We note that it is not retrospective inasmuch as it does not affect the
OCI Cardholders who have participated in the selection process, have
secured a seat and are either undergoing or completed the MBBS course
or such other professional course. However, it will act as retroactive
action to deny the right to persons who had such right which is not
sustainable to that extent. The goal post is shifted when the game is
about to be over. Hence we are of the view that the retroactive operation
resulting in retrospective consequences should be set aside and such
adverse consequences is to be avoided.
57. Therefore in the factual background of the issue involved, to sum up,
it will have to be held that though the impugned notification dated
04.03.2021 is based on a policy and in the exercise of the statutory
power of a Sovereign State, the provisions as contained therein shall
apply prospectively only to persons who are born in a foreign country
subsequent to 04.03.2021 i.e. the date of the notification and who seek
for a registration as OCI cardholder from that date since at that juncture
the parents would have a choice to either seek for citizenship by descent
or to continue as a foreigner in the background of the subsisting policy
of the Sovereign State.
58. In light of the above, it is held that the respondent No. 1 in
furtherance of the policy of the Sovereign State has the power to pass
appropriate notifications as contemplated under
Section 7B(1)
of
the Citizenship Act, 1955, to confer or alter the rights as provided for
therein. However, when a conferred right is withdrawn, modified or
altered, the process leading thereto should demonstrate application of
mind, nexus to the object of such withdrawal or modification and any
such decision should be free of arbitrariness. In that background, the
impugned notification dated 04.03.2021 though competent under
Section 7B(1)
of Act, 1955 suffers from the vice of non-application of
mind and despite being prospective, is in fact ‘retroactive’ taking away
the rights which were conferred also as a matter of policy of the
Sovereign State.
10
59. Hence, the notification being sustainable prospectively, we hereby
          declare that the impugned portion of the notification which provides for
          supersession of the notifications dated 11.04.2005, 05.01.2007 and
          05.01.2009 and the clause 4(ii), its proviso and Explanation (1) thereto
          shall operate prospectively in respect of OCI cardholders who have
          secured the same subsequent to 04.03.2021.
60. We further hold that the petitioners in all these cases and all other
          similarly placed OCI cardholders will be entitled to the rights and
          privileges which had been conferred on them earlier to the notification
          dated 04.03.2021 and could be availed by them notwithstanding the
          exclusion carved out in the notification dated 04.03.2021. The
          participation of the petitioners and similarly placed OCI cardholders in
          the selection process and the subsequent action based on the interim
          orders passed herein or elsewhere shall stand regularised.”
16.   It is evident that the ruling held that notification (dated 04.03.2021)
operated arbitrarily because firstly it indicated non-application of mind in not
saving accrued rights. The application of proviso to Clause 4 (ii) of the
notification of 04.03.2021 was held to have no nexus with the objects sought to
be achieved. The court also held that those who are born prior to 2005 and
residing in India had received their education in India and had pursued by having
some advantages and disadvantages like other children who are citizens of India,
and could not be denied their right to participate in NEET examinations or such
similar examinations. It was also held that no additional advantage was granted
to such class of people merely because they were born abroad and importantly,
court took note of the amendment which introduced concession to OCI Card
holders. Therefore, the Court concluded that when the right conferred was
withdrawn and altered, in the process leading to such change, should demonstrate
application of mind, nexus to the object of such withdrawal or modification and
any such decision had to be free of arbitrariness. In the light of this conclusion,
the court held that the notification saved from the vice of non-application of mind
and was in fact retroactive. It was in these circumstances that the Court held that
only those persons who obtained OCI Cards after 04.03.2021 were rendered
ineligible in terms of the notification.
11
17.      In the present case, although the OCI Card relied upon by the petitioner on
04.08.2022, the fact that she was in fact issued the OCI registration card first, on
02.11.2015.
In such circumstances, the petitioner’s eligibility to claim the benefit
of OCI card holder in terms of the ruling in
Anushka
(supra) is undeniable. The
rejection of her candidature at this stage, i.e. on 19.06.2023 is not supportable in
law. She is consequently directed to be considered in remaining counselling
rounds by the AIIMS and all participating institutions for PG Medical seats. It is
clarified that the consideration would be regarding seats that are unfilled on the
date of this judgment whether reserved for SC/ST/OBC or other categories and
such as specially earmarked for Bhutanese candidates etc. if they can be filled by
other candidates, like her. Furthermore, this facility should be open to the
petitioner as well as other candidates based upon the available records of those
issued OCI cards prior to 04.03.2021 and who can participate in such counseling
having regard to their performance in the NEET test, and their ranking.
18.      The writ petition is allowed in the above terms and there is no order as to
costs.
.................................................J.
                                                      [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]




                                                      .................................................J.
                                                      [ARAVIND KUMAR]

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 01, 2023.
12