[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhaku Gorain . vs The State Of West Bengal on 12 September, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC821                                                       NON-REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 20 OF 2014

                         BHAKTU GORAIN & ANR.                          …APPELLANTS

                                                    VERSUS


                         THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                      …RESPONDENT




                                            J U D G M E N T
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.       Heard Shri Ranjan Mukherjee and Ms. Astha Sharma, learned

                         counsel for the parties.
2.       In Sessions Trial No. 05/1998 arising from Sessions Case No.

                         37/1997 pursuant to the FIR No.110/1993 lodged under
Signature Not Verified   Sections 341, 302 read with 34 of
IPC
at Jhalda Police Station,
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.09.12
Purulia, by one Lakshmi Mahato, the eldest son of the
17:09:11 IST
Reason:
deceased-Smt. Keshari Mahato, all the five accused persons
1
namely; Bhaktu Gorain (A-1), Surendra Gorain (A-2), Bandhu

     Gorain (A-3), Ranjit Gorai (A-4) and Rajen Gorain (A-5) were

     convicted and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life

     with a fine of Rs.1000/- each, in default of payment of which

     they were directed to serve further imprisonment of one

     month each. The above judgment and order of the conviction

     and sentencing the accused persons has been affirmed by the

     High Court vide judgment and order dated 21.07.2010.
3.   All the accused persons assailed the above conviction i.e.

     judgments and orders of the High Court and the trial court by

     filing the Special Leave Petition wherein leave was granted on

     03.01.2014. The appeal against A-2, A-4 and A-5 was

     dismissed vide order dated 25.11.2011. Therefore, presently

     the appeal is concerning A-1 (Shri Bhaktu Gorain) and A-3

     (Shri Bandhu Gorain) only.
4.   The aforesaid FIR was lodged at 08:45 a.m. on 27.09.1993

     alleging that the incident in which the mother of the

     informant/complainant was put to death had occurred early

     in the morning at around 06:00 am. The five accused persons
2
surrounded (gheraoed) the deceased Smt. Keshari Mahato,

     the widowed mother of the complainant, and her daughter-in-

     law Smt. Bijali Mahato, who were returning from the pond

     after performing their daily ablutions. The accused persons

     were armed with tangi, tabala and lathi. Upon hearing the

     screams of the deceased and her daughter-in-law, the

     complainant along with his brothers Sudhir Mahato (PW-2),

     Rampada Mahato (PW-3) and the uncle’s son Pratham

     Mahato (PW-5) rushed out of their house which was hardly 30

     cubits away and found the accused persons assaulting the

     deceased on her head. The deceased instantly fell down and

     died on the spot. The accused persons made good their escape

     from the place of occurrence.
5.   The Investigating Officer reached the place of occurrence and

     prepared an Inquest Report (Ext.2) of the dead body, seized

     the incriminating article (Ext.5), examined the witnesses and

     recorded their statements under
Section 161
CrPC and

     prepared a sketch map (Ext.4) of the place of occurrence. The

     post-mortem was conducted by Dr. A.K. Hazari (PW-9) around
3
2 pm on the same day. All the accused persons were arrested

     by the police on 04.10.1993.
6.   Admittedly, Lakshmi Mahato (PW-1), the informant, Sudhir

     Mahato (PW-2) and Rampada Mahato (PW-3) are the sons of

     the deceased and are the eye witnesses to the incident. Bijali

     Mahato (PW-4) is the daughter-in-law of the deceased [wife of

     Lakshmi Mahato (PW-1)] and is one another eye witness of the

     incident. Pratham Mahato (PW-5) is the nephew of the victim

     Raghu Mahato (PW-6) is a post-occurrence witness. Binode

     Mahato (PW-7) is the father-in-law of Krishna Chandra

     Mahato, one another brother of the informant who was

     visiting the house of the deceased due to karam puja and as

     such had an occasion to witness the heinous crime. The

     presence of Raghu Mahato (PW-6) and Binode Mahato (PW-7)

     has been established by the evidence of Sudhir Mahato (PW-
2). The scribe of the FIR Subhash Mahato was examined as

     (PW-8). Dr. A.K. Hazari who conducted the post-mortem

     examination on the body of the deceased was examined as

     PW-9 whereas Sub-Inspector Santosh Kumar Das who was

     on duty at the police station and had received the complaint
4
was examined as PW-10. The Investigating Officer of the case

     had died and as such could not be examined.
7.   The contents of the FIR (Ex.1) were proved by the ocular

     evidence of Lakshmi Mahato (PW-1). He stated that he rushed

     to the place of occurrence along with his brothers upon

     hearing the screams of the deceased and his wife and upon

     reaching the spot they witnessed that the deceased had been

     stopped and surrounded (gheraoed) by the accused persons

     whereupon Surendra Gorain (A-2) and Bhaktu Gorain (A-1)

     assaulted her with tangi and tabala on her head whereas

     Ranjit Gorain (A-4) assaulted her with lathi on her right hand,

     consequently, the deceased fell down on the ground and died

     instantaneously.
8.   The aforesaid witness also testified that on the previous night,

     all the above five accused persons called the deceased a witch

     (diayen) who is the cause of trouble to the villagers as she

     used to indulge in witchcraft. Her activities have caused

     suffering to the wife of Surendra Gorain (A-2) who was not

     keeping good health for some time. The place where deceased
5
was killed was near the house of one Buka Mahato. He

     identified all the accused persons while they were in the court

     room.
9.   The testimony of Lakshmi Mahato (PW-1) was corroborated by

     Sudhir Mahato (PW-2). He even corroborated the incident of

     the previous night wherein the deceased was abused for

     practicing witchcraft and alleged to be the cause of trouble to

     the villagers particularly to the wife of Surendra Gorain (A-2).

     He also stated that the place of incident was only at a distance

     of 40-50 cubits from their house and they have reached the

     spot instantly upon hearing the screams. Rampada Mahato

     (PW-3) categorically proved that when he reached the place of

     occurrence upon hearing the screams of his mother and that

     of his elder brother’s wife Bijali Mahato (PW-4), he saw

     Surendra Gorain (A-2) assaulting his mother by a tangi,

     Bhaktu Gorain (A-1) by tabala and Ranjit Gorain (A-4) by lathi

     on the head whereupon his mother fell on the ground and

     died.
6
10. Bijali Mahato (PW-4) in her testimony stated that after

    washing their face etc. she was returning with her mother-in-

    law to her house but on the way back, they were intercepted

    by all the five accused persons who surrounded (gheraoed)

    them and assaulted the mother-in-law with the weapons

    possessed by them in front of the house of Biju Mahato. Her

    mother-in-law fell down and died instantly. She also stated

    that there was a quarrel between her mother-in-law and the

    five accused persons on the previous night.
11. It may be pertinent to mention here that all the aforesaid

    witnesses successfully stood the test of cross-examination

    and nothing could be extracted from them in cross-

    examination that could discredit their testimony. The

    credibility of the above witnesses is not in doubt and in fact

    they   are   wholly   reliable   witnesses   in   the   facts   and

    circumstances of the case.
12. In addition to the above witnesses, there is one chance

    witness Raghu Mahato (PW-6). He rushed to the place of

    occurrence upon hearing the shouting of “Mario Mario”, he
7
found all the accused persons proceeding towards their house

    on the south with the weapons in their hands. He saw the

    deceased lying dead in front of the house of Buka Mahato. His

    evidence could not be demolished in cross-examination. He

    had signed the Inquest Report (Ext.2) as a witness.
13. Dr. A.K. Hazari (PW-9), who conducted the post-mortem

    cross-examination, proved the post-mortem report and the 3

    injuries reported therein. The said injuries are as follows:
“1). Incised wound over left side face, orbit
           and frontal region, vertically placed,
           measuring 6" x 1" bone cut.
On dissection, muscle left eye-ball cut, left
          xygomatic bone and frontal bone (left side)
          cut. Intracrtranial haemorrhage was
          present.
2). Incised would over occipital region,
           transfersely placed, measuring 6" x 2" x
           bone cut.
On dissection, blood-clots were present.
Occipital bone cut and intractranial
          hemorrhage was present.
3). Swelling over right fore-arm.
On dissection, fracture both bone of mid-
shaft of right forearm present.”
14. He had opined that injury Nos.1 and 2 might have been

    caused by sharp cutting weapon like tangi, tabala etc. and
8
that injury No.3 might have been caused by hard and blunt

     substance like lathi. The cause of death was stated to be

     shock and hemorrhage as a result of the aforesaid injuries

     which was ante-mortem and homicidal in nature. The tangi

     which was the only weapon recovered was shown to him in

     open court and he opined that injury Nos.1 and 2 could have

     been caused by that type of weapon.
15. In view of the above evidence and some other evidence which

     is not very material and worth referring, it is evident that all

     the witnesses have proved that all the five accused persons

     have surrounded (gheraoed) the deceased and her daughter-

     in-law Bijoli Mahato in the early hours of the day while they

     were returning to their home after performing their day’s

     routine at the pond and had assaulted the deceased with

     tangi, tabala and lathi on her head due to which she fell down

     and died instantaneously. The injuries she received were

     enough to cause death.
16. The submission on behalf of the appellants is that they never

     had any common intention to kill the deceased and that they
9
simply wanted to teach a lesson to the deceased so that she

    may not indulge in her practices of witchcraft in future.
17. The submission is devoid of any merit as admittedly an

    altercation had taken place between the parties on the

    previous night in which all the five accused persons were

    present and it is in furtherance of the said quarrel that all of

    them had appeared in the morning with reinforced vengeance.

    The very fact that they had assembled in the morning and

    surrounded (gheraoed) the deceased with deadly weapons is

    sufficient indication to infer that they had surrounded

    (gheraoed) in a pre-planned manner with a pre-determined

    mind. Thus, the submission that they had no common

    intention stands completely ruled out. Moreover, the nature

    of injuries which have been caused on the head of the

    deceased with the deadly weapons proves that they had

    assembled with the common intention and not merely to

    threaten her or to deter her from practicing witchcraft.
18. Notwithstanding that two of the accused persons Bandhu

    Gorain (A-3) and Rajen Gorain (A-5) had no weapons with

    them or might not have assaulted the deceased but certainly
10
they were part of the team that surrounded (gheraoed) the

     deceased with the common intention to kill after they had an

     altercation with her the previous night on the subject of

     practicing witchcraft.
19. In the light of the above clinching evidence and in the absence

     of any specific lacuna in the testimony of the witnesses and

     the documentary evidence adduced, we are of the opinion that

     the trial court had not committed any error in convicting and

     sentencing the accused persons with imprisonment of life.

     The conviction and sentence have rightly been affirmed by the

     High Court.
20. It may not be out of context to mention that the detention

     certificates of Bhaktu Gorain (A-1) and Bandhu Gorain (A-3)

     issued   by   the   Superintendent     of   Midnapore    Central

     Correctional Home, Paschim Midnapore, on 28.10.2022

     certifies that they have served a total period of 15 years, 9

     months & 24 days and 11 years, 7 months & 5 days (without

     remission) respectively as on the date of the certificate. They

     are, therefore, permitted to seek remission in accordance with

     the prevailing policy of the State and it is expected that if any
11
such application/representation is made by them, it shall be

     duly considered on its own merits. The application shall be

     decided in accordance with applicable policy within three

     months from the date of filing.
21. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the Appeal lacks

     merit and is dismissed with the above observation.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)


                                           ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
     NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 12, 2023.
12