[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs Jaswant Singh on 5 September, 2023
Author:
J. K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
2023INSC798                                                        REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11871 OF 2014


             THE STATE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS                       …APPELLANTS


                                                Versus


             JASWANT SINGH                                       ...RESPONDENT


                                                 WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11634 OF 2014


                                            JUDGMENT
J. K. MAHESHWARI, J.
1.             In the present appeals, respondent Jaswant Singh was

             recruited as a constable with Punjab Police. During probation, he

             was discharged from the services by Senior Superintendent of

             Police, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as “S.S.P.”) in exercise of

             power under Rule 12.21 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter

             referred to as “PPR”). Challenging the same, the respondent-
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2023.09.05
plaintiff filed a suit, which was partly decreed by the Trial Court
   17:32:02 IST
   Reason:
1
and the discharge order was held to be illegal on the ground that

it was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
2.   Assailing the same, the appellants/State preferred first

appeal before Additional District Judge, Amritsar. Simultaneously,

the respondent-plaintiff also filed a first appeal and sought relief

of mandatory injunction on the ground that since the order

discharging him from services was not found legally sustainable,

therefore, he should be allowed to join duty and should be granted

all the consequential benefits. The first appellate Court by common

judgment dismissed the appeal filed by State and allowed the

appeal of the respondent-plaintiff holding him entitled to receive

all service benefits as accrued.
3.   Challenging the common judgment passed by the first

appellate Court, two regular second appeals were filed before the

High Court by the State Government. The first one was against

the judgment in their appeal passed by the first appellate Court

and the second was against the grant of mandatory injunction

granting all service benefits to the respondent-plaintiff. Both the

appeals were dismissed by the impugned judgment, against which

the present appeals have been filed.
4.   Brief facts of the case are that, the respondent-plaintiff was
2
appointed as constable in Punjab Police on probation, who joined

on 12.11.1989 and was allotted number 1669. He was sent for

training to ‘Police Recruits Training Centre, Jahan Khelan, District

Hoshiarpur’ (hereinafter referred to as “Training Centre”).

Meanwhile, he along with other recruit constables were sent to

Amritsar on 24.11.1990 for special duty as security guards. After

the completion of the said assignment, all the constables deputed

on duty were relieved and they reported back to the Training

Centre, except respondent-plaintiff who remained absent without

any intimation. The Superintendent of Police of the Training

Centre (hereinafter referred to as “S.P.”), came to know about such

conduct and reported to S.S.P. Amritsar vide memorandum dated

21.02.1991. It was stated therein that owing to prolonged absence

from duty without intimation, respondent-plaintiff had no interest

in training, and he lacked a sense of responsibility. Therefore, it

was recommended that he cannot prove himself to be a good,

efficient police officer and he is setting a bad precedent for other

trainees. The S.P. further recommended for his discharge from

service under Rule 12.21 of PPR with a request to strike-off his

name from the rolls of the Training Centre with immediate effect

treating the absence period as on leave without pay. In furtherance
3
to the said recommendation, the S.S.P. passed the order dated

28.03.1991, discharging the respondent-plaintiff. The said order is

relevant and for ready reference is being reproduced as under:
“ORDER
        Constable Jaswant Singh No. 1669/ASR S/o Shri Hazara
        Singh, caste Jat, R/o Village Thoba, PS Ramdass, Police
        District Majitha is hereby discharged from service under
        P.P.R. 12.21 as he is not likely to become an efficient Police
        Officer. His absent period from 24.11.1990 to date is treated
        as non-duty non pay.
Issue orders in OB.
Sd/-xxxxxxxxxxx
                                         Sr. Superintendent of Police,
                                                             Amritsar
        No. 11369 – 76/B Dated 28.03.1991”
5.   The respondent-plaintiff being aggrieved by the order of

discharge, filed ‘Civil Suit No. 306 of 1994’ seeking declaration that

the said order is illegal, unconstitutional, null and void. He also

prayed for a relief of mandatory injunction against appellants-
defendants to take him back in service and grant arrears of salary

and other benefits accrued to him for the said period. It was stated

by him that he had worked with utmost diligence and efficiency.

When he was sent as security guard to Amritsar on special duty,

he fell sick and had to take medical treatment due to which he

could not join the duty on time. After recovery, when he made an

attempt to re-join his duty along with medical and fitness

certificates, he was not allowed to join the duty and was discharged
4
from service without any show-cause notice and affording an

opportunity of hearing. The said action was challenged by him

alleging gross violation of the principles of natural justice.
6.    The   appellants-defendants     contested     the     suit   raising

preliminary objection regarding its maintainability and being

barred by time. Due to not joining S.P., Training Centre as

defendant, the objection regarding non-joinder of necessary party

was also taken. On merits, it was pleaded that the order of

discharge has rightly been passed by the competent authority in

exercise of power under Rule 12.21 of PPR, and therefore, the suit

be dismissed.
7.    The Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Amritsar, vide judgment dated

12.01.2000, partly decreed the suit recording a finding that order

of discharge was passed without affording an opportunity of

hearing to the respondent-plaintiff. It was held that, the order of

discharge passed by the appellants-defendants is in violation of

the principles of natural justice. The Trial Court further directed

the   appellants-defendants    to   remove    the    said     procedural

irregularity within two months and decide the case of respondent-

plaintiff after affording due opportunity of hearing.
8.    The said judgment was challenged by the appellants on the
5
ground that the respondent-plaintiff was a probationer constable

and hence, the power under Rule 12.21 of PPR has rightly been

exercised to discharge him from duty. The Trial Court has not duly

considered   the   said   provisions   in   the   right   perspective.

Simultaneously, due to non-grant of mandatory injunction, the

respondent-plaintiff also preferred appeal contending that since

the order of discharge was not found legally sustainable, therefore,

he should be allowed to join the duties granting all consequential

benefits. Both the appeals were decided by a common judgment

dated 14.02.2002. The first appellate Court dismissed the appeal

filed by the appellants/State, whereas the appeal filed by

respondent-plaintiff was allowed and he was held entitled to all the

service benefits as accrued. However, the Court granted liberty to

the appellants to proceed against respondent-plaintiff under Rule

16.24 of PPR. The said judgment and decree was confirmed by

High Court vide common impugned judgment. Being aggrieved by

the same, these appeals have been preferred by State.
9.   Learned counsel for the appellants contends that the

respondent was appointed on probation and during training, he

was sent for special duty along with other trainee/recruited

constables. After the completion of the deputation, while the other
6
trainee constables reported back to the Training Centre and joined,

the respondent-plaintiff neither reported back nor gave any

intimation for his non-reporting. Therefore, the S.P., Training

Centre, made a recommendation to S.S.P., Amritsar to exercise

power under Rule 12.21 of PPR to discharge the probationary

constable. In the said recommendation, it was indicated that the

act of non-reporting at the Training Centre without any intimation

reflects absolute lack of interest in training and sense of

responsibility. In the said view, S.P. further reported that

respondent-plaintiff cannot prove himself to be a good and efficient

police officer. Hence, on the said recommendation, the order of

discharge has rightly been passed under Rule 12.21 PPR by the

S.S.P. within the period of three years from date of enrolment as

the probationer constable was found unlikely to prove an efficient

police officer. It is further urged that the order of termination is

simpliciter and not punitive or stigmatic in nature and the High

Court while affirming the judgment and decree of the Courts below

committed grave error in law.
In support of the said contentions,

reliance has been placed on 3-Judge Bench judgment of this Court

in the case of
“State of Punjab and Others Vs. Sukhwinder

Singh
, (2005) 5 SCC 569” and also on the judgment in the case
7
of
“State of Punjab and others Vs. Constable Avtar Singh
,

(2008) 7 SCC 405”.
10. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent contends that

the impugned order of discharge is not simpliciter, but it is

punitive. It is urged that, recommendation made by S.P., Training

Centre, indicates that the foundation of such recommendation is

based on an allegation of misconduct. Therefore, it was mandatory

to conduct an inquiry following the procedure contemplated under

Rule 16.24 of PPR and for the said reason, the Courts below have

rightly set-aside the order of discharge. It is further urged that the

concurrent finding as recorded does not warrant any interference

in these appeals.
In support of the said contention, counsel for the

respondent has placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in

the case of
“Amar Kumar Vs. State of Bihar and Others
, (2013)

4 PLJR 269” and
“Ratnesh Kumar Choudhary Vs. Indira

Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna, Bihar and

Others
, (2015) 15 SCC 151”.
11. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and looking to

the nature of the order passed against the respondent as quoted

above, it is apparent that the respondent was discharged from

service under Rule 12.21 of PPR as the appellants were of the
8
opinion that the probationer constable was not likely to become an

efficient police officer. In the said context, to appreciate the issue

in detail, reference to Rule 12.21 of PPR is relevant and the same

is reproduced hereinbelow:
“12.21 – A constable who is found unlikely to prove an
         efficient police officer may be discharged by the
         Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
         There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge
         under this Rule.”
12. The Full Bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in the

case of
“Sher Singh, Ex-Constable Vs. State of Haryana & Ors.
,

1994 SCC OnLine P&H 166” has examined the content and

scope of Rules 12.21, 19.3 and 19.5 of PPR in detail. In the said

case, the High Court held that during the period of probation the

constable remains under surveillance and is kept in close

supervision. The probationer has no right to the post and the

services are terminable at any time during the said period. The

probationer can secure his position in service only if he convinces

the Superintendent of Police that he is likely to prove as an efficient

police officer. It was further stated that, if on a consideration of the

relevant material, the Superintendent of Police finds that a

particular constable       is not active, disciplined, self-reliant,

punctual, sober, courteous, straightforward or that he does not
9
possess the knowledge of the technical details of the work required

to be performed by him, he can reasonably form an opinion that

he is not likely to prove an efficient police officer. The Full
Bench

further held
that in such a situation, the Superintendent of Police

can invoke his power under Rule 12.21 of PPR and can discharge

the constable from the force.
The observations as made by Full

Bench of the High Court have been approved by this Court in the

case of
Sukhwinder Singh
(supra) wherein it was observed that

this Court is in agreement with the view taken by the Full Bench

of the High Court.
In the said case, this Court relied upon the

judgment of
“Superintendent of Police Vs. Dwarka Das
, (1979)

3 SCC 789”, in which also Rule 12.21 and Rule 12.21(3) of PPR

were dealt with, and it was held that the Superintendent of Police

has the power to discharge the probationer within the period of

probation.
13.
In the case of
“State of Punjab and Others Vs. Balbir

Singh
, (2004) 11 SCC 743”, this Court had an occasion to

consider Rule 12.21 of PPR and in paragraphs 5, 7 and 11, this

Court observed as thus –

        “5. Thus, the order of discharge simpliciter, prima facie, is
        not punitive, it being in terms of Punjab Police Rule 12.21,
        but the question still is whether the incident which led to the
        passing of that order was motive or inducing factor or was
10
the foundation of order of discharge.
7. Thus the principle that in order to determine whether the
       misconduct is motive or foundation of order of termination,
       the test to be applied is to ask the question as to what was
       the “object of the enquiry”. If an enquiry or an assessment
       is done with the object of finding out any misconduct on the
       part of the employee and for that reason his services are
       terminated, then it would be punitive in nature. On the other
       hand, if such an enquiry or an assessment is aimed at
       determining the suitability of an employee for a particular
       job, such termination would be termination simpliciter and
       not punitive in nature. This principle was
laid down by
Shah, J. (as he then was) as early as 1961 in the case
       of
State of Orissa v. Ram Narayan Das
, (1961) 1 SCR 606 :
AIR 1961 SC 177 : (1961) 1 LLJ 552. It was held that one
       should look into “object or purpose of the enquiry” and not
       merely hold the termination to be punitive merely because
       of an antecedent enquiry. Whether it (order of termination)
       amounts to an order of dismissal depends upon the nature
       of the enquiry, if any, the proceedings taken therein and the
       substance of the final order passed on such enquiry. On the
       facts of that case, the termination of a probationer was
       upheld inasmuch as the purpose of the enquiry was held to
       be to find out if the employee could be confirmed. The
       purpose of the enquiry was not to find out if he was guilty
       of any misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other
       disqualification.
11. In the light of the above legal position, we will now
       determine whether, in substance, the order of discharge in
       the present case is punitive in nature. For this purpose it
       would be necessary to ascertain, firstly, the “nature of
       enquiry” i.e. whether the termination is preceded by a full-
scale formal enquiry into allegations involving misconduct
       on the part of the respondent, which culminated in the
       finding of guilt, and, secondly, the “purpose of the enquiry”
       i.e. whether the purpose of the enquiry is to find out any
       misconduct on the part of the employee or it is aimed at
       finding out as to the respondent being unlikely to prove as
       an efficient police officer.”
14. Similarly, this Court in the case of
“Ravindra Kumar Misra
11
Vs. U.P. State Handloom Corporation Ltd. and Another
, 1987

(Supp) SCC 739”, while dealing the case of termination of a

temporary employee, made a distinction between simpliciter

termination and punitive termination applying the test of motive

and foundation. This Court clarified the said distinction and

observed as under –

       “6. As we have already observed, though the provisions of
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution do not apply, the Service
       Rules which are almost at par make the decisions of this
       Court relevant in disposing of the present appeal. In several
       authoritative pronouncements of this Court, the concept of
       “motive” and “foundation” has been brought in for finding
       out the effect of the order of termination. If the delinquency
       of the officer in temporary service is taken as the operating
       motive in terminating the service, the order is not considered
       as punitive while if the order of termination is founded upon
       it, the termination is considered to be a punitive action. This
       is so on account of the fact that it is necessary for every
       employer to assess the service of the temporary incumbent
       in order to find out as to whether he should be confirmed in
       his appointment or his services should be terminated. It may
       also be necessary to find out whether the officer should be
       tried for some more time on temporary basis. Since both in
       regard to a temporary employee or an officiating employee
       in a higher post such an assessment would be necessary
       merely because the appropriate authority proceeds to make
       an assessment and leaves a record of its views the same
       would not be available to be utilized to make the order of
       termination following such assessment punitive in
       character. In a large democracy as ours, administration is
       bound to be impersonal and in regard to public officers
       whether in government or public corporations, assessments
       have got to be in writing for purposes of record. We do not
       think there is any justification in the contention of the
       appellant that once such an assessment is recorded, the
       order of termination made soon thereafter must take the
       punitive character.”
12
15.
In the same context, this Court in the case of
“Pavanendra

Narayan Verma Vs. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical Sciences

and Another
, (2002) 1 SCC 520” has reiterated the same

principle in the matter of termination of a probationer. It has been

observed as thus:
“29. Before considering the facts of the case before us one
        further, seemingly intractable, area relating to the first test
        needs to be cleared viz. what language in a termination
        order would amount to a stigma? Generally speaking, when
        a probationer's appointment is terminated it means that the
        probationer is unfit for the job, whether by reason of
        misconduct or ineptitude, whatever the language used in
        the termination order may be. Although strictly speaking,
        the stigma is implicit in the termination, a simple termination
        is not stigmatic. A termination order which explicitly states
        what is implicit in every order of termination of a
        probationer's appointment, is also not stigmatic. The
        decisions cited by the parties and noted by us earlier, also
        do not hold so. In order to amount to a stigma, the order
        must be in a language which imputes something over and
        above mere unsuitability for the job.”
16. After considering the various pronouncements on the similar

issue, this Court in the case of
Sukhwinder Singh
(supra) in

paragraph 20 observed as thus:
“20. In the present case neither any formal departmental
        inquiry nor any preliminary fact-finding inquiry had been
        held and a simple order of discharge had been passed. The
        High Court has built an edifice on the basis of a statement
        made in the written statement that the respondent was a
        habitual absentee during his short period of service and has
        concluded therefrom that it was his absence from duty that
        weighed in the mind of the Senior Superintendent of Police
        as absence from duty is a misconduct. The High Court has
13
further gone on to hold that there is direct nexus between
        the order of discharge of the respondent from service and
        his absence from duty and, therefore, the order discharging
        him from service will be viewed as punitive in nature calling
        for a regular inquiry under Rule 16.24 of the Rules. We are
        of the opinion that the High Court has gone completely
        wrong in drawing the inference that the order of discharge
        dated 16-3-1990 was, in fact, based upon misconduct and
        was, therefore, punitive in nature, which should have been
        preceded by a regular departmental inquiry. There cannot
        be any doubt that the respondent was on probation having
        been appointed about eight months back. As observed
        in
Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab
[(1983) 2 SCC 217 : 1983
        SCC (L&S) 303 : AIR 1983 SC 494] the period of probation
        gives time and opportunity to the employer to watch the
        work, ability, efficiency, sincerity and competence of the
        servant and if he is found not suitable for the post, the
        master reserves a right to dispense with his service without
        anything more during or at the end of the prescribed period,
        which is styled as period of probation. The mere holding of
        preliminary inquiry where explanation is called from an
        employee would not make an otherwise innocuous order of
        discharge or termination of service punitive in nature.
        Therefore, the High Court was clearly in error in holding that
        the respondent's absence from duty was the foundation of
        the order, which necessitated an inquiry as envisaged
        under Rule 16.24(ix) of the Rules.”
17. The said judgment has been followed by this Court in the case

of
Avtar Singh
(supra) and in paragraph 11 of
the said judgment
observed as thus:
“11. We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We are
        in total agreement with the submission of the learned
        counsel for the State of Punjab that the controversy involved
        in this case is no longer res integra. Learned counsel
        appearing for the respondent had drawn our attention to a
        two-Judge Bench decision of this Court in
Prithipal
        Singh v. State of Punjab
[(2002) 10 SCC 133 : 2003 SCC
        (L&S) 103] . The Court held that once there is stigma, the
        principle is well settled, an opportunity has to be given
14
before passing any order. Even where an order of discharge
        looks innocuous, but on a close scrutiny, by looking behind
        the curtain if any material exists of misconduct and which
        is the foundation of passing of the order of discharge, or
        such could be reasonably inferred, then it leaves no room
        for doubt that any consequential order, even of discharge,
        would be construed as stigmatic. The decision
        in Sukhwinder Singh [(2005) 5 SCC 569 : 2005 SCC (L&S)
        705] was given by a three-Judge Bench and in view of that
        decision in 2005, there is no scope for this Court to take a
        different view. We are squarely bound by the said
        decision.”
18. In view of the principles as reiterated in various judgments

by this Court, if we examine the facts of the case in hand leading

to the order of discharge, then it is crystal clear that respondent-

plaintiff was appointed as a constable and joined the duties on

12.11.1989 on probation. During probation, while he was on

training, he along with other trainee constables was deputed for

law and order duty in Amritsar District on 24.11.1990.

Respondent-plaintiff and other recruits were relieved from the said

duty and reported back at the Training Centre, except respondent-

plaintiff, who remained on prolonged absence without any

intimation to the Training Centre. The S.P., Training Centre, vide

memorandum dated 21.02.1991, made a recommendation to

S.S.P. that the respondent-plaintiff had not shown any interest in

the   training   and    lacks     sense    of    responsibility,       further

recommending that he is unlikely to prove himself as a good and
15
efficient police officer, hence, he may be discharged under Rule

12.21 of PPR. From perusal of the said Rule, it is apparent that in

case a probationary constable is found unlikely to prove an

efficient police officer, he may be discharged by the Senior

Superintendent of Police at any time within three years from the

date of enrolment. The S.S.P. relying upon the recommendation of

the supervising officer (S.P., Training Centre) formed an opinion

that the probationary constable is found unlikely to prove an

efficient police officer owing to his demeanour as reported and

discussed herein above.
19. In our considered view, all the three Courts misconstrued

Rule 12.21 of PPR and decreed the suit filed by the respondent-

plaintiff. Looking to the contents of the order of discharge, in the

considered opinion of this Court, there is no foundation of

misconduct alleged in the order and it is an order of simpliciter

discharge of a probationer constable. The judgment in the case of
Ratnesh    Kumar     Choudhary
(supra) relied upon by the

respondent is of no help for the simple reason that
in that case
,

the initial appointment was alleged to be illegal based on a

vigilance report which was on record. Thereafter, notice was issued

on the anvil of the said vigilance report which contained serious
16
allegations and in the said peculiar situation, the Court found that

the termination was not simpliciter, but it was punitive
20. Similarly, in the case of
Amar Kumar
(supra), wherein the

Court found that the appellant therein had instigated to do

commotion/agitation/protest and also raised slogans by spreading

false rumours in connection with the death of one of the trainees,

which was the foundation to pass the order for termination. Thus,

in the said case, the Court was of the opinion that the order of

termination cannot be simpliciter. In both the cases as
referred

above
, the allegation of serious misconduct is common, unlike in

the instant case, wherein, the foundation of discharge is not on

any serious allegation or act of misconduct. The discharge order

was passed on the recommendation of the concerned supervisory

authority of the Training Centre due to prolonged absence from

training without any intimation. The authority found that the

probationer constable has no interest in training, and no sense of

responsibility, hence, he cannot prove himself a good, efficient

police officer. In view of above discussion, both the referred cases

are distinguishable on facts.
21. For the reasons discussed above, we are of the considered

opinion that the view taken by the High Court and also by the two
17
courts below is completely erroneous in law and must be set-aside.

The appeals are accordingly allowed. The judgments and decree

passed by the High Court and also by the first appellate Court and

Civil Judge (Jr. Division) are set-aside, and the suit filed by the

respondent-plaintiff shall stand dismissed. No order as to costs.
..……..……..........…......J.
                                        (J.K. MAHESHWARI)



                                        ……….……...................J.
                                        (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 5, 2023.
18