[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pr. Commissioner Of Income Tax 10 vs M/S Krishak Bharti Cooperative Ltd. on 15 September, 2023
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
B.V. Nagarathna
1


2023INSC834                                                                        REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 836 OF 2018


             PRINCIPAL COMMISSION ER OF
             INCOME TAX-10                                                      …. APPELLANT

                                                       VERSUS

             M/S KRISHAK BHARTI COOPERATIVE LTD.                              …. RESPONDENT

                                                         WITH

             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3369 of 2019, CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 2256 OF 2018, CIVIL
             APPEAL NO(s). _______ OF 2023 @ SLP(C)NO(s). _______OF 2023 @ SLP (C)
             Diary No(s). 4647 of 2018, CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). ______ OF 2023 @ SLP(C)
             No(s). 11204 of 2023 & CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). _______ OF 2023 @ SLP (C) NO(s).
             _______ OF 2023 @ SLP (C) Diary No(s). 15333 of 2023.


                                                  JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
Delay condoned in SLP (C) Diary No. 4647 of 2018 and SLP (C) Diary No.

             15333 of 2023.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2023.09.15
2.
   16:49:52 IST
   Reason:                  Leave granted in SLP (C) No. _____ @ Diary No. 4647 of 2018, SLP(C) No.

             11204 of 2023 and SLP (C) No. _____ @ Diary No. 15333 of 2023.
2
3.    This judgment governs the disposal of Civil Appeal No. 836 of 2018, C.A.

No. 3369 of 2019, Civil Appeal No. 2256 of 2018 and the appeals arising out of

SLP (C) Diary No. 4647 of 2018, SLP(C) No. 11204 of 2023 and SLP (C) @ Diary

No. 15333 of 2023.
BACKGROUND FACTS:
4.    The assessee is a multi-State Co-operative Society registered in India,

under the administrative control of the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of

Agriculture and Co-operation, Government of India. In the course of its

business of manufacturing fertilizers, it entered into a joint venture with Oman

Oil Company to form the Oman Fertilizer Company SAOC (for short ’OMIFCO’ or

‘the JV’), a registered company in Oman under the Omani laws. The assessee

has 25% share in the JV. The JV manufactures fertilizers, which are purchased

by the Central Government. The assessee has a branch office in Oman which is

independently registered as company under the Omani laws having permanent

establishment status in Oman in terms of
Article 25
of the DTAA. The branch

office maintains its own books of account and submits returns of income under

the Omani income tax laws.
5.    The assessment for the relevant year was completed under
Section 143

(3)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, ‘the Act’). The Assessing Officer
3
allowed tax credit in respect of the dividend income received by the assessee

from the JV. The dividend income was simultaneously brought to the charge of

tax in the assessment as per the Indian tax laws. However, under the Omani tax

laws, exemption was granted to the dividend income by virtue of the

amendments made in the Omani tax laws w.e.f the year 2000.
6.    The Assessing Officer allowed credit for the said tax, which would have

been payable in Oman, but exemption was granted. Thereafter, the Principal

Commissioner of Income Tax (for short, ‘PCIT’) issued a show cause notice

under
Section 263
of the Act on the ground that the reliance placed on
Article

25(4)
of   DTAA was erroneous in this case and no tax credit was due to the

assessee under
Section 90
of the Act. This notice was duly replied to by the

assessee. However, the PCIT rejected all the contentions raised by the assessee

inter alia holding that
Article 25
of Omani tax laws is not applicable in the

instant case because there is tax payable on dividend in Oman and, accordingly,

no tax has been paid and that assessee is not covered under the exemption.
7.    Questioning the order of PCIT, the assessee preferred an appeal before

the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘ITAT’), which allowed the appeal

holding that the order passed by the PCIT under
Section 263
of the Act is

without jurisdiction and is not sustainable in law.
4
8.    The order passed by the ITAT was challenged before the Delhi High Court

by preferring an Income Tax Appeal, which has been dismissed by the High

Court by the impugned judgment holding that as per the relevant terms of the

DTAA between India and Oman, the assessee is entitled to claim the tax credit,

which has been rightly allowed by the Assessing Officer.


CONTENTIONS RAISED BY THE PARTIES:
9.    Shri Arijit Prasad, learned senior counsel would submit that
Article 11(4)
would only apply in a case where the Permanent Establishment (for short, ‘PE’)

of the assessee was carrying on business in Oman, whereas, in the case in

hand, the PE is only doing preparatory and auxiliary work and is not having any

tangible expenses. Therefore, the dividend income of the assessee is not

related to its PE. It is also argued that the exemption letter dated 11.12.2000

issued by the Sultanate of Oman, Ministry of Finance under the signatures of

Secretary General for Taxation, has no statutory force as per Omani Tax Laws,

therefore, the same cannot be relied upon to claim exemption.
10.   Per contra, Mr. Arvind P. Dattar, learned senior counsel appearing for the

assessee would contend that the provisions of DTAA fully exempt the assessee

from payment of tax on dividend in Oman which, in turn, would exempt the
5
assessee from taxation in India. It is further argued that the letter issued by the

Sultanate of Oman, Ministry of Finance emanates from the highest authority of

the Omani regime, therefore, the clarification set out in the said letter is valid

for interpretation of the relevant clauses of DTAA, to exempt the assessee from

payment of dividend tax in Oman and, in turn, in India.


ISSUE TO BE CONSIDERED BY THIS COURT:
11.   All the matters involve a similar question of law as to whether the

dividend income earned by the assessee is taxable, although exempted under

Omani Tax Laws to entitle the assessee to the benefits of the Double Taxation

Avoidance Agreement (for short, ‘DTAA’) between India and Oman.


ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS:
12.   The decision in these appeals revolves around the relevant provisions of

the DTAA and Omani Tax Laws, therefore, it is profitable to extract them for

ready reference.
Article 7
speaks about business profits which reads as follows:
“ARTICLE 7.
The profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be
          taxable only in that State unless the enterprise carried on
          business in the other Contracting State through a Permanent
          Establishment situated therein. If the enterprise carries on
          business as aforesaid, the profits of the enterprise may be taxed
          in the other Contracting State but only so much of them as is
6
attributable directly     or   indirectly   to   that   Permanent
   Establishment.”
Article 11
deals with dividends, which reads as follows:
“ARTICLE 11 DIVIDENDS
1. Dividends paid by a company which is resident of a
   Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State
   may be taxed in that other Contracting State.
2. However, such dividends may also be taxed in the Contracting
   State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident
   and according to the laws of the State, but if the recipient is the
   beneficial owner of the dividends, the tax so charged shall not
   exceed:
(a) 10 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends if the
        beneficial owner is a company which owns at least 10 per
        cent of the shares of the company paying the dividends;
(b) 12½ per cent of the gross amount of the dividends in all
        other cases. This paragraph shall not affect the taxation of
        the company in respect of the profits out of which the
        dividends are paid.
3. The term “dividends” as used in this Article means income
   from shares or other rights, not being debt-claims, participating
   in profits as well as income from other corporate rights which is
   subjected to the same taxation treatment as income from shares
   by the laws of the Contracting State of which the company
   making the distribution is a resident.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the
   beneficial owner of the dividends, being a resident of a
   Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting
   State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident,
   through a permanent establishment situated therein or
   performs in that other Contracting State independent personal
   services from a fixed base situated therein, and the holding in
7
respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected
         with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case,
         the provisions of
Article 7
or
Article 16
, as the case may be, shall
         apply.
5. Where a company which is a resident of a Contracting State
         derives profits or income from the other Contracting State, that
         other Contracting State may not impose any tax on the dividends
         paid by the company except insofar as such dividends are paid to
         a resident of that other Contracting State or insofar as the
         holding in respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively
         connected with a permanent establishment or a fixed base
         situated in that other Contracting State, nor subject the
         company’s undistributed profits to a tax on the company’s
         undistributed profits, even if the dividends paid or the
         undistributed profits consist wholly or partly of profits or income
         arising in such other Contracting State.”


      The significant provision concerning avoidance of double taxation is

contained in
Article 25
, which is re-produced hereinunder:
“25. AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION.
(1)      The law in force in either of the Contracting States will
         continue to govern the taxation of the income in the respective
         Contracting States except where provisions to the contrary are
         made in this Agreement.
(2)      Where a resident of India derives income which, in
         accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, may be taxed
         in the Sultanate of Oman, India shall allow as a deduction from
         the tax on the income of that resident an amount equal to the
         income tax paid in the Sultanate of Oman, whether directly or by
         deduction. Such deduction shall not, however, exceed that part
         of the income tax(as computed before the deduction is given)
         which is attributable to the income which may be taxed in the
         Sultanate of Oman.
8
(3)      Where a resident of the Sultanate of Oman derives
          income which, in accordance with the provisio0ns of this
          Agreement, may be taxed in India, the Sultanate of Oman shall
          allow as a deduction from the tax on the Income of the resident
          an amount equal to the income tax paid in India, whether
          directly or by deduction. Such deduction shall not, however,
          exceed that part of the income tax (as computed before the
          deduction is given) which is attributable to the income which
          may be taxed in India.
(4)      The tax payable in a Contracting State mentioned in
          paragraph 2 and Paragraph 3 of this Article shall be deemed to
          include the tax which would have been payable but for the tax
          incentive granted under the laws of the Contracting State and
          which are designed to promote development.
(5)     Income which, in accordance with the provisions of this
          Agreement, is not to be subjected to tax in a Contracting State,
          may be taken into account for calculating the rate of tax to be
          imposed in that Contracting State.”

      The provisions contained in Omani Tax Laws, relied upon by the

assessee read as follows:
“Article 8 (bis) – In exception to the provisions of
Article 8
of this
          law, tax shall not apply on the following:
1. Dividends received by the company against equity shares,
          portions or stocks in the capital of any other company.
2. Profits or gains realized by the company from the sale of
          securities listed in Muscat Securities Market or from their
          disposal.”
13.
Article 25 (2)
of the DTAA provides that where a resident of India derives

income, which in accordance with this agreement, may be taxed in the
9
Sultanate of Oman, India shall allow as a deduction from the tax on the income

of that resident an amount equal to the income tax paid in the Sultanate of

Oman, whether directly or by deduction.
Article 25 (4)
clarifies that the tax

payable in a Contracting State mentioned in clause 2 and clause 3 of the said

Article shall be deemed to include the tax which would have been payable but

for the tax incentive granted under the laws of the Contracting State and which

are designed to promote development.
14.   The revenue relied upon
Article 11
which provides that dividends paid by

a company which is a resident of a Contracting State to a resident of the other

Contracting State may be taxed in that other Contracting State. Thus, according

to the revenue, dividend received by the assessee is taxable in India and is not

exempt because the same is not designed as tax incentive in Oman to promote

development in that country. In the same manner, it is argued that the letter

issued by the Secretary General for Taxation, Ministry of Finance, Oman was

not issued by the competent Omani authority and has no statutory force.
15.   The term ‘incentive’ is neither defined in the Omani Tax Laws nor in the
Income Tax Act, 1961
. Faced with this situation, the JV addressed a letter in

November, 2000 to Oman Oil Company seeking clarification regarding the

purpose of
Article 8 (bis)
of the Omani Tax Laws. The clarification letter dated
10
11.12.2000 addressed by the Secretary General for Taxation, Sultanate of

Oman, Ministry of Finance, Muscat to Oman Oil Company SAOC is significant,

and reads as follows:
“We refer to your letter dated 2nd December, 2000 and our
          previous letter dated 8 August, 2000 on the above subject.
Under
Article 8
of the Company Income Tax Law of Oman,
          dividend forms part of the gross income chargeable to tax. The
          tax law of Oman provides income tax exemption to companies
          undertaking certain identified economic activities considered
          essential for the country’s economic development with a view to
          encouraging investments in such sectors.
Before the recent amendments to the Profit Tax Law on
          Commercial and Industrial Establishments,
Article 5
of this law
          provided for exemption of dividend income in the hands of the
          recipients if such dividends were received out of the profits on
          which Omani income tax was paid by distributing companies. It
          meant that Omani income tax was payable by the recipients on
          any dividend income received out of the exempt profits from tax
          exempt companies. As a result, investors in tax exempt
          companies that undertake those activities considered essential
          for the country’s economic development suffered a tax cost on
          their return on investments the tax treatment under the above-
          mentioned
Article 5
had the negative impact on investments in
          tax exempt project.
The company Income Tax Law of 1981 was, therefore, recently
          amended by Royal Decree No. 68/2000 by the insertion of a new
Article 8 (bis)
which is effective as from the tax year 2000. As per
          the newly introduced
Article 8 (bis)
of the Company Income Tax
          Law, dividend distributed by all companies, including the tax-
          exempt companies would be exempt from payment of income
          tax in the hands of the recipients. In this manner, the
          Government of Oman would achieve its aim objective of
          promoting economic development within Oman by attracting
          investments.
11
We presume from our recent discussions with you that the
         Indian investors in the above Project would be setting up
         Permanent Establishment in Oman and that their equity
         investments in the Project would be effectively connected with
         such Permanent Establishments.
On the above presumption, we confirm that tax would be
         payable on dividend income earned by the Permanent
         Establishments of the Indian Investors, as it would form part of
         their gross income under
Article 8
, if not for the tax exemption
         provided under
Article 8 (bis).
As the introduction of
Article 8 (bis)
is to promote economic
         development in Oman, the Indian Investors should be able to
         obtain relief in India ITA Nos. 6785 & 6786/DEL/2015 (AYRS.
2010-11 & 2011-12) KRISHAK BHARATI CO-OPERATIVE LIMITED
         VS. ACIT
under
Article 25 (4)
of the Agreement for Avoidance of
         Double Taxation in India. All other matters covered in our letter
         No. FT/13/92 dated 6th August, 2000 remained unchanged.”
16.   It is, thus, clear from the above letter of the Omani Finance Ministry that

the dividend distributed by all companies, including the tax-exempt companies

would be exempt from payment of income tax in the hands of the recipients.
By extending the facility of exemption, the Government of Oman intend to

achieve its object of promoting development within Oman by attracting

investments. Since the assessee has invested in the project by setting up a

permanent establishment in Oman, as the JV is registered as a separate

company under the Omani laws, it is aiding to promote economic development

within Oman and achieve the object of
Article 8 (bis).
The Omani Finance
12
Ministry concluded by saying that tax would be payable on dividend income

earned by the permanent establishments of the Indian Investors, as it would

form part of their gross income under
Article 8
, if not for the tax exemption

provided under
Article 8(bis).
17.   A plain reading of
Article 8
and
Article 8 (bis)
would manifest that under
Article 8
, dividend is taxable, whereas,
Article 8(bis)
exempts dividend received

by a company from its ownership of shares, portions, or shareholding in the

share capital in any other company. Thus,
Article 8(bis)
exempts dividend tax

received by the assessee from its PE in Oman and by virtue of
Article 25
, the

assessee is entitled to the same tax treatment in India as it received in Oman.
18.   Insofar as the argument concerning the assessee not having PE in Oman,

it is significant to note that from the year 2002 to 2006, a common order was

made under
Article 26 (2)
of the Income Tax Law of Oman. The High Court has

extracted the opening portion of the above order, which reads as under:
“We refer to the returns of income and determine the taxable
          income as under:
Kribhco Muscat is a permanent establishment supported by M/s.
          Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited, a multi-state cooperative
          society registered in India. As per the accounts, Kribhco-Muscat
          is in receipt of dividend income from Omifco, a joint stock
          company registered in Oman, and that dividend income is
          connected with the investment of Kribhco-Muscat. The dividend
13
income is, however, exempt from tax in accordance with
Article
          8(bis) (1)
of the Company Income Tax Law.
The tax exemption on dividend is granted with the objective of
          promoting economic development within Oman by attracting
          investments.”


      It is, thus, apparent that the assessee’s establishment in Oman has been

treated as PE from the very inception up to the year 2011. There is no reason

as to why all of a sudden, the assessee’s establishment in Oman would not be

treated as PE when for about 10 years it was so treated, and tax exemption was

granted basing upon the provisions contained in
Article 25
read with
Article 8

(bis)
of the Omani Tax Laws.
19.   Learned senior counsel for the appellant has also raised an issue to the

effect that the letter dated 11.12.2000 issued by the Secretary General for

Taxation, Ministry of Finance, Sultanate of Oman has no statutory force as per

Omani Tax Laws, hence, the same cannot be relied upon to claim exemption. In

our view, the above letter, as has been reproduced in the preceding paragraph

of this judgment, is only a clarificatory communication interpreting the

provisions contained in
Article 8
and
Article 8 (bis)
of the Omani Tax Laws. The

letter itself has not introduced any new provision in the Omani Tax Laws. In this

view of the matter, the argument raised by the learned senior counsel would

not convince us to deny exemption to the assessee.
14
20.   In our considered view, the appellant has not been able to demonstrate

as to why the provisions contained in
Article 25
of DTAA and
Article 8 (bis)
of

the Omani Tax Laws would not be applicable and, consequently, we hold that

the appeals have no substance and deserve to be dismissed which are hereby

dismissed.
………………………………………J.
                                              (B.V. NAGARATHNA)


                                        ………………………………………J.
                                        (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
SEPTEMBER 15, 2023
NEW DELHI.