[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Life Insurance Corporation Of India vs Dravya Finance Pvt. Ltd. . on 6 September, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023INSC815


                                                                              Non-Reportable

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.4095 OF 2012


                            Life Insurance Corporation of India                  … Appellant


                                                          versus


                            Dravya Finance Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.                  … Respondents


                                                     JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.    Under
Section 38
of the Insurance Act, 1938 (for short,
                            ‘the
Insurance Act
’), an insured who is holding a policy of life
                            insurance issued by the appellant–Life Insurance Corporation
                            of India (insurer) is entitled to transfer or assign the policy with
                            or without consideration by an endorsement upon the policy
                            itself or by a separate instrument duly signed by the transferor
                            or by the assignor and attested by one witness. Unamended
                            sub-Section (2) of
Section 38
provided for service of notice in
                            writing of transfer or assignment to the insurer in a manner set
                            out therein.        Unamended Sub-Section (4) of
Section 38
Signature Not Verified
provided that upon receipt of a notice of transfer or assignment
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.09.06
17:38:34 IST
Reason:
under sub-Section (2) of
Section 38
, the appellant–insurer was
                            under an obligation to record the fact of such transfer or
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                          Page 1 of 10
assignment together with the date thereof and the name of the
       transferee or assignee. On request of the person who gives
       notice, the appellant–insurer was under an obligation to issue
       a written acknowledgement of the receipt of such notice on
       payment of a fee not exceeding Rs.1.
2.     The appellant–insurer issued a circular on 24th April
       2006 and imposed a registration charge of Rs.250 per
       assignment.         The first respondent–Dravya Finance Private
       Limited, which is a finance company, challenged the said
       circular before the Bombay High Court on the ground that
       firstly, it is contrary to
Section 38
of the Insurance Act and
       secondly, it is in violation of
Article 265
of the Constitution of
       India as a levy of a tax or fee was sought to be made without
       any authority of law. There were other challenges, such as
       violation of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
and
300A
of the Constitution of
       India.
3.     By the impugned judgment, the High Court of Judicature
       at Bombay concluded that the levy of a sum of Rs.250/- for
       registration of assignment under the impugned circular was
       the levy of service charge or fee without there being any power
       to do so.       Therefore, the impugned circular was held to be
       unconstitutional and was, accordingly, struck down.
SUBMISSIONS
4.     The learned counsel appearing for the appellant–insurer
       invited our attention to
Section 6
of the Life Insurance
       Corporation Act, 1956 (for short, ‘the
LIC Act
’). He submitted
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                    Page 2 of 10
that under sub-Section (1) of
Section 6
, the appellant has a
       duty to carry on life insurance business. In fact, he relied upon
       sub-Section (3) of
Section 6
of the LIC Act by pointing out that
       in the discharge of its functions, LIC has to act in accordance
       with business principles.         He submitted that the appellant–
       insurer has placed on record before the High Court more than
       sufficient material indicating the large number of notices of
       assignments received by the appellant and the enormous
       expenditure involved in dealing with the same. He submitted
       that when the appellant–insurer issues a life insurance policy,
       it is a contract of insurance which is purely a business
       transaction. He submitted that for registration of assignments,
       service charges of Rs.250 per assignment are levied as a part
       of the business transaction between the insured and the
       appellant–insurer. He submitted that the levy of such a fee to
       meet the expenditure is a part of the business contract which
       will not attract
Article 265
of the Constitution of India. The
       learned counsel appearing for the appellant urged that 95% of
       the surplus of the appellant is usually allocated to the
       policyholders.          He submitted that under sub-Section (4) of
Section 38
, a fee of Rs.1 is provided for issuing an
       acknowledgement of receipt of the notice of the assignment and
       what is sought to be charged under the impugned circular, is
       the fee or charge on account of administrative expenses
       incurred for recording the assignment. He would, therefore,
       submit that there is no illegality associated with the circular
       which was impugned before the High Court.             The learned
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                     Page 3 of 10
counsel appearing for the respondent supported the impugned
       judgment.
OUR CONCLUSION
5.
Section 38
of the Insurance Act, before it was substituted
       by the Act 5 of 2015, read thus:
“38. Assignment and transfer of
                      insurance policies.—(1) A transfer or
                      assignment of a policy of life insurance,
                      whether with or without consideration,
                      may be made only by an endorsement
                      upon the policy itself or by a separate
                      instrument, signed in either case by the
                      transferor or by the assignor, his duly
                      authorized agent and attested by at least
                      one witness, specifically setting forth the
                      fact of transfer or assignment.
(2) The transfer or assignment shall be
                      complete and effectual upon the
                      execution of such endorsement or
                      instrument duly attested but except
                      where the transfer or assignment is in
                      favour of the insurer shall not be
                      operative as against an insurer and shall
                      not confer upon the transferee or
                      assignee, or his legal representative, any
                      right to sue for the amount of such
                      policy or the moneys secured thereby
                      until a notice in writing of the transfer or
                      assignment and either the said
                      endorsement or instrument itself or a
                      copy thereof certified to be correct by
                      both transferor and transferee or their
                      duly authorized agents have been
                      delivered to the insurer:
Provided that where the insurer
                      maintains one or more places of
                      business in India, such notice shall be
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                         Page 4 of 10
delivered only at the place in India
                      mentioned in the policy for the purpose
                      or at his principal place of business in
                      India.
(3) The date on which the notice referred
                      to in sub-section (2) is delivered to the
                      insurer shall regulate the priority of all
                      claims under a transfer or assignment
                      as between persons interested in the
                      policy; and where there is more than one
                      instrument of transfer or assignment the
                      priority of the claims under such
                      instruments shall be governed by the
                      order in which the notices referred to in
                      sub-section (2) are delivered.
(4) Upon the receipt of the notice referred
                      to in sub-section (2), the insurer shall
                      record the fact of such transfer or
                      assignment together with the date
                      thereof and the name of the transferee or
                      the assignee and shall, on the request of
                      the person by whom the notice was
                      given, or of the transferee or assignee, on
                      payment of a fee not exceeding one
                      rupee, grant a written acknowledgement
                      of the receipt of such notice; and any
                      such     acknowledgement        shall    be
                      conclusive evidence against the insurer
                      that he has duly received the notice to
                      which such acknowledgment relates.
(5) Subject to the terms and conditions
                      of the transfer or assignment, the
                      insurer shall, from the date of the receipt
                      of the notice referred to in sub-section
                      (2), recognise the transferee or assignee
                      named in the notice as the only person
                      entitled to benefit under the policy, and
                      such person shall be subject to all
                      liabilities and equities to which the
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                        Page 5 of 10
transferor or assignor was subject at the
                       date of the transfer or assignment and
                       may institute any proceedings in
                       relation to the policy without obtaining
                       the consent of the transferor or assignor
                       or making him a party to such
                       proceedings.
(6)……………….
(7)……………….”
6.       This Court in the case of
Life Insurance Corporation of
       India v. Insure Policy Plus Services Private Limited and
       Ors.1
has dealt with sub-Section (1) of
Section 38
dealing with
       the assignment and transfer of the policy. In paragraph 11 of
the said decision
, this Court held that on transfer or
       assignment of a policy and on the requisite procedure being
       complied with, the assignee alone has an interest in the policy.
       It was held that the insurer was bound by the provisions of
Section 38
to accept such transfer or endorsement. This Court
       also considered amended sub-Section (2) of
Section 38
of the
       Insurance Act which enables the insured to decline to act upon
       any endorsement made under sub-Section (1), where it has
       sufficient reason to believe that such transfer or assignment is
       not bona fide or is not in the interest of the policyholder or
       public interest or for the purpose of trading of insurance policy.
7.       In this case, we are not dealing with the issue when an
       insurer can decline to act upon endorsement of assignment. In
       this case, we are concerned with the impugned circular which



       1   (2016) 2 SCC 507
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                       Page 6 of 10
prescribes fees for recording the assignment of policies. In the
       impugned circular dated 24th April 2006, it is stated thus:
“At present, assignment of policies is
                      being registered without any charges.
                      However, the cost of the transaction of
                      assignments/re-assignment of a policy
                      is considerable. Therefore, it has now
                      been decided to levy service charges of
                      Rs.250/-           transaction           of      effecting
                      assignment under a policy .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
                      .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
                      .. .. .. .. .. .. ..”
8.     The question is whether the appellant–insurer is lawfully
       entitled to levy a service charge of Rs.250/- for a transaction of
       assignment of a life insurance policy. In the impugned order,
       the High Court, in detail, went into the question of whether the
       levy of Rs.250/- under the impugned circular was a tax or a
       fee. The High Court held that by the impugned circular, the
       appellant has provided for service charge or fee for the services
       to be rendered to the person requesting for registration of an
       assignment. This finding regarding the nature of the levy has
       not been assailed by the appellant–insurer.
9.     Now, the only question is whether the appellant had a
       lawful authority to levy a service charge or fee for the
       transaction of assignment or transfer of policy. It is not the
       case of the appellant–insurer that in the contract of policy,
       there is any clause which allows such a levy. Moreover, the
       assignment or transfer of policy is governed by statutory
       provisions in the form of
Section 38
of the Insurance Act. It is
       well settled that if the law requires a particular thing to be done
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                                           Page 7 of 10
in a particular manner, it must be done in that manner and
       not in any other manner.
Section 38
does not authorise the
       levy of any such fee. Unamended sub-Section (2) of
Section 38
of the Insurance Act provided for giving acknowledgement of a
       notice of transfer or assignment given in terms of sub-Section
       (2) of
Section 38
. It was specifically provided therein that the
       insurer can charge and levy a fee not exceeding Rs.1 for giving
       such acknowledgement. Thus, it prescribed a fee for issuing
       acknowledgement of notice of assignment or transfer. Though,
       there was a specific provision made to levy a fee for giving
       acknowledgement of notice of transfer, the legislature, in its
       wisdom, has not provided any fee or charge for recording the
       assignment or transfer in the records of the insurer.
Interestingly, in the substituted
Section 38
of the Insurance
       Act, which was brought into force on 26th December 2014, the
       provision enabling the charging of a fee of Rs.1 for
       acknowledgement has been done away with.
10.    Under
Section 48
of the LIC Act, the general rule-making
       power is vested in the Central Government. Under
Section 49
,
       the power to make regulations vests in the appellant–insurer.
       It is an admitted position that neither rules under
Section 48
have been framed nor regulations under
Section 49
have been
       made, authorising the appellant–insurer to levy a service
       charge or fee for recording the endorsement of transfer or
       assignment by the appellant–insurer. The rule-making power
       under
Section 114
of the Insurance Act has not been exercised
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                  Page 8 of 10
for this purpose. As mentioned earlier, even in the contract of
       policy, such a provision has not been made.
11.    At this stage, we may note that the Insurance Regulatory
       and Development Authority of India (Fee for granting written
       acknowledgement of the receipt of Notice of Assignment or
       Transfer) Regulations, 2015 have been made in accordance
       with the powers conferred by
Section 114A
of the Insurance
       Act. The Regulations were brought into force on 29th April
       2015. Regulations 3 and 4 of the said Regulations read thus:
“Fee for granting acknowledgement of
                   Notice of Assignment or Transfer:
(3) An Insurer is permitted to collect the
                   following fee for granting a written
                   acknowledgement of the receipt of notice of
                   assignment or transfer.
(a) In respect of those policies that are
                      issued in electronic form as specified by
                      the regulations under the provisions of
Section 14(2)
of the Act the fee collected
                      shall not exceed Rs.50 (Rupees fifty only)
                      inclusive of applicable taxes;
(b) In respect of policies issued other
                      than those referred under Regulation
                      (3)(a) above the fee collected shall not
                      exceed Rs.100 (Rupees Hundred Only)
                      inclusive of applicable taxes;
(4) No other fee shall be collected for
                   rendering any other services such as,
                   recording the fact of the transfer or
                   assignment or any other services
                   connected to the assignment or transfer
                   prescribed in
Section 38
of the Act.”
                                          (emphasis added)
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                       Page 9 of 10
Hence, the said Regulations prohibit the levy of any fee for
       recording the assignment of policies.
12.    For the aforesaid reasons, we find no error in the view
       taken by the High Court that the appellant–insurer had no
       right to claim fees of Rs.250/- for recording the endorsement
       of assignment or transfer.
13.    Hence, there is no merit in this appeal and the same is,
       accordingly, dismissed.
….…………………….J.
                                                (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                …...…………………...J.
                                                (Sanjay Karol)
       New Delhi;
September 6, 2023.
Civil Appeal No.4095 of 2012                                 Page 10 of 10