[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chen Khoi Kui vs Liang Miao Sheng on 13 September, 2023
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aniruddha Bose
REPORTABLE
2023INSC827
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO……………………. OF 2023
                            (Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to Appeal
                             (Civil) No._____________ @ Diary No.29700 of 2019)


                   CHEN KHOI KUI                                  …APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS

                   LIANG MIAO SHENG & ORS.                        …RESPONDENT(S)



                                              JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Delay condoned.
2.       Leave granted.
3.       The main question which arises for adjudication in this

                   appeal is as to whether the Registrar of Society, empowered to

                   grant registration under West Bengal Registration Act 1961, also

                   has the power to cancel such registration. There is no specific

                   provision in the statute granting such authority the power to

                   review or cancel his own decision. The root of the dispute lies in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2023.09.13
what appears to be a conflict between two groups of the chinese
   17:28:52 IST
   Reason:
tannery owners in Kolkata over the control of a school. The school
1
in question, as per pleadings, came into existence in the year

1929 as ‘Pei May Chinese School’, and operated out of a small hut

in an area commonly referred to as China Town. Subsequently,

the Chinese Tannery Owners’ Association in Kolkata set up the

school on a large tract of land in a locality known as Tangra. As

per the appellant, the school was moved to this location, now

carrying the street address P-1 and 2, Iswar Mondal Lane,

Kolkata-700046. The tanners of Chinese origin at one point of

time constituted an affluent and vibrant trade group in Kolkata in

the field of processing and production of leather goods and they

still have a presence in that sector. The Chinese Tannery Owners’

Association was registered as a society in the year 1967 under the
West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961
. The Regulation of

the Association, a copy of which has been annexed at page 72 of

the paperbook records that the said association had been

functioning since 1944 and has a school of its own known as Pei

May School. The address of the school is also specified therein.
The appellant claims to be the secretary of the school, which

according to him was operated by the Chinese Tannery Owners’

Association.
2
4.       Dispute arose when the Registrar, under the aforesaid

Statute, granted certificate of Registration in the name of ‘Pei May

Chinese High School’ as an independent society on 19.02.2010 in

response to an application made by the respondents herein. The

address of this society has been shown to be P-1-2, Iswar Mondal

Lane over which the Chinese Tannery Owners’ Association claim

title.    The appellant contends that the said association has no

connection whatsoever with Pei May Chinese High School. This

dispute was initially raised with the Registrar by filing a

complaint. The appellant, on 17.08.2010, had submitted to the

Registrar copies of letters by seven individuals who had been

shown as office bearers/members of the “Pei May Chinese High

School” society. Their letters were broadly to the effect that they

were never appointed in such capacity, as was shown in the

memorandum of association of the “school society”.         The said

letters carried the request for cancelling the registration of Pei

May Chinese High School as a society. There were allegations of

forgery and fabrication of signatures in this set of complaints.
5.       It appears such disputes were taken to the civil court and

criminal proceeding was also instituted. A writ petition was also

filed by the appellant in which cancellation of the said registration
3
was asked for. The civil suit was instituted by the Chinese

Tannery Owners’ Association in the year 2016 in the Court of

Civil Judge, Junior Division at Sealdah, registered as T.S.

No.142/2016. This was a suit for declaration and injunction and

the substantive relief of the plaintiff therein was to restrain the

respondents from interfering with the administration of Pei May

Chinese High School. It appears that in an interlocutory

proceeding taken out in connection with that suit, ad-interim

injunction was granted in favour of the appellant.
6.   From the year 2011, there have been several rounds of

litigations by and between the rival parties. The order of the

Registrar, from which the present proceeding originates was

passed in pursuance of an earlier Division Bench judgment of the

Calcutta High Court in APOT No. 498 of 2015 delivered on

14.01.2016. This judgment records:-
“The entire issue in the appeal revolves round the question
        whether the Registrar of Societies has power to cancel the order
        passed by him on 25-1-2012. An application came to be
        presented before the Registrar complaining that the application
        consists of forged signature of one Chung Chis Ping. Admittedly,
        a criminal case is registered and investigation is pending so far
        as allegation of forgery is concerned.
In that view of the matter the observation of the Registrar that on
        observation it does not appear that the signature of the other
        person namely Chung Shih Ping who has signed as Chung Chih
        Ping has not been forged is premature. On what basis he comes
        to such finding is also not spelt out in the impugned order which
        is under challenge before the learned Single Judge.
4
So far as the question of power of review, apparently there is no
          substantive power of review provided in the Act in question. So
          far as the procedural review, it is inherent within the authority
          who passes the order. In that view of the matter, learned Judge
          was justified in remanding the matter to the Registrar of
          Societies.
Coming to the argument of learned Senior Counsel Mr.
          Bandopadhyay with regard to
sections 25
and
26
of the
          Societies Registration Act, 1961, we are of the opinion, it has no
          application since they operate altogether under a different
          circumstance. It is left to the wisdom of the Registrar in the above
          circumstances to proceed with the matter keeping in mind the
          pendency of the criminal investigation as regards allegation of
          forgery of the signature, as mentioned above.
With these observations, the appeal and application are
          disposed of.”
7.   The Registrar had passed an order for cancelling the

registration on 19.04.2016 and it was, inter-alia, held in this

order:-
“Hence, the matter is taken up for compliance of the Hon'ble
          Court's order and to avoid further prolixity, I have decided to
          pass a reasoned order. I have gone through the writ applications,
          Mandamus Appeal, the applications for stay file thereon,
          arguments put forward by the parties in dispute and their
          learned Advocates and the solemn orders passed by the Hon'ble
          Court and the provisions of law which were referred by the
          Hon'ble Court as well as the contesting parties. It is evident from
          Clause- I (a) of the Memorandum of Association of the Chinese
          Tannery Owners' Association, that the school in question (Pei
          May School) at 1 & 2, Iswar Mondal Lane, Kolkata - 700046
          shall run under the auspices of the Chinese Tannery owners'
          Association registered under
West Bengal Societies Registration
          Act, 1961
having its registration umber S/8546 of 1967-68.
          If a new society (Pei May Chinese High School) is emerged with a
          separate entity at the same address of Pei May School which is a
          part of Chinese Tannery Owners' Association and wish to
          register under
West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961
then
          the Memorandum of Association of Chinese Tannery Owners'
          Association is to be amended to that effect and to be approved
          from the Registrar of Societies. But I have not found any of such
          documents in the records wherein the Chinese Tannery owners'
          Association applied for such amendment of their Memorandum
          of Association.
5
I have not gone through the merits of the criminal proceedings
        pending in this issue on which the decision to be taken by the
        competent authority concerned but emphasis is only given on the
        matter of justification of issuance of certificate to Pei May
        Chinese High School. In my opinion, the application for
        registration of Pei May Chinese High School under the separate
        ambit of a registered society i.e. Chinese Tannery Owners
        Association, in violation of the provision of the Act and the
        registration so obtained by suppressing the fact, is liable to be
        cancelled.
Hence, being empowered by
Section 22
of the Bengal General
        Clauses Act, 1899 mentioned in the order of the Hon'ble Justice
        Arijit Banerjee dated 16,07.2015, I am passing this order of
        cancellation of the registration granted under
West Bengal
        Societies Registration Act, 1961
dated in respect of Pei May
        Chinese High School bearing registration number S/ lL/68216 of
        2009-10.
Hence forth the very society cannot function as a society
        registered under
West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961
.
        This is further to note that this order cannot be cited as
        precedent case unless it is specifically directed by the Court of
        law.”
8.   The order of the Registrar passed on 19.04.2016 was

unsuccessfully assailed before a Single Judge of the High Court in

Writ Petition No.391 of 2016 and Writ Petition No.518 of 2016.
There was difference of opinion between the learned Judges of the

Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, in a Letters Patent

Appeal filed by the respondent no.1 and others against the

decision of the learned Single Judge sustaining the cancellation

order. The presiding Judge opined that the Registrar’s decision

was correct whereas the companion Judge held that such an

issue could not be dealt with by the Registrar as it was not in the

nature of procedural review.               The companion Judge in her
6
differing view observed that since the issue of fraud and forging

signatures is already pending before the “Court below,” possibly

implying pendency of the civil suit and the criminal proceeding,

the decisions in such cases would provide complete relief to the

parties. In case the court arrived at a finding that the signatures

appended to the Memorandum of Association were forged then

the Registrar in exercise of his procedural power to review his own

registration order would be free to take a decision to deregister

the society as fraud vitiates everything, and in case the court

opines that the complaint does not have any merits then the

certificate of registration will not be open for scrutiny.
9.   In terms of the Clause 36 of the Letters Patent Act, 1865 of

the Calcutta High Court, the matter was referred to a third Judge

and the Referee Judge formulated the following two questions for

answering the reference:-
“1. Whether the Registrar of Firms, Societies and Non-trading
        Corporations, West Bengal, the respondent no.2 in the writ
        petition (hereafter the Registrar), did have the power to cancel
        the registration earlier granted in the name of "Pei May
        Chinese High School" on the ground that such registration was
        obtained by the appellants/writ petitioners (hereafter the
        appellants) by suppression of material facts?
2. If the first question were answered in the affirmative,
        whether the Registrar prior to passing the impugned order of
        cancellation extended due and reasonable opportunity to the
        appellants in consonance with the principles of natural justice
        to defend the allegation levelled against them by the
        respondent no.4, Mr. Chen Khoi Kui. (hereafter the objector)?”
7
10. Analysing the distinction between procedural review and

substantiative     review,     the     Referee     Judge       answered         above

questions in the following terms:-
“36. What the 1961 Act expressly bars is registration of a society
        under a name which is identical with, or too nearly resembles,
        the name of any other society which has been previously
        registered. In the present case, it is not in doubt that the names
        of the two societies are different, although it is true that the
        Chinese Tannery Owners' Association has been registered under
        the 1961 Act, with a disclosure that Pei May Chinese High
        School is a sister organisation of such association. However,
        whether registration obtained by the appellants in the name of
        Pei May Chinese High School is the result of any fraud or is
        otherwise statutorily barred, is not too clearly reflected in the
        order of cancellation passed by the Registrar. In order to ensure
        that an allegation of suppression of a material fact succeeds, it is
        incumbent on the party alleging to prove it by reference to
        documents on record at the time the application for registration of
        the appellants was being considered. The 1961 Act requires that
        registration be applied for with particulars to be disclosed in a
        memorandum together with the rules and regulations of the
        proposed registered society. No form of memorandum has been
        statutorily prescribed. In the absence of such form, one is left to
        wonder what are the queries that are required to be answered
        for registration to ensue. The memorandum submitted by the
        appellants has not been shown to be on the records of the writ
        appeal. The memorandum or its contents not being on record and
        the Registrar too not having referred to it in his impugned order,
        the degree of suppression and also whether it is of a material
        fact which, if disclosed, could have had the effect of summary
        rejection of the application for rejection cannot be ascertained
        and it is difficult in the exercise of the present jurisdiction to
        return a finding one way or the other.
37.
In
Shri Krishnan v. Kurukshetra University
, (1976) 1SCC311,
        the Supreme Court while considering the claim of a law student
        to take an examination which the respondent university had
        refused, observed in paragraph 7 that:
"*** It is well settled that where a person on whom fraud is
        committed is in a position to discover the truth by due diligence,
        fraud is not proved. It was neither a case of suggestio falsi, or
        suppressio veri. ***"
(italics in original)
38. In my view, because of ignorance or otherwise, the Registrar
        did not act within the parameters of the jurisdiction
laid down by
the Hon'ble Division Bench in its order dated January 14, 2016,
8
which is apparent on the face of the record. He proceeded to
exercise a power of substantive review, which was not available
to him in terms of such order and that too without reference to
the application for registration of the appellants that succeeded.
The vital difference between a power of substantive review and a
power of procedural review, evidently, was not present in the
mind of the Registrar. If at all there was suppression on the part
of the appellants, it had to be shown that such suppression was
akin to a fraud that had resulted in an order granting registration
in violation of a statutory provision. That has not been shown. It
is for this reason that, on facts and in the circumstances, I
answer the first point of difference noted above in the negative.
39. In view of such answer, question of answering the second
point does not arise.
40. Thus, though I agree with the learned Judge who proposed
that the order of the learned Judge dated May 18, 2017 should
be set aside and the appeal allowed, I am also of the view that
leaving the parties to battle it out before the civil court may not
be appropriate in the circumstances. There being an allegation of
fraud levelled by one party against the other and bearing in
mind the law relating to fraud noticed above, coupled with
observance of the order of the Hon'ble Division Bench dated
January 14, 2016 in the breach by the Registrar, much to the
detriment and prejudice of both the parties, it would only be fit
and proper to set aside the order impugned in the writ petition
and the judgment and order under appeal, and to order a further
remand of the matter to the Registrar for taking an appropriate
decision not only by adhering to the said order of January 14,
2016 but also in the light of the observations made hereinabove.
It is ordered accordingly. To support such course of action, which
is different from those directed by the differing Judges of the
Hon'ble Division Bench, I may refer to the decisions of referee
Judges of this Court in the decisions reported in 2014 (4) CHN
(CAL) 242 (Shivani Properties Private Limited vs. Bank of India)
and 2015 (2) CLJ (CAL) 141 (Tapas Paul vs. State of West Bengal
& Ors.), and the unreported decision dated January 31, 2019 in
APO 508 of 2017 (Sri Ami yo Bhusan Das vs. United Bank of
India & Ors.) rendered by me.
41. The objector and the appellants shall be heard within four
weeks from date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and order.
The Registrar shall, immediately after hearing is closed, proceed
to consider the contentious issues and render his decision within
a further period of a month thereafter. Needless to observe, the
Registrar ought to decide in the light of the observations made in
this order and whatever decision is taken by him must have the
support of reasons.
42. The reference is answered accordingly and the writ appeal
stands disposed of, without costs.”
9
11. On the point of power of the Registrar to cancel his own

order, the Referee Judge, whose judgment is under appeal, has

cited the provisions of
Section 22
of the Bengal General Clauses

Act, 1899 which stipulates:-
“22. Power to issue to include power to add to, amend,
        vary or rescind orders etc.— Where, by any Bengal Act or
        West Bengal Act, a power to issue orders, rules, bye-laws, or
        notifications is conferred, then, that power includes a power,
        exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction
        and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any
        orders, rules, bye-laws or notifications so issued.”
12. Citing the judgments of this Court in the cases of Grindlays

Bank Ltd. -vs- Central Government Industrial Tribunal and

Others [1980 (Supp) SCC 420] and Kapra Mazdoor Ekta Union
-vs- Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. and Another

[(2005) 13 SCC 777], and also a decision of the same High Court

in the case of Rina Mukherjee and Another -vs- New India

Assurance Co. Ltd. and Another [(2008) ACJ 1248], the Referee

Judge opined that the Registrar had proceeded to exercise his

power of substantive review and that too without reference to the

application for registration that succeeded.                This has been

recorded in paragraph 38 of the judgment impugned, which we

have reproduced above.
13. One of the points raised on behalf of the appellant before us

is that the judgment of the Division Bench delivered on
10
14.01.2016 not having been appealed against, has attained

finality and it was not permissible for the Division Bench, and

subsequently by the Referee Judge to re-examine the question as

to the manner in which the Registrar had exercised his power.

But we find that the Referee Judge has not addressed any issue

already covered by the decision of the Division Bench delivered on

14.01.2016. The Division Bench has explained the position of law

on the aspect of power of substantive review and procedural

review. The Referee Judge has only applied the same principle to

test the order of the Registrar.             Thus, we do not think the

principle   of   constructive   res        judicata   applied   against   the

respondents so far as this point is concerned. Moreover, before

the Referee Judge, the dispute centred around the decision taken

by the Registrar after the Division Bench had delivered the

judgment on 14.01.2016 and it formed a fresh cause of action.
14. On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted that the

FIR No.673/2010 dated 19.10.2010 in which the same allegation

of forged signatures was made stood closed with submission of

final report by the Investigating Officer before the concerned

court. It has been submitted before us that the person accused in

the criminal case (respondent no.14) has been discharged by the
11
ACJM, Sealdah by an order passed on 07.04.2021. But this fact,

in our opinion, does not conclude the dispute and in any event

closure report cannot result in final determination of the dispute

between two sets of parties on the adjudication of allegations of

filing false and fabricated documents before the Registrar of

Societies.   Otherwise, the respondents have defended the

judgment which is under appeal before us.
15.   We are of the view that the impugned judgment does not

suffer from any legal shortcoming warranting our interference.
16. It has also been argued before us that Chinese Tannery

Owners’ Association is the owner of the land where the subject

school is located. On this point, we would add that in the event

the respondents cannot demonstrate their right to run the school

on the land owned by the said Association without their

permission, that factor may also be taken into consideration by

the Registrar and that could also be a ground for cancellation of

registration. But any decision on that count shall be subject to

final adjudication by the civil court if an action on that count is

pending before the civil court.
17. The present appeal shall stand disposed of in the above

terms.
12
18. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
19. There shall be no order as to costs.
.................................J.
                                            (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)



                                            ...............................J.
                                           (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 13, 2023
13