[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sabbir (Dead) Through Lrs vs Anjuman (Since Deceased) Through Lrs on 22 September, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
1
2023INSC898
                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL No.6075 OF 2023
                            (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4477/2019)



               SABBIR (DEAD) THROUGH LRS                         … APPELLANT(S)


                                                   VERSUS


               ANJUMAN (SINCE DECEASED) THROUGH LRS.             … RESPONDENT(S)



                                               O R D E R
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Leave granted.
2.           Heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.           Both the original parties to the agreement to sell

               being dead, are now represented through their Legal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Representatives
   Neetu Khajuria
   Date: 2023.10.10
   18:13:32 IST
                                         (LRs).   Appellants   are   LRs   of   the
   Reason:
2
defendant whereas the Respondents are the LRs of the

plaintiff.
4.   The present appeal is directed against the Final

Judgment     and    Order   dated       18.07.2018        (hereinafter

referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by the

High Court     of Judicature        at Allahabad          (hereinafter

referred to as “the High Court”) in Second Appeal

No.1574 of 1984 by which the second appeal filed by

the respondents was allowed; judgment of the First

Appellate Court was set aside, and; judgment of the

Trial Court was affirmed and restored.


THE FACTUAL PRISM:
5.   An Agreement to Sell (hereinafter referred to as

“ATS”) was executed in favour of the respondents by

the appellants on 31.07.1975. The ATS envisioned that

the appellants had to apply for permission to sell the

property within eight days and upon permission being

received,     the    same   was    to     be     intimated     to   the

respondents    and    the   Sale       Deed    was   to   be   executed
3
within 15 days from receipt of such intimation by the

respondents. Earnest money of Rs.1,000/- was paid out

of the total sale consideration of Rs.6,000/-. The

appellants did not apply for any permission to sell

which led to the respondents filing Suit No. 5 of 1981

on 01.01.1981 for specific performance of the ATS. The

suit was decreed by judgment dated 08.03.1982. The

appellants     filed    Appeal     No.118         of    1982   which   was

allowed by the First Appellate Court vide judgment

dated   09.05.1984.      The     respondents           thereafter    filed

Second Appeal No.1574 of 1984 which was allowed by the

High Court on 02.04.2010. The appellants then carried

the case to this Court, which remanded the matter to

the   High    Court.    On     remand,      the    High    Court     again

allowed      the    Second     Appeal      by   its     judgment     dated

18.07.2018,        reversing    the       finding(s)      of   the   First

Appellate      Court.    The     High      Court’s      judgment     dated

18.07.2018 is impugned herein.
4
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
6.   Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that

the Trial Court had totally mis-appreciated the facts

and law while decreeing the suit. It was stated that

the First Appellate Court, after appreciation of the

facts in their correct perspective and applying the

law to the same, rightly reversed the Trial Court’s

view, and dismissed the suit. It was contended that

the High Court without giving any cogent reasons, on

wrong appreciation of the material/facts and law, had

reversed the judgment of the First Appellate Court.
Learned counsel submitted that our interference was

called for. It was contended that the First Appellate

Court had rightly come to the conclusion that in the

background of the various clauses in the ATS, the

respondents      had   not      taken   any    steps    despite      the

appellants not having applied for permission for five

years;   which    showed     that   the    respondents        were   not

ready    and   willing     to    perform      their    part    of    the
5
contract,     and       therefore,         the    suit    was    barred    by

limitation.
7.     It was submitted that Clauses 3 & 4 of the ATS

dated    31.07.1975       would    indicate        that    the     time   for

moving the court for specific performance started upon

expiry of the 8th day from 31.07.1975 and thus, filing

of    the   suit    on   01.01.1981         was    clearly       beyond   the

period specified to institute such case.


SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENTS:
8.      Learned    counsel      for     the      respondents      submitted

that    the   Trial      Court    had       rightly       held    that    the

appellants      had      to    apply       for    permission      and     upon

getting the same had to intimate to the respondents

and    within      fifteen     days        of    such    intimation,      the

respondents were to get the Sale Deed executed. As the

appellants        had    not     even       applied       and     thus,     no

permission was ever obtained, they had not informed

the respondents and therefore, the suit would not be

hit by limitation. It was his submission that the suit

was filed within the limitation period.
6
9.     It was further contended that the respondents had

orally shown their willingness to the appellants to

pay the balance amount and get the Sale Deed executed

in terms of the time-frame as per the ATS but the

appellants stoutly refused to act as per the terms of

the ATS. It was submitted that the respondents, who

were     the    tenants,       had       even    got      the    property

reconstructed      in      the       year       1978     by      investing

Rs.5,000/- after getting the maps approved by the

concerned       Municipal         Corporation            through        the

appellants.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
10.     Having considered the matter, the Court finds

that the Impugned Judgment cannot be sustained. The

true typed copy of the ATS dated 31.07.1975 has been

brought    on   record   by      the     learned       counsel    for   the

appellants.     Clause     3     thereof        stipulates       that   the

appellants within 8 days from that date, for sale of

the property, would apply for permission before the

District    Magistrate,        Saharanpur,        Uttar    Pradesh      and
7
upon the same being granted shall communicate it to

the respondents through registered post. Thereafter,

it   was    stipulated      that   within    15    days   from     such

intimation, the respondents shall get the Sale Deed

executed either in their favour or in favour of a

person of their choice and the expenses would be borne

by the respondents. Further, Clause 4 stipulated that

in case the appellants did not apply for permission

within      the   stipulated       time     ‘or’    after    getting

permission, did not inform the respondents and get the

deed executed in favour of either the respondents or

anyone of their choice then the respondents would have

the right to get the sale of the property in question

executed in their favour through the Court, and also

take    possession     through     the    Court.   A    conjoint    and

harmonious reading       of the        relevant Clauses      clearly

indicates that the onus was on the appellants to apply

within 8 days for permission and upon the permission

being      received,   to    intimate       to    the   respondents,

whereafter the respondents had to get the Sale Deed

executed within 15 days. It was clarified that in the
8
event of failure to do so i.e., either of not applying

for permission         ‘or’ not      intimating the           respondents

upon receipt of permission, the respondents had the

right to move the Court for getting the sale executed

as also for possession. Thus, from the ninth (9th) day

onwards, the onus would shift on the respondents, if

within 8 days the appellants had not even applied for

permission. Since the consequences of non-performance

of    the   duty     cast   upon   the      appellants    of    applying

within 8 days or non-intimation of permission having

been granted, in either contingency, a right accrued

to the respondents to move Court.
11.    In this background, the respondents cannot take

the plea that they would be entitled to indefinitely

wait    till    the    appellants         informed    them     about   the

permission. As soon as the first eight days expired,

the respondents had to show due diligence by being

vigilant       and    conscious      of    their     rights    and     were

required to act promptly. There being no notice given

to the      appellants by      the       respondents for five and a
9
half    years    to   indicate     the       reason      why   they    kept

waiting or that despite their willingness to comply

with their portion of the obligations under the ATS,

the appellants had not discharged their obligations

under the ATS and why the respondents should not move

before    the    Court   for     enforcement         of    the   ATS,    as

contemplated thereunder, coupled with the fact that in

the entire plaint, there is not even a whisper with

regard to the respondents having ever called upon the

appellants or given notice to them that they were

ready and willing to pay the balance amount and get

the Sale Deed executed, in our considered view does

not aid the respondents. We see nothing on the record

to    fathom    a   valid   or    justifiable         reason     for    the

respondents to have waited for five and a half years

before instituting the suit.
12.     From perusal of the plaint on the record it,

transpires that there is a statement in Paragraph No.6

that till the month of October, 1980, the original

respondent (since deceased) and her husband (now, as

Legal    Representative)         had       asked   the    appellants     to
10
execute the Sale Deed and then an eviction notice was

served on the original respondent (since deceased) and

her husband (now, as Legal Representative) and his

brother. It has further been stated that this was

after the respondents asked the appellants to execute

the Sale Deed within 15 days after taking permission.

Thus, nowhere it has been even indicated, in clear

terms, that the respondents were ready and willing to

pay the balance amount and get the Sale Deed executed

in   their    favour.   In   view    thereof,   from   their   own

pleadings in the plaint, even after five and a half

years, there being no averment that the respondents

were ready and willing to perform their obligations

under the ATS and pay the balance/remaining amount is

enough for the suit of the respondents to be dismissed

on the ground of limitation alone. The ATS is dated

31.07.1975 and the suit was filed on 01.01.1981. The

limitation for filing a suit for specific performance,

as per
Article 54
of the
Schedule to The Limitation

Act,   1963
is   3   years   ‘from    the    date   fixed   for

performance or if no such date is fixed, when the
11
plaintiff has notice that the performance is refused.’

In
Ghewarchand v Mahendra Singh
, (2018) 10 SCC 588, it

was observed that when deciding upon the question of

limitation, it is mainly required to see the plaint

allegations   and   how   the   plaintiff   has   pleaded   the

accrual of cause of action for filing of the suit.
Apropos limitation, this Court observed, in
Basawaraj

v Land Acquisition Officer
, (2013) 14 SCC 81 as under:
‘12. It is a settled legal proposition that
    law of limitation may harshly affect a
    particular party but it has to be applied
    with all its rigour when the statute so
    prescribes. The court has no power to extend
    the period of limitation on equitable
    grounds. “A result flowing from a statutory
    provision is never an evil. A court has no
    power to ignore that provision to relieve
    what it considers a distress resulting from
    its operation.” The statutory provision may
    cause   hardship  or   inconvenience  to   a
    particular party but the court has no choice
    but to enforce it giving full effect to the
    same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which
    means “the law is hard but it is the law”,
    stands attracted in such a situation. It has
    consistently been held that, “inconvenience
    is not” a decisive factor to be considered
    while interpreting a statute.
13. The statute of limitation is founded on
     public policy, its aim being to secure
     peace in the community, to suppress fraud
     and perjury, to quicken diligence and to
     prevent oppression. It seeks to bury all
12
acts of the past which have not been
      agitated unexplainably and have from lapse
      of   time   become   stale.  According  to
      Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 28, p.
266:
“605. Policy of the Limitation Acts.—
        The courts have expressed at least
        three differing reasons supporting the
        existence of statutes of limitations
        namely, (1) that long dormant claims
        have more of cruelty than justice in
        them, (2) that a defendant might have
        lost the evidence to disprove a stale
        claim, and (3) that persons with good
        causes of actions should pursue them
        with reasonable diligence.”

      An unlimited limitation would lead to a
      sense of insecurity and uncertainty, and
      therefore, limitation prevents disturbance
      or deprivation of what may have been
      acquired in equity and justice by long
      enjoyment or what may have been lost by a
      party's own inaction, negligence or laches.
      (See
Popat and Kotecha Property v. SBI
      Staff Assn.
[(
2005) 7 SCC 510], Rajender
      Singh v. Santa Singh
[(1973) 2 SCC 705:
AIR
      1973 SC 2537] and Pundlik Jalam Patil v.
      Jalgaon Medium Project
[(2008) 17 SCC 448:
(2009) 5 SCC (Civ) 907].)’
                              (emphasis supplied)
13.   For reasons aforesaid, we set aside the Impugned

Judgment. The judgment and order passed by the First

Appellate   Court,   dismissing   the   suit,    stands

restored. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
13
14.   The respondents had paid, in 1975, Rs.1,000 to

the   appellants.    The     respondents     are   entitled   to

refund   thereof.   We     quantify   such   lump-sum   refund,

factoring in the time elapsed, at Rs.1,50,000 to be

paid on/before 01.01.2024 to the respondents by the

appellants.
15.   In the extant circumstances, there shall be no

order as to costs.
.....................J.
                                       [VIKRAM NATH]




                                      .....................J.
                                       [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]



NEW DELHI.
SEPTEMBER 22, 2023