[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Buddhadeb Saha vs The State Of West Bengal on 13 September, 2023
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
1

                                                                                           REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1084



                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1692 OF 2022



                            BUDDHADEB SAHA & ORS.                                    Appellant(s)

                                                                VERSUS


                            THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                                 Respondent(s)



                                                         O R D E R
1.      This    appeal      is        at     the    instance        of     four

                         convicts and is directed against the judgment and

                         order    dated    23rd     July,       2019        passed    by    the     High

                         Court at Calcutta in Criminal Appeal No. 26 of

                         2018, by which the High Court dismissed the appeal

                         filed    by     the     convicts           (appellants       herein)        and

                         thereby        affirmed         the        judgment     and        order     of

                         conviction and sentence passed by the Additional
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Sessions       Judge,     2nd    Court,       Katwa,        Burdwan,       West
   Date: 2023.12.20
   10:30:47 IST
   Reason:
Bengal    in     the      Sessions           Trial    No.     13    of     2014

                         holding    the     appellants              guilty     for    the     offence
2
punishable under Sections 498A, 304B read with 34

of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for short, “the
IPC
”). The Trial Court sentenced them to suffer

rigorous imprisonment for three years with a fine

of   Rs.      5,000/-      each    for        the   offence       punishable

under
Section       498A
of         the   IPC     and     rigorous

imprisonment for a period of seven years for the

offence       punishable          under
Section      304B
of    the

Indian Penal Code.
CASE OF THE PROSECUTION:-
2.      The appellant No.1 (Buddhadeb Saha) is the

son of the appellants Nos. 2 and 3 resply. The

appellant          No.4    is     the    younger        brother        of    the

appellant No.1. The appellant No.1 was married to

the deceased, namely, Tuli Shah. The marriage was

solemnized on 24.02.2011.
3.      On     19th       September,          2011,       the     de        facto

complainant-Uma            Shankar           Shah   (PW-1)        lodged      an

First Information Report at the Ketugram Police

Station       stating       that        his    niece      Tuli     Shah      was

married       to    the    appellant          No.   1     past    couple      of

months. He further stated that as the parents of
3
Tuli Shah passed away while she was of a very

young age, it is he who took care of Tuli Shah and

brought her up. At the time of marriage, cash and

gold ornaments were given to the family of the

husband       of    Tuli     Shah.      However,      within     a   short

time,      the       appellants             started     harassing      the

deceased for want of more dowry.
4.      It is the case of the prosecution that on 16 th

September, 2011, the deceased committed suicide by

consuming           poison        on        account     of      incessant

harassment by the appellants at her matrimonial

home.
5.      Upon completion of investigation, chargesheet

was filed for the offences enumerated above. The

Trial      Court       framed          charge     for     the     offence

punishable under
Sections 498A
,
304B
read with 34

of   the
Indian    Penal      Code
.        The   accused     persons

pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
6.      In the course of the trial, the prosecution

examined       as    many    as    11       witnesses    and    also   led

documentary evidence.
7.      The    Trial       Court       upon    appreciation       of   the

evidence on record came to the conclusion that the
4
prosecution had successfully established its case

against       the     accused   persons      beyond      reasonable

doubt and accordingly held them guilty.
8.      The appellants herein being dissatisfied with

the judgment and order of conviction and sentence

passed by the Trial Court, went in appeal before

the   High     Court.    The    High    Court    thought       fit   to

affirm the judgment and order of conviction passed

by    the     Trial     Court   and     dismissed       the    appeal

accordingly.
9.      In    such    circumstances,       the   appellants          are

here before this Court with the present appeal.
10.     We take notice of the fact that the appellant

No.3 Pratima Saha (Mother-in-law) of the deceased

passed away during the pendency of this appeal.



SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS:-
11.     The    learned       counsel       appearing      for        the

appellants      vehemently         submitted     that    the    Trial

Court    as    well     as   the    High    Court     committed       a

serious error in holding the appellants guilty of

the offence they were charged with. According to

the learned counsel this is a case of no evidence.
5
He     laid    much       emphasis       on     the     fact    that    the

prosecution         has    not    been    able     to    establish      the

exact cause of death. He would argue that if it is

the    case    of     the    prosecution         that     the    deceased

committed      suicide       due     to       incessant        harassment,

then prosecution has to establish on the basis of

evidence on record as to what was the exact cause

of death.
12.     The learned counsel laid much emphasis on the

fact    that    the       post-mortem         report     does     not   say

anything about the exact cause of death.
13.     He     further           submitted        that         even     the

histopathology report is silent about any traces

of poison in the viscera. In such circumstances,

according to the learned counsel, the prosecution

has not been able to establish that the case on

hand is one of            unnatural death.
14.     He further submitted that the appellants have

already undergone almost six years of sentence. He

would submits that assuming for the moment that

there was harassment for the purpose of dowry, at

best,    they       could    have     been       convicted        for   the

offence       punishable         under
Section    498A
of    the
6
Indian Penal Code
, but, in any event, not under
Section 304B
of the Indian Penal Code.
15. In such circumstances referred to above, the

learned counsel prayed that there being merit in

his       appeal,           the   same       be     allowed    and   the

appellants be acquitted of all the charges.



SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE:-
16.      On        the   other    hand,      this     appeal   has   been

vehemently opposed by Mr. Avishkar Singhvi, the

learned counsel appearing for the State of West

Bengal.        He would submit that no error not to

speak of any error of law could be said to have

been committed by the Courts below in holding the

appellants guilty of the offence with which they

were charged.
17.      The learned counsel laid much emphasis on

the fact that within couple of months from the

date     of        marriage,      the       deceased    died    at    her

matrimonial          home    under      suspicious      circumstances.

According to him, there is thumping evidence on

record        to     indicate      that       there     was    incessant

harassment to the deceased by all the appellants
7
for want of dowry.
18.    The learned counsel invited the attention of

this Court to
Section 113B
of the Indian Evidence

Act, 1872 (for short, “the
Evidence Act
”) which

raises a presumption against the accused.
Section

113B
of the Evidence Act reads thus:-
“Section 113B. Presumption as to dowry
      death. -- When the question is whether a
      person has committed the dowry death of a
      woman and it is shown that soon before her
      death such woman had been subjected by such
      person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
      connection with, any demand for dowry, the
      court shall presume that such person had
      caused the dowry death.”
19.    The learned counsel drew a fine distinction

between     Sections   113A   and    113B    resply   of   the
Evidence Act
. In Section 113A, the Legislature has

thought fit to use the word “may”. Therefore, in a

given set of facts, the Court may presume whereas

under
Section 113B
of the Indian Evidence Act the

word used is “shall”. In view of the word “shall”,

the Court is left with no other option but to draw

the presumption.
20.    He   would   submit    that   there    is   intrinsic

evidence on record to indicate that the deceased
8
died on account of consumption of poison. He would

submit that there was long delay in forwarding the

sample of viscera collected during the course of

post-mortem to the Forensic Science Laboratory and

perhaps on account of delay, the histopathology

report is silent in so far as any traces of poison

being found in the viscera.
21.   In such circumstances referred to above, Mr.

Avishkar Singhvi, the learned counsel prayed that

there being no merit in this appeal the same may

be dismissed.
22.   Having    heard   the    learned   counsel      appearing

for   the   parties     and    having    gone     through   the

materials on record, the only question that falls

for our consideration is whether the High Court

committed      any   error     in   passing     the    impugned

judgment.
ANALYSIS
23.   Indisputably,      the    post     mortem    report    is

silent in so far as the exact cause of death is

concerned. There is no escape from the fact that

the viscera report is also silent in so far as any
9
traces of poison being found therein.
24.    However, the Trial Court in its judgment has

discussed the aforesaid aspect of the matter in a

quite satisfactory manner, which reads as under:-
“It is the opinion of Modi that in some
      cases, which had definite signs of death
      from   poisoning,   the   Chemical    Examiner
      failed to detect any poison and in that
      case the duty of the Judge is to weigh the
      evidences,    the    symptoms,     post-mortem
      appearances etc., to reach to the just
      conclusion. It was also the opinion of Modi
      that unsuitable samples, incorrect sampling
      sites,    delayed     storage,     delay    in
      examination of the viscera, use of wrong
      analytical   technique   may    frustrate   or
      distort proper      analysis and the final
      outcome may be wrong. I have gone through
      the observations made by Modi & HWV Cox in
      this regard. I have gone through the
      observations   made   by   them   in   respect
      various poisons and the symptoms. As per
      the inquest report (Ext-2), the police
      officer had noticed that froth was coming
      out from the right nostril. The skin color
      noted by the police officer was whitish.
      During post mortem it was noticed that
      Rigor Mortis was not present, the eyes were
      half closed, froth was coming out from the
      nose and mouth. On opening of the body the
      Oesophagus, lungs, trachea and bronchial
      trees were found congested. In the stomach
      the doctor found food particles and fluid
      with pungent smell. On analysis of various
      cases Modi & Cox had framed a guideline of
      detection of poison from the symptoms.
      According to them, white froth may come out
      from mouth and nose in case of Opium or its
      alkaloids. It was also their opinion that
10
in that case all the internal organs like
      stomach or lungs may be congested. They
      have also opined that if on opening of
      stomach detectable smell may found, that
      may be the effects of the poison like
      organophosphorus    compounds,     opium,
      formaldehyde etc.

            Here, in this case the post mortem
      observations shows that it was definitely a
      case of death due to poisoning. It is fact
      that the nature of poison could not be
      ascertained but all the symptoms proves
      that   the  death   of  Tuli   was  due   to
      consumption of poison and there is no other
      probable cause of her death. Obviously the
      death was caused otherwise than under the
      normal circumstances.”
                                 (Emphasis supplied)
25.     The aforesaid findings recorded by the trial

court    were   looked   into    by   the   High   Court   in

paragraph 13 of its impugned judgment discussed as

under:-
“The accused persons in vain sought to set
      up a futile plea by way of suggestion to
      the prosecution witnesses that Tuli died
      under normal circumstances due to illness
      and not by consuming poison. This plea
      could not be substantiated by any iota of
      evidence.
Section   106
of  the   Indian
      Evidence Act provides that when any fact is
      specially within the knowledge of any
      person, the burden of providing that fact
      is upon him. It is not in dispute that Tuli
      was married to the appellant No.1 on 24 th
      February, 2011. The fact that Tuli died in
      her matrimonial house within seven months
      of her marriage has not been denied. From
11
the evidence of PW-9 Dr. N. Ghatak it
transpires that no poison was found in the
viscera    sample      of   deceased   which   was
                  nd
received on 22         February, 2012. PW-10 is
the medical officer who held post-mortem
examination over the dead body of Tuli on
17th September, 2011. This witness testified
in    his     evidence      that    on    visceral
examination “odour material with pungent
smell was found in the stomach”. PW-10
opined that if anyone takes poison, such
kind of pungent smell may be found. PW-10
did not give any conclusive opinion as to
the cause of death since the viscera was
sent    for    chemical      examination.    Being
quizzed    in   course      of   evidence,   PW-10
admitted that if delay is caused in sending
viscera sample for chemical examination,
the poison might not be found. In the
present case, the viscera was received for
chemical examination on 22nd February, 2012
that is, after five months.              There is
nothing on record to show that the viscera
sample was preserved properly during the
aforesaid period. Though no poison could be
detected in the viscera sample of the
deceased, the factual position of the case
in hand substantiated by the evidence of
the witnesses and the inquest report go to
show that death of Tuli had occurred
“otherwise          than        under       normal
circumstances”. The inquest report lends
credence to the prosecution case as it
appears therefrom that death of Tuli was
caused by consuming poison. At the time of
inquest it was noted that froth was coming
out from the mouth and nose of the
deceased.       The        expression      “normal
circumstances”       apparently    means   natural
death. In other words, the expression
“otherwise than under normal circumstances”
means death not being in the usual course
but      apparently          under      suspicious
circumstances.        In the case of Bhupendra
Versus State of Madhya Pradesh reported in
12
2013(4) Crimes 480(Supreme Court) it was
      held that chemical examination of viscera
      is not mandatory in every case of dowry
      death. For the purpose of
Section 304 B
IPC
      mere   fact  of   an   unnatural   death   is
      sufficient to invite a presumption under
Section 113B
of the Evidence Act. The
      relevant paragraph 26 of the judgment in
      Bhupendra’s   case    (supra)    is    quoted
      hereinbelow:
“26. These decisions clearly bring out
          that a chemical examination of the
          viscera is not mandatory in every case
          of a dowry death; even when a viscera
          report is sought for, its absence is
          not necessarily fatal to the case of
          the prosecution when an unnatural death
          punishable under
Section 304-B
of the
          IPC or under
Section 306
of the IPC
          takes place; in a case of an unnatural
          death inviting
Section 304-B
of the IPC
          (read   with   the   presumption   under
Section 113-B
of the Evidence Act,
          1872) or
Section 306
of the IPC(read
          with the presumption under
Section 113-
A of the Evidence Act, 1872
) as long as
          there   is   evidence    of   poisoning,
          identification of the poison may not be
          absolutely necessary.
Reverting to the case in hand, from
      the evidence on record it is clear that
      death of Tuli had occurred otherwise than
      under normal circumstances.”
                                 (Emphasis supplied)
26.    There   is   intrinsic    evidence   on   record   to

indicate that the case on hand is one of suicide by

poison. The     PW-10 (Medical Officer) who performed
13
the post mortem has deposed that “odour material

with pungent smell was found in the stomach”. The

expert     opined    that     in    cases      of    consumption     of

poison, such kind of pungent smell would be found.

The PW-10 admitted that if there is any delay in

forwarding         the    viscera        sample       for    chemical

examination, the poison may not be detected.
27.      Unfortunately, in the                 case on hand, the

viscera      was    received       by    the   FSL    for    chemical

analysis on 22nd February, 2012 that is after a

period of almost five months.
28.   In     a     research    article         titled,      “Negative

viscera report and its medico-legal aspects”, it

has been mentioned that in many cases, the viscera

report is negative on three major basis, namely it

can be procedure based, sample based or lab based.

The   said    research      paper       reveals     that    there   are

circumstances in which viscera test may not reveal

the   presence       of   compounds         from     the    following

circumstances:—
1. Sample quantities received by FSL much less

 than those prescribed for optimal analysis;
2. Required quantity and quality of preservative
14
not used during sampling;
3.   Appropriate     temperature,            time    and      container

 not maintained for preservation of sample;
4.   Difficulty      in   detection          of     poison      due   to

 vomiting, purging or elimination from the system

 by the kidneys or due to prolonged stay in the

 hospital immediately prior to the death;
5. Not sending stomach wash (gastric lavage) and

 vomit along with viscera for examination;
6. Some organic poison decompose due to improper

 preservation or temperature control;
7. Site of sample collection on the body also

 play an important role;
8.   In     postmortem     decomposition,            many       poisons

 present in the tissue undergo chemical changes

 which cannot be detected in routine toxicological

 analysis;
29.   This    Court   in
Mahabir           Mandal       v.   State   of

Bihar
,     (1972)     1    SCC        748,     looked          into    the

observations     found     at    page        477     of    the    Modi’s

Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology (Seventeenth

edition) and held that under some circumstances, if

the whole of the poison has disappeared from the
15
lungs by evaporation, or has been removed from the

stomach and intestines by vomiting and purging, and

after absorption has been detoxified, conjugated

and eliminated from the system by the kidneys and

other channels, it is possible that there may not

be traces of poison.
30.    Thus, the absence of detection of poison in

the viscera report alone need not be treated as a

conclusive proof of the fact that the victim has

not died of poison.
31.
In
Mahabir Mandal
(supra), this Court has ob-

served as under:-
“Empty reference has been made by Mr.Chari
      to report dated December 23, 1963 of the
      Chemical Examiner, according to whom no
      poison could be detected in the viscera of
      Indira deceased. This circumstance would
      not, in our opinion, militate against the
      conclusion that the death of the deceased
      was due to poisoning. There are several
      poisons particularly of the synthetic hyp-
      notics and vegetable alkaloids groups,
      which do not leave any characteristic signs
      as can be noticed on post mortem examina-
      tion."
(Emphasis supplied)
32.      The   above    observation   of    this   Court   was

based on the reference made in the Modi's Medical

Jurisprudence     and    Toxicology.       Those   references
16
were also referred to by this Court, which are as

follows:-
“It is quite possible that a person may die
      from the effects of a poison, and yet none
      may be found in the body after death, if
      the whole of the poison has disappeared
      from the lungs by evaporation, or has been
      removed from the stomach and intestines by
      vomiting and purging, and after absorption
      has been detoxified, conjugated and elimi-
      nated from the system by the kidneys and
      other channels. Certain vegetable poisons
      may not be detected in the viscera, as they
      have no reliable tests, while some organic
      poisons, especially the alkaloids and glu-
      cosides, may be oxidation during life or by
      putrefaction after death, be split up into
      other substances which have no characteris-
      tic reactions sufficient for their identi-
      fication.”
                              (Emphasis supplied)
33.    As pointed out by this Court in a number of

cases, where the deceased dies as a result of poi-

soning, it is difficult to successfully isolate

the poison and recognise it. Lack of positive evi-

dence in this respect would not result in throwing

out the entire prosecution case, if the other cir-

cumstances clearly point out the guilt of the ac-

cused.
34.    According to Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and

Toxicology, 23rd Edition, Editors : K. Mathoharan
17
and    Amrit      K    Patnaik,    the    preserved     materials

should be sent to the concerned Forensic Science

Laboratory, through the concerned police station

as quickly as possible. Otherwise, the poison may

not be detected during the analysis of the vis-

cera, even though they may contain some poison.
35.      Ken      Kulig    MD,    in    Critical     Care   Secrets

(Fourth     Edition),      2007    states     that    the   gastric

lavage must be performed soon after ingestion to

be at all effective in removing the drugs from the

stomach. For this reason, many clinicians do not

lavage patients who have overdosed if more than 1

hour has elapsed since ingestion.
36.    We   are       conscious   of    the   legal   proposition

that while dealing with a case of circumstantial

evidence, the Court has to be circumspect. A note

of caution was sounded by a Constitution Bench of

this Court in
Raghav Prapanna Tripathi v. State of

U.P.
[AIR 1963 SC 74] quoting (AIR p. 89 para 60)

from R. vs. Hodge [(1838) 2 Law CC 227].
“The mind was apt to take a pleasure in
      adapting circumstances to one another, and
      even in straining them a little, if need
      be, to force them to form parts of one con-
18
nected whole; and the more ingenious the
      mind of the individual the more likely was
      it, considering such matter, to overreach
      and mislead itself, to supply some little
      link that is wanting, to take for granted
      some fact consistent with its previous the-
      ories and necessary to render them com-
      plete.”
37.    Thus, the Court should not unwittingly fall

into the same dangerous trap which the Constitu-

tion Bench has cautioned to be guarded against.
38.    Considering the overall evidence on record,

we find it difficult to take the view that in the

absence of any positive viscera report, the prose-

cution could be said to have failed to establish

its case.
39.    For the foregoing reasons, we have reached to

the conclusion that we should not interfere with

the concurrent findings recorded by the two Courts

below.
40.    In   the   result,   this   appeal   fails   and   is

hereby dismissed.
19
41.   Pending applications, if any, stand disposed

of.
….........................J
                         (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                         ...........................J
                         (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)


New Delhi
September 13, 2023
20
ITEM NO.114                 COURT NO.16                 SECTION II-B

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F        I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal    No(s).   1692/2022

BUDDHADEB SAHA & ORS.                                  Appellant(s)

                                   VERSUS

THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                               Respondent(s)


(IA No. 19003/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

Date : 13-09-2023 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA

For Appellant(s)

                     Mr. Md. Apzal Ansari, Adv.
Mr. V. N. Raghupathy, AOR


For Respondent(s)

                     Mr. Avishkar Singhvi, Adv.
Ms. Astha Sharma, AOR
                     Mr. Shreyas Awasthi, Adv.
Mr. Vivek Kumar, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.   The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed order.
2.   Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(DEEPAK SINGH)                                  (RAM SUBHAG SINGH)
COURT MASTER (SH)                               COURT MASTER (NSH)
                [Signed order is placed on the file]