[Cites
7
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Revenue Divisional Officer vs Dasari Ganga Raju And Others on 20 February, 1989
Equivalent citations: AIR1991AP110, AIR 1991 ANDHRA PRADESH 110, (1992) 7 LACC 403 (1990) 2 ANDHWR 124, (1990) 2 ANDHWR 124
JUDGMENT
1.
Land
Acquisition Act
on December 1,1977, acquiring Acs. 1-35 cents in Rayalam village of Narsipatnam town for establishment of the
bus-stand. The Land Acquisition Officer
determined the market value of the land
under acquisition at the rate of Rs.10,000/-
per acre. On reference, the Civil Court
enhanced the market value at the rate of
Rs.10/- per square yard. As against the
enhancement of the market value, the State
has filed these appeals.
2. The contention of Sri Reddeppa Reddy, the learned Standing Counsel for the Corporation, is that there are no written applications filed by the claimants pursuant to the notices u/Ss.9 and 10 of the Act. Therefore, they are not entitled to receive more than what has been awarded by the Land Acquisition Officer. I find no force in the contention.
S. 9
of the Act provides that the Collector shall cause public notice to be given at convenient places on or near the land to be taken, stating that the Government intends to take possession of the land, and that claim to compensation for all interests in such land may be made to him and that such notice shall state the particulars of the land so needed and shall require all persons interested in the land to appear personally or by agent before the Collector at a time and place therein mentioned (such time not being earlier than fifteen days after the date of publication of the notice)," and to state the nature of their respective interests in the land and the amount and particulars of their claims to compensation for such interests, and their objections (if any) to the measurements made
u/S.8
.
S.25(1)
of the Act provides that, "When the applicant has made a claim to compensation, pursuant to any notice given
u/S.9
the amount awarded to him by the Court shall not exceed the amount so claimed or be less than the amount awarded by the

Collector
u/S. 11
." A conjoint reading of the abovementioned sections of the Act provides that claimants shall state the amount and the particulars of their claims to compensation for their interests in the land and also objections, if any, for the measurements of the lands. The claim to compensation has not been provided with any specific procedure or the form under which the claim is to be made. It is now an admitted fact that preceding taking over possession, the claimants appeared before the Land Acquisition Officer and stated that the lands under acquisition could be used as house-sites and claimed the compensation at Rs.1,000/-percent. During the enquiry also, they reiterated their earlier stand. Thereby it is clear that they laid their claim for compensation at the rate of Rs.1,000/-per cent i.e., 1,00,000/- per acre. As stated earlier, the
Land Acquisition Act
does not postulate of making any claim in a particular form. Therefore, the oral claim made before the Land Acquisition Officer can also be taken as the claim made before him. Under those circumstances, the absence of a written application does not take away the right of claimants to lay compensation and the court is not precluded from enhancing the market value of the lands under acquisition.
3. It is next contended that the lower court has committed grievous error in treating the lands as fit for house sites when the lands are actually used for agricultural purposes and awarding market value on the yardage basis. I find no force in the contention. In the judgment of the court below, His pointed out that the land in question have got very suitability for the purpose of building houses and, therefore, to be used as house sites. At page 31 of the judgment, the learned Subordinate Judge observed as follows:
"I am of the opinion that the land in question has got very suitability and it already attained building activity as there is already RTC Complex situated there itself and the acquired land in question is bounded by RTC Complex on one side, residential colony on the other side and also in immediate Cinema Hall on the side on Narsipatnam town and the High Way road from Narsipatnam to

Anakapalli and Visakhapatnam on the other side. This is my information on my personal observations on local inspection in the presence of the learned Assistant Government Pleader as ilicalished (sic) by land in question with the aid of combined sketch which is marked as Ex.B.14."
A reading thereof dearly postulates that the lands are possessed of potential value for use as house-sites and that they are bounded by R.T.C. complex on one side, residential colony on the other side and immediately adjacent to it there exists a cinema hall on the Narsipatnam town side. There is High Way road from Narsipatnam to Anakapalli and Visakhapatnam and the land is abutting the main National High Way road. Under those circumstances, the lands are even lands having potential value for use as house sites. Therefore, merely because the agricultural crops were being raised on lands, the treatment of the lands under acquisition as having potential value as house sites by the court below cannot be said to be illegal.
4. It is next contended that once the lands are treated as having potential value as house sites, in view of the catena of decisions of this court and the Supreme Court, at least 1/3rd of the market value should have been deducted by the court below and the court below has committed a grievous error in not deducting the 1/3rd of the market value from the marked value determined for the lands under acquisition. Though, prima facie, there appears to be some force in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant, this argument is not applicable to the facts and circumstances arising in these appeals. It is admitted fact that the lands were acquired for the purpose of establishment of a bus-stand. If it were a case where the lands are acquired for providing house sites, necessarily the roads, drainage facilities, sewage facilities and electricity facilities and recreational facilities have to be provided for. In that regard, some additional expenditure is to be incurred and also some portions of land are to be set apart from the land acquired. In that context the courts have held that at least 1/3rd of the market value of the land acquired is to be

deducted towards development charges. But when the land is acquired for the establishment of bus-stand, these requirements are not needed except to level the land. But in this case, it is found that the lands are even lands and, therefore, no additional expenditure is needed for levelling the land. In those circumstances, the omission of deducting 1/3rd of the market value towards the development charge cannot be said to be illegal. Accordingly I do not find any illegality in the determination of the market value.
5. It is next contended that under the sale deed Ex.A.4 dated May 9, 1979, 30 cents of land was sold for Rs.8,000/-. It works out at the rate of Rs.2,666/- per acre and the court below has committed grievous error in enhancing the market value beyond that value fetched under Ex.A.4. If it were a case where the lands are treated as agricultural lands and market value is determined on that basis, Sri Reddeppa Reddy, the learned counsel for the appellant is well justified in placing reliance on this document. Since it is already found and accepted by me that the lands are possessed of potential value capable of being used as house sites, by the mere fact that Ex.A.4 secured only Rs.2,666/- per acre it cannot be said that the determination of the market value at Rs.10/- per yard is illegal.
6. In A.A.No.2720 of 1984, it appears that in respect of two items reference
u/S. 18
of the Act was made. In respect of the third item namely an extent of Acs.0.27 cents in Survey No.49/1 A/A1, it appears that no reference has been made to the Civil Court
u/S. 18
of the Act. Therefore, by operation of S. 28-A, it is open to the appellant therein to make an application before the Land Acquisition Officer as required u/S. 28-A for re-determination in the light of this judgment.
7. Subject to the observations made above, the appeals are dismissed but in the circumstances without costs.
8. The claimants are entitled to all the benefits of the
Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act
and this will be subject to the result of the Supreme Court. In the event of the Supreme Court holding that the Amendment Act has no application to the pending cases, it is open to the State to file an application to amend the decree.
Appeals dismissed.