[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Raghubir Singh vs The State Of Rajasthan on 26 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 676
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Non­Reportable

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.10781 OF 2018
                            (Arising out of SLP(C ) No. 26294 of 2018)


                          RAGHUBIR SINGH                               …..Appellant(s)



                                                   VERSUS



                          STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.        …..Respondent(s)

                                   
                                           J U D G M E N T

                          Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.   This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final

                          judgment   and   order   dated   04.12.2017   of   the   High

                          Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in D.B.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.10.26
Special   Appeal   Writ   No.   1598   of   2017   whereby   the
17:15:41 IST
Reason:
High   Court   disposed   of   the   same   filed   by   the
1
appellant   upholding   the   final   order   and   judgment

dated   04.09.2017   passed   by   the   learned   Single

Judge.
3.    Few   facts   need   to   be   mentioned   infra   for   the

disposal of this appeal, which involves a short point.
4.   The   dispute,   which   is   subject   matter   of   this

appeal,   relates   to   acquisition   of   land   under   the

provisions   of   the
Land   Acquisition   Act
(for   short

called
The Act
).
5.     The challenge was made by the appellant (writ

petitioner)   by   filing   the   writ   petition   in   the   High

Court to the issuance of
Section 4
notifications and

subsequent   notifications   issued   under   the   Act   on

several factual and legal grounds.
6.      The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ

petition, which gave rise to filing of the intra court

appeal   by   the   writ   petitioner   before   the   Division

Bench.   By   impugned   order,   the   Division   Bench
2
dismissed the appeal and upheld the order passed

by the learned Single judge, which has given rise to

filing of special leave to appeal in this Court.
7.    Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   are

constrained   to   allow   the   appeal   and   while   setting

aside   the   impugned   order   remand   the   intra   court

appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court for its

disposal afresh on merits in accordance with law.
8.    In our considered view, the need to remand the

appeal to the Division Bench for its decision afresh

on   merits   has   occasioned  inter   alia  for   the   reason

that it did not deal with any of the issues arising in

the case and nor it seemed to have dealt with any of

the submissions urged by the parties and, especially,

the submissions urged by the appellant.
9.    In   our   considered   opinion,   the   intra   court

appeal   did   involve   factual   and   legal   issues,   which
3
were   decided   by   the   Single   Judge,   therefore,   once

they   were   carried   in   intra   court   appeal   by   an

aggrieved party and pressed in service while assailing

the order of the Single Judge, it was incumbent upon

the Division Bench to deal with all the issues urged

and record its findings one way or the other on every

issue   urged   keeping   in   view   the   legal   provisions

applicable to the issues.
10.   It was, however, not done by the Division Bench

and   in   a   cursory   manner,   the   Division   Bench

disposed of the appeal, resulting in its dismissal.
11.   We  find   ourselves unable  to concur  with  such

disposal and feel inclined to set aside the impugned

order and remand the case to the Division Bench of

the High Court with a request to decide the appeal

afresh on merits in accordance with law.
12.   Having formed an opinion to remand the case in

the light of our reasoning mentioned above, we do not
4
consider  it proper to go into  the merits of the case

and, therefore, leave all the issues to be dealt with by

the Division Bench for its decision on merits.
13.    In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds and is accordingly allowed. Impugned order

is   set   aside.   The   case   (intra   court   appeal)   is

remanded to the Division Bench of the High Court for

its   decision   on   merits   uninfluenced   by   any   of   our

observations in this order. We request the High Court

to dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible

preferably within 6 months.
14.    Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……...................................J.
                                     [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                               

                                        …....................................J.
                                       [INDU MALHOTRA]

New Delhi,
October 26, 2018.
5