[Cites
9
, Cited by
9
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Larsen And Toubro Limited Scomi ... vs Mumbai Metropolitian Region ... on 3 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 733, 2019 (2) SCC 271, AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 1237, (2019) 1 CAL HN 130, (2018) 14 SCALE 151, (2018) 4 CURCC 91, (2018) 6 ARBILR 174, (2019) 2 CIVLJ 285
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
R.F. Nariman
1


                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    ARBITRATION PETITION (C) No. 28 OF 2017


                          M/S LARSEN AND TOUBRO LIMITED SCOMI
                          ENGINEERING BHD                   …PETITIONER


                                                     VERSUS

                          MUMBAI METROPOLITAN REGION
                          DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY                         ...RESPONDENT



                                                   JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1)     The present petition, under
Section 11
of the Arbitration

                         & Conciliation Act, 1996, (in short ‘the Act’), that has been filed

                         before this Court, arises out of a contract entered into on

                         09.01.2009 for the work of planning, design, development,

                         construction, manufacture, supply, testing and commissioning of

                         a Monorail system in two particular earmarked sections in

                         Wadala, Mumbai including operation and maintenance for a

                         period of three years from the date of start of commercial
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.10.10
operations.   This agreement contains an arbitration clause,
16:54:46 IST
Reason:
which is set out hereunder:-
2
“Claims, Disputes and Arbitration

20.1           If the Contractor considers himself to be entitled to any extension
Contractor’s   of the Time for Completion and/or any additional payment, under
Claim
               any Clause of these Conditions for otherwise in connection with
               the   Contract,   the     Contractor     shall    give   notice       to   the
               Employer/Employer’s Representative, describing the event or
               circumstance giving rise to the claim. The notice shall be given
               as soon as practicable, and not later than 30 days after the
               Contractor became aware, or should have become aware, of the
               event or circumstance.
If the Contractor fails to give notice of a claim within such period
               of 30 days, the Time for Completion shall not be extended, the
               Contractor shall not be entitled to additional payment, and the
               Employer/Employer’s Representative shall be discharged from all
               liability in connection with the claim. Otherwise, the following
               provisions of this Sub-Clause shall apply.
The Contractor shall also submit any other notices which are
               required by the Contract, and supporting particulars for the claim,
               all as relevant to such event or circumstance.
The Contractor shall keep such contemporary records as may be
               necessary to substantiate any claim, either on the Site or at
               another   location      acceptable     to   the    Employer/Employer’s
               Representative.          Without       admitting         liability,        the
               Employer/Employer’s Representative may, after receiving any
               notice under this Sub-Clause, monitor the record-keeping and/or
               instruct the Contractor to keep further contemporary records.
               The    Contractor       shall   permit      the    Employer/Employer’s
               Representative to inspect all these records, and shall (if
3
instructed)    submit      copies     to     the   Employer/Employer’s
Representative.
Within 45 days after the Contractor became aware (or should
have become aware) of the event or circumstances giving rise to
the claim, or within such other period as may be proposed by the
Contractor     and   approved         by     the   Employer/Employer’s
Representative,      the        contractor     shall   send   to   the
Employer/Employer’s Representative a fully detailed claim which
includes full supporting particulars of the basis of the claim and of
the extension of time and/or additional payment claimed. If the
event or circumstance giving rise to the claim has a continuing
effect:
(a) this fully detailed claim shall be considered as interim;
(b) the Contractor shall send further interim claims at monthly
intervals, giving the accumulated delay and/or amount claimed,
and such further particulars as the Employer may reasonably
require; and
(c) the Contractor shall send a final claim within 30 days after
the end of the effects resulting from the event or circumstance, or
within such other period as may be proposed by the Contractor
and approved by the Employer/Employer’s Representative.
Within 45 days after receiving a claim or any further particulars
supporting a previous claim, or within such other period as may
be proposed by the Employer/Employer’s Representative and
approved by the Contractor, the employer shall respond with
approval, or with disapproval and detailed comments. He may
also request any necessary further particulars, but shall
4
nevertheless give his response on the principles of the claim
                  within such time.
Each interim payment shall include such amounts for any claim
                  as have been reasonable substantiated as due under the
                  relevant provision of the Contract, unless and until the particulars
                  supplied are sufficient to substantiate the whole of the claim, the
                  Contractor shall only be entitled to payment for such part of the
                  claim as he has been able to substantiate.
The Employer/Employer’s Representative shall proceed in
                  accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5 (Determination) to agree or
                  determine (i) the extension (if any) of the Time for completion
                  (before or after its expiry) in accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4
                  [Extension of Time for Completion], and/or
(ii) the additional payment (if any) to which the Contractor is
                  entitled under the Contract. The requirements of this Sub-Clause
                  are in addition to those of any other Sub-Clause, which may
                  apply to a claim. If the Contractor fails to comply with this or
                  another Sub-Clause in relation to any claim, any extension of
                  time and/or additional payment shall take account of the extent (if
                  any) to which the failure has prevented or prejudiced proper
                  investigation of the claim, unless the claim is excluded under the
                  second paragraph of this Sub-Clause.
20.2              Should any dispute or difference of any kind whatsoever arise
Dispute to be     between the Employer and the Contractor, in connection with, or
referred to and   arising out of the Contract, or subject matter thereof, or the
settled      by
                  execution of Works/commissioning of the System/Operation &
Employer’s
Representative    Maintenance of the System, whether, during the progress of
5
at Site   Works/during Operation and Maintenance of the System or after
          their completion and whether before or after termination,
          abandonment or breach of Contract, it should, in the first place,
          subject to the provision under Sub-clause 14.4 above, be
          referred to and settled by the Employer’s Representative at Site,
          who shall, within a period of 60 days after being requested in
          writing by either party to do so, give written notice of his decision
          to   the   Employer    and    the   Contractor.   The    Employer’s
          Representative at Site while considering the matters of dispute
          referred to him, shall be competent to call for any records,
          vouchers, information and enforce the attendance of the parties
          either in person or through authorised representatives, to sort out
          or clarify any issue, resolve the differences and to assist him to
          decide the matters referred to him.      Subject to arbitration, as
          hereinafter provided, such decision in respect of every matter so
          referred shall be final and binding    upon the Employer and the
          Contractor, who shall proceed with the execution of Works/
          commissioning of the System/Operation & Maintenance of the
          System (as the case may be) with all due diligence irrespective
          of whether any of the parties goes in or desires to go in for
          arbitration. If the Employer’s Representative at Site has given
          written notice of his decision to the Employer and the Contractor
          and no intimation of reference of any claim to arbitration has
          been sent to him by either the Employer or the Contractor within
          a period of 60 days from receipt of such notice, the said decision
          of the Employer’s Representative shall remain final and binding
          upon the Employer and the Contractor and the same shall be
          deemed to have been accepted by them. The Employer or the
6
Contractor shall not seek any arbitration thereafter.

20.3             If the Employer’s Representative at Site fails to give notice of his
Referring      of decision, as aforesaid, within a period of 60 days after being
Disputes      for requested as aforesaid or if either the Employer or the Contractor
Arbitration
                 be dissatisfied with any such decision of the Employer’s
                 Representative at Site, only then shall the matter in dispute be
                 referred to arbitration as herein provided
20.4             Disputes or differences shall be due for arbitration only if the
Disputes Due conditions in Sub-Clause 20.2 and 20.3 above fulfilled.
for Arbitration
                Except where otherwise provided in the Contract, all disputes or
and Settlement
of Disputes     differences, whatsoever arising between the parties, arising out
                of or relating to construction, measuring operation or effect of the
                 Contract or the breach thereof, shall be settled by arbitration as
                 detailed in Sub Clause 20.5.
20.5             Matters to be arbitrated upon shall be referred to a Sole Arbitrator
Nomination of where the individual claim does not exceed Rs. 5 million or the
Arbitrators/Sole total value of claims does not exceed Rs. 15 millions. Beyond the
Arbitrator
                 above limit(s), there shall be three arbitrators. For this purpose
                 the employer will make out a panel of Arbitrators with the
                 requisite qualifications and professional experience relevant to
                 the field to which the Contract relates and will be residents of
                 India only. In case of a single arbitrator, the Panel will be of three
                 Arbitrators, out of which the Contractor will choose one. In case
                 three arbitrators are to be appointed, the Employer will make out
                 a panel of five. The Contractor and the Employer will choose one
                 arbitrator each from the above and the two so chosen will choose
                 the third arbitrator from the above panel only who will act as the
7
“Presiding Arbitration” of the arbitration panel.

               If in a dispute, the contractor fails to choose the Arbitrator within
               thirty (30) days after the Employer has nominated the Panel, the
               Employer may nominate an Arbitrator from the same panel of
               Arbitrators given by the Employer for the matter in dispute.

               If, in a dispute, the two chosen Arbitrators fail to appoint third
               Arbitrator- Presiding Arbitrator (Arbitration Panel’s case) within
               thirty (30) days after they have been appointed, the Employer
               may apply to the Indian Council of Arbitration, New Delhi, to
               nominate the third Arbitrator from the same panel of Arbitrators
               given by the Employer for the matter in dispute.

               Neither party shall be limited in the proceedings before such
               arbitrator/s to the evidence or arguments put before the
               Employer’s Representative at Site for the purpose of obtaining
               his   decision.     No    decision    given       by   the   Employer’s
               Representative in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall
               disqualify him from being called as a witness and giving evidence
               before the arbitrator/s on any matter, whatsoever, relevant to
               dispute or difference referred to arbitrator/s.

               Substitute Arbitrators- If for any reason on arbitrator is unable to
               perform his function, a substitute shall be appointed in the same
               manner as the original arbitrator.
20.6 Arbitration In any Arbitration proceedings hereunder:
Venue,
(a) Proceedings shall be held in Mumbai, India only.
Language and
Award            (b) English language shall be the official language for all
               purposes. (Note: English language may be changed to any other
               language, with the agreement of both the parties)
8
(c) The Arbitration Award shall be final and binding on all parties
               and shall be enforceable in any Court of competent jurisdiction,
               and the parties hereby waive any objection to or claims of
               immunity in respect of such enforcements.
(d) In Arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, any
               decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a majority of all
               its members.
(e) The Arbitrator(s) shall always give item-wise and reasoned
               awards irrespective of the value of claim(s) in the dispute in all
               cases.
(f) Where the arbitral award is for payment of money, no interest
               shall be payable on the whole or any part of the money for any
               period till the date on which the award is made.
(g)   The cost of arbitration shall be borne by the respective
               parties. The cost inter-alia includes the fees of the Arbitrator(s)
               as per the rate fixed by the Employer from time to time.
20.7           The arbitration proceedings shall be governed by
India Arbitration
Rules         and Conciliation Act, 1996
, as amended, from time to time
Governing the including provisions in force at the time the reference is made.
Arbitration
Proceedings
20.8           The reference to arbitration shall proceed notwithstanding that
No Supervision Works/System shall not then be or be alleged to be complete,
of Work        provided always that the obligations of the Employer/Employer’s
               Representative and the Contractor shall not be altered by
               reasons of arbitration being conducted during the progress of
               Works. Neither party shall be entitled to suspend the work to
               which the dispute relates on account of arbitration and payments
9
to the Contractor shall continue to be made in terms of the
                Contract.
20.9            No dispute or difference shall be referred to Arbitration after
Limitation    of expiry of 60 days from the date of decision by the Employer’s
Time            Representative at Site, if notified, or from the date when the
                Employer’s Representative at Site ought to have given his
                decision in terms of provisions under Sub-Clause 20.2 in case of
                failure on the part of the Employer’s Representative at Site to
                give notice of decision.
Since disputes arose between the parties to the agreement,

         various interim claims had been made by the Consortium of M/s

         Larsen and Toubro, an Indian company, together with Scomi

         Engineering Bhd, a Company incorporated in Malaysia, for

         which the Consortium has filed this petition under
Section 11
of

         the Act to this Court, since according to them, one of the parties

         to the Arbitration agreement, being a body corporate,

         incorporated in Malaysia, would be a body corporate, which is

         incorporated in a country other than India, which would attract
Section 2(1)(f)(ii)
of the Act.
2)     Shri Gopal Jain, learned senior counsel appearing on

         behalf of the Consortium, has taken us through the agreement,

         in which he strongly relies upon the fact that the two entities,

         that is, the Indian company and the Malaysian company, though
10
stated to be a Consortium, are jointly and severally liable, to the

employer. Learned senior counsel has also relied upon the fact

that throughout the working of the contract, separate claims

have been made, which have been rejected by the Mumbai

Metropolitan    Region    Development       Authority   (hereinafter

referred to as ‘MMRDA’). He has also further relied upon the

fact that by at least three letters, during the working of the

agreement, the claims have in fact been rejected altogether and

that, therefore, there is no impediment in invoking the Arbitration

clause under
Section 20
.4 of the General Conditions of Contract

(hereinafter referred to as ‘GCC’), as the procedure outlined by

Clauses 20.1 to 20.03 had already been exhausted.
3)     On the other hand, Mr. Shyam Diwan, learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of MMRDA, the respondent, has

relied upon both the contract dated 09.01.2009 as well as the

actual Consortium Agreement dated 04.06.2008 between the

Indian company and the Malaysian company, which, when read

together, would show that they are really an un-incorporated

association and would, therefore, fall within
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
as

being an association or a body of individuals, provided the

central management and control is exercised in any country

other than India. He has also gone on to rely heavily upon the
11
fact that in the Consortium, the lead partner is the Indian

company, and the Consortium’s office is at Wadala in Mumbai

making it clear, therefore, that sub-Clause (iii) of
Section 2(1)(f)
of the Act would not apply as it is clear that the central

management and control, that is envisaged by the said sub-

Clause, would not be exercised in a country outside India but in

India itself. He has also strongly relied upon an order passed by

the High Court of Bombay, dated 20.10.2016 between the same

parties, in which an interim Award dated 18.08.2016 was

challenged, which was between the same parties arising out of

the self-same agreement. This Order upheld the interim Award

of the Learned Arbitrators in stating that the particular claim that

was made in that case could be made only as a Consortium

and not as two entities separately. He has also pointed out that

this Order has become final as it has not been challenged by

the petitioner before this Court. In answering Mr. Gopal Jain’s

submission as to Clause 20.4 of the GCC being invoked after

the procedure under Clauses 20.1 to 20.3 has been exhausted,

he referred to and relied upon a letter dated 22.04.2016 written

by the respondent in which, after referring to the various

refusals, referred to by Mr. Jain, further information and material

was requested from Mr. Jain’s client. Instead of furnishing such
12
material straightaway, a notice invoking Arbitration dated

01.07.2016 was sent by Mr. Jain’s client. The respondent, by a

reply dated 20.08.2016 reiterated its position that Clauses 20.1

to 20.3 had not yet been exhausted, and therefore, on

08.09.2016, rejected the request for arbitration.
4)     The contract dated 09.01.2009 is between (1) MMRDA

and (2) a Consortium, comprising, (a) L&T, an Indian Company,

and; (b) M/s Scomi Engineering Bhd, a Malaysian Company. It

is true that each of them are jointly and severally responsible to

the employer, being collectively referred to as the “contractor.”
5)     Under    the   General    Conditions    of    Contract,   the

“contractor”, in Clause 1.1.2.3 is defined as meaning an

Individual, Firm, Company, Corporation, Joint Venture or

Consortium, whether incorporated or not.            “Bidder” is also

defined under Clause 1.1.2.10 as meaning an Individual, Firm,

Company, Corporation, Joint Venture or Consortium which

could submit a bid.     What is important to notice is that the

contract was signed by the employer, viz., MMRDA and by the

contractor under the head sub-Clauses (A) and (B) in which

L&T India signed as ‘A’ and Scomi Engineering Bhd has signed

as ‘B’. When we come to the consortium agreement that is

entered into between the Indian company and the Malaysian
13
company as aforestated, we find in the definition clause that

“Consortium” shall mean L&T and Scomi Engineering Bhd,

acting in collaboration, for the purpose of this agreement and

shall be called “the L&T-SEB” Consortium “un-incorporated.”

The contract is defined in sub-Clause 6 as meaning, “the

contract to be entered by the Consortium with the employer for

the execution of the Project”. Under sub-Clause 7, “the lead

Member of the Consortium” or “Consortium Leader” shall mean

L&T, that is, the Indian Company.       Under sub-Clause 8, the

“Supervisory Board” (hereinafter referred to as ‘the SB’) shall

mean a Board constituted under Clause 11 of the GCC. When

we come to Clause 11.2, it is clear that the Members of this

Supervisory Board will consist of four members, two appointed

by each Member.       One of the Members nominated by the

Consortium Leader and agreed to by all members shall then act

as the Chairman of the Supervisory Board, which is, by Clause

11.5, to decide on various matters relating to the execution of

the contract.   Clause 21.1(g) provides that the Consortium

leader shall lead all arbitration proceedings.
6)     As correctly pointed out by Shri Jain, separate claims

were made by the Indian company and the Malaysian company

which were rejected by the respondent.           Nonetheless, by a
14
letter dated 22.04.2016, the respondent referred to these

various rejection letters, and stated that documents in support

of the list of “delayed events” had not yet been given, and

therefore, necessary information and clarification, in response

to certain observations, together with all documents in support

of the claim, was requested to be furnished. By a letter dated

01.07.2016, the Consortium, instead of responding to this letter,

invoked arbitration, stating that interim claims had already been

rejected, and all the necessary information had already been

furnished, as a result of which, the stage of Clause 20.4 had

arrived. This was replied to by a letter dated 20.08.2016 in

which the respondent reiterated its position that the remedies

provided under Clause 20.3 has not yet been exhausted, and

that therefore, there is no question of appointing an Arbitrator.

On 08.09.2016, the notice invoking arbitration was replied to by

the respondent, rejecting the same.
7)     It is important, at this juncture, to refer to an order made

by the High Court of Bombay dated 20.10.2016 which, as has

been stated earlier, arises between the self-same parties, under

the same contract. An interim Award made by the Arbitrators

qua different claims arising under the same contract had made

it clear that the claim could be filed only in the name of the
15
Consortium and not separately, as was contended by Shri

Jain’s client. The preliminary issue framed on this count was

“whether the claimants are entitled to file this claim as Claimant

No. 1 and Claimant No. 2 or only as the Consortium of L&T and

Scomi Engineering Bhd?” The High Court of Bombay, agreed

with the interim Award of the Arbitrators, and held as follows:-
“8. Considering the terms and conditions of the contract
         as well as the decision cited by Mr. Ankhad, in my
         opinion, in the facts and circumstances of the present
         case, it is not open for the petitioners to rely upon their
         independent identities while dealing with the respondent
         and that they will have to deal with the respondent as a
         Consortium only. Therefore, there is no infirmity in the
         impugned order. For the same reason, the present
         petition as filed would also not been maintainable.
         Hence, the same is dismissed.”
8)     Shri Gopal Jain did not dispute the fact that this

judgment was final inter-parties as no appeal has been

preferred. Therefore, to stress the fact that it pertains only to

“this claim” and would therefore, not apply to a different set of

claims under the arbitration clause is not an argument that

appeals to us.
9)     It is clear, as has been held by the judgment of the High

Court of Bombay, and which is binding inter-parties, that it is not

open for the petitioner to rely upon their status as independent
16
entities while dealing with the respondent and they will have to

deal with the respondent as a Consortium only.
10)    This being the case, it is clear that the un-incorporated

“association” referred to in
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
would be attracted

on the facts of this case and not
Section 2(1)(f)(ii)
as the

Malaysian body cannot be referred to as an independent entity

following the judgment of the High Court of Bombay.
11)
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
of the Act refers to two different sets of

persons: an “association” as distinct and separate from a “body

of individuals”. For example, under
Section 2(31)
of the Income

Tax Act, 1961, “person” is defined as including, under sub-
clause (v), an association of persons, or body of individuals,

whether incorporated or not. It is in this sense, that an

association is referred to in
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
which would

therefore include a consortium consisting of two or more bodies

corporate, at least one of whom is a body corporate

incorporated in a country other than India.
12)    Further, the expression “a company or” which was

originally at the beginning of
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
was omitted by

Act 3 of 2016. This was for the reason that the judgment of this

Court, in
TDM Infrastructure Private Ltd. v. UE Development

India Private Ltd.
, (2008) 14 SCC 271, held that the
17
expression “a company or” in
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
of the Act

cannot possibly be said to refer to a company registered and

incorporated in India which may be controlled by persons in a

country outside India. The Court held:
“20. The learned counsel contends that the word "or"
         being disjunctive, sub-clause (iii) of
Section 2(1)(f)
of
         the 1996 Act shall apply in a case where sub-clause (ii)
         shall not apply. We do not agree. The question of taking
         recourse to sub-clause (iii) would come into play only in
         a case where sub-clause (ii) otherwise does not apply
         in its entirety and not where by reason of an exclusion
         clause, consideration for construing an agreement to be
         an international commercial arbitration agreement goes
         outside the purview of its definition. Once it is held that
         both the companies are incorporated in India, and, thus,
         they have been domiciled in India, the arbitration
         agreement entered into by and between them would not
         be an international commercial arbitration agreement
         and, thus, the question of applicability of sub-clause (iii)
         of
Section 2(1)(f)
would not arise.”

The Law Commission Report No. 246 of August 2014, which

made several amendments to the
Arbitration and Conciliation

Act, 1996
, gave the following reason for deleting the words “a

company or”:
“(iii) In sub-section (1), clause (f), sub-clause (iii), delete
         the words “a company or” before the words “an
         association or a body of individuals.
[NOTE: The reference to “a company” In sub-section
(iii) has been removed since the same is already
         covered under sub-section (ii). The intention is to
         determine the residence of a company based on its
         place of incorporation and not the place of central
         management/control. This further re-enforces the “place
         of incorporation” principle
laid down by
the Supreme
18
Court in
TDM Infrastructure Private Limited v. UE
         Development India Private Limited
, (2008) 14 SCC 271,
         and adds greater certainty in case of companies having
         a different place of incorporation and place of exercise
         of central management and control]”


It would become clear that prior to the deletion of the

expression “a company or”, there were three sets of persons

referred to in
Section 2(1)(f)(iii)
as separate and distinct persons

who would fall within the said sub-clause. This does not change

due to the deletion of the phrase “a company or” for the reason

given by the Law Commission. This is another reason as to why

“an association” cannot be read with “body of individuals” which

follows it but is a separate and distinct category by itself, as is

understood from the definition of “person” as defined in the
Income Tax Act
referred to above
.
13)    This being the case, coupled with the fact, as correctly

argued by Shri Diwan, that the Indian company is the lead

partner, and that the Supervisory Board constituted under the

Consortium Agreement makes it clear that the lead partner

really has the determining voice in that it appoints the Chairman

of the said Board (undoubtedly, with the consent of other

members); and the fact that the Consortium’s office is in

Wadala, Mumbai as also that the lead member shall lead the

arbitration proceedings, would all point to the fact that the
19
central management and control of this Consortium appears to

be exercised in India and not in any foreign nation.
14)      This being the case, we dismiss the petition filed under
Section 11
of the Act, as there is no “international commercial

arbitration” as defined under
Section 2(1)(f)
of the Act for the

petitioner to come to this Court. We also do not deem it

necessary to go into whether the appropriate stage for invoking

Arbitration has yet been reached.
15)      The Arbitration Petition is dismissed in the aforesaid

terms.
16)      It would be open for the petitioner to approach the

relevant court on the footing that this is not a case of an

international commercial arbitration.
…………………………......J.
                                     (R.F. Nariman)


                                     …………………………......J.
                                     (Navin Sinha)
 New Delhi;
October 3, 2018.