[Cites
6
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Lt. General Manomoy Ganguly Vsm vs Union Of India on 29 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 839
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 980 OF 2018

                         LT. GEN. MANOMOY GANGULY, VSM                          .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                        VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                             .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                                        WITH

                                                       M.A. NO. 2188 OF 2018
                                                                 IN
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5800 OF 2018



                                                           JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
There is a chequered history in this case, which is getting

                                 curious with each round of litigation. Present proceedings are the

                                 repeat attempt of the petitioner Major General Manomoy Ganguly

                                 to get the position of Director General Medical Services (Army)

                                 {hereinafter referred to as 'DGMS (Army)'}, which has alluded him
Signature Not Verified
till now.
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.10.29
16:59:17 IST
Reason:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 1 of 39
2)      First round of litigation started when the petitioner, who was

        working as Major General, was denied the promotion to the next

        rank of Lieutenant General.            The Special Promotion Board

        (Medical) {hereinafter referred to as the 'SPB (Medical)'}, which

        was constituted to consider the cases of promotion and held its

        sitting on 20th January, 2016, did not empanel him for promotion

        to the said rank. The petitioner filed the Original Application (OA)

        before the Armed Forces Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the

        'AFT') which decided the case in his favour vide its judgment

        dated 2nd September, 2017. The Union of India challenged the

        judgment before this Court and the said appeal of the Union of

        India was dismissed on 10th November, 2017. In the aforesaid

        judgment of the AFT, it had held that the petitioner was wrongly

        allotted lesser marks than his entitlement by the SPB (Medical)

        on account of overall profile which resulted in denial of promotion

        to him. It was categorically held that he was entitled to 1.7 marks

        (out of 2 marks) for 'Overall Profile' on comparison of his case

        with Major General Sanjiv Chopra. This Court while upholding the

        judgment directed the respondents to take further steps without

        loss of time.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 2 of 39
3)      Notwithstanding the above, in the fresh review by the SPB

        (Medical) held on December 04, 2017, the petitioner was again

        given 1.5 marks. The petitioner approached the AFT again by

        means of Miscellaneous Application in the earlier disposed of OA

        seeking restraint against the respondents from filling up the post

        of DGMS (Army) for which he would have become eligible, had

        he been promoted as Lieutenant General.           Interim stay was

        granted.       In the meantime, the Competent Authority, i.e., the

        Raksha Mantri, after examining the matter did not approve the

        review undertaken by SPB (Medical) awarding 1.5 marks to the

        petitioner       and       recommended   his   promotion.         This

        recommendation met the approval of ACC as well and,

        accordingly, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant

        General on March 01, 2018.
4)      After earning his promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General with

        lot of struggle and legal battle, the petitioner aspired to get the

        position of DGMS (Army), for which position he had gained

        eligibility. He was also senior most person in feeder rank. The

        Director General, Armed Forces (Medical) Services, after

        consideration of his case along with one Lieutenant General

        Sanjiv Chopra, decided to recommend Lieutenant General Sanjiv
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 3 of 39
Chopra, though the petitioner was senior to him. It is important to

        mention that while making this recommendation, eligible officer

        from Army discipline only were considered. The petitioner once

        again approached the AFT by means of OA bearing no. 372 of

        2018. The AFT decided that OA as well in favour of the petitioner

        vide its judgment dated May 07, 2018. This judgment was again

        challenged by the Union of India in the form of a statutory appeal,

        i.e., Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018 before this Court.
5)      This appeal was decided on August 01, 2018.              It was partly

        allowed on certain aspects with the direction that the matter be

        placed before the Raksha Mantri to consider as to who would be

        entitled to the appointment to the post of DGMS (Army). The

        Raksha Mantri, on examination of the files and 'Note' that was put

        up before her, decided that the post be manned by a person other

        than the petitioner. When the petitioner came to know of the

        intended move, he immediately rushed to this Court by filing

        Miscellaneous Application no. 2188 of 2018 in Civil Appeal No.

        5800 of 2018 with the prayer that status quo order be passed

        against filling up of the vacancy for a period of two weeks after

        declassification of the decision of the Competent Authority to

        enable the petitioner to take a remedial action. This application
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 4 of 39
was mentioned for listing on August 10, 2018 and was directed to

        be listed on August 13, 2018.          However, it transpired that Air

        Marshal Rajvir Singh, who was holding the position of DGMS (Air)

        as on that date and had been recommended for appointment of

        DGMS (Army), had joined the new post on August 10, 2018. In

        these circumstances, the petitioner filed the instant Writ Petition

        (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 challenging the appointment of the Air

        Marshal Rajvir Singh (Respondent no. 4 herein) to the post of

        DGMS (Army).
6)      The aforesaid events would show that insofar as Miscellaneous

        Application No. 2188 of 2018 is concerned, it has been rendered

        infructuous. It stands disposed of as such. In the writ petition,

        the respondents have filed counter affidavit.        Arguments have

        been heard at length and we propose to dispose of the writ

        petition by this judgment.
7)      We may point out at the outset that case of the petitioner is that in

        spite of judgment dated August 01, 2018 passed by this Court in

        Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018, the matter has not been examined

        dispassionately and objectively keeping in view the law laid down

        therein as well as the spirit behind the said judgment. According

        to the petitioner, the respondents are finding one or the other
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 5 of 39
excuse to deny him the post of DGMS (Army). Interestingly, even

        the respondents rely upon the same very judgment dated August

        01, 2018 and the case set up by the respondents is that fresh

        exercise has been undertaken strictly in accordance with law laid

        down and the observations made in the said judgment.                 It is

        submitted that 'inter se suitability' which is the criteria laid down

        for appointment to such a post has been followed, as explained in

        the said judgment and on that basis since Air Marshal Rajvir

        Singh has been found to be more suitable than the petitioner, he

        is assigned the said post.
8)      Having regard to the aforesaid positions taken by the parties, it

        becomes necessary to first note down the laid down criteria for

        appointment to DGMS (Army) and the interpretation thereto which

        has been given in the judgment dated August 01, 2018.
The post in question is in an Armed Forces Medical

        Services (AFMS).             At top level, 10 Lieutenant Generals are

        appointed in the AFMS and placed in different tiers. The structure

        of AFMS specifying these three tiers is as follows:
DGAFMS
                                      (1st tier post)

            DGMS (Army)                DGMS(Navy)          DGMS(Air)
                                       (2nd Tier post)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                           Page 6 of 39
Comdt Comdt    DG Org & Pers                  DCIDS Comdt DGHS
            AHRR AMC (C&S)                                 (Med) (AFMS) (AF)

                                       (3rd Tier posts)


               Though, three DGsMS in Army, Navy and Air Force

        respectively fall in 2nd tier posts, it is an admitted position that the

        post of DGMS (Army) is considered better than the other two

        posts, namely, DGMS (Navy) and DGMS (Air).
9)      The criteria for appointment of DGsMS is laid down in policy

        decision taken on June 01, 1992, which is stipulated in a Circular

        issued by the Government of India, it reads as under:
Subject:- Appointment of DGsMS of Service-Policy
                      regarding.
Reference your note No. 16972/11/92/DGAFMS/DG IX
            dated 1st June 1992.
2. Taking into account various aspects relating to the
            appointment of DGsMS of Services the following criteria is
            laid down for their appointment, in future:
(i)      The inter-se seniority and suitability of officers in
            the rank of Lt. Gen(and equivalent) holding the posts of
            Comdt AMC Centre and School, Comdt AFMC, Pune and
            the Addl. DGAFMS shall be assessed in the light of their
            earlier experience of serving in particular services and they
            shall be considered for appointment as DGsMS of services
            provided they have a minimum remainder service of six
            months, from the date of occurrence of the vacancy.
(ii)     If, after the exercise of (i) above, none of the
            offices are found suitable for appointment as DGsMS of
            services, against available vacant posts, officers of Maj
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                            Page 7 of 39
Gen (and equivalent) rank, already approved for promotion
            to Lt. Gen rank, may be considered for such appointments.
(iii)   The lateral shifting of DGMS of one Service to
            another Service may be considered only in exception
            circumstances.
3. Government shall review above criteria, for suitable
            modification, after the tenure of AMC officers in Lt. Gen
            (and equivalent) rank stabilise."
10)     It is the common case of the parties that the aforesaid criteria has

        not undergone any change till date and continues to govern the

        appointment of DGsMS of services. As can be seen from the

        aforesaid criteria, 'the inter se seniority and suitability of officers in

        the rank of Lieutenant General (and equivalent)' is to be

        considered.
11)     On the last occasion, when DGAFMS had recommended

        Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra for this post and that was

        challenged by the petitioner before the AFT, while allowing the

        O.A. of the petitioner, the AFT had held that the expression 'inter

        se seniority and suitability' meant that the post was to be given to

        the person who is the senior most eligible officer, if he is

        otherwise found suitable. In essence, criteria of seniority subject

        to fitness was applied. Based on this notion that the criteria was

        'seniority-cum-suitability', the AFT had taken the view that

        seniority is a decisive factor and suitability is a secondary factor.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                           Page 8 of 39
Then it proceeded on the premise that since it was not the case

        of the respondents that the petitioner is unsuitable, he was

        wrongly overlooked. The AFT also remarked that there was a

        deliberate attempt to somehow recommend the name of

        Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra and ignore the petitioner. It

        was also found that there have always been a convention to

        appoint senior most person to the post of DGMS (Army)

        inasmuch as the appellants were not able to cite even a single

        case in last 20-30 years where the seniority was overlooked.

        Contrary thereto, name of the petitioner was not even forwarded

        by the DGAFMS to the Competent Authority for consideration

        while sending the names of two other officers (including

        Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra). In this way, the petitioner

        was wrongly ignored, was the opinion of the AFT.
12)     In the appeal filed by the Union of India against the order of the

        AFT, which culminated in the judgment dated August 01, 2018,

        this Court did not approve the said interpretation given by the

        AFT, namely, criteria laid down in policy decision taken on June

        01, 1992 was merely 'seniority-cum-suitability'. On the contrary, it

        was held that the word 'inter se' occurring in the aforesaid

        expression applies both to seniority as well as suitability.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 9 of 39
Therefore, apart from the 'inter se seniority', 'inter se suitability' is

        also to be assessed, which assessment is 'in the light of their

        earlier experience of serving in a particular service'. The Court

        then defined the meaning of expression 'inter se suitability'.

        Discussion on this aspect is contained in paragraphs 40 to 45 of

        the judgment dated August 01, 2018. Since both the parties rely

        upon the discussion contained therein, it would be apt to

        reproduce these paragraphs in their entirety.
"40. When we read the aforesaid para (i) as a whole,
                    we find force in the submission of the appellant that
                    the word ‘inter se’ applies both to seniority as well as
                    suitability. Therefore, ‘inter se suitability’ is also to be
                    assessed inasmuch as this assessment is ‘in the light
                    of their earlier experience of serving in a particular
                    service’. As far as consideration on the parameters
                    of ‘inter se seniority’ is concerned, it would mean that
                    a person who is senior gets precedence. To this
                    extent, there is no quarrel. Question is as to what
                    meaning is to be assigned to ‘inter se suitability’.
                    Two questions arise from the above. First, what is
                    the meaning of ‘suitability’.         Second, how the
                    expression ‘inter se suitability’ is to be construed, i.e.
                    whether it should be understood as choosing a ‘more
                    suitable’ officer for appointment as DGsMS. As far
                    as inter se suitability is concerned, all the eligible
                    officers in the rank of Lt. General (& Equiv), having
                    regard to their earlier experience of serving in
                    particular services, they are to be considered for
                    appointment as DGsMS of services (i.e. DGMS
                    (Army)).
41. Let us first consider the meaning of ‘suitability’.
42.    In English parlance, the word ‘suitable’ is
                   assigned the meaning as ‘appropriate, fitted for the
                   purpose or acceptable’.       The concise Oxford
                   Dictionary defines the word suitable as ‘well fitted for
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                                Page 10 of 39
the purpose; appropriate’. This ordinary meaning is to
                   be given effect to as a general guide, unless this
                   expression is given special meaning in a statute or
                   rule in administrative instructions.
In
R (Quintavalle)
                   v. Human Fertilisation Authority1
, the House of
                   Lords remarked that “the word ‘suitability’ is an empty
                   vessel which is filled with meaning by context and
                   background.
43.     In service jurisprudence, where the word
                   ‘suitable’ is normally examined from the point of view
                   as to whether a particular person is suitable to hold a
                   particular post, it is construed as ‘fit’ to hold that post.
It would mean that the job profile and job requirement
                   of a particular post would be seen and then, going by
                   the calibre, competence, attributes, skill and
                   experience of the candidate, it would be ascertained
                   as to whether such a person would be able to
                   discharge the duties of the post i.e. whether he is
                   suited to carry out the functions of the post, to the
                   satisfaction of his employer.
44. It, thus, follows from the above that the person to
                   be eligible should quality the following conditions:
(i) the officer should be in the rank of Lt. General (&
                   Equiv);
(ii) such an officer should be holding the post of
                   Comdt AM          C&C; and
(iii) he should have a minimum remainder service of
                   one year from the date of occurrence of the vacancy.
45. Adverting to the second question, the prefix ‘inter
                   se’ has also to be given some meaning as it cannot
                   be rendered otiose. Therefore, whereas while
                   assessing ‘suitability’, it has to be seen that a
                   particular officer is not unfit for the post, when it
                   comes to ‘inter se suitability’, it has reference to
                   assessing the suitability of all eligible officers and
                   thereafter finding who is more suitable to occupy such
                   a post. We have to keep in mind that these are very
                   high ranking posts and, therefore, the competent
                   authority is supposed to choose a more suitable
                   officer for such posts. We are of the opinion that for
                   expressing such an intention, the Circular could have

1   (2005) UKHL 28
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                               Page 11 of 39
been worded more appropriately and with clarity to
                   avoid such doubts. However, since the word ‘inter se’
                   is used, it implies that the intention behind laying
                   down this criteria was to give these posts to a better
                   suited person after evaluating their inter se suitability.
                   Of course, while doing this exercise seniority of an
                   officer is also to be given due weightage, meaning
                   thereby if the senior most person is competent to hold
                   the post, he is to be given preference. Therefore, we
                   conclude that the view of the AFT that the post of
                   DGMS (Army) is to be filled by the officer on the
                   strength of ‘seniority-cum-suitability’, where seniority
                   is a decisive factor and suitability is a secondary
                   factor, is not correct. In the entire discussion resting
                   with the aforesaid view, the Tribunal ignored the fact
                   that it is not only seniority and suitability simpliciter
                   but ‘inter se’ seniority and suitability. The expression
                   ‘inter se’ is totally ignored and there is no discussion
                   thereupon at all, which has led the AFT to take wrong
                   view insofar as interpretation of the criteria
laid down
                   in
the Circular dated 10th July, 1992 is concerned,
                   which talks of ‘inter se seniority and suitability’."
13)     Thereafter, this Court examined the recommendation of DGMS

        (Army) to appoint Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra and found

        that the AFT rightly quashed the said recommendation. At the

        same time, the direction of the AFT that the petitioner be

        straightway appointed to the post of DGMS (Army) was also set

        aside and it was found that the said direction of the AFT was on

        the basis that the appointment was to be given keeping in view

        the seniority alone which was not found to be the correct position.

        It is in these circumstances, the matter was remitted back to the

        Raksha Mantri for taking appropriate decision in the matter.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                             Page 12 of 39
14)     The petitioner contends that his apprehensions that he would be

        denied the post, come what may, have turned out to be correct. It

        is stated that even this Court in its judgment dated August 01,

        2018 had specifically remarked that the apprehensions of the AFT

        in regard to the possible ouster of the petitioner may not be

        unfounded. Still, reposing faith in the Competent Authority, matter

        was remanded back with the hope that petitioner would be

        treated fairly.       The grudge of the petitioner is that it has not

        happened and the manner in which the matter is projected and

        placed before the Raksha Mantri by the concerned authorities

        shows their state of mind which is antagonistic to the petitioner. It

        is submitted that Air Marshal Rajvir Singh was empanelled in his

        second chance, i.e., the next Promotion Board after the previous

        Board in which the petitioner was empanelled for promotion to the

        rank of Lieutenant General and was not even in the zone of

        consideration in the earlier process of selection for appointment

        to the post of DGMS (Army). There was no way he could have

        now suddenly made it to the said post on the ground of suitability,

        especially when he is retiring after 7 months. Further, Air Marshal

        Rajvir Singh is a plain MBBS doctor, who has never served as an

        MG (Medical) of a Command, whilst the petitioner besides being

        a super-specialist and a nationally renowned Onco-surgeon, also
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                       Page 13 of 39
has the maximum Administrative and Operational experience.
Therefore, the petitioner feels aggrieved by his non-selection for

        the post of DGMS (Army), declassified vide promotion order

        dated August 10, 2018.
15)     It is further argued that in case of inter se suitability, the petitioner

        is any day a more suitable person as compared to respondent no.

        4 which is clear from the following:
(i)    The petitioner who is one promotion batch senior to Air

        Marshal Rajvir Singh, is a super-specialist while respondent no. 4

        is not even a specialist, leave alone a super-specialist. Besides

        this the petitioner has the maximum Administrative and

        Operational         Experience,        having   tenated   two    Command

        Appointments as a Brigadier/Major General and four prestigious

        appointments of Commandant Officers Training College, MG

        (Medical) in three different Commands/Armies and Delhi area,

        whereas as the Head of the Medical Services of these

        Operational Commands and Armies he has                          successfully

        performed the actual work of the DGMS (Army) in half the

        country.
(ii)   In the Special Selection Board for promotion to the post of

        Lieutenant General held in January, 2016, the petitioner and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                             Page 14 of 39
respondent no. 4 were considered together. The petitioner would

        be deemed empanelled in the said Board (after a litigation which

        came upto this Court), as he was considered as a fresh case,

        whereas respondent no. 4 has been empanelled with the next

        (Junior) Promotion batch, as a second timer and hence is

        a batch junior in this rank.
(iii)   That as recent as on 23rd January, 2018, the respondents

        vide their noting dated January 23, 2018, had only recommended

        the names of Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra and Surg. V.

        Adm U.K. Sharma, in the panel for appointment to the post of

        DGMS (Army), in spite of him being the senior most eligible

        Lieutenant General to tenate the post. This noting was ultimately

        approved by the Raksha Mantri (as submitted by the respondents

        to this Court, in the earlier hearings) but was not declassified.
This order was subsequently quashed by this Court. However, at

        this stage, respondents had not even found respondent no. 4

        worthy of consideration for appointment to the post of DGMS

        (Army). Now all of a sudden, in August, 2018, after 8 months,

        respondent no. 4 has been brought from the Air Force, told to

        change his service and uniform to Army and appointed to the post

        of DGMS (Army), with the sole purpose of ousting the petitioner

        from tenating the post of DGMS (Army). This again proves that
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                  Page 15 of 39
the respondents have always had a fixed agenda of somehow

        denying the appointment of DGMS (Army) to the petitioner, by all

        means possible and have now achieved their aim by appointing

        respondent no. 4 in an extremely hasty fashion.
(iv)   Respondent no. 4 is being transferred from Air Force to

        Army, whereas the petitioner is already serving in the Army.

        Secondly, in the past, like in the case of last two DGMS's (Army),

        whenever lateral transfers from one service to another have taken

        place, it is only to place the senior most officers as the DGMS

        (Army) as this has always been considered as a "better"/higher

        post, with the maximum responsibilities, since he is the Head of

        the Army Medical Corps, which comprises over 75 per cent of the

        AFMS (Armed Forces Medical Services).
(v)    Respondent no. 4 is already tenating the post of DGMS(Air)

        and is being shifted laterally only to oust/deny the petitioner from

        tenating his rightful post of DGMS (Army).
(vi)   In fact, in the past couple of decades, only three officers

        have been transferred laterally from the DGsMS of one service

        (Navy) to Army, because they were the senior most.              This

        includes Lieutenant General G. Ramdas and the last two

        DGsMS(Army), i.e., Velu Nair and Bipin Puri (the present

        DGAFMS).
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                     Page 16 of 39
16)     It is, thus, contended, by Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. P.S. Patwalia,

        learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner is that insofar

        as Air Marshal Rajvir Singh is concerned he had already been

        given the post of DGMS(Air).           There was no question of

        considering him, now, for the post of DGMS (Army).          Further

        more, it amounted to lateral shifting of DGMS of one service to

        another service, namely, from Air Force to Army. According to the

        policy letter dated July 10, 1992, such lateral shifting could be

        done only in 'exceptional circumstances'.      However, no such

        exceptional circumstances were mentioned by the respondents.

        It was also submitted that a novel exercise was undertaken by the

        respondents by taking into consideration the ACRs of the officers

        from the beginning of their career terming it as 'Overall Average

        Profile' which was entirely new concept invented by the

        respondents for the first time and outside the policy dated July 10,

        1992.
17)     Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India referred to

        the discussion contained in paragraphs 40 - 45 of judgment dated

        August 01, 2018 and submitted with much vehemence that the

        entire exercise was undertaken by the respondents keeping in

        view the aforesaid interpretation given to the policy letter dated
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                     Page 17 of 39
July 10, 1992. He emphasised that this Court very categorically

        held that while adjudging 'inter se suitability' it was to be

        assessed in respect of eligible officers.        For this reason, all

        eligible officers, including Air Marshal Rajvir Singh, were

        considered.         He also submitted that this Court has specifically

        observed that since these are very high ranking posts, the

        Competent Authority is supposed to choose a very suitable officer

        for such post who is found to be better suited person, after

        evaluating the 'inter se suitability'.        The Attorney General

        highlighted that the parameters of suitability in respect whereof

        the eligible offices are to be considered are stipulated in the

        judgment itself, viz., suitability is to be assessed with respect to

        caliber, competence, attributes, skill and experience, with

        consideration to 'inter se seniority'. In this hue, his submission

        was that for considering these aspects, Overall Average

        Performance (OAP) of service ACRs of all eligible General

        Officers as on November 01, 2017 was rightly taken into

        consideration, as this provided an objective and fair basis for the

        assessment of the inter se suitability of the officers. As a result,

        Air Marshal Rajvir Singh was found to be more suitable than the

        petitioner. It was argued that such an exercise was strictly in
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                       Page 18 of 39
conformity with the judgment given by this Court which could not

        be faulted with.
18)     The learned Attorney General emphasised the importance of

        DGMS (Army) post by contending that with the vast multitudinous

        activities in health and medical care of the personnel of the

        regular army, and which respondent no. 1 is duty bound to take

        care, the post of DGMS (Army) requires for adequate discharge

        of its functions, high degree of intellect and experience, having

        onerous responsibilities, with wide executive powers and not

        necessarily specialized knowledge in any filed of medicine.

        Respondent No. 1, in the circumstances therefore, had to make

        the best possible choice it can, keeping in view the larger

        interests of the regular army.         Therefore, in exercise of this

        choice, the respondent no. 1 has selected and transferred

        respondent no. 4 from DGMS(Air) to DGMS (Army), but that does

        not make the transfer arbitrary. He submitted that the transfer is

        made on account of the exigencies of administration and is not

        with any discriminatory preference for respondent no. 4 over the

        petitioner.
19)     He also laid emphasis on the proposition that post of DGMS

        (Army) can only be filled by an incumbent in whom the State must
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                       Page 19 of 39
necessarily have the highest confidence, and appointment to the

        same cannot go by seniority alone as contended by the petitioner.

        Therefore, once in the opinion of the Raksha Mantri, respondent

        no. 4 was the most suitable one, it is not open to the petitioner to

        seek judicial review by filing the writ petition as if it is an appeal

        over the view taken by the authority in such a case or substitute

        the view for that of the authority.
In support of the aforesaid proposition, Mr. Venugopal

        referred to the following judgments:
(
i) Union of India and Others vs. Lt. Gen. Rajendra Singh
        Kadyan2
"20...Further, the expression “fit” has been brought to our
               notice as legally meaning “fit to be chosen” by elaborating
               the expression “eligible” in Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, 5th
               Edn. However, the expression “fit”, which has different
               shades of meanings, also means “a person to be
               appointed shall be legally eligible” and “eligible” has
               already been explained by us to mean “fit to be chosen”.
Again, the expression “select” means “chosen or picked
               up”. Therefore, we are of the view that to the post of Army
               Commander, selection has to take place. Of course,
               considering the nature of rigorous standards adopted in
               the matter of selection of officers from the stage of Lt.
               Colonel onwards up to the stage of Lt. General in the usual
               course it may be that the senior most officer is selected as
               the Army Commander. But that does not debar the Chief of
               the Army Staff or the Union of India from making the
               selection of any other person for good reasons who fulfills
               the necessary criteria. Therefore, we are of the opinion
               that it was improper on the part of the High Court to have
               concluded that the post of Army Commander is a non-
               selection post. Further, the conclusion reached by the High
               Court that appointment to the post of Army Commander


2   (2000) 6 SCC 698
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                           Page 20 of 39
has to be made on the basis of seniority alone cannot be
               accepted."
(ii)   Indira Jaising v. Supreme Court of India3

               "68. What is merit? Is it the academic qualification or
               brilliance or is it something more? The matter has been
               considered earlier by this Court in
K.K. Parmar v. High
Court of Gujarat.
Placing reliance on an earlier view in
Guman Singh v. State of Rajasthan
it has been held that:
(
K.K. Parmar
case, SCC pp. 801-02, paras 27-28)

                  “27. Merit of a candidate is not his academic
                  qualification. It is sum total of various qualities. It
                  reflects the attributes of an employee. It may be his
                  academic qualification. He might have achieved
                  certain distinction in the university. It may involve the
                  character, integrity and devotion to duty of the
                  employee. The manner in which he discharges his
                  final duties would also be a relevant factor.
(See
Guman Singh v. State of Rajasthan
.)
28. For the purpose of judging the merit, thus, past
                  performance was a relevant factor. There was no
                  reason as to why the same had been kept out of
                  consideration by the Selection Committee. If a
                  selection is based on the merit and suitability, seniority
                  may have to be given due weightage but it would only
                  be one of the several factors affecting assessment of
                  merit as comparative experience in service should
                  be.”"
(
iii) State of West Bengal and others v. Manas Kumar
        Chakraborty
and others4 [Para 17]

               "17. The learned Senior Counsel for the first respondent
               then contended that if a person moves to a post of greater
               prestige, duties and responsibilities, honour or status, as
               compared to the previous post held, then that movement,
               even if lateral, would amount to promotion, even if both the
               posts carry the same scale of pay.
Learned counsel relied
               upon the case of
Meera Massey and Vice-Chancellor, L.N.
               Mithila University v Dayanand Jha
to support the
               contention urged. Even if the contention is accepted, the

3   (2017) 9 SCC 766
4   (2003) 2 SCC 604
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                            Page 21 of 39
fact remains that the second respondent was promoted by
               the composite order dated 23-5-2001 to the substantive
               rank of DGP and simultaneously posted as DG&IGP. We
               see no illegality in this. Secondly, there is no dispute that
               the post of DG&IGP is a selection post like the other
               DGPs. The post of DG&IGP being a post of very sensitive
               nature can only be filled by an incumbent in whom the
               State Government must necessarily have the highest
               confidence. We are, therefore unable to accept the
               contention of the respondent that deployment of an
               incumbent in such a post can go only by seniority. Merit in
               the nature of past record, the credibility and confidence
               which one is able to command with — the Government of
               the State must play a predominant role in selection of an
               incumbent to such a post. In the opinion of the appointing
               authority, the second respondent was the most suitable
               one. It is not open to the courts to sit in appeal over the
               view taken by the appointing authority in such a case or
               substitute its own view for that of the duly constituted
               authority. The Administrative Tribunal, as a matter of
               comparison of merit, was inclined to hold that the second
               respondent was by far the better and more meritorious
               candidate. The High Court has skirted this question and
               declined to decide this issue. Since we are of the view that
               there was no legal ineligibility in the second respondent to
               hold the post of DG&IGP, we must necessarily accept the
               comparative assessment of merit by the first appellant
               State of West Bengal and give credence to its own choice,
               of a suitable incumbent for being posted, as such."
20)     He further submitted that internal office notings referring the case

        for consideration by the Raksha Mantri will bear out the objective

        exercise undertaken by the respondents and submitted the

        original records for the perusal of this Court.
21)     We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions

        which have been made by the learned counsel on both sides. we

        have also perused the original records of the case.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 22 of 39
22)     File of the Ministry reveals that after the judgment of this Court on

        August 01, 2018, Director (Medical) prepared his 'Note' dated

        August 02, 2018 in which the salient aspects of the judgment

        have been summarized. It is a fair and objective recording of the

        gist of the judgment.             The Director has even highlighted the

        'admitted facts' which have been culled out in the judgment dated

        August 01, 2018. After stating the summary of the judgment, the

        Director (Medical) in his note pointed out that as on the date of

        the vacancy of the post of DGMS (ARMY), i.e., November 01,

        2017, four persons, who were Lieutenant Generals (and

        equivalent) Officers, were eligible for posting as DGMS (Army).

        These four names stated in the note are: (a) Lieutenant General

        Manomoy Ganguly (petitioner herein); (b) Lieutenant General

        Sanjiv Chopra; (c) Air Marshal Rajvir Singh (respondent no. 4

        herein); and (d) Surg V Adm U.K. Sharma. Against each of these

        officers, Director (Medical) has appended his remark as well in a

        tabulated form, which is reproduced hereinbelow:
S.No Officer's particulars              Remarks
          .
          (a)      Lt.   Gen.   Manomoy         Vide    note     23.01.2018,
                   Ganguly, VSM MG(Med)         DGAFMS with the approval
                   HQ, SC, Pune (MR-            of COAS had found him to
                   014141M)                     be unsuitable for the post of
                                                DGMS (Army) on the ground
Seniority in the rank of Lt. that he does not have
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 23 of 39
Gen: 1 Sep 2016            previous exposure to the
                   Date of retirement: 31 May working environs of the IHQ
                   2019                       of the MoD. However, these
                                              grounds have been quashed
                                              by the Hon'ble Supreme
                                              Court
(b)      Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, He has been selected for
                   VSM Col Comdt (MR- appointment to the post of
                   04142P) DGHS(AF)             DGMS (Army) vide note 9-
                                                10 of preceding note.
Seniority in the rank of Lt.
Gen.: 18 Nov. 2016           However, the selection has
                                                been quashed by Hon'ble
                   Date of retirement: 17 Nov AFT vide its order dated
                   2018                         07.05.2018 and upheld by
                                                Hon'ble Supreme Court vide
                                                its order dated 01.08.2018.
(c)      Air Mshl Rajvir Singh, VSM The officer was not included
                   ( MR-04153F)               in the panel for posting as
                                              DGMS (Army) in the letter
                   Date of Seniority in the dated        23.1.2018      by
                   rank : 1 May 2017          DGAFMS as he had already
                                              taken over as DGMS(Air
Date of retirement: 31 Mar Force) w.e.f. 9.1.2018
2019
(d)      Surg V Adm U.K. Sharma, Vide          note     23.01.2018,
                   (MR-04262N)                  DGAFMS with the approval
                                                of     COAS       had     not
                   Commandant        AH(R&R) recommended the officer for
                   Delhi Cantt                  the post of DGMS (Army) on
                                                the ground that he "is the
                   Seniority in the rank of Lt. senior      most      Medical
                   Gen: 1 June 2017             Specialist and Nephrologist.
The Flag Officer has been
                   Date of Retirement: 30 proposed for permanent
                   June 2019                    secondment to Army in the
                                                rank of Lt. Gen for the
                                                appointment                of
                                                Commandant          AH(R&R)
                                                which is falling vacant on
                                                31.03.2018. Hence, he is
                                                not recommended for the
                                                appointment      of    DGMS
                                                (Army)".
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 24 of 39
The officer has since been
                                               posted as Commandant
                                               AH(R&R) w.e.f. 01.04.2018.
23)     The matter was placed before the Raksha Mantri, who gave the

        following direction on August 03, 2018"
'in compliance with the Hon'ble Supreme Court's order, a
               proposal may be put up".
24)     On the said direction, DGAFMS/VCOAS were requested by the

        Ministry to submit a proposal.         DGAFMS vide his note dated

        August 04, 2018, proposed a panel of five names for

        consideration for the post of DGMS (Army). Apart from the four

        names which are noted above, he added name of Lieutenant

        General Anup Banerji as well. On the above panel proposed by

        DGAFMS, the COAS has put his note dated August 08, 2018. He

        revised the panel by removing the name of Lieutenant General

        Anup Banerji and considered the suitability of the four officers.

        After considering their ACRs of the entire service, he concluded

        that "considering the seniority and by also factoring the conditions

        of suitability; it is apparent that Air Mshl Rajvir Singh, VSM

        DGMS(Air) is more suited to tenant the appointment of DGMS

        (Army)."       In his note while recommending Air Marshal Rajvir

        Singh, the COAS stated that Air Marshal Rajvir Singh has the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                       Page 25 of 39
highest ACR average among the officers in the panel. Once this

        proposal was received by the Ministry, the Director (Medical)

        appended         his    note      dated   August   09,   2018   thereupon,

        incorporating the aforesaid exercise and the recommendation of

        COAS.        In his note, he also brought out the following three

        pertinent aspects:-
(A)    In respect of exercise undertaken by COAS based on the

        ACRs of the officers, while considering their suitability, it is

        remarked that average of ACR gradings have never been used as

        criteria for posting of Lieutenant General rank officers.

        (B)    Air Marshal Rajvir Singh was not included in the panel for

        the post of DGMS (Army) forwarded by the DGAFMS/COAS in

        their earlier note dated January 23, 2018 as he had already

        assumed the post of DGMS(Air) at that time. It is also stated in

        the note that MoD's guidelines dated July 10, 1992 provided that

        "lateral shifting of DGMS of one service to another service may

        be considered only in exceptional circumstances."

        (C)    The note again points out the observations of this Court in

        its order dated August 01, 2018 to the effect that matter was

        remitted back to the Raksha Mantri reposing full faith in her and

        the Court was confident that she would consider the entire matter

        in totally dispassionate manner, with utmost objectivity and
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                            Page 26 of 39
depicting total fairness. In the process, "the admitted facts culled

        out in the judgment would also be placed before the Raksha

        Mantri".
25)     Raksha Mantri while accepting the recommendation of COAS,

        remarked that COAS had relied upon the Overall Average

        Performance          (OAP)       as    per   the   personal   profile   sheets

        (Confidential Reports).            It is further stated that this Court has

        clarified that the suitability of a candidate is to be assessed upon

        the touchstones of caliber, competence, attribute, skill and

        experience and since the confidential report mechanism of the

        Armed Forces has been a rigorous and time tested tool to assess

        the suitability of officers to hold high command appointments and

        has an inbuilt assessment of all characteristics specified in the

        judgment, the exercise of COAS based on OAP could be

        accepted.        It is also specifically remarked that though ACR

        gradings have never been used as a criteria for posting of a

        Lieutenant General rank officer earlier, this was adopted to

        comply with the directions of this Court. It is also mentioned that

        guidelines dated July 10, 1992 do provide for "lateral shifting".
26)     On the aforesaid parameters, the Raksha Mantri expressed her

        agreement with the recommendation of the COAS and approved
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                               Page 27 of 39
the appointment of Lieutenant General Rajvir Singh as the DGMS

        (Army).
27)     We may record at the outset that the exercise undertaken by

        Raksha Mantri does not suffer from any element of unfairness

        and that Raksha Mantri has endeavored to arrive at the decision,

        by interpreting the order of this Court in a particular way. We

        shall advert to the question as to whether such an understanding

        of the order is correct or not. However, the record shows, at

        least, that the exercise undertaken in arriving at
the said decision
dated August 10, 2018 is bona fide, at least insofar as the Raksha

        Mantri is concerned. At the same time, we are constrained to

        remark that the decision making process suffers from some

        significant errors and it cannot be said to be unblemished.
28)     At the outset, we may observe that emphasis of the learned

        Attorney General about the importance of DGMS (Army) post is

        absolutely correct.             The incumbent to this post has the

        responsibility to discharge his function with high degree of

        intellect and experience as it carries onerous responsibility, with

        wide executive powers, which would include, but is not limited to,

        specialised knowledge in any field of medicine. Therefore, the

        person to be appointed to this post should be one in which the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                     Page 28 of 39
State has highest confidence and the appointment cannot go by

        seniority alone. At the same time, it is also to be borne in mind

        that the Government has itself taken a decision on July 10, 1992

        which mentions the eligibility conditions for this post and also lays

        down the criteria which has to be adopted while deciding the

        person who would be eminently suited to hold such a post. To

        repeat, the criteria is 'inter se seniority' and 'suitability'. While

        adjudging this inter se seniority and suitability, assessment is in

        the light of their earlier experience and serving in particular

        service. Therefore, in this scenario the scrutiny of this Court is

        limited to the aspect as to whether the aforesaid criteria is

        scrupulously followed.
29)     We are also one with Mr. Venugopal about the scope of judicial

        review in such mattes. The court, in exercise of judicial review, is

        not concerned with the correctness of the findings of fact on the

        basis of which the orders are made so long as those findings are

        reasonable and supported by evidence.          The court does not

        substitute its judgment for that of the legislature or executive or

        their agents as to matters within the province of either. The court

        does not supplant "the feel of the expert" by its own review.
Undoubtedly, this Court is not sitting as an appellate authority
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 29 of 39
over the decision taken in making such appointments and is not

        supposed to substitute its view for that of the respondent

        authorities. However, scope of judicial review certainly extends to

        examining the decision making process and to see as to whether

        appropriate process, legally permissible, has been undertaken

        while taking the decision. While undertaking this examination, the

        court can deliberate and ensure that all relevant factors are taken

        into     consideration          and,       correspondingly,   no    irrelevant

        considerations have crept in in the decision making process.

        These are, among others, the accepted norms of judicial review.

        After all, discretionary powers conferred on the administration

        cannot be unguided. No doubt, in such matters, the discretion

        exercised by the authorities is to be generally accepted. This

        does not, however, mean that there is no control over discretion

        of the administration.            All powers have legal limits.     There is

        distinction between decision making process and the merit of the

        decision. Whereas in the former, the court applies the standard

        of judicial review, in the latter, it enters into the merits of the

        matter. In the leading decision of in Chief Constable of the

        North Wales Police v. Evans (Evans)5, Lord Hailsham stated:
"The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the
               individual receives fair treatment, and not to ensure that
               the authority, after according fair treatment, reaches, on a
5   (1982) I WLR 1155 : (1982) 3 All ER 141 (HL)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                               Page 30 of 39
matter which it is authorised by law to decide for itself a
               conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the court.
(emphasis supplied)"
30)     First fundamental error has occurred in lateral shifting of Air

        Marshal Rajvir Singh and considering his candidature along with

        others. It is contrary to the policy Guidelines dated July 10, 1992.

        The Guidelines permit such a lateral shifting 'only in exceptional

        circumstances'.         No such exceptional circumstances are sated

        anywhere on the basis of which this move of lateral shifting is

        justified.
31)     It is pertinent to mention here that DGAFMS/COAS in their earlier

        notings dated January 23, 2018 had not included Air Marshal

        Rajvir Singh in the panel for the post of DGMS (Army) on the

        ground that he had already assumed the post of DGMS(Air) at

        that time. Again, at that time only the petitioner and Lieutenant

        General Sanjiv Chopra were considered and Lieutenant General

        Chopra was recommended for the post. This recommendation

        had been set aside by the AFT and that decision was approved

        by this Court.          In such circumstances, lateral shifting of Air

        Marshal Rajvir Singh is beyond comprehension, more so, when

        no exceptional circumstances, which is the requirement, are
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 31 of 39
pointed out. These are neither stated while taking the decision

        nor in the counter affidavit filed by the Union of India.
32)     It has to be highlighted that this Court, no doubt, explained the

        meaning of 'inter se suitability by examining the same on the

        basis of caliber, competence, attributes, skills and experience of

        the officers.       However, these attributes are to be seen in the

        context of 'suitability of the eligible persons'. Once we discard

        lateral shifting, only the petitioner and Lieutenant General Sanjiv

        Chopra remain in the fray. Now, we advert to 'inter se suitability'

        as per the decision dated August 01, 2018 of this Court. The

        criteria is 'inter se suitability' and not 'inter se merit'.     Thus,

        suitability of the persons was to be adjudged with the adoption of

        the said criteria. It is for this reason that in the judgment dated

        01-08-2018 it was also recorded: 'of course, while doing this

        exercise seniority of an officer is also to be given due weightage,

        meaning thereby if senior most person is competent to hold the

        post, he is to be given preference'. It seems that the COAS got

        an impression (may be bona fide, but definitely erroneous

        impression) from the judgment dated August 01, 2018, that

        "comparative merit" of the officers is to be adjudged and for that

        purpose better method would be to go through the Overall
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 32 of 39
Average Performance (OAP).             We fail to understand as to on

        what basis this methodology was thought of, when concededly

        ACR gradings have never been used as a criteria for posting of a

        Lieutenant General rank officer earlier. Guidelines dated July 10,

        1992 are in place for last more than 26 years.           If it has not

        happened earlier and there was no such mandate of this Court

        also, as the Court never meant that performance of an officer

        from the beginning of his career is to be adjudged, such an

        exercise was unwarranted. We state at the cost of repetition that

        the parameters of caliber, competence, attributes, skill and

        experience are to be looked into, but with the objective to find out

        the 'suitability of a person'. Guidelines dated July 10, 1992 do not

        stipulate the criteria on 'comparative merit' and it is not treated as

        'selection' post. It uses the expression 'suitability'. Above all 'inter

        se seniority' is also an important criteria mentioned in the said

        policy. It is for this reason, this Court had categorically stated that

        if the senior most person is competent to hold the post he is to be

        given preference. Thus, we also find that the mechanism of OAP

        adopted is foreign to the Guidelines dated July 10, 1992. Having

        regard to this position contained in the policy decision dated July

        10, 1992, the judgments in the case of Lt. Gen. Rajendra Singh

        Kadyan and Indira Jaising, which have been relied upon by the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 33 of 39
learned Attorney General, would have no application. No doubt,

        judgment in the case of Lt. Gen. Rajendra Singh Kadyan throws

        light on the meaning which is to be given to the expression 'fit' as

        the Court has said that a person who is to be selected for the post

        should be 'fit to be chosen'. However, as is seen, nowhere the

        respondents have undertaken the exercise to this effect, namely,

        fitness or suitability of the petitioner to occupy the post in

        question.       On the earlier occasion, when he was considered

        along with Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra, the latter was

        recommended only on the basis that the petitioner would be

        newly promoted from the rank of Major General, he does not

        have 'previous exposure to the working and environs of the IHQ

        of the MoD'. It was held that it was an extraneous reason and did

        not amount to fair and objective consideration of his suitability for

        the post of DGMS (Army) as it is not necessary to have working

        experience in IHQ alone. This time, again, nowhere his suitability

        to man the post of DGMS (Army) is adjudged. On the contrary,

        norm of Overall Assessment Purpose (OAP) is brought in and

        applied, which is again foreign to the guidelines dated July 10,

        1992.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 34 of 39
33)     We, thus, are of the opinion that the process undertaken by the

        respondents in taking decision to appoint Air Marshal Rajvir Singh

        as DGMS (Army) does not stand judicial scrutiny.           We are

        constrained to set aside the appointment of respondent no. 4 as

        DGMS (Army).
34)     With this, we come to another crucial part, namely, in this whole

        background and scenario when we find that respondent No.4

        could not have been literally shifted and appointed as DGMS

        (Army) in the absence of any exceptional circumstances, what

        kind of directions can be issued. Once when lateral shifting is

        held to be impermissible, two officers remain in the fray, namely,

        the petitioner and Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra.         Having

        regard to the fate of Lieutenant General Sanjiv Chopra in the first

        round of litigation, we are left with the petitioner.   As already

        pointed out above, it is not the case of the respondents that the

        petitioner is not suitable for the post of DGMS (Army). After all,

        he has not been rejected on this ground. It is also an admitted

        fact that he is the senior most person. At this juncture, we would

        like to reiterate the admitted facts which were taken note of in the

        judgment dated August 01, 2018.
"47. Some admitted facts which are pertinent for the
               outcome of the present appeal need to be highlighted at
               this juncture. These are:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                     Page 35 of 39
(i) The respondent is the senior most Lt. General.
(ii) He fulfills the eligibility criteria for appointment to the
               post of DGMS (Army).
(iii) DGMS (Army) is treated as better post than other
               DGs, i.e., DGMS(Navy) and DGMS(AF).
(iv) The past practice has been to fill up the post of DGMS
               (Army) from a senior most officer. Before the AFT, the
               appellants failed to give any example where seniority was
               ignored. In the past, i.e. ever since issuance of Circular
               dated 10th July 1992, the practice has been to appoint the
               senior most Lt. General from Army. Before the AFT, the
               appellants could not cite a single deviation to the aforesaid
               practice. In the appeal, example of one Air Marshal H.K.
               Maini is given. However, it is adequately answered by the
               respondent by pointing out that that happened because Air
               Marshal Maini himself chose not to be posted as DGMS
               (Army) because of his health reasons, which the
               appellants could not controvert.
(v)     Even, in the present case, for appointment of DGMS
               (Army) the first Note dated 16th January 2018 by
               DGAFMS, in no uncertain terms, stated that the
               appointment to this post is to be made ‘strictly on the basis
               of their seniority’, meaning thereby the senior most Lt.
General (& Equiv) is to be posted. That Note was
               prepared on the assumption that the respondent is not in
               the reckoning as his case for promotion to the post of Lt.
               General was not recommended.
(vi) It is for the first time that in the Note dated 23 rd
               January 2018 the question of so-called ‘suitability’ is taken
               up. We have used the expression ‘so-called’ for the
               reason that (as would be discussed in some detail
               afterwards) even this Note dated 23rd January 2018 does
               not reflect that any exercise of “inter se suitability” is
               carried out strictly in accordance with the criteria laid down
               in the Circular dated 10th July 1992, i.e. on the touchstone
               of ‘inter se seniority and suitability’.
35)     Having regard to overall circumstances of the case and the

        manner in which this case has been dealt with in the past, we are

        left with no alternative but to give the directions ourselves. In

        adopting this course of action, we would also like to reproduce
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                             Page 36 of 39
the following discussion from the judgment dated August 01,

        2018:
"Apart from the aforesaid admitted facts, we also would
               like to state some of the findings as recorded by the AFT,
               with which we are in agreement. These are listed below:
(i)    There has been some attempt (though we are not
               suggesting as to whether it was deliberate or bona fide) in
               denying the respondent his claim for promotion to the rank
               of Lt. General. Events in detail on this aspect have
               already been narrated above, which need not be
               reiterated. Suffice it is to mention that even after the
               orders of the AFT and affirmation thereafter by the
               judgment of this Court, the Board had stuck to its earlier
               notion about the respondent. Fortunately for him, the
               Raksha Mantri took a fair and objective view in the matter
               and granted him his deserved promotion, which was
               legitimately due to him.
(ii)    As on 16th January 2018, when DGAFMS prepared
               his Note for appointment to the post of DGMS (Army),
               which had fallen vacant few months ago, he only knew that
               the Review Board had again refused to recommend the
               case of the respondent in the rank of Lt. General
               Therefore, he proceeded on the basis that since the
               respondent is not occupying the post of Lt. General he is
               out of reckoning and, accordingly, Lt. General Sanjiv
               Chopra was the senior most officer. Proceeding on the
               aforesaid presumption, after excluding the respondent
               from consideration, he recommended Lt. General Sanjiv
               Chopra for appointment as DGMS (Army) being the senior
               most in the AFMS cadre. This Note went to the extent of
               recording that not only promotion is strictly on the basis of
               their seniority, it was being done even for the posts of
               ‘DGAFMS’, ‘DGsMS’ and the ‘CDC IDC’ who are retained
               in the order of seniority for administrative reasons. Within
               three days thereafter, when the decision of the Raksha
               Mantri to promote the respondent to the rank of Lt.
General was declassified, in the fresh Note prepared on
               23rd January 2018, there was a complete turn around. For
               the first time, it was mentioned in this Note that as per the
               criteria Lt. General (& Equiv) will be assessed for
               appointment of DGMS ‘in the light of their earlier
               experience in a particular service’. No doubt, this criteria
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 37 of 39
is mentioned in the Circular dated 10th July 1992 and,
               therefore, there may not be anything wrong per se.
               However, we find substance in the submission of the
               learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent that
               such a realisation dawned only after coming to know that
               the respondent was also in the reckoning for appointment
               to the post of DGMS (Army) and he was the senior most
               officer.
(iii) The manner in which this Note is written leaves a
               reasonable impression that the exercise was done to
               exclude the respondent from appointment to the post of
               DGMS (Army). In the first instance, though the criteria of
               assessment ‘in the light of their earlier experience in a
               particular service’ is mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Note,
               it nowhere reproduces the exact criteria, namely, ‘inter se
               seniority and suitability’. Thus, while considering the
               earlier experience in a particular service, it was to be done
               in the light of inter se seniority-cum-suitability is not
               reflected in the said Note. In fact, there is no such
               exercise of inter se suitability undertaken in this Note.
(iv) In paragraph 7 of the Note dated 23 rd January 2018,
               case of the respondent is discussed. Qua him it is
               mentioned that since he would be newly promoted from
               the rank of Major General, he does not have ‘previous
               exposure to the working and environs of the IHQ of the
               MoD’. On that basis, he is proposed for appointment as
               DGHS (AF) instead of DGMS (Army). This, according to
               us, is not a fair and objective consideration of his suitability
               for the post of DGMS (Army) as it is not necessary to have
               working experience in IHQ alone. Mr. Patwalia had
               vehemently argued that the respondent had adequate
               administrative experience while working as Major General
               in Southern Command, which was equally relevant, doing
               similar nature of duties from which he has gained sufficient
               experience making him aptly suitable for the post of DGMS
               (Army). He had also pointed out that in the past, officers
               who are appointed to the post of DGMS (Army) were not
               necessarily those officers who had earlier worked in the
               environs of the IHQ of the MoD. This fact also could not
               be refuted by the appellants. Therefore, we find that there
               has not been any proper and valid consideration in
               applying the criteria of inter se seniority and suitability."
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                             Page 38 of 39
36)     As a result, we allow this writ petition and quash orders dated

        August 01, 2018 and issue mandamus directing the respondents

        to appoint the petitioner as DGMS (Army).
Necessary orders in this behalf shall be passed within one week.
.............................................J.
                                                                           (A.K. SIKRI)



                                               .............................................J.
                                                             (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 29, 2018.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 980 of 2018 & Anr.                                 Page 39 of 39