[Cites
20
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
Medical Council Of India vs The Chairman Sr Educational And ... on 29 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1349, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1120
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Arun Mishra
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL  APPEAL NO(S). 10372    OF 2018
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.24120 of 2018)

          MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA                                       ..APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

          THE CHAIRMAN, S.R. EDUCATIONAL AND 
          CHARITABLE TRUST & ANR.                                        ..RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    WITH

                                   CIVIL  APPEAL NO(S).  10373    OF 2018
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.24130 of 2018)

          MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA                                       ..APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

          THE CHAIRMAN, AL­AZHAR MEDICAL COLLEGE
          AND SUPER SPECIALITY HOSPITAL & ORS.      ..RESPONDENT(S)

                                 CIVIL  APPEAL NO(S).  10374     OF 2018
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 27763/2018
                                                                       D.32809 of 2018)

          MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA                                       ..APPELLANT(S)


Signature Not Verified
                                                  VERSUS
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI

          D.M. EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Date: 2018.10.30
16:07:41 IST
Reason:

          FOUNDATION & ORS.                                              ..RESPONDENT(S)




                                                      1
                                     AND
                  CIVIL  APPEAL NO(S). 10375       OF 2018
          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.27764/2018
                                                 D.32811 of 2018)

MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA                                         ..APPELLANT(S)

                                       VERSUS

DR. P. KRISHNA KUMAR & ORS.                                      ..RESPONDENT(S)


                                J U D G E M E N T

ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.    The Medical Council of India (for short, “the MCI”) is aggrieved by

the judgment and order dated 30.8.2018 passed by the High Court of

Kerala at Ernakulam.  The High Court has quashed the order passed by

the   Government   of   India   declining   to   grant   renewal   permission/

recognition   to   respondents   –   medical   colleges.     The   High   Court   has

directed   the   Commissioner   for   Entrance   Examinations,   Government   of

Kerala to allot students to the colleges for the academic year 2018­2019

immediately.  The MCI has also been directed to carry out the inspection

to verify whether the colleges had rectified the deficiencies found at the

time of earlier inspection. In case they have not done so, the MCI shall be

at   liberty   to   take   appropriate   action   against   them   including   the

enforcement   of   the   Bank   Guarantees.     At   the   same   time,   it   has   been
2
ordered that in case fresh deficiencies are detected, the colleges shall be

given   the   opportunity   to   rectify   such   deficiencies   within   a   stipulated

time.
2.     The High Court has decided the petitions of the four colleges by the

common order.  Probably, High Court had felt that the question on which

it decided the matters was common, however, the facts of each and every

college are different, the deficiencies found obviously varies and the order

of the High Court is subject to further judicial review. It would have been

appropriate for the High Court to decide the matter by separate orders

duly   reflecting   the   facts   of   each   case   and   the   deficiencies   found.

Clubbing of matters in the method and manner it had been done may

indicate   non­serious   approach.     In   three   of   the   matters,   question   was

that of admissions in the academic session 2018­2019 and in one of the

matters,   the   question   pertains   to   the   grant   of   recognition   as   well   as

admissions.
3.     The   High   Court   has   observed   that   there   are   many   serious

deficiencies and the lack of patients would result in a lack of exposure of

the   students   in   so   far   as   treatment   of   patients   was   concerned.     The

deficiencies,   such   as   lack   of   teaching   faculty,   residents,   lack   of   a

sufficient  number  of   surgical  procedures,   though,   are  of  nature   which

would have a serious impact on the quality of education, the explanation
3
offered   by   the   colleges   on   the   deficiencies   has   not   been   found   to   be

genuine   to   impress   the   court.     Notwithstanding   the   aforesaid

observations,   the   High   Court   has   proceeded   to   grant   the   relief   to   the

medical colleges.
4.     The colleges had contended that they had rectified the deficiencies

and   the   Hearing   Committee   had   recommended   the   MCI   to   review   the

case.     Accordingly,   the   Central   Government   had   required   the   MCI   to

review   its   earlier   stand.   However,   the   Executive   Committee   of   MCI

refused to reconsider its earlier stand in view of the provisions contained

in   the   Regulations   8(3)(1)(a)   of   the   Establishment   of   Medical   College

Regulations,   1999   (for   short,   “the   Regulations”).     The   MCI   declined   to

review   the   order  on   the   ground   that   the   time   for  the   MCI   to   send   its

recommendations   to   Central   Government   had   already   expired   on   30 th

April 2018 and the schedule was required to be strictly adhered to.
5.     The   High   Court   had   observed   that   opportunity   of   hearing   would

mean   to   make   a  representation.     Timely  assessment   is   integral  to   the

scheme and such an opportunity is to be given not only when permission

for the establishment of a new college is under consideration but even in

cases of subsequent renewal of such permission.   The High Court had

referred to the decisions in
Swamy Devi Dayal Hospital & Dental College

v.   Union   of   India   &   Ors.
AIR   2014   SC   284   and  Priyadarshini   Dental
4
College and Hospital v. Union of India & Ors., 2011 AIR SCW 2383= 2011

(4) SCC 623. At the time of renewal what is required to be considered is

whether the prescribed faculty and infrastructure is available.
There is

some difference between the renewal and the parameters prescribed for

the establishment.  The High Court has relied upon the decision in
D.M.

Education and Research Foundation v. Union of India
[2016 KHC 171] in

which   a   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   of   Kerala   held   that   the

principle of natural justice has to be strictly adhered to. The stand taken

by the MCI had been rejected and it was observed that compliance once

reported   was   required   to   be   considered,   thus,   the   MCI   ought   to   have

reconsidered   the   matter.     In   the   cases,   the   recommendation   to   review

had not been considered, lack of time could not be accepted as an excuse

to deny the petitioner the right claimed to which they were entitled.
6.    It was urged by learned senior counsel for the MCI that the High

Court has failed to consider the provisions contained in the Regulation

8(3)(1)(a) of the Regulations that was attracted in the matter of grant of

renewal/   recognition.   If   upon   assessment   the   deficiencies   had   been

found to be gross as provided in the aforesaid regulation, the college was

not entitled to seek liberty of compliance and further verification in the

same  academic   year.     The  decision  of  this  court  in
Medical Council of

India v. Vedantaa Institute of Academic Excellence Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
2018
5
(7) SCC 225 though referred to in the judgment, has not been discussed

but,   the   decision   of   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   has   been

preferred which was contrary to it.  Similarly, the decision of this Court

in
Medical Council of India v. The Principal, KMCT Medical College, and

Anr.  (Civil   Appeal   No.8429
of   2018)   had   not   been   adverted   to.   In   the

matter   of
D.M.   Education   and   Research   Foundation
(supra)   the

compliance was reported by the college belatedly on 22.5.2018.   Thus,

considering the time schedule, it was not possible to make the inspection

again   for   verification   of   the   compliance.     Therefore,   it   was   not   legally

permissible to grant any relief for the academic session 2018­2019 to the

said   college.     However,   it   was   the   case   of   recognition   where   the   main

provision of regulation 8 (3)(1) was applicable. For recognition, its case

would   be   considered   and   admissions   can   be   made   only   in   the   next

academic session i.e. 2019­2020 if permitted.
7.     Shri   Neeraj   Kishan   Kaul,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   on

behalf of the two of the colleges contended that when the Government of

India/Hearing   Committee   had   directed   the   MCI   to   review   the

recommendation   and   consider   the   compliance   reported,   the   order   was

binding   upon   the   MCI.     It   was   necessary   for   the   MCI   to   consider   the

compliance   that   was   reported   and   to   conduct   a   fresh   inspection   for

assessment, in case, it was so required and thereafter to take decision
6
afresh.   Declining to review the earlier recommendation clearly indicate

that there was non­application of mind and subsequently Government of

India  erred   in   accepting   the   stand   of   the   MCI  declining   to   review  and

consider   the   compliance.     Thus,   the   High   Court   was   fully   justified   to

permit   the   colleges   to   admit   the   students   subject   to   removal   of   the

deficiencies and liberty has been given to the MCI to inspect the colleges

and in case of deficiencies still subsist, to take appropriate action.
8.     Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of   the   respondent   college   ­   P.K.   Dass   Institute   of   Medical   Sciences

vehemently  contended   that  the   report   of   the   Assessors   was   absolutely

incorrect.  The website portal of the college clearly indicated the number

of indoor patients occupying the beds in the hospital.  The patients were

more   than   500.     The   Assessors   had   wrongly   reported   the   number   of

indoor patients in their report.   A large number of patients were in the

operation theatre, bathrooms, and other places. They have been illegally

excluded.   He further contended that somebody is required to consider

all   these   factual   aspects.   The   High   Court   has   also   not   considered   the

explanation offered.  At some level, somebody is required to consider the

compliance.     Assessors   cannot   be   said   to   be   the   final   arbiter   in   such

matters   when   the   report   is   ex­facie   incorrect   as   apparent   from   the

explanation offered by the college.   Thus, this court should look in the
7
same   and   grant   the   relief   to   the   college   discarding   the   report   of   the

Assessor.
9.     Shri Hufeza H. Ahmedi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of D.M. Education and Research Foundation contended that the case of

the respondent falls for recognition and proviso (a) to Regulation 8(3)(1)

of   Regulations   was   not   attracted.   The   opportunity   of   compliance   was

required   to   be   given   and   by  not  giving  opportunity  the   regulation   has

been violated.   Thus, the decision rendered by the MCI/Government of

India cannot be said to be appropriate.   The MCI, thus, deserves to be

directed to take a decision afresh in the matter of college in question.  No

case for interference is made out in the matter of D.M. Education and

Research Foundation as the matter was with respect to the recognition­

cum­admission.
10.    When we consider the report of the Assessors, in the case of S.R.

Educational   and   Charitable   Trust,   the   physical   inspection   was   carried

out   on   6th  and   7th  November   2017.     The   question   involved   was   of   3 rd

Batch of 100 students for the academic year 2018­2019. A large number

of   deficiencies   were   found   as   observed   in   the   order   dated   31.5.2018

passed by the Government of India:
1.   Deficiency of faculty is 12.64% as detailed in the report.
2.   Shortage of Residents is 15.21 % as detailed in the report.
8
3.    OPD attendance at 2 p.m. on the day of assessment is 575
      against the requirement of 600.
4.    Bed Occupancy at 10 a.m. on the day of assessment is 37%.
5.    There was NIL Major Operation on the day of assessment.
6.    There was NIL Normal Delivery on the day of assessment.
7.    The workload of Histopathology was NIL on the day of
      assessment.
8.    OPD: Separate Registration counters for male/ female are not
      available. Registration counters for OPD/ IPD patients are not
      separate.
9.    Audiometry room is not air-conditioned. Speech Therapy is
      not available.
10.   Casualty: Separate Casualty for O.G. is not available.
11.   O.T.s: They are under renovation.
12.   ICUs: There was NIL patient in SICU and only 1 patient in
      ICCU and 2 patients each in MICU, PICU/ NICU.
13.   Radiodiagnosis department: Only 1 Mobile X-ray machine is
      available against the requirement of 2. Only 1 Static X-ray
      machine is available against the requirement of 2.
14.   C.T. Scan is not available.
15.   CSSD: Receiving and Distribution points are not separate.
16.   Central Research Laboratory is not functional.
17.   Lecture Theaters: 2 Lecture Theatres are available against the
      requirement of 3.
18.   Central Library: Students Reading room (Outside) is not
      furnished. 2,968 books are available against the requirement
      of 3,000.
19.   Central Photography section is not available.
20.   Students’ Hostels: They are shared with BDS students.
21.   Residents’ Hostel: It is not available.
22.   Residential Quarters: NIL quarters are available for Non-
teaching staff.
23.   Pathology department: Audiovisual aids are not available.
Specimens are not available in the Museum. 4 Service
      Laboratories are not available.
24.   Microbiology department: Audiovisual aids are not available.
The museum is not available. 7 Service Laboratories were not
      available. Media Preparation facility, Autoclaving are not
      available.
25.   Pharmacology department: Audiovisual aids are not available.
The museum is not available. Clinical Pharmacology
      laboratory is not available.
9
26. Forensic Medicine department: Audiovisual aids are not
                available. Museum is not available. Cold storage is not
                available. Autopsy block is under construction.
27. Community Medicine department: Audiovisual aids are not
                available. Museum is not available. Practical Laboratory is not
                available. It is not furnished.
28. RHTC: Cold chain equipment is not available. Survey/ MCH/
                Immunization/ FW Register are not available.
29. CME: There was no CME activity during the year.
30. Other deficiencies are as pointed out in the assessment report.
11.   In   the   matter   of   Al­Azhar   Medical   College   and   Super   Specialty

Hospital   the   Government   of   India   in   its   order   dated   31.5.2018   has

mentioned   the   deficiencies   found   by   the   Assessors   in   the   inspection

made, in the matter of renewal of permission for 5 th Batch of 150 seats in

MBBS   course   for   the   academic   year   2018­2019.     The   deficiencies

mentioned are extracted herein:
1. Deficiency of faculty is 37.12% as detailed in the report.
2. Shortage of Residents is 100 % as detailed in the report.
3. Residents and Assistant Professors are drawing more salary than
               Professors and HOD. All Senior and Junior Residents have been
               appointed with orders mentioning duty hours from 8 am to 4.30
               pm. Hence, they have not been counted as SR/JR.
4. OPD attendance up to 2 p.m. on the day of assessment is 592
               against the requirement of 1200.
5. Bed Occupancy at 10 a.m. on the day of assessment was 46.15%.
6. Patients:
(a) In Pediatric wards case sheets of 35 patients shows IV
               Antibiotics going on but on cross verifying with patients,
               relatives it was found that no injections were given. Also, none
               of such patients had IV Cannulas inserted hence they were not
               counted.
(b) In Pulmonary Medicine Department, female ward 9 patients
               had a diagnosis of COPD, Bronchiectasis, Pneumonia etc. on
               taking history and examining the patient, no corroborative
               clinical findings were found. Also, none of the patients had Chest
               X-rays done. Hence, they were not counted.
10
(c) In Orthopedics ward, 15 patients with complaints of Neck
                  Pain, Leg pain under evaluation were not counted as they were
                  asymptomatic also did not have x-rays.
(d) In Ophthalmology female ward, 3 patients were kept with.
diagnosis of corneal opacity. On examination, no such findings
                  were seen. Hence not counted.
7.   There were only 3 Major Operations on the day of assessment.
8.   There was only 1 Normal delivery & NIL Caesarean Section on
                  the day of assessment.
9.   Histopathology workload was only 4 & Cytopathology workload
                  was 2.
10.   OPD: Plaster Cutting room is not available.
11.   Casualty: Separate Casualty or O.G. is not available.
12.   ICUs: There was only 1 patient in NICU & 2 patients each in
                  PICU, SICU on the day of assessment.
13.   There was NIL issue of Blood on the day of assessment.
14.   Residential Quarters: 24 quarters are available for faculty against
                  requirement of 26.
15.   Anatomy Department: Band Saw is not available.
16.   Physiology department: Mammalian Laboratory is not available.
17.   RHTC: Cold Chain equipment are not available. Immunization is
                  not available.
18.   Dean has refused to sign the assessment report.

       The provision contained in Regulation 8(3)(1)(a) of the Regulation

had been invoked by the MCI and the decision had been taken not to

grant permission for admission in the academic session 2018­2019.
12.    In the case of P.K. Dass Institute of Medical Sciences, Palakkad,

Kerala the matter pertains to the renewal of permission for admission of

5th Batch of 150 seats in MBBS course for the academic year 2018­2019.

On   the   basis   of   the   report   of   the   Assessors   dated   31 st  October   &   1st

November   2017   the   matter   was   considered   and   following   deficiencies

were noted:
11
1. Deficiency of faculty is 9.2% as detailed in the report.
2. OPD attendance up to 2 p.m. is 1,060 against the requirement of
                1,200.
3. Bed Occupancy is 40.60 % at 10 a.m. on the day of assessment.
4. There were only 09 Major Operations on the day of assessment.
5. Central Kitchen: No register is available in the kitchen.
6. Other deficiencies as pointed out in the assessment report.
13.   Regulation   8(3)(1)(b)   of   the   Establishment   of   Medical   College

Regulation (Amendment), 2010, had been applied by the MCI as the bed

occupancy   was   less   than   65%.     As   per   the   MCI,   the   compliance   of

rectification   of   the   deficiencies   could   not   have   been   considered   for

renewal of the permission in the same academic year.
14.   Regulation 8(3) is extracted hereinunder:
“8.   GRANT OF PERMISSION:
(1) The Central Government, on the recommendation of the Council for
       Letter of Permission, may issue a letter to set up a new medical college
       with such conditions or modifications in the original proposal as may be
       considered necessary. This letter can also include a clear-cut statement
       of preliminary requirements to be met in respect of buildings,
       infrastructural facilities, medical and allied equipment’s, faculty and staff
       before admitting the first batch of students. The formal permission may
       be granted after the above conditions and modifications are accepted and
       the performance bank guarantee for the required sums are furnished by
       the person and after consulting the Medical Council of India.
       (2) The formal permission may include a time-bound program for the
       establishment of the medical college and expansion of the hospital
       facilities. The permission may also define annual targets as may be fixed
       by the Council to be achieved by the person to commensurate with the
       intake of students during the following years.
The following shall be added:
8(3)(1).   The permission to establish a medical college and admit
       students may be granted initially for a period of one year and may be
12
renewed on yearly basis subject to verification of the achievements of
annual targets. It shall be the responsibility of the person to apply to the
Medical Council of India for purpose of renewal six months prior to the
expiry of the initial permission. This process of renewal of permission
will continue such time the establishment of the medical college and
expansion of the hospital facilities are completed and a formal
recognition of the medical college is granted. Further admissions shall
not be made at any stage unless the requirements of the Council are
fulfilled. The Central Government may at any stage convey the
deficiencies to the applicant and provide him an opportunity and time to
rectify the deficiencies.
8(3)(1)(a) Colleges in the stage of Letter of Permission up to II renewal
(i.e.) Admission of the third Batch
      If it is observed during any inspection/ assessment of the institute
that the deficiency of teaching faculty and/ or Residents is more than 30
% and/ or bed occupancy is <50% (45% in North East, Hilly Terrain,
etc.) compliance of rectification of deficiencies from such an institute
will not be considered for issue of Letter of Permission (LOP)/ renewal
of permission in that Academic Year.)
(b) Colleges in the stage of III & IV renewal (i.e. Admission of fourth &
fifth batch).
If it is observed during any inspection of the Institute that the
deficiency of teaching faculty and/ or Residents is more than 20% and/ or
bed occupancy is <65%, compliance of rectification of deficiencies from
such an institute will not be considered for renewal of permission in that
Academic Year.
(c) Colleges which are already recognized for award of M.B.B.S.
degree and/ or running Postgraduate courses.
If it is observed during any inspection/ assessment of the institute
that the deficiency of teaching faculty and/ or Residents is more than
10% and/ or bed occupancy is < 70%, compliance of rectification of
deficiency from such an institute will not be considered for issue of
renewal of permission in that Academic Year and further such an institute
will not be considered for processing applications for Postgraduate
courses in that Academic Year and will be issued show-cause notices as
to why the recommendations for withdrawal of recognition of the courses
run by that institute should not be made for undergraduate and
postgraduate courses which are recognized
u/s 11(2)
of the IMC Act,
1956 along with direction of stoppage of admissions in permitted
postgraduate courses.
13
8(3)(1)(d): However, the office of the Council shall ensure that such
        inspection are not carried out at least 2 days before and 2 days after
        important religious and festival holidays declared by the Central/ State
        Government.”
        (2) The recognition so granted to an Undergraduate Course for award of
        MBBS degree shall be for a maximum period of 5 years, upon which it
        shall have to be renewed.
(3) The procedure for ‘Renewal’ of recognition shall be same as
        applicable for the award of recognition.
(4) Failure to seek timely renewal of recognition as required in subclause
(a) supra shall invariably result in stoppage of admissions to the
        concerned Undergraduate Course of MBBS at the said institute."

      It is apparent from the aforesaid regulation that in the case of the

third batch, deficiencies of teaching faculty and/or residents are found to

be more than 30% and bed occupancy less than 50%, a college cannot be

given an opportunity for compliance in the same year.
15.   In the case of the 4th and 5th batch as provided in regulations 8(3)(1)
(b), if the deficiencies of teaching faculty and the residents is more than

20% and bed occupancy is less than 65%, such college cannot be given

opportunity of reporting compliance during the same academic year.
16.   Considering the aforesaid deficiencies in case of S.R. Educational

Trust,
Regulation   8(3)(1)(a)
was   attracted.   In   Al­Azhar   Medical   College

and   the   college   at   Palakkad   for   5th  Batch   deficiencies   found   by   the

assessors   were   gross   so   as   to   attract   the   provisions   contained   in

amended
Regulation 8(3)(1)(b)
.
14
17.
Regulation   8(3)(1)(a)
came   up   for   consideration   in   the   case   of
Vedantaa  Institute
(supra) and while upholding vires of the provisions,

precluding opportunity of re­verification, this court has observed:
“10. Though
Regulation 8(3)(1)(a)
was challenged in the Writ Petition
       filed by Respondent No. 1 and 2, they did not press the relief. They
       restricted their challenge to the manner in which the inspection was done
       and for a direction to the Appellant-Council to carry out a fresh
       inspection. The interpretation of
Regulation 8(3)(1)(a)
by the High Court
       is patently erroneous in as much as the High Court did not take note of
       the proviso to
Regulation 8(3)(1)
. Without a proper examination of the
       provision, the High Court fell in error in holding that
Regulation 8(3)(1)
(a) would be applicable only to the Colleges seeking second renewal i.e.
       admissions of the third batch. Admissions up to the second renewal i.e.
       admissions to the third batch would fall under
Regulation 8(3)(1)(a)
. In
       other words, the proviso is not restricted only to second renewal cases.
Even the first renewal is covered by proviso (a) to
Regulation 8(3)(1)
as
       the language used is "up to second renewal". We do not see any conflict
       between Section 10-A (3) and (4) of the Act on one hand and
Regulation
       8(3)(1)(a)
on the other.
Regulation 8(3)(1) (a)
is complementary to
Section 10-A
of the Act. Fixing minimum standards which have to be
       fulfilled for the purpose of enabling a medical College to seek fresh
       inspection would not be contrary to the scheme of Section 10-A. In fact,
Regulation 8(3)(1)
provides that an opportunity shall be given to the
       Medical College to rectify the defects. But, the proviso contemplates that
       certain minimum standards are to be satisfied i.e. there should not be a
       deficiency of teaching faculty and/or residents more than 30 percent
       and/or bed occupancy should not be less than 50 percent. This
       prescription of standards for availing an opportunity to seek re-inspection
       is not ultra vires either the Regulation or
Section 10-A
of the Act.
11. On perusal of the material on record, we are of the opinion that the
       conclusion reached by the High Court regarding the manner in which
       inspection was conducted is also not correct. Bed occupancy at 45.30
       percent on random verification was the claim of Respondent No. 1 and 2.
       However, the inspection report shows that out of the required minimum
       of 300 patients only 3 were available at 10.00 am on 25th September
       2017. This Court in Kalinga (supra) has held that medical education must
       be taken very seriously and when an expert body certifies that the
       facilities in a medical College are inadequate, it is not for the Courts to
       interfere with the assessment, except for very cogent jurisdictional
       reasons such as malafide of the inspection team, ex facie perversity in the
15
inspection, jurisdictional error on the part of the M.C.I., etc. The
        submission relating to the cyclone being a reason for the number of
        patients being less is not acceptable. We are in agreement with the
        submission made on behalf of the Appellant that the Resident Doctors
        are required to be in the hospital at all points of time.”
                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
18.
In
Medical Council of India vs. Principal, KMCT Medical College and

Anr.  (Civil   Appeal   No.8429
of   2018)  decided   on   August   21,   2018,   this

Court has again considered the provisions of Regulations 8(3)(1)(a) and

the   applicability   of   clause   8(3)(1)(c)   and   the   submission   raised   on   the

strength in
Royal Medical Trust (Registered) & Anr. v. Union of India &

Anr.
2015   (10)   SCC   19.
This   Court   after   considering   the   decision   in
Madha Medical College and Research Institute v. Union of India & Anr.
2017 (
15) SCC 791 and I.Q. City Foundation and Anr. v. Union of India &

Ors.
2017   (16)   SCC   249   observed   that   the   recommendation   of   the

Hearing Committee at best had the force of observation for conducting

the review.   Physical verification of compliance can be done only by the

MCI.  The manner of verification of the compliance has to be necessarily

left to the appellant­MCI.  The Court observed:
“14. The conclusion of the High Court that a second inspection ought not
        to have been conducted by the MCI is contrary to the law
laid down by
this Court in the judgments referred to supra. We are also not in
        agreement with the High Court that the MCI was bound to comply with
        the direction issued by Respondent No.2 and that a recommendation
        ought to have been made by the Appellant without verification. It is
        relevant to note that the Hearing Committee was prima facie convinced
        that the deficiencies pointed out in the inspection conducted on 18th/19th
16
September 2017 appeared to have been rectified on the basis of
        documentary evidence furnished by the College. Therefore, the Hearing
        Committee suggested that the Appellant may review and make a revised
        recommendation without any need for compliance verification. On the
        basis of such recommendation of the Hearing Committee, the matter was
        sent back to the Appellant by Respondent No.2. At best, the observation
        of the Hearing Committee, as affirmed by Respondent No.2, is a
        suggestion. Remand of the matter to the Appellant -MCI for conducting a
        review is due to the fact that the physical verification for compliance can
        be done only by the Appellant - MCI. The manner of verification of the
        compliance has to be necessarily left to the Appellant -MCI. We are of
        the view that it is open to the Appellant to choose the manner of
        compliance verification. Remand by the Government of India to MCI for
        a review does not place any restriction of verification to only the
        deficiencies pointed out earlier. MCI is competent to conduct the
        inspection regarding the compliance of the minimum standards as
        prescribed by the Regulations as well.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
19.
In
Royal   Medical   Trust
(supra),   the   Court   observed   that   when

verification   is   required,   it   should   be   before   deadline   fixed   for   taking   a

decision:
"31. ... ... ... (A) Initial assessment of the application at the first level
        should comprise of checking necessary requirements such as essentiality
        certificate, consent for affiliation and physical features like land and
        hospital requirement. If an applicant fails to fulfil these requirements, the
        application on the face of it, would be incomplete and be rejected. Those
        who fulfill the basic requirements would be considered at the next stage.
        (B) The inspection should then be conducted by the Inspectors of MCI.
By very nature, such inspection must have an element of surprise.
        Therefore sufficient time of about three to four months ought to be given
        to MCI to cause inspection at any time and such inspection should
        normally be undertaken latest by January. Surprise inspection would
        ensure that the required facilities and infrastructure are always in place
        and not borrowed or put in temporarily. (C) Intimation of the result or
        outcome of the inspection would then be communicated. If the
        infrastructure and facilities are in order, the medical college concerned
        should be given requisite permission/renewal. However, if there are any
        deficiencies or shortcomings, MCI must, after pointing out the
        deficiencies, grant to the college concerned sufficient time to report
17
compliance. (D) If compliance is reported and the applicant states that
       the deficiencies stand removed, MCI must cause compliance verification.
       It is possible that such compliance could be accepted even without actual
       physical verification but that assessment be left entirely to the discretion
       of MCI and the Central Government. In cases where actual physical
       verification is required, MCI and the Central Government must cause
       such verification before the deadline. (E) The result of such verification
       if positive in favour of the medical college concerned, the applicant
       ought to be given requisite permission/renewal. But if the deficiencies
       still persist or had not been removed, the applicant will stand disentitled
       so far as that academic year is concerned.”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)
20.   There can be a statutory prohibition on fresh inspection.  Same has

been created by amending regulation of 1999 in 2016.
In
Madha Medical

College and Research Institute
(supra) this Court has observed:
"17. While considering the above submissions, we must make it clear at
       the outset that we are not impressed with the argument that MCI is
       prohibited from conducting a second or subsequent inspection. The
       purpose of inspection by an expert team of assessors is to verify whether
       a medical college has the requisite infrastructure and facilities including
       faculty, residents as well as clinical and nonclinical material. The basic
       purpose of the inspection is to verify whether the college possesses the
       wherewithal and resources to provide a quality legal education consistent
       with the statutory regulations which hold the field. The powers of MCI
       cannot be constricted by prohibiting it from carrying out another
       inspection, even if it were to come close on the heels of an earlier
       inspection. As an expert statutory body, MCI may have legitimate
       reasons for seeking a reverification of the observations contained in a
       prior inspection. There may be reasons to doubt the genuineness of the
       picture which has been made out by the College during the course of an
       inspection. MCI may have prima facie reasons to believe that the actual
       possession of resources and infrastructure is at variance with what was
       portrayed before its team of assessors. MCI has been conferred with
       statutory powers to protect the cause of medical education. MCI is a
       custodian of public interest and acts in trust for the welfare of society.
       Access to medical care requires the presence of qualified health
       professionals. Verification of the conditions which prevail in medical
       colleges is central to the role discharged by MCI. Hence, it would be
18
manifestly contrary to public interest to restrict the powers of MCI to
       carry out a fresh inspection even though in its considered decision, such
       an inspection is necessary. This Court cannot sit in judgment over the
       wisdom of an expert body and we find no basis to hold in law that there
       is a prohibition in carrying out a fresh inspection. In the absence of a
       statutory interdict, the court will not read such a restriction into the
       powers of MCI. In these circumstances, we find no merit in the
       submission.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
21.
In
I.Q.   City   Foundation   vs.   Union   of   India
(supra)   the   Court   has

emphasized ‘objectivity’ in the decision­making process, it observed:
"31. On a reading of
Section 10-A
of the Act, Rules and the
       Regulations, as has been referred to in Manohar Lal Sharma [Manohar
       Lal Sharma v. Medical Council of India, (2013) 10 SCC 60: 6 SCEC
       578], and the view expressed in
Royal Medical Trust [Royal Medical
       Trust v. Union of India
, (2015) 10 SCC 19: 7 SCEC 429], it would be
       inapposite to restrict the power of the MCI by laying down as an absolute
       principle that once the Central Government sends back the matter to MCI
       for compliance verification and the assessors visit the college they shall
       only verify the mentioned items and turn a Nelson's eye even if they
       perceive certain other deficiencies. It would be playing possum. The
       direction of the Central Government for compliance verification report
       should not be construed as a limited remand as is understood within the
       framework
of Code of Civil Procedure
or any other law. The distinction
       between the principles of open remand and limited remand, we are
       disposed to think, is not attracted.
Be it clearly stated, the said principle
       also does not flow from the authority in
Royal Medical Trust [Royal
       Medical Trust v. Union of India
, (2015) 10 SCC 19 : 7 SCEC 429] . In
       this context, the objectivity of the Hearing Committee and the role of the
       Central Government assume great significance. The real compliant
       institutions should not always be kept under the sword of Damocles.
       Stability can be brought by affirmative role played by the Central
       Government. And the stability and objectivity would be perceptible if
       reasons are ascribed while expressing a view and absence of reasons
       makes the decision sensitively susceptible."
19
22.   The MCI has been established in order to streamline the standard

of  medical  education.     It  has  the   power  to   supervise  qualification   and

eligibility standards for admissions into medical institutions, as observed

in
State of Kerala vs. T.P. Roshna
(1979) SCC 580:
“
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
has constituted the Medical
       Council of India as an expert body to control the minimum standards of
       medical education and to regulate their observance. Obviously, this
       high-powered Council has power to prescribe the minimum standards of
       medical education. It has implicit power to supervise the qualifications or
       eligibility standards for admission into medical institutions. Thus, there
       is an overall invigilation by the Medical Council to prevent sub-standard
       entrance qualifications for medical courses.”
23.
In
Medical Council of India vs. State of Karnataka
1998 (6) SCC 131

the Court observed that the country does not want a half­baked medical

professional to come out of the medical colleges.   The college should be

well   equipped   with   faculty   and   competent   doctors.     The   Court   has

observed:
“A medical student requires grueling study and that can be done
       only if proper facilities are available in a medical college and the hospital
       attached to it has to be well equipped and the teaching faculty and
       doctors has to be competent enough that when a medical student comes
       out, he is perfect in the science of treatment of human beings and is not
       found wanting in any way. The country does not want half-baked
       medical professionals coming out of medical colleges when they did not
       have full facilities of teachings and were not exposed to the patients and
       their ailments during the course of their study. ………”
      The Court has further observed that the regulations of the MCI are

binding and mandatory.  There cannot be any contrary State enactment.
20
The said view was affirmed by this Court in
Dr. Preeti Srivastava v. State

of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
1999 (7) SCC 120.
24.    For   effective   implementation   of   provisions   of
Section   10   A
of   the

Indian   Medical   Council   Act,   1956   (for   short,   “the   Act”)   requiring   prior

permission   from   the   Central   Government   for   the   establishment   of

medical colleges, regulations have been made in exercise of powers under

Section 10 A read with
Section 33
of the Act.
25.    Consequently, the regulations of 1999 are binding with respect to

availability   of   teaching   faculty,   infrastructural   and   other   facilities   and

with   the   advancement   of   the   batches   this   requirement   become   more

rigorous as there is more requirement in the faculty than the college is

recognized   after   fulfillment   of   all   the   conditions   as   apparent   from   the

provisions   contained   in   the   Regulations.     With   the   aforesaid   objective,

the   provisions   contained   in
Regulation   8(3)
have   been   carved   out   and

amended   in   2016.   In   case   there   are   gross   deficiencies,   more   than

prescribed   in   regulation   for   the   concerned   batch   then   the   compliance

verification   would   not   be   considered   in   the   same   academic   year.
Regulation 8(3)(1)(a)
shall be applicable to an institution which has been

established and is at the stage of second renewal of permission and in

case   deficiency   of   faculty   and/or   residents   are   found   more   than   30%

and/or   bed   occupancy   is   found   less   than   50%,   institute   shall   not   be
21
given opportunity to rectify such deficiency in same academic year. In

case   discrepancies   are   less,   then   the   opportunity   is   afforded   to   make

compliance.  In the case of recognition, an opportunity of compliance has

to   be   given   as   per
Regulation   8(3)(1)
,   once   recognition   is   denied   no

admissions can be made.
26.    Considering the aforesaid provisions and the deficiencies found in

the case of the aforesaid three medical colleges, we are of the considered

opinion  that the  recommendations  made by the Hearing Committee  to

review and to consider the compliance could not be said to be binding.

The provisions of the regulations 8(3)(1)(a) and (b) are binding upon the

Hearing Committee/Government of India and the MCI.   It is only in a

case when a report of the Assessors on the face of it, makes out that the

same is incorrect, a reconsideration or review is called for. Otherwise, in

the case of gross deficiency, the yardstick contained in regulation 8(3)(1)
(a) or (b) has to  be applied by the Hearing Committee, Government of

India or the MCI, as the case may be.  It is not open to the Government

of India/ MCI or Hearing Committee to depart in a few cases and in some

other to take a different stand. They have to scrupulously observe the

provisions of regulations which are binding on them.
27.    It is unfortunate that the High Court has made a passing reference

to   the   decision   of   this   Court   in
Medical   Council   of   India   v.   Vedantaa
22
Institute   of   Academic   Excellence   Pvt.   Ltd.   &   Ors.
(
supra)  and  Medical

Council of India v. The Principal, KMCT Medical College, and Anr.
(supra).
It was incumbent upon the High Court in pith and substance to follow

the mandate of
Vedantaa Institute of Academic Excellence Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
(supra). The High Court has relied upon other judgments which were not

based   upon   the   consideration   of   the   amended   provisions   of   the

regulation 8(3)(1).
It could not have relied upon its own decision of the

Division Bench in
D.M. Education and Research Foundation v. Union of

India
(supra) which was clearly contrary to the aforesaid decisions of this

Court.
28.    It is high time for the MCI to ensure its functions well and eradicate

all the loop­holes and decide the case within a reasonable time and not

to lend the colleges in a situation with no legal remedy available once

case is decided at the fag end of the academic session on 31 st  May. We

are   constrained   to   observe   that   it  would   be   appropriate   that   MCI  and

Government of India take a decision in all the cases at an early date and

not by the end of May 2018. The next academic session has to commence

from  first   of   July  of   the   Gregorian   calendar  year   as   such   at  least  3­4

months’ time should be available to seek judicial review of the action or

re­inspection, if any, so warranted by the MCI or Government of India.

We find that once a petition is filed and even if in some cases we are
23
inclined to grant a relief of re­inspection to a college, but due to the lapse

of the time schedule and the admissions having already been made, it is

not  considered   appropriate  to   disturb  the   uniform  schedule  of  various

universities.   In our opinion, it would be appropriate that the MCI, as

well   as   the   Government   of   India,   should   take   a   final   decision   after

inspection, by the end of February or latest by the end of March.
29.    Now, we  consider the submission raised by Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan

in the case of P.K. Dass Institute of Medical Sciences in regard to the

correctness of the report of the Assessors as to the occupancy of the bed,

wherein bed occupancy had been found to be 40.60% at 10.00 am on the

date of the inspection held on 31 October and 1 st November, 2017 for the

purpose of renewal of permission for admission of fifth batch of 150 seats

in MBBS Course or 2018­2019.  The provisions contained in
Regulation

8(3)(1)(b)
had   been   applied.     The   Executive   Committee   on   16.01.2018

considered the representations dated 5.1.2018 submitted by the college,

forwarded to it by the Ministry.   The Hearing Committee had observed

that attendance was counted till 2.00 p.m. the college has explained the

deficiency of faculty and deficiency of attendance in OPD, however, it was

observed that the submission of the college regarding bed occupancy was

not   entirely   satisfactory.   The   case   was   referred   to   the   MCI   for   review

including   considering   the   imposition   of
Regulation   8(3)(1)(b)
.   After
24
considering the recommendation decision was taken by the MCI, as the

aforesaid regulation was applicable, the decision was taken not to renew

the permission for admission of 5th Batch of MBBS course.
30.   It   was   further   contended   on   behalf   of   the   college   that   the

performance of the students and result of the examination was extremely

good   and   bed   occupancy   was   more   as   shown   on   the   college   website.

With respect to the bed occupancy, it was reported by the Assessor that

there were 262 patients out of 650 required beds at 10.00 am on the first

day.   It   was   submitted   by   the   learned   senior   counsel   that   there   were

approximately 500 patients admitted as indoor patients as apparent from

the web portal of the college in question thus, the report of the Assessors

was absolutely incorrect and this aspect should be looked into by this

Court.     It   was   contended   that   the   Assessors   had   counted   patients

available on the beds at that time.  Assessors did not count patients who

were   under   investigation   procedures   and   operation   theatre   and   those

who were in the washrooms, pantry etc.   As per the Assessors, the bed

occupancy was 40.30% i.e. 262 patients out of 650 patients which were

required. Whereas college claimed that 493 indoor patients were there at

10.00   am   on   31.10.2017.     There   was   80%   bed   occupancy   on   30­

31.10.2017   and   1.11.2017.   The   learned   senior   counsel   has   drawn

support from the website portal.
25
31.   We have no hesitation in rejecting the submission as it has no legs

to stand. Whatever college says is not a gospel truth.   There is no case

wherein college does not dispute the report of the Assessors and contend

that there were no such deficiencies.   It is clearly disputed fact. Firstly,

the report of the Assessor cannot be lightly disbelieved. It is not open to

examining the case set up by the college as facts are found by Assessors

are at great variance secondly, in the judicial review, the report cannot

be discarded relying on data put up by the college on self­serving website

portal.     In   our   view,   the   High   Court   was   right   in   discarding   the

explanation offered by the colleges with respect to deficiencies.  Even the

Hearing   Committee   with   respect   to   P.K.   Dass   Institute   of   Medical

Sciences did not doubt the report of Assessors as to bed occupancy. This

Court has considered the value of a website portal and such objections in
Medical Council of India v. N.C. Medical College & Hospital and Ors
.
(Civil

Appeal No.9519 of 2018) decided on 13.9.2018 in which the decision of
Medical Council of India vs. Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) &

Ors.
2016 (11) SCC 530 has been referred to.  The Court observed:
“18. On the one hand, the High Court has doubted the report of
       inspection and for that surprisingly relied on the self-serving contents of
       the website of the college. There is nothing to vouch for the authenticity
       of the website information. It is not what the institution asserts on
       website but what is actually found on inspection, that has to be
       considered by the court and while exercising judicial review it is settled
       law that court cannot sit in appeal over the report of the assessors as
26
observed in
Medical Council of India v. Kalinga Institute of Medical
       Sciences (KIMS
), (2016) 11 SCC 530 thus:
"21. A perusal of the decision of the High Court clearly indicates
             that it considered the latest report of the Inspection Team as if it
             was hearing an appeal against the report. In doing so, the High
             Court went into great details on issues relating to the number of
             teaching beds in the hospital, the limitations in the OPD
             Department, the number of units available in the subjects of
             General Medicine, Pediatrics etc., bed occupancy, number of
             Caesarean sections, discrepancy in data of major and minor
             operations, computerization in the institution, number of patients in
             the ICU, number of static X-ray machines, deficiency of
             examination halls, lecture theatres, library, students hostel, interns
             hostel, playground etc. etc. Surely, this was not within the domain
             of the High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article
             226
of the Constitution. 22. The High Court did not appreciate that
             the inspection was carried out by eminent Professors from reputed
             medical institutions who were experts in the field and the best
             persons to give an unbiased report on the facilities in KIMS. The
             High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution was certainly not
             tasked to minutely examine the contents of the inspection report
             and weigh them against the objections of KIMS in respect of each
             of its 18 items. In our opinion, the High Court plainly exceeded its
             jurisdiction in this regard in venturing into seriously disputed
             factual issues.”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)
      It was also observed that at the time of inspection faculty should be

present   barring   certain   exceptions   otherwise   the   very   purpose   of   the

inspection   would  be  defeated.    The  Report  of  the  Assessors  cannot  be

lightly faulted and the court cannot sit in an appeal and go into disputed

facts.   There were other deficiencies too but due to the aforesaid gross

deficiencies, the provisions of regulations 8(3)(1)(b) were clearly attracted.
27
32.
In
Medical Council of India v. The Principal, KMCT Medical College
(supra) it was contended that the inspection was not properly conducted.

The submission had been rejected thus:
“15. We do not deem it necessary to deal with the submission made on
        behalf of the College regarding the inspection not being properly
        conducted. This Court has repeatedly said that a decision taken by the
        Union of India on the basis of a recommendation of an expert body
        regarding the inadequacy of facilities in medical colleges cannot be
        interfered with lightly. Interference is permissible only when the colleges
        demonstrate jurisdictional errors, ex facie perversity or mala fide. [See:-
Manohar Lal Sharma v. Medical Council of India 4 and
Medical Council
        of India v. Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS
) 5 ]. As no case
        is made out by the College for interference with the inspection report, we
        decline the request of Mr. Sibal for remand of the matter to the High
        Court.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
       In our opinion, in view of the aforesaid legal position, it is not open

to   the   court   in   judicial   review   to   accept   tenuous   objections   as   to   bed

occupancy in the absence of mala fide.
33.    In   view   of   the   aforesaid   discussion,   we   are   of   the   considered

opinion that the High Court has gravely erred in law while passing the

impugned judgment and order in quashing Government’s order, allowing

the admissions for the academic session 2018­2019 without there being

Government of India’s permission and the recommendation of the MCI.

The High Court has issued direction for fresh inspection and thereafter

the MCI to consider the report after the grant of opportunity to remove

defects if any. Firstly, it could not have issued such a direction in view of
28
regulations   and   also   the   blanket   direction   that   college   should   be

permitted   to   remove   the   deficiencies   if   any   found.   Deficiencies   can   be

removed, if found, within the permissible limits as provided in regulation

8(3), not in a case
Regulation 8(3)(1)(a)
or (b) is attracted.   Thus, such

kind of general direction issued without considering the provisions of the

Regulations are wholly illegal and unwarranted and on inspection, the

decision   has   to   be   taken   in   accordance   with   law   as   per   regulations.

Obviously,   regulations   would   come   into   play   as   per   outcome   of   an

assessment.     It   cannot   be   predicted   in   advance   what   would   be   the

outcome   of   inspection   to   decide   in   advance   opportunity   of   removal   of

deficiencies.   There   may   be   a   case   where   deficiencies   are   found   by

Assessors to be gross as contemplated in the proviso to
Regulation 8(3)

(1)
,   they   cannot   be   removed   in   that   year.     Even   otherwise,   the   Court

could not have at all ordered the admissions, as directed in the instant

matter. High Court at the same time has ordered inspection and if the

deficiencies   are   found   to   exist  then   the   MCI  and   Government   of   India

have been given liberty to take appropriate decision.   Such orders may

ruin the entire career of the students. Once permission to admit students

is   granted,   it   should   not   be   such   conditional   one.     Considering   the

deficiencies, it would be  against the efficacious medical education and

would   amount   to   permit   the   unequipped   medical   college   to   impart
29
medical   education   without   proper   infrastructure   and   faculty,   patients

serve as the object of teaching by such an approach ultimately interest of

the society would suffer and half­baked doctors cannot be left loose on

society like drones and parasites to deal with the life of patients in the

absence   of   proper   educational   training.     It   would   be   dangerous   and

against the right to life itself, in case unequipped medical colleges are

permitted   to   impart   substandard   medical   education   without   proper

facilities and infrastructure.
In re: D.M. Education and Research Institute of Medical Sciences:
34.   Coming   to   the   case   of   recognition   and   admission   in   of   D.M.

Education   and   Research   Institute   of   Medical   Sciences   established   by

D.M. Education Research Foundation Trust, it was a case of recognition

and   admission.   In   the   inspection   dated   27.2.2018   and   14/15   March

2018   various   deficiencies   were   found   supported   by   photographs,

videography etc.  The deficiencies which were found as mentioned in the

Government of India order dated 31.5.2018 are extracted hereunder:
“The Executive Committee of the Council considered the
          assessment report (27.2.2018) and 14th & 15th March 2018) along with
          photographs/ videography and letters/ representation dated 15.03.2018
          from Dean of the Institute with regard to Recognition/ Approval of DM
          Wayanad Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala and noted the following:
1.   “Deficiency of faculty is 18.93% as detailed in the report.
30
2.   OPD: On both days, at 09.40 a.m., most of the faculty &
            residents were not available.
3.   Bed Occupancy at 10 a.m. on the day of assessment was
            61.69%; however about 15% of the patients were not
            genuine reducing Bed Occupancy to 46%. Out of these,
            most of the patients were admitted on a day prior to
            assessment.
4.   Patients: On verification of the patients on the beds (from
            among the 401), the following patients were notified in most
            of the wards, indicating the nongenuine patients. For
            example:-
I.        Mini C.K. WIMS No.258951, Gen. Med-3, was admitted on
            14.3.2018 at 9.40 pm when the institution was inspecting at
            9.30 am on 14.3.2018. Nurses clinical chart was entered
            even for 13th doctors notes too, thereby indicating that case
            sheets with non-genuine patients are prepared in advance.
II.        Raimanath – WIMS No.310182, OBG Ward, was admitted
            twice on 13.3.2018 and 14.3.2018. No case notes of the
            patient in the case sheet and no treatment.
III.        Mr. Sivan WIMS No.212033 – Gen Medicine Only
            admission request form – entire inpatient case records
            including names blank.
IV.         Prabhashini WIMS No.39575, OBG Ward 2 – admitted with
            complaints of excessive bleeding PV, on enquiry, she gives a
            history of no bleeding at all, but only pain abdomen. The
            same was endorsed by the Resident in the ward on the case
            sheet. No investigations and treatment were given. Taking
            this into account in the wards, around 15% of the patients
            were non-genuine, taking the effective bed occupancy to
            around 46%.
Also apart from this, in the wards, more than 50% of the
            patients were admitted on 13.3.2018, the day before the
            assessment.
5.   Data of Radiological & Laboratory investigations given by
            the Institute include data of private patients & Super
            specialties patients which is not permissible.
6.   Wards: There is no signage of Unit-wise bed distribution, no
            faculty & residents were available inwards during the round.
31
7.   ICUs: There was only 1 patient in PICU on the day of
                  assessment.
8.   4 Mobile X-ray machines are available against the
                  requirement of 6.
9.   Microbiology department: 6 Service laboratories are
                  available against requirement of 7.
10. Pharmacology department: There are NIL Specimen & NIL
                 Model in the Museum.
11. Forensic Medicine Department: Cold Storage is not
                 available.
12. RHTC: Cold Chain equipment are not available.
13. Residents’ Hostel: On verification, about 15-20% of
                 Residents are found to be not staying in the campus. Rooms
                 allotted to them were closed on inspection by the assessors.”
35.   The   background   facts   indicate   that   the   college   was   granted

permission for the academic sessions 2013­2014 and 2015­2016. For the

academic year 2016­2017, it was granted conditional permission on the

recommendation of the Oversight Committee to the effect that in case of

failure to remove the deficiencies, it would be debarred for two academic

years.   Thereafter, on inspection assessment that was made on 5 th  and

6th  December 2016, gross deficiencies were found and due to that the

MCI on 28.1.2017 recommended the Central Government to debar the

college for two academic years and to encash the bank guarantee. On

31.5.2017,   Government   of   India   accepted   the   recommendations   of   the

MCI.  As the first batch admitted in the college reached the final year, the

application was filed by the college for grant of recognition.  The college,

aggrieved by the Government of India’s decision on 31.5.2017 filed Writ
32
Petition (C) No.19753 of 2017 for permission to admit fresh batch of 150

M.B.B.S. students for the academic year 2017­2018.   The writ petition

was   decided   by   order   dated   2.8.2017   the   High   Court   directed

Government   of   India   to   give   a   personal   hearing   to   the   college   and

thereafter to pass a fresh reasoned order.  The Government of India after

considering the recommendation  of the Hearing Committee decided on

14.8.2017   to   confirm   the   conditional   renewal   of   permission   for   the

academic year 2016­2017 and that no fresh batch for 2017­2018 may be

allowed.
36.    Writ   Petition   No.19753   of   2017   came   to   be   filed   for   grant   of

admission in 2017­18 in which interim order was granted by the High

Court on 25.8.2017.  This Court set aside the interim order of the High

Court on 6.9.2017, however, permitted the college to approach this court

under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India.  Thereafter, Writ Petition (C)

No.838   of   2017   was   filed   in   this   Court.     This   Court   vide   order   dated

22.9.2017 while permitting the students admitted for the academic year

2017­2018 to continue, directed the college to remove the deficiencies.

The order was passed to safeguard the interest of the students already

admitted pursuant to the interim order dated 25.8.2017.
37.    In order to consider the case of the respondent – medical college for

recognition,   an   inspection   was   carried   out   on   27.2.2018   and   14/15,
33
March   2018.     In   the   assessment   report,   various   deficiencies   as   noted

above were found.  The Executive Committee decided not to recommend

the recognition in regard to MBBS degree.  It was also recommended to

the   Central   Government   not   to   grant   renewal   of   permission   for   the

admission of a fresh batch of 150 MBBS students for the academic year

2018­19.  The decision of the Executive Committee was communicated to

the   Oversight   Committee,   which   in   turn   vide   order   dated   28.3.2018

approved the same.
38.   The   Executive   Committee   then   vide   letter   dated   20.04.2018

communicated to the Government of India. At the same time, the MCI

vide letter dated 20.04.2018 requested the respondent­Medical College to

rectify   the   deficiencies   and   submit   compliance   within   one   month   for

further   consideration   of   its   case   for   grant   of   recognition.   As   against

recommendation made by the MCI, the college filed the Writ Petition (C)

No.15171   of   2017   before   the   High   Court   of   Kerala.     The   High   Court

directed Government of India to grant a hearing and to pass final order

on   or   before   31.5.2018.     The   Government   of   India   granted   hearing

opportunity   on   21.5.2018.     The   college   reported   compliance   on

22.5.2018.  The MCI vide letter dated 25.5.2018 requested the Oversight

Committee   to   consider   the   matter.     The   Oversight   Committee   on

28.5.2018 directed the MCI to follow the regulations.  The Government of
34
India   was   informed   by   the   MCI   on   28.5.2018   that   last   date   to   send

recommendation by MCI was up to 30.04.2018 which was already over,

as   such   the   case   of   the   college   could   not   have   been   considered   for

admission for 2018­2019 and the matter of the recognition was under
consideration   of   the   MCI   and   shall   be   decided   appropriately   after

considering compliance.  The Central Government passed the impugned

order on 31.5.2018 and in view of the gross deficiencies decided not to

grant   renewal   of   permission   admission   for   the   batch   of   150   MBBS

students in the academic year 2018­2019.  Aggrieved by the same, Writ

Petition   (C)   No.19543   of   2018   was   filed   in   which   prayer   was   made   to

grant recognition and to permit the students to be admitted.   The said

writ petition had been allowed by the impugned common judgment.
39.    For  the purpose of recognition, the Regulations  of 1999 contains

the   provisions   in
Regulation   8(3)(1)
wherein   the   process   of   renewal   of

permission will continue till such time the establishment of the medical

college   and   expansion   of   the   hospital   facilities   are   completed   and   a

formal recognition of the medical college is granted.  Further admissions

shall not be made at any stage unless the requirements of the Council

are   fulfilled.     The   Central   Government   may   at   any   stage   convey   the

deficiencies to the applicant and provide him an opportunity and time to

rectify the deficiencies. It is the stand of the MCI also that the matter of
35
recognition is under consideration and shall be considered in terms of

said   regulation   after   giving   the   opportunity   to   make   good   deficiency.
However,   with   respect   to   admissions   in   2018­19,   the   recommendation

was made not to admit the students.
40.   It   is   apparent   that   when   the   Hearing   Committee   has   ordered   on

21.5.2018   to   consider   the   compliance   and   to   make   a   fresh

recommendation, the MCI declined to do so on the ground that time to

make a recommendation was already over on 30.04.2018.  The decision

of
Mridul Dhar v. Union of India
, 2005 (2) SCC 65, Priya Gupta v. State of

Chhattisgarh 2012 (
7) SCC 433 and Royal Medical Trust (Regd.) & Anr. v.

Union   of   India
2015   (10)   SCC   19   were   referred   to.     It   was   clearly

mentioned by the MCI in its letter dated 25.5.2018 that the matter could

not   be   considered   for   renewal   of   permission   for   admission   for   the

academic year 2018­2019, but compliance of the medical college for the

purpose of recognition/approval under
section 11(2)
of the Act was under
consideration   of   the   MCI   and   compliance   verification/assessment   and

recommendations  of  the  MCI would  be  sent to   Central Government  in

due course of time.  The matter was under consideration before the MCI

for recognition, renewal for permission for admission had been declined

by   the   MCI   on   28.5.2018.     Thereafter,   the   Government   of   India   has

passed the order on 31.5.2018 declining admission for 2018­19.
36
41.   In   view   of   the   deficiencies   of   faculty   and   of   bed   occupancy,   the

decision   not  to  grant  permission   for  admission   in   the  year  2018­2019

was appropriate. However, the compliance that had been submitted by

the college on 22.5.2018 will be considered for the purpose of recognition

by the MCI as provided under the regulation 8(3). Let the MCI consider

the   matter   for   the   purpose   of   recognition   duly   considering   the

compliance unfettered by the order passed by the Government of India

on 31.5.2018.   The Government of India also to consider the matter of

recognition in accordance with the law.  Let the decision be taken by the

respondents­ MCI and Government of India as expeditiously as possible.
42.   Resultantly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment and

order are set aside.   However, it would be open to the colleges to stake

their claim for permission for admission for next academic session  i.e.

2019­2020, in accordance with law.  No costs.
........................J.
                                                                       (ARUN MISHRA)




                                                                    ……..................J.
                                                                     (VINEET SARAN)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 29, 2018
37