[Cites
17
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
J S Luthra Academy vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 30 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5367, 2019 (1) KCCR SN 56 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1348
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N.V. Ramana
1


                                                                                  [Reportable]
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7184­7185 OF 2013



          J.S. Luthra Academy & Another                                        ........Appellants


                                                     Versus

          State of Jammu and Kashmir & Others                             .......Respondents




                                               J U D G M E N T



          MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
The   judgment   of   the  Division  Bench  of  the   High  Court  of

          Jammu and Kashmir at Jammu in L.P.A. (OW) No. 38/2008 and

          L.P.A. (OW) No. 39/2008 dated 01.04.2009 is the subject matter

          of these appeals.
2.             The   brief   facts   leading   to   these   appeals   are   that   the

          Appellant­J.S.   Luthra   Academy   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   the
Signature Not Verified
‘Academy’), an educational institution, initially was situated on a
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.10.30
16:37:21 IST
Reason:
Wakf   property   in   Jammu.   Vide   order   dated   27.12.1995   of   the
2
authority   constituted   under   the  J&K   Wakf   Act,   1978,   the   said

educational institution was ordered to be evicted from the Wakf

property.   Against   the   said   order,   the   Academy   approached   the

Jammu & Kashmir Special Tribunal, and an interim order of stay

on eviction was granted by the tribunal on 09.01.1996. During

the interregnum, the Academy made representations to the State

Government   requesting   for   allotment   of   a   piece   of   land   at   any

place mentioned in the representations for shifting and running

the   school.   The   concerned   minister   in   the   meeting   dated

14.1.1998 considered the question of allotment of land in favour

of   the   Academy.   Subsequently,   a   note   was   prepared   by   the

Managing   Director   of   the   J   &   K   Housing   Board   on   25.1.1999,

proposing   that   the   Board   had   4   kanals   of   land   in   Sector   2   of

Channi Himmat, Jammu earmarked for schools which could be

considered for allotment to the Appellant at Rs. 8,00,000/­ per

kanal. In a subsequent meeting on 29.4.1999 after completion of

formalities,   four   kanals   in   Sector   2   of   Channi   Himmat   were

alloted to the Academy at Rs. 8,00,000/­ per kanal on lease for

40   years   and   the   Academy  was directed to deposit 50% of  the

said   amount,   the   remaining   amount   to   be   deposited

subsequently.   In   a   meeting   dated   28.6.2000,   a   decision   was
3
taken by the J & K Housing Board in pursuance of the orders of

the Chief Minister, that two kanals of land would be allotted to

the   Academy   at   the   rate   of   Rs.   8,00,000/­   per   kanal   and   the

other two kanals free of cost. Further, in a Cabinet meeting dated

18.8.2000,   it   was   decided   that   the   Jammu   Development

Authority was to be compensated for the free allocation of land in

the   form   of   allotment   of   alternate   land   to   the   Authority.   The

allotment of land to the Academy was sanctioned by the Principal

Secretary, Government of J&K, vide letter dated 24.8.2000. The

Academy finally paid a total of Rs.16,00,000/­ for two kanals of

land and obtained two more kanals free of cost. A lease deed was

executed, and possession was handed over on 12.12.2001. The

Academy constructed the school building thereon and the school

is   being   run   on   this   premises,   having   shifted   from   the   wakf

property.
3.    The residents of Channi Himmat vide Writ Petition No. 1093

of 2002 questioned the allotment made in favour of the Academy,

on the ground that the piece of land was meant for a playground

but   the   same   was   allotted   to   the   Academy   in   violation   of   the

original scheme and plan of the Channi Himmat Housing Colony.
4
One Mr. Naresh Kumar, a proprietor of the United Public School

situated at Channi Himmat, filed a writ petition being O.W.P. No.

10/2003,   questioning   the   allotment   made   in   favour   of   the

Academy   on   the   ground   that   the   property   ought   to   have   been

auctioned by the Government, so that he could have also applied

for   the   allotment   of   the   plot,   which   he   required   for   the

upgradation of his school to the higher secondary level. Both the

writ petitions were clubbed, heard and decided together by the

learned   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   and   were   dismissed.

However, the Division Bench by the impugned judgment set aside

the order of the Single Judge and allowed the writ petitions and

consequently   quashed   the   allotment   made   in   favour   of   the

Academy with the following observations:
“The   board   is   directed   to   hold   public   auction   of   the
    land   for   the   purpose   of   leasing   the   same   out   on   the
    same   terms   and   conditions   it   had   leased   it   to   the
    private   respondent,   except   that   the   premium   thereof
    shall   be   fixed   at   the   highest   price   to   be   obtained   at
    such auction to be held by inviting people interested in
    setting up of a secondary school on the plot of land in
    question by publishing at least two advertisements in
    newspapers   widely   circulated   in   Jammu   and   also
    published   therefrom.   The  Board  is  directed  to  fix   the
    minimum   bid   price   at   Rs.16.00   lacs   plus   the   cost   of
    construction   ascertained   in   the   manner   as   above.   In
    the event the bid to be had at the public auction does
    not exceed the minimum reserved bid price, the Board
5
shall   execute   a   fresh   lease   in   favour   of   the   private
     respondent   upon   obtaining   payment   of   Rs.16.00   lacs
     from him. In the event the bid price to be had at the
     auction   exceeds   the   minimum  reserved bid price and
     the   same   is   not   given   by   the  private  respondent,  the
     Board   shall   give   an   opportunity   to   the   private
     respondent   to   meet   the   same   and,   if   he   meets   the
     same,   to   execute   the   lease   in   favour   of   the   private
     respondent   upon   accepting   the   amount   of   such   bid,
     less the cost of construction ascertained in the manner
     as   above,   as   premium.   In   the   event   the   private
     respondent fails to match the bid price, the Board shall
     grant the lease in favour of the highest bidder and from
     the   amount   so   to   be   received,   first   pay   the   cost   of
     construction ascertained in the manner as above to the
     private respondent.”
4.    The   contesting   respondents   herein,   i.e.,   the   original   writ

petitioners   who   were   before   the   learned   Single   Judge   and   the

Division Bench, have chosen to remain absent before this Court

despite service of notice on them. Heard the learned counsel for

the Academy, the State and the Housing Board. Learned counsel

for   the   Academy   taking   us   through   the   material   on   record

submitted that the allotment of the site was done following due

procedure. The Academy was asked to vacate the wakf property,

where it was running the school earlier, since the wakf wanted

the property for its personal purposes. As the school was catering

to  the  needs  of  hundreds of students and as it was being  run

successfully,   the   Managing   Committee   of   the   Academy   did   not
6
want to close the academy, inasmuch as the closure would have

been   detrimental   to   the   interests   of   the   students.   The   Cabinet

being competent to allot the land had duly considered the matter

and had taken the decision on 18.8.2000 to allot the land to the

Appellant keeping in mind the plight of the students and urgency

of   the   matter   inasmuch   as   the   school   had   to   be   shifted   at   an

early   date.   The   sum   and   substance   of   the   argument   of   the

Academy, the State and the Housing Board is that the allotment

was made keeping in mind the public interest at large and the

personal   interest   of   any   personality   involved   in   running   the

Academy was not given any importance at all.
5.    Learned   Advocate   for   the   State   of   Jammu   and   Kashmir

submitted that the allotment of 2 Kanals of land to the Appellant

free of cost was a policy decision of the Government inasmuch as

such allotment was in the nature of an exchange for eviction of

the Appellant, who was running a school on the Wakf  land in the

main   city   area.     The   object   was   twofold,  firstly,   to   ensure

continuity   of   the   school/public   purpose,   and  secondly,   to

expeditiously   evict   the   appellant   from   the   wakf   land   and

consequently,   free   such   land   from   prolonged   litigation.     He
7
further   submitted   that   neither   was   there   any   violation   of   any

policy   for   allotment   of   land   to   educational   institutions   in   the

State of Jammu and Kashmir at the relevant time, nor was there

any loss caused to the State qua the 2 Kanals of land (out of total

4 Kanals of land) that was allotted to the Appellant.  Under such

facts and circumstances of the case, he argued that the judgment

of this Court in the case of
Institute of Law Chandigarh v. Neeraj

Sharma
,  (2015) 1 SCC 720 wherein the allotment of land to an

educational institution without inviting competitive bidding was

cancelled is distinguishable on two counts:
a) At para 32 of the judgment, the Development
             authority   was   found   not   to   have   adhered   to
             the applicable policy, i.e. the allotment of land
             to   Educational  Institutions  (Schools), etc. on
             lease hold basis in Chandigarh Scheme, 1996
             for allotment of land.
b) At Para 17 of the judgment it is recorded that
             the   audit   department   of   the   UT   Chandigarh
             Administration   found   that   the   allotment
             caused a loss of Rs.139 crores to the public
             exchequer.
Lastly, he submitted that the allotted land was earmarked

for  schools   and  playfields  in the Master  Plan and hence, there

was no violation of the Master Plan in allotment of land to the

Appellant.
8
6.    This Court in a series of cases including  Centre for
Public

Interest   Litigation   v.   Union   of   India
,  2012   3   SCC   1   (popularly

known as the “2G case”), in  Natural Resources Allocation, In Re.

Special Reference  No. of 1/2012, (
2012) 10 SCC 1,  Manohar Lal

Sharma v. Principal Secy.
, (
2014) 9 SCC 516, Bharti Airtel Limited

v. Union Of India
, (
2015) 12 SCC 1, and Goa Foundation v. Sesa

Sterlite Ltd.
, (2018) 4 SCC 218 has formulated the guidelines for

allocation of natural resources by the State.
In
Bharti Airtel Ltd.

v. Union of India
, (2015) 12 SCC 1, this Court summed up the

principles   governing   the   allocation   of   natural   resources   by   the

State
laid down in
Centre for
Public Interest Litigation v. Union of

India
, (2012) 3 SCC 1 (“the 2G case”) as follows:
“41. The   licensor/Union   of   India   does   not   have   the
      freedom   to   act   whimsically.   As   pointed   out   by   this
      Court   in 2G   Case [Centre   for
Public   Interest
      Litigation v. Union   of   India
,   (2012)   3   SCC   1]   in   the
      above­extracted paragraph, the authority of the Union
      is fettered by two constitutional limitations:
firstly, that any decision of the State to grant access to
      natural   resources,   which   belong   to   the   people,   must
      ensure   that   the   people   are   adequately   compensated
      and,   secondly,   the   process   by   which   such   access   is
      granted   must   be   just,   non­arbitrary   and   transparent,
      vis­à­vis private parties seeking such access.”
9
(emphasis supplied)

Referring   to   the   observations   in   the   2G   case,   the   Court   also

highlighted that the State is bound to act in consonance with the

principles of equality and public trust and ensure that no action

is taken which may be detrimental to public interest, and that it

must   always   adopt   a   rational   method   for   disposal   of   public

property,  and   ensure   that   a   non­discriminatory   method   is

adopted for distribution and alienation, which would necessarily

result in national/public interest.
The principles governing the distribution of natural resources by

the State were also discussed in the decision of the constitutional

bench of this Court in Natural Resources Allocation, In Re, Special

Reference No. 1 of 2012, (2012) 10 SCC 1. In para 149 thereof,

the Court observed as follows:
“149. Regard being had to the aforesaid precepts, we
      have   opined   that   auction   as   a   mode   cannot   be
      conferred   the   status   of   a   constitutional   principle.
      Alienation   of   natural   resources   is   a   policy   decision,
      and   the   means   adopted   for   the   same   are   thus,
      executive   prerogatives.   However,   when   such   a   policy
      decision is not backed by a social or welfare purpose,
      and   precious   and   scarce   natural   resources   are
      alienated for commercial pursuits of profit maximising
      private   entrepreneurs,   adoption   of   means   other   than
10
those that are competitive and maximise revenue may
      be   arbitrary   and   face   the   wrath   of
Article   14
of   the
      Constitution.”

This decision emphasised that the ultimate goal to be served was

that of the public good, and all methods of distribution of natural

resources that ultimately served the public good would be valid,

as reflected in the following observations:
“120. …There is no constitutional imperative in the
      matter   of   economic   policies—Article   14   does   not
      predefine   any   economic   policy   as   a   constitutional
      mandate. Even the mandate of
Article 39(b)
imposes
      no restrictions on the means adopted to subserve the
      public good and uses the broad term “distribution”,
      suggesting that the methodology of distribution is not
      fixed.   Economic   logic   establishes   that
      alienation/allocation   of   natural   resources   to   the
      highest bidder may not necessarily be the only way to
      subserve the common good, and at times, may run
      counter   to   public   good.   Hence,   it   needs   little
      emphasis   that   disposal   of   all   natural   resources
      through   auctions   is   clearly   not   a   constitutional
      mandate.”

It would be useful to note at this juncture that in this decision,

the   Court   assessed   the   position   of   law   developed   through   a

catena of decisions, including
Netai Bag & Ors. v. State of W.B. &

Ors.
, (
2000) 8 SCC 262, 5 M&T Consultants v. S.Y. Nawab
, (
2003)

8 SCC 100, and Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam v.  Union of
11
India
,   (2009)   7   SCC   561,   wherein   it   has   been   held   that   non­

floating of tenders or holding of auction by itself is not sufficient

to   hold   that   the   exercise   of   power   was   arbitrary.
It   would   be

useful   to   reproduce   the   following   observations   from
Netai   Bag
(supra),   which   were   also   relied   upon   by   the   Court   in  Natural

Resources Allocation, In Re  (supra) to highlight that the ultimate

test is only that of fairness of the decision­making process and

compliance with
Article 14
of the Constitution:
“19.   …   There   cannot   be   any   dispute   with   the
       proposition that generally when any State land is
       intended   to   be   transferred   or   the   State   largesse
       decided   to   be   conferred,   resort   should   be   had   to
       public   auction   or   transfer   by   way   of   inviting
       tenders   from   the   people.   That   would   be   a   sure
       method   of   guaranteeing   compliance   with   the
       mandate   of
Article   14
of   the   Constitution.   Non­
       floating of tenders or not holding of public auction
       would not in all cases be deemed to be the result of
       the exercise of the executive power in an arbitrary
       manner.   Making   an   exception  to   the  general  rule
       could   be   justified   by   the   State   executive,   if
       challenged   in   appropriate   proceedings.   The
       constitutional   courts   cannot   be   expected   to
       presume   the   alleged   irregularities,   illegalities   or
       unconstitutionality   nor   can   the   courts   substitute
       their opinion for the bona fide opinion of the State
       executive.   The   courts   are   not   concerned  with   the
       ultimate decision but only with the fairness of the
       decision­making process.”
12
The above principles were also reiterated in
Manohar Lal Sharma
(supra), wherein this Court observed at para 110:
“It is not the domain of the Court to evaluate the
      advantages   of   competitive   bidding   vis­à­vis   other
      methods   of   distribution/disposal   of   natural
      resources. However, if the allocation of subject coal
      blocks   is   inconsistent   with
Article   14
of   the
      Constitution   and   the   procedure   that   has   been
      followed   in   such   allocation  is  found  to  be  unfair,
      unreasonable,   discriminatory,   non­transparent,
      capricious or suffers from favouritism or nepotism
      and   violative   of   the   mandate   of
Article   14
of   the
      Constitution,   the   consequences   of   such
      unconstitutional or illegal allocation must follow.”

In
Ajar Enterprises (P) Ltd. v. Satyanarayan Somani
, (2018)

12 SCC 756, this Court affirmed the above principles in the

following terms:
“49.   …Where   a   public   authority   exercises   an
      executive prerogative, it must nonetheless act in a
      manner which would subserve public interest and
      facilitate   the   distribution   of   scarce   natural
      resources   in  a  manner  that  would achieve public
      good.   Where   a   public   authority   implements   a
      policy,   which   is   backed   by   a   constitutionally
      recognised social purpose intended to achieve the
      welfare of the community, the considerations which
      would govern would be different from those when it
      alienates   natural   resources   for   commercial
      exploitation. When a public body is actuated by a
      constitutional   purpose   embodied   in   the   Directive
13
Principles, the considerations which weigh with it
      in   determining   the   mode   of   alienation   should   be
      such as would achieve the underlying object.” 

The   position   of   law   developed   through   these   decisions   was

summed   up   in   the   following   manner   by   this   Court   in
Goa

Foundation v. Sesa Sterlite Ltd.
, (2018) 4 SCC 218, after adverting

to the various decisions
referred to above
:
“80.1. It   is   not   obligatory,   constitutionally   or
      otherwise,   that   a   natural   resource   (other   than
      spectrum)   must   be   disposed   of   or   alienated   or
      allocated   only   through   an   auction   or   through
      competitive bidding;
80.2. Where the distribution, allocation, alienation
      or   disposal   of   a   natural   resource   is   to   a   private
      party   for   a   commercial   pursuit   of   maximising
      profits,   then   an   auction   is   a   more   preferable
      method of such allotment;
80.3. A decision to not auction a natural resource
      is liable to challenge and subject to restricted and
      limited   judicial   review   under
Article   14
of   the
      Constitution;
80.4. A   decision   to   not   auction   a   natural   resource
      and   sacrifice   maximisation   of   revenues   might   be
      justifiable if the decision is taken, inter alia, for the
      social good or the public good or the common good;
80.5. Unless the alienation or disposal of a natural
      resource   is   for   the   common   good   or   a   social   or
      welfare purpose, it cannot be dissipated in favour of
      a private entrepreneur  virtually free of cost or for a
14
consideration   not   commensurate   with   its   worth
         without attracting
Article 14
and
Article 39(b)
of the
         Constitution.” 

                                                              (emphasis
                                          supplied)

From the above decisions, the following principles may be culled

out:
(i) Generally,   when   any   land   is   intended   to   be
           transferred by the state, or any state largesse is
           to   be   conferred,   resort   should   be   had   to   public
           auction   or   transfer   by   way   of   inviting   tenders
           from   the   people.   The   state   must   ensure   that   it
           receives   adequate   compensation   for   the   allotted
           resource. However, non­floating of tender or non­
           conducting   of   public   auction   would   not   be
           deemed in all cases to be an arbitrary exercise of
           executive   power.   The   ultimate   decision   of   the
           executive   must   be   the   result   of   a   fair   decision­
           making process.
(ii) The   allocation   must   be   guided   by   the
            consideration of the common good as per
Article
            39(b)
, and must not be violative of
Article 14.
This
            does   not   necessarily   entail  auction  of   the
            resource; however, allocation of natural resources
            to   private   persons   for   commercial   exploitation
            solely for private benefit, with no social or welfare
            purpose,   attracts   higher   judicial   scrutiny   and
            may be held to be violative of
Article 14
if done by
            non­competitive   and   non­revenue   maximizing
            means.
15
Keeping in mind the aforementioned principles formulated

by   this   Court   in   the   aforementioned   judgments,   we   have

considered the entire material on record. It must be determined

as to whether the allocation made in favour of the Academy fell

foul   of   the   above   principles. In the instant  case, the allocation

has  evidently been done to a private educational institution by

non­revenue maximizing means. Assuming that the Academy is

engaged   in   commercial   activities   while   engaging   in   its   main

activity of imparting education to students, two questions remain

to be seen: first, whether there was any social or welfare purpose

underlying   the   allocation,   i.e.,   if   the   furtherance   of   the   public

good was the ultimate goal of the allocation so as to justify the

non­auctioning of the land, and second, if the allocation is bad

for lack of adequate compensation.
7.    As   far   as   the   underlying   objective   of   the   allocation   is

concerned, in our considered opinion, the Division Bench of the

High Court was not justified in rejecting the submission of the

Academy that the allocation of land was done keeping in mind

the   plight   of   the   students   of   the   school.   One   of   the   reasons

assigned by the Division Bench in rejecting this contention was
16
that there was no discussion about the plight of the students in

the   correspondence   between   the   Appellant­Academy   and   the

Government. However, a mere lack of explicit statements to that

effect does not imply that the action was not motivated by welfare

considerations, inasmuch as the displacement and uprooting of

several hundreds of students from their school was the obvious

underlying concern in the representation  made by the Appellant

and   the   order   passed   by   the   State   Government.   It   would   be

appropriate at this stage to quote the following observation made

by this court in
Shrilekha Vidyarathi vs. State of U.P.
,  (1991) 1

SCC 212:
“36. The meaning and true import of arbitrariness
       is   more   easily   visualized   than   precisely   stated   or
       defined. The question, whether an impugned act is
       arbitrary   or   not,   is   ultimately   to   be   answered   on
       the facts and in the circumstances of a given case.
       An obvious test to apply is to see whether there is
       any   discernible   principle   emerging   from   the
       impugned act and if so, does it satisfy the test of
       reasonableness.   Where   a   mode   is   prescribed   for
       doing   an   act   and   there   is   no   impediment   in
       following   that   procedure,   performance   of   the   act
       otherwise and in a manner which does not disclose
       any discernible principle which is reasonable, may
       itself attract the vice of arbitrariness.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)
17
As a corollary of the above, it is evident that an executive

action would not be arbitrary merely because the action is not

explicitly   stated   to   have   been   taken   for   a   particular   reason   or

based   on   a   particular   principle   which   in   itself   is   reasonable;
rather,   it   would   be   open   to   the   Court   to   see   whether   such   a

reasonable   principle   is   discernible   from   the   facts   and

circumstances of the case. Just like the Court has the power to

look   into   the   underlying   purpose   of   an   executive   action   to

determine  whether it is  motivated by  extraneous  reasons while

examining it for arbitrariness, so also the Court may determine

whether  there  is  a  germane objective being served through the

execution of the action, by examining the surrounding facts and

circumstances   in   which   the   executive   action   was   effected.
Though   the   Appellant   is   a   private   educational   institution,   it

cannot be said that the action of the government was not backed

by a welfare purpose merely because it is not stated in so many

words in the correspondence between the Academy and the State

Government that the alternative land sought for allotment was to

protect the interests of children studying at the school. This is

because   the   same   is   clearly   discernible   from   the   facts   and

circumstances of the case. It has been stated that the Appellant
18
was evicted from the wakf land not because of any wilful default

or unauthorized use, but because the wakf required the land for

its own use. In such circumstances, having no other alternative,

the   Appellant   approached   the   government   for   allotment   of

suitable   land   for   running   the   school.   It   seems   that   the   State

Government also preferred to peacefully settle the issue of getting

the   school   vacated   from   the   wakf   property,   at   an   early   date,

without   disturbing   the   education   of  the  students  and  peace  in

the locality.
8.
Articles 38
and
39
of the Constitution of India provide that

the State must strive to promote the welfare of the people of the

State by protecting all their economic, social and political rights.

These   rights   may   cover   means   of   livelihood,   health   and   the

general well­being of all sections of the people in the society, of

which education is an important aspect.
9.    Imparting basic education is a constitutional obligation on

the   State   as   well   as   societies   running   educational   institutions.

Children are the future of our nation. Education is a basic tool

for individuals to lead an economically productive life and is one

of the most vital elements for the preservation of the democratic
19
system   of   government.   The   Constitution   of   India   bestows

considerable attention to the field of education. It recognizes the

need for regulating the various facets of activity of education and

also   the   need   for   not   only   establishing   and   administering

educational institutions but also providing financial support for

educational institutions run by private societies. (See:
Secretary,

Mahatama   Gandhi   Mission   v.   Bhartiya   Kamgar   Sena
,   (2017)   4

SCC 449, paras 33­36 and 39).
Thus,   in   our   considered   opinion,   the   State   Government

proceeded to allot the land in favour of the Appellant keeping in

mind the public interest in the education of hundreds of children

as well as considering the urgency of the matter and it cannot be

said   that   the   action   was   not   backed   by   a   social   or   welfare

purpose. It is worth emphasizing that the test of
Article 14
must

be applied from the perspective of substantive rather than formal

equality, and must be mindful of the effect of the action or rule

that   is   being   tested.   While   under   ordinary   circumstances,   the

usual practice of allocation of sites on the basis of advertisements

or auction was being followed, the instant situation warranted a

deviation from the standard procedure to prevent prejudicing the
20
future   of   the   children   studying   at   the   Academy.   In   our   view,

taking a holistic view of the matter, the action taken by the State

Government did not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness insofar

as it was backed by a welfare purpose.
10.   In   addition,   we   do   not   find   any   reason   to   reject   the

contention   of   the   State   Government   that   the   allotment   of   4

Kanals of land to the Appellant was in the nature of an exchange,

inasmuch as the State Government wanted to evict the Appellant

who was running a school at Wakf land situated in the main city

area.   Such   a   decision   seems   to   have   been   taken   by   the   State

Government to avoid any unrest in the locality or city.   In such

circumstances, we do not find any arbitrariness in the decision

taken by the State in allotting 4 Kanals of property. On the other

hand, we are of the opinion that the action of the State was fair,

reasonable,   transparent,   unbiased,   without   favourtism   and

nepotism.
11.   We   now   turn   to   the   second   question,   regarding   the

adequacy of compensation recovered by the State. In this respect,
21
we   note   the   following   observations   made   by   Khehar   J.   in   his

concurring opinion in Natural Resources Allocation, In Re (supra):
“200.   I   would,   therefore,   conclude   by   stating
       that no   part   of   the   natural   resource   can   be
       dissipated   as   a   matter   of   largesse,   charity,
       donation   or   endowment,   for   private   exploitation.
       Each   bit   of   natural   resource   expended   must   bring
       back   a   reciprocal   consideration.   The   consideration
       may be in the nature of earning revenue or may be
       to “best subserve the common good”. It may well be
       the   amalgam   of   the   two.  There   cannot   be   a
       dissipation of material resources free of cost or at a
       consideration   lower   than   their   actual   worth.   One
       set of citizens cannot prosper at the cost of another
       set   of   citizens,   for   that   would   not   be   fair   or
       reasonable.” 

                                                          (emphasis

                                       supplied)


Thus,   the   impugned   transaction   must   be   probed   to   determine

whether it leads to an adequate consideration being received by

the State.
12.   In our view, the action of the authorities can be assailed to

the extent that the allotment of two kanals free of cost was bad in

law.   It is evident that the consideration paid by the Appellant

was   only   with   respect   to   two   kanals   and   the   remaining   two
22
kanals of land were allotted for free to the Appellant. It is not in

dispute that Rs. 8,00,000/­ per kanal was the average auction

sale   price   which   was   fetched   around   the   time   of   allotment.

Keeping   this   figure   in   mind,   the   State   Government   fixed   the

allotment price at Rs. 8,00,000/­ per kanal.  It is clear that there

was   no   arbitrariness   in   fixing   the   price   at   Rs.   8,00,000/­   per

kanal.  However, we are unable to accept the contention that the

allotment of 2 Kanals of land for free was justified.  This is all the

more significant in light of the absence of any material on record

to show that the school was being run purely for charitable and

educational purposes.
In this regard it would be pertinent to refer

to the observations of this Hon’ble Court in the matter of
Union of

India and another v. Jain Sabha, New Delhi and another
, (1997) 1

SCC 164 wherein the following observations are made:
“11.   Before   parting   with   this   case,   we   think   it
          appropriate   to   observe   that   it   is   high   time   the
          Government   reviews   the   entire   policy   relating   to
          allotment of land to schools and other charitable
          institutions.   Where   the   public   property   is   being
          given   to   such   institutions   practically   free,
          stringent   conditions   have   to   be   attached   with
          respect to the user of the land and the manner in
          which   schools   or   other   institutions   established
          thereon   shall   function.   The   conditions   imposed
          should   be   consistent   with   public   interest   and
          should always stipulate that in case of violation of
23
any of those conditions, the land shall be resumed
         by   the   Government.   Not   only   such   conditions
         should   be   stipulated   but   constant   monitoring
         should   be   done   to   ensure   that   those   conditions
         are   being   observed   in   practice.   While   we   cannot
         say anything about the particular school run by
         the   respondent,   it   is   common   knowledge   that
         some   of   the   schools   are   being   run   on   totally
         commercial   lines.   Huge   amounts   are   being
         charged   by   way   of   donations   and   fees.   The
         question  is  whether there is any justification for
         allotting   land   at   throw­away   prices   to   such
         institutions.   The   allotment   of   land   belonging   to
         the   people   at   practically   no   price   is   meant   for
         serving   the   public   interest,   i.e.,   spread   of
         education or   other  charitable purposes; it is not
         meant  to  enable  the allottees to make money  or
         profiteer   with  the  aid of public property. We are
         sure   that   the   Government   would   take   necessary
         measures   in   this   behalf   in   the   light   of   the
         observations contained herein.”


The aforementioned observations suggest that while in the case

of a non profit­oriented educational institution serving the public

interest, public property can be allotted to it at a concessional

price or for free by imposing stringent conditions for the use of

the   land,   it  is   questionable  whether  the  same  can  be done  for

profit­oriented institutions.
13.   Thus, in our considered opinion, there is a loss to the public

exchequer to the extent of Rs.16,00,000/­ for two kanals as on

the date of allotment. However, having regard to the fact that the
24
Appellant­Academy has  been running on the allotted site since

many years, after constructing a new building, the transfer may

be saved by giving the transferee an opportunity to make good

the shortfall in the consideration.
In this context, it is relevant to

note certain observations made by this Court in the case of
ITC

Limited vs. State of U.P.
, (2011) 7 SCC 493 :
“107.1   If   the   transferee   had   acted   bona   fide   and
      was   blameless,   it   may   be   possible   to   save   the
      transfer   but   that   again   would   depend   upon   the
      answer to the further question as to whether public
      interest   has   suffered   or   will   suffer   as   a
      consequence of the violation of the regulations:
(i) If public interest has neither suffered, nor is
      likely   to   suffer,   on   account   of   the   violation,   then
      the transfer may be allowed to stand as then the
      violation   will   be   a   mere   technical   procedural
      irregularity without adverse effects.
(ii)  On   the   other   hand,  if  the   violation   of  the
      regulations leaves or is likely to leave an everlasting
      adverse effect or impact on public interest  (as for
      example   when   it   results   in   environmental
      degradation   or   results   in   a   loss   which   is   not
      reimbursable),   public   interest   should   prevail   and
      the transfer should be rescinded or cancelled.
(iii)  But where the consequence of the violation
      is merely a short­recovery of the consideration, the
      transfer may be saved by giving the transferee an
      opportunity   to   make   good   the   shortfall   in
      consideration.
107.2     The   aforesaid   exercise   may   seem   to   be
      cumbersome, but is absolutely necessary to protect
25
the   sanctity   of   contracts   and   transfers.   If   the
        Government or its instrumentalities are seen to be
        frequently   resiling   from   duly   concluded   solemn
        transfers,   the   confidence   of   the   public   and
        international community in the functioning of the
        Government will be shaken. To save the credibility
        of   the   Government   and   its   instrumentalities,   an
        effort should always be made to save the concluded
        transactions/transfers wherever possible,  provided
(i) that it will not prejudice the public interest, or
        cause   loss   to   public   exchequer   or   lead   to   public
        mischief,   and   (ii)   that   the   transferee   is  blameless
        and   had   no   part   to   play   in   the   violation   of   the
        regulation.
107.3     If   the   concluded transfer  cannot  be saved
        and   has   to   be   cancelled,   the   innocent   and
        blameless transferee should be reimbursed all the
        payments   made   by   him   and   all   expenditure
        incurred   by   him   in   regard   to   the   transfer   with
        appropriate   interest.   If   some   other   relief   can   be
        granted   on   grounds   of   equity   without   harming
        public interest and public exchequer, grant of such
        equitable relief should also be considered.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
14.   On  an  examination  of the facts and circumstances of the

case in the light of the above observations, it is evident that it is

appropriate to give the Appellant the opportunity to make good

the shortfall in consideration, as the loss to the public exchequer

caused   by   the   free   allocation   cannot   be   said   to   have   had   an

everlasting effect or impact on public interest.   Moreover, we do

not   find   any   high­handedness   on   the   part   of   the   Appellant   in

seeking   the   allotment   in   its   favour,   as   it   acted   in   a   bona   fide
26
manner.     This   would   also  be in consonance with the  principle

stated   by   us   in  the   beginning   of the  judgment  that  the  public

must   be   adequately   compensated   for   the   alienation   of   natural

resources by the State.
15.   Therefore,   the   Appellant   should   pay   consideration   for   two

kanals of land received gratuitously, at the rate of Rs. 8,00,000/­

per kanal, which was the average auction price prevailing at the

time of allocation. The Appellant is also liable to pay interest at

the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the allotment till the

date   of   payment.   The   payment   should   be   made   within   three

months from this date.
16.   In view of the above, the appeals are allowed, the impugned

judgment passed by the Division Bench dated 01.04.2009 is set

aside   and   the   judgment   of   the   learned   Single   Judge   dated

25.04.2008 passed in O.W.P No. 1093 of 2002 and O.W.P No.10

of 2003 is restored, with the aforementioned modification.
……………………………………..J.
                                                     (N.V. RAMANA)
                                              
                                        ……………………........................J.
                                         (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)
New Delhi,
October 30, 2018
27