[Cites
51
, Cited by
53
]
Supreme Court of India
Om Prakash Agarwal Since Deceased Thr ... vs Vishan Dayal Rajpoot on 12 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5486, 2019 (14) SCC 526, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 697, 2019 (1) ALJ 337, 2018 (191) AIC (SOC) 9 (SC), (2018) 131 ALL LR 453, (2018) 14 SCALE 116, (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 9, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 735, (2018) 3 ALL RENTCAS 652, (2018) 4 CURCC 330, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 87, (2019) 2 MAD LW 549, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 869
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.9051­9052 OF 2018
                         (arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 4275­4276 of 2017)

                 OM PRAKASH AGARWAL SINCE DECEASED 
                 THR. LRS. & ORS.                        ... APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

                 VISHAN DAYAL RAJPOOT & ANR.                  ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                         J U D G M E N T


                 ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
These   appeals   have   been   filed   by   the

                 appellant(landlord),   questioning   the   judgment   of

                 Allahabad   High   Court   in   Small   Causes   Court   Revision

                 filed by the respondents(tenant) challenging the decree

                 of   eviction   passed   by   Additional   District   Judge,

                 Firozabad.   The issue which has arisen in these appeals

                 pertains   to   the   jurisdiction   of   Court   of   Additional

                 District   Judge   in   deciding   Small   Causes   Suit   on
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.10.12
15:24:20 IST
22.10.2016.
Reason:
2
2.  The facts necessary to be noticed for deciding these

appeals are:­
     The appellant, the landlord of premises in question

    filed Judge Small Causes Suit No. 1 of 2008 in the

    Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division), Small Cause

    Court,   Firozabad   praying   for   decree   of   eviction,

    rent and damages.  By order dated 05.04.2010 passed

    by District Judge, the suit was transferred to the

    Court   of   District   Judge,   Firozabad   and   was

    registered   as   S.C.C.   Suit   No.   1   of   2010.     The

    pecuniary   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge,   Small   Cause

    Court, which at the time of filing of the suit was

    Rs.25,000/­   was   raised   from   Rs.25,000/­   to   Rs.   1

    lakh   w.e.f.   07.12.2005   vide   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil

    Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015.     The   Additional

    District   Judge   to   whom   the   suit   was   transferred

    earlier   on   the   ground   that   pecuniary   jurisdiction

    of   the   suit   is   more   than   Rs.25,000/­   i.e.

    Rs.27,775/­, proceeded to decide the suit vide its

    judgment   and   order   dated   22.10.2016   and   the   suit

    for   eviction,   rent   and   compensation   was   decreed.
3
Aggrieved   against   the   judgment   of   Addl.   District

Judge, revision under
Section 25
of the Provincial

Small   Cause   Courts   Act,   1887   was   filed   by   the

tenant   (respondents   to   this   appeal).   One   of   the

grounds   taken   in   the   revision   was   that   after

enactment   of   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)

Act,   2015,   the   Court   of   Additional   District   Judge

ceased   to   have   any   jurisdiction   to   try   the   suit

between   lessor   and   lessee   of   a   value   upto   Rs.   1

lakh.     The   assumption   subsequent   thereto   of   the

jurisdiction   by   the   Additional   District   Judge   is

without jurisdiction.
Some   other   grounds   were   also   taken   for

challenging the judgment dated 22.10.2016. The High

Court   vide   its   impugned   judgment   dated   07.12.2016

allowed   the   Small   Cause   Court   revision   taking   a

view that order passed by Additional District Judge

was   without   jurisdiction   in   view   of   Uttar   Pradesh

Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015 w.e.f. 07.12.2015,

after   which   date,   such   case   of   valuation   of

Rs.27,775/­ could have been decided by Civil Judge
4
(Senior   Division)   working   as   Judge   Small   Causes

     Court.   The   High   Court   relied   on   the   earlier

     judgment  of High  Court  in  SCC Revision  No. 278  of

     2016   –   Shobhit   Nigam   Vs.   Smt.   Batulan   and   another

     decided on 29.08.2016. The High Court remanded back

     the   Revision   for   a   fresh   decision   by   Small   Causes

     Court   presided   over   by   a   Civil   Judge   (Senior

     Division). The  landlord aggrieved by  said judgment

     has come up in this appeal.
3.   Shri A.K. Singla, learned senior counsel appearing

for the appellant contended that High Court committed an

error   in   allowing   the   Revision.     It   is   submitted   that

Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015   w.e.f.

07.12.2015   has   only   enhanced   the   jurisdiction   for

institution of small causes suit, which amendment shall

have   no   effect   on   the   pending   cases.     In   the   Uttar

Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, there was no

stipulation   that   pending   cases   of   having   valuation   of

more than Rs.25,000/­ before the Court of District Judge

should be transferred. He submits that no objection to

the pecuniary jurisdiction of Additional District Judge
5
was   taken   by   the   respondents   before   the   Additional

District   Judge,   hence   by   virtue   of
Section   21
of   the

Civil Procedure Code, they were estopped from taking any

such objection in the Revision.
4.     Shri   S.U.   Khan,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

respondents   refuting   the   submission   of   the   appellant

contends   that   the   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)

Act, 2015 w.e.f. 07.12.2015, uses the word “cognizance”.

If a suit is cognizable by a Court then the Court has

got the jurisdiction not only to receive the plaint but

also to decide the suit.   After the amendment by Uttar

Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015, the Court of

Additional   District   Judge   was   not   only   debarred   from

receiving plaints but was also not competent to decide

Small Causes Suit, which has valuation upto Rs. 1 lakh.

To the view taken by the High Court in  Shobhit Nigam’s

case (supra), there is a contrary view taken by the High

Court in
Pankaj Hotel Vs. Bal Mukund
, (2018) 1 ALJ 2017.

The principles and objections of pecuniary jurisdiction

as contemplated in
Section 21(2)
is not attracted in the

present   case.     In  Shobhit   Nigam’s   case  (supra)  High
6
Court had issued a general direction for transferring of

Regular Judge Small Causes Court Suits upto valuation of

Rs.   1   lakh   to   the   Civil   Judge   (Senior   Division).     He

submits   that   special   leave   petition   deserves   to   be

dismissed.
5.     From   the   above   submissions   of   learned   counsel   for

the parties and the pleadings on record, following are

the   issues,   which   arise   for   consideration   in   this

appeal:
(i)      Whether   the   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws

           (Amendment)   Act,   2015   is   only   prospective   in

           nature   and   confined   only   to   the   fresh

           institution   of   suits   in   the   Court   of   Civil

           Judge (Senior Division) w.e.f. 07.12.2015 upto

           valuation   of   Rs.   1   lakh   and   shall   not   affect

           the   cognizance/hearing   of   pending   suits   upto

           the   valuation   of   Rs.   1   lakh   pending   in   the

           Court   of   District   Judge/Additional   District

           Judge?
(ii)     Whether the Court of District Judge/Additional

           District Judge, which Court was vested with the

           jurisdiction   of   Small   Causes   suit   of   the
7
valuation   of   more   than   Rs.25,000/­   w.e.f.
08.02.1991   shall   cease   to   have   or   could   have

            still   exercised   the   pecuniary   jurisdiction   on

            the Small Causes Suits of Valuation upto Rs. 1

            lakh?
(iii)     Whether respondents (tenants) having not raised

            any   objection   regarding   jurisdiction   of   the

            Court   of   Additional   District   Judge   where   the

            suit was pending after amendments made by Uttar

            Pradesh   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015,   the

            respondent   (tenant)   is   precluded   to   question

            the   competence   of   the   Court   of   Additional

            District   Judge   to   decide   the   suit   vide   his

            judgment dated 22.10.2016 in view of
Section 21
of   Code   of   Civil   Procedure,   1908   in   revision

            filed under
Section 25
of the Provincial Small

            Causes Court Act?
6.  Before we proceed to consider the issues, which has

arisen for consideration in this appeal, it is useful to

refer the relevant statutory provisions relevant for the

subject.
8
7.     Two   enactments   namely   (i)
The   Bengal,   Agra,   Assam

Civil   Courts   Act,   1887
and   (ii)
The   Provincial   Small

Causes   Courts   Act,   1887
,   were   passed   with   regard   to

constitution,   jurisdiction   of   Civil   Courts   in   the   then

North­Western   Provinces   both   being   enforced   w.e.f.

01.07.1887.
The   Bengal,   Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts

Act, 1887
was enacted to consolidate and amend the law

relating   to   Civil   Courts   in   Bengal,   the   North­Western

Provinces and Assam.
Section 3
of the Act provides for

Constitution   of   Civil   Courts.
Section   4
relates   to

number   of   District   Judges,   Subordinate   Judges   and

Munsifs.
Section   17
dealt   with   continuance   of

proceeding   of   Courts   ceasing   to   have   jurisdiction.
Section 18
dealt with extent of original jurisdiction of

District   or   Subordinate   Judge   (for   the   State   of   Uttar

Pradesh, the word “Subordinate” was substituted with the

word   “Civil”).
Section   19
dealt   with   extent   of

jurisdiction of Munsif.
Section 19
as applicable in the

State of Uttar Pradesh was substituted by U.P. Act No.

17 of 1991 was to the following effect:­
     “19(1) Save as aforesaid, and subject to the
     provisions of sub­section(2), the jurisdiction
9
of a Munsif extends to all like suits of which
     the value does not exceed ten thousand rupees.

     (2)  The High Court may direct by notification
     in the official Gazette, with respect to any
     munsif   named   therein,   that   his   jurisdiction
     shall exceed to all like suits of such value
     not  exceeding twenty  five thousand  rupees as
     may be specified in the notification.”
8.
Section   25
deals   with   power   to   invest   Subordinate

Judges and Munsifs with Small Cause Court Jurisdiction.
Section   25
of   the   Act   as   applicable   in   the   State   of

Uttar Pradesh is as follows: ­

     “[25.[1]   The   High   Court   may   by   notification
     in   the   official   Gazette,   confer   within   such
     local limits as it thinks fit, upon any Civil
     Judge or Munsif, the jurisdiction of a Judge
     of   a   Court   of   Small   Causes   under   the
Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,   1887
for
     the trial of suits cognizable by such Courts
     up to such value not exceeding five thousand
     rupees as it thinks fit, and may withdraw any
     jurisdiction so conferred:
Provided   that   in   relation   to   suits
           of   the   nature   referred   to   in   the
           proviso   to   sub­section   (2)   of
Section   15
of   the   said   Act,   the
           reference   in   this   sub­section   to
           five   thousand   rupees   shall   be
           construed   as   reference   to   twenty­
           five thousand rupees.]

     [(2)   The   High   Court   may,   by   notification   in
     the   Official   Gazette,   confer   upon   any
     District   Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge
10
the   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   a   Court   of
     Small Causes under the
Provincial Small Cause
     Courts   Act,   1887
,   for   the   trial   of   all
     suits(irrespective   of   their   value),   by   the
     lessor   for   the   eviction   of   a   lessee   from   a
     building   after   the   determination   of   his
     lease,   or   for   the   recovery   from   him   of   rent
     in   respect   of   the   period   of   occupation
     thereof   during   the   continuance   of   the   lease
     or of compensation for the use and occupation
     thereof   during   the   continuance   of   the   lease
     or of compensation for the use and occupation
     thereof   after   such   determination   of   lease,
     and   may   withdraw   any   jurisdiction   so
     conferred.
Explanation – For the purposes of this sub­
     section,   the   expression   ‘building’   has   the
     same meaning as in
Article (4)
in the Second
     Schedule of the said Act.]

     [(3)]x x x ]

     [(4)   Where   the   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   a
     Court   of   Small   Causes   is   conferred   upon   any
     District   Judge   of   Additional   District   Judge
     by   notification   under   section,   then,
     notwithstanding anything contained in
section
     15
of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act,
     1887,   all   suits   referred   to   in   sub­section
     (2)   shall   be   cognizable   by   Court   of   Small
     Causes.]”
9.
The   Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,   1887
was

enacted   to   consolidate   and   amend   the   law   relating   to

courts of small causes established beyond the Presidency

town.  AS the name suggests, the Provincial Small Cause
11
Courts Act
1887 was enacted to deal with “Small Causes”.

The Object of the Act was to create a separate court for

dealing with small causes. The object obviously was that

small causes may be dealt with expeditiously.  A summary

procedure   was   also   envisaged   for   dealing   with   small

causes.
The Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882
was

already   in   place   in   Calcutta,   Bombay   and   Madras.     In

this   country,   before   the
Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts

Act
1887 was enacted, there were different legislations

applicable   in   different   areas   with   the   same   object,

i.e., to deal with cases of small causes effectively and

summarily.     The   Statement   of   Objects   and   Reasons   of

Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act   1887   was   to   the

following effect:­

     “The   suits   cognizable   in   Courts   of   Small
     Causes   are   subject   to   certain   provisos,
     described   in
Section   6
,   Act   XI   of   1865,   as
     “claims   for   money   due   on   bond   or   other
     contract,   or   for   rent,   or   for   personal
     property, or for the value of such property,
     or   for   damages,   when   the   debt,   damage   or
     demand does not exceed in amount or value the
     sum of five hundred rupees whether on balance
     of account or otherwise" and
Sec. 586
of the
     Code   of   Civil   Procedure   provides   that   "no
     second   appeal   shall   lie   in   any   suit   of   the
     nature  cognizable in  Courts  of  Small  Causes,
     when the amount or value of the subject­matter
12
of   the   original   suit   does   not   exceed   five
    hundred rupees". Since
Section 6
of the Act of
    1865 was enacted, a vast quantity of case­law
    has grown up around it, and, as the rulings of
    the   Courts   have   not   been   uniform,   doubts
    constantly   arise   on   the   question   whether   a
    suit   is   or   is   not   a   suit   of   the   nature
    cognizable   by   a   Court   of   Small   Causes,   and,
    consequently, whether or  not, where  the  suit
    is of value not exceeding five hundred rupees
    and   the   original   decree   made   in   it   was   not
    final but was open to appeal, an appeal will
    also   lie   from   the   appellate   decree   in   the
    suit.   It   appears   to   the   Government   of   India
    that   the   conflicting   constructions   placed   on
Section   6
,   of   which   some   are   due   to   the
    progress of legislation during the last twenty
    years (ILR 3 All 66), render a more accurate
    definition   necessary   of   the   suits   of   which
    Courts   of   Small   Causes   may   take   cognizance,
    and that legislation to this end should follow
Sections   18
and
19
of   the   Presidency   Small
    Cause   Courts   Act,   1882,   in   declaring   the
    jurisdiction of those Courts to extend to all
    suits of a civil nature, subject to specified
    exceptions.   This   Bill   has   accordingly   been
    prepared, its primary object  being  to remove
    the   doubts   now   felt   as   to   the   effect   of
Section   6
,   Act   XI   of   1865;   and,   as   several
    sections   and   parts   of   sections   of   that   Act
    have,   from   time   to   time,   been   repealed   and
    other   sections   are   obsolete   as   regards   both
    expression and utility, it has been considered
    desirable to repeal the Act and re­enact the
    substance of the extant portions of it………." —
    Gazette of India, 1886, Part V, page 8.”
10. Black's   Law   Dictionary   has   referred   to   “Small

Claims Court”, which explained it in following manner:­
13
"A   court   that   informally   and   expeditiously
     adjudicates claims that seek damages below a
     specified   monetary   amount,   usu.   claims   to
     collect   small   accounts   or   debts.­­   Also
     termed   small­debts   court;   conciliation
     court.”
11.     The   object   as   is   delineated   from   Statements   of

Objects of enactment was to provide for speedy machinery

for small claims.  Although,
Code of Civil Procedure
is

applicable   by   virtue   of   Section   17   of   Small   Causes

Courts   Act,   but
the   Code   of   Civil   Procedure
itself   in

Order   L   provides   a   simplified   procedure   excluding

various rules and orders
of the C.P.C
. for small causes

cases.
Order L of the C.P.C
. is as follows:­

     “1.  Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   ­  The
     provisions   hereinafter   specified   shall   not
     extend   to   Courts   constituted   under   the
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887
(9 of
     1887)[or   under   the   Berar   Small   Cause   Courts
     Law,   1905]   or   to   Courts   exercising   the
     jurisdiction   of   a   Court   of     Small   Causes
     [under the said Act or Law], [or to Courts in
     [any part of India to which the said Act does
     not   extend]   exercising   a   corresponding
     jurisdiction] that is to say­
(a) so much of this Schedule as relates to­
(i)   suits   excepted   from   the   cognizance
                 of a Court of Small Causes  or the
                 execution of decrees in such suits;
(ii)   the   execution   of   decrees   against
                immovable property  or the interest
14
of   a   partner   in   partnership
                 property;
(iii) the settlement of issues; and
(b) the following rules and orders:­
           Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit);
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination
           of parties);
Order   XV,   except   so   much   of   rule   4   as
           provides   for   the   pronouncement   at   once
           of judgement;
Order XVIII, rules 5 to 12 (evidence);
           Orders XLI to XLV (appeals);
Order   XLVII,   rules   2,   3,   5,   6,   7
           (review);
Order LI.”
12.
Section   5
provided   for   establishment   of   small

causes   courts   by   the   State   Government.
Chapter   III   of

the   Act
deals   with   “Jurisdiction   of   Courts   of   Small

Causes”.
Section 15
of the Act provides: ­
15.   Cognizance   of   suits   by   Courts   of   Small
     Causes­(1) A Court of Small Causes shall not
     take   cognizance   of   the   suits   specified   in
     the   Second   Schedule   as   suits   expected   from
     the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes.
     (2)   Subject   to   the   exceptions   specified   in
     that   Schedule   and   to   the   provisions   of   any
     enactment   for   the   time   being   in   force,   all
     suits   of   a   civil   nature   of   which   the   value
     does not exceed five hundred rupees shall be
     cognizable by a Court of Small Causes.
15
(3)   Subject   as   aforesaid,   the   [State
    Government] may, by order in writing, direct
    that   all   suits   of   a   civil   nature   of   which
    the   value   does   not   exceed   one   thousand
    rupees   shall   be   cognizable   by   a   Court   of
    Small Causes mentioned in the order."
13.   The Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 1972

(U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972) was enacted by Uttar Pradesh

Legislature with the Presidential assent.  The Statement

of Objects and Reasons of U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972, which

are relevant for understanding the Scheme and purpose of

the amendment are to the following effect:­

    “Prefatory   Note—Statement   of   Objects   and
    Reasons.­­(1)
The   Provincial   Small   Cause
    Courts   Act,   1887
,   provides   for   a   summary
    procedure in the trial of suits. Moreover, the
    decisions of  such courts  are  not  appealable,
    and   only   one   revision   is   provided.   However
    such   courts   cannot   take   cognizance   of   suits
    for   possession   of   immovable   property.   By   a
    recent amendment contained in
Section 20(6)
of
    the   U.P.   Urban   Buildings   (Regulation   of
    Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 (U. P.
    Act XIII of 1972), eviction suits against the
    tenant   after   the   expiration   of   his   tenancy
    have been taken out from the purview of this
    exception and have been made cognizable by the
    small cause courts. This has been done because
    in such suits the issues are usually simple.
    In cases where the question of title comes to
    be in issue, a small cause court has power to
    return   the   plaint   for   presentation   to   a
    regular   court.   It   is   now   proposed   to   delete
    the aforesaid amendment from U. P. Act XIII OF
16
1972,   and   instead,   to   incorporate   a   wider
     amendment   directly   in   the
Provincial   Small
     Causes Court Act, 1887
, so that all buildings,
     and   not   merely   those   buildings   which   are
     governed   by   U.   P.   Act   XIII   of   1972,   may   be
     covered  thereby.  It  is  further  proposed  that
     in   respect   of   such   suits   the   ordinary   small
     cause courts may be conferred jurisdiction to
     decide   cases   of   a   value   up   to   Rs.   5,000
     (instead of only Rs. 2,000 in some districts
     and Rs.1,000 in most districts, as at present)
     and   that   cases   of   a   higher   value   may   be
     decided  by  District  Judges  sitting  as Judges
     of   Small   Causes,   and   revisions   against   such
     decisions of District Judge shall lie to the
     High   Court,   while   revision   against   decisions
     of other Courts of Small Causes may continue
     to lie to the District Judge.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx”
14.   As per
Section 15(1)
, A Court of Small Causes was

not competent to take cognizance of the suits specified

in   the   Second   Schedule.     Clause   (4)   of   the
Second

Schedule of the Act
was to the following effect:­

     “(4) a suit for the possession of immoveable
     property or for the recovery of an interest in
     such property;”
15.
By   Act
No.   37   of   1972   amendments      were   made   in
Section 15
,
Section 25
and
Second Schedule of the Act
.
17
Sections 2, 3 and 4 of the U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972

provides as follows:-
“2.   Amendment of
Section 15
of Act IX of
    1887.-- In
Section 15
of the Provincial Small
    Cause Courts Act, 1887, as amended in its
    application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter
    referred to as the principal Act, in sub-
    section (3), the following proviso shall be
    inserted, namely:
"Provided that in relation to suits
         by the lessor for the eviction of a
         lessee from a building after the
         determination of his lease, or for
         recovery from him of rent in respect
         of the period of occupation thereof
         during the continuance of the lease,
         or of compensation for the use and
         occupation    thereof   after   such
         determination     of   lease,    the
         reference in this sub-section to two
         thousand rupees shall be construed
         as a reference to five thousand
         rupees.
Explanation.--For the purposes of
         this   sub-section,  the   expression
         'building' has the same meaning as
         in
Article   (4)
in   the   Second
         Schedule."
3. Amendment of
Section 25
of Act IX of
    1887.-- In
Section 25
of the principal Act the
    following proviso thereto shall be inserted,
    namely :
"Provided that in relation to any
         case decided by a District Judge or
         Additional District Judge exercising
         the jurisdiction of Judge of Small
         Causes, the power of revision under
18
this section shall vest in the High
           Court."
4.
Amendment of the Second Schedule to Act
IX
     of 1887.-- In the Second Schedule to the
     principal Act, for
Article (4)
the following
     Article shall be substituted, namely :
"(4) a suit for the possession of
           immovable   property   or   for the
           recovery of an interest in such
           property, but not including a suit
           by a lessor for the eviction of a
           lessee from a building after the
           determination of his lease, and for
           the    recovery     from    him  of
           compensation    for   the   use and
           occupation of that building after
           such determination of lease.
Explanation.--For the purposes of
           this    Article,      the     expression
           'buildings, means a residential or
           non-residential     roofed    structure,
           and includes any land (including any
           garden),    garages   and    out-houses,
           appurtenant to such building, and
           also   includes    any    fittings   and
           fixtures affixed to the building for
           the    more     beneficial     enjoyment
           thereof."
16.  One more amendment, which was affected by U.P. Act

No.   37   of   1972   was   amendment   in
Section   25
of   Bengal,

Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   which   was   made   by
Section 5
of the Act, which is to the following effect:­

     “5.   Amendment   of
Section   25
of   Act   XII   of
     1887.­­
Section   25
of   the   Bengal,   Agra   and
     Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   1887,   as   amended   in
19
its application to Uttar Pradesh shall be re­
numbered as sub­section (1) thereof, and­­
(i)   in   sub­section   (1),   as   so   re­
 numbered,   for   the   existing   proviso,   the
 following   proviso   shall   be   substituted,
 namely :
"Provided that in relation to suits
    of   the   nature   referred   to   in   the
    proviso   to   sub­section   (3)   of
Section   15
of   the   said   Act   the
    references   in   this   sub­section   to
    one thousand rupees and five hundred
    rupees   shall   be   construed
    respectively   as   references   to   five
    thousand   rupees   and   one   thousand
    rupees."
(ii)   after   sub­section   (1)   as   so   re­
 numbered, the following sub­section shall
 be inserted, namely :
"(2)   The   State   Government   may   by
    notification   in   the   official
    Gazette,   confer   upon   any   District
    Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge
    the   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   a
    Court   of   Small   Causes   under   the
Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,
    1887
,   for   the   trial   of   all   suits
    (irrespective   of   their   value),   by
    the   lessor   for   the   eviction   of   a
    lessee   from   a   building   after   the
    determination   of   his   lease,   or   for
    the   recovery   from   him   of   rent   in
    respect of the period of occupation
    thereof   during   the   continuance   of
    the lease or of compensation for the
    use   and   occupation   thereof   after
    such determination of lease, and may
20
withdraw   any   jurisdiction   so
           conferred.
Explanation­­For   the   purposes   of
           this   sub­section,   the   expression
           'building'   has   same   meaning   as   in
Article   (4)
in   the   Second   Schedule
           to the said Act.
(3)   The   State   Government   may   by
       notification   in   the   official   Gazette
       delegate   to   the   High   Court   its   powers
       under this section."
17.     As   noted   above,   the   jurisdiction   of   Small   Causes

Court in so far as State of Uttar Pradesh was concerned

was to be vested in both in the Court of Munsifs [now

known as Civil Judge (Junior Division)] and Civil Judge

[now designated as Civil Judge (Senior Division)].   As

noted   above,   Court   of   Small   Causes   were   empowered   to

take   cognizance   of   small   causes   having   particular

pecuniary jurisdiction only.
Section 25
of the Bengal,

Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   1887   empowered   the

State   Government   by   notification   to   confer   upon   any

Subordinate   Judges   and   Munsifs   with   jurisdiction   of

Small Cause Court for the trial of suits and cognizance

of   such   suits   upto   the   value   as   fixed   in   the   Act.
21
Section   25
of   the   Bengal,   Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts

Act,   1887   as   applicable   in   the   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh

has   been   amended   as   has   been   noticed   above,   where   the

High Court exercising power under
Section 25(2)
of the

Bengal, Agra & Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 can  confer

upon any District Judge or Additional District Judge the

jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   Small   Causes   Court   for   the

trial of all suits(irrespective of their value), by the

lessor for the eviction of a lessee of a building after

the determination of his lease.
18.  In
Section 15
of Provincial Small Cause Courts Act,

for   sub­section   (2)   and   (3),   following   was   substituted

by U.P. Act 17 of 1991 w.e.f. 15.01.1991:­

 
     “(2)   Subject   to   the   exceptions   specified   in
     that   Schedule   and   to   the   provisions   of   any
     enactment   for   the   time   being   in   force,   all
     suits   of   a   civil   nature   of   which   the   value
     does not exceed five thousand rupees shall be
     cognizable by a Court of Small Causes;
Provided that in relation to suits by the
     lessor   for   the   eviction   of   a   lessee   from   a
     building after the determination of his lease
     or   for   recovery   from   him   of   rent   in   respect
     of   the   period   of   occupation   thereof   during
     the   continuance   of   the   lease,   or   of
     compensation   for   use   and   occupation   thereof
22
after   the   determination   of   the   lease,   the
     reference   in   this   sub­section   to   five
     thousand   rupees   shall   be   construed   as   a
     reference to twenty­five thousand rupees.

     Explanation­   For   the   purposes   of   this   sub­
     section,   the   expression   ‘building’   has   the
     same   meaning   as   in
Art.(4)
in   the   Second
     Schedule.”
19.
Section   17
of   the   Act   makes
the   Code   of   Civil

Procedure
applicable to the Court of Small Causes in all

suits cognizable by it and all proceedings arising out

of   all   such   suits.   By   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws

(Amendment)   Act,   2015   w.e.f.   07.12.2015,
Section   19
,
Section   21
of   the   Bengal,   Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts

Act,   1887   and
Section   15
of   Provincial   Small   Cause

Courts   Act,   1887,   were   amended.   The   act   contains   only

four sections which is to the following effect: ­

     “AN ACT further to amend the
Bengal, Agra and
     Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   1887
and   the
Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act
­1887   in
     their application to Uttar Pradesh.

     IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Sixty­sixth year
     of Republic of India as follows:­

                            CHAPTER – I
                            PRELIMINARY
1.(1)
This   Act
may   be   called   the   Uttar
     Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015,
23
(2)   It   shall   extend   to   whole   of   Uttar
Pradesh.
CHAPTER – II

Amendment   of   Bengal,   Agra   and   Assam,   Civil
Courts Act­1887.
2.
Bengal, Agra and Assam, Civil Courts Act
­
1887 hereinafter in this chapter referred to
as the principal Act,­
(a)   in   sub­section   (1)   for   the   words   “ten
thousand rupees” the words “one lakh rupees”
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub­section (2) for the words “twenty
five   thousand   rupees”   the   words   “five   lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
3.   In
section   21
of   the   principal   Act,   in
sub­section (1), in clause (b)­
(a) for the words “one lakh rupees” the words
“five lakh rupees” shall be substituted; and
(b)   for   the   words   “five   lakh   rupees”   the
words   “twenty   five   lakh   rupees”   shall   be
substituted.
CHAPTER  ­ III

Amendment   of   the   Provincial   Small   Cause
Courts Act, 1887
4.   In
Section   15
of   the   Provincial   Small
Cause Courts Act, 1887,­
(a)   in   sub­section(2)   for   the   words   “five
thousand   rupees”   the   words   “twenty   five
thousand rupees” shall be substituted;
24
(b) in the proviso to sub­section (2) for the
     words “twenty five thousand rupees” the words
     “one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.”
20. By   the   above   amendment   in   the
Provincial   Small

Cause   Courts   Act,   1887
the   limit   of   pecuniary

jurisdiction   of   small   causes   court   was   increased   from

Rs.25,000/­ to Rs.1 Lakh. The Judge, Small Causes Court

in the State of U.P. is senior­most Civil Judge, working

in the district. Although the Court of Small Causes was

empowered   to   take   cognizance   of   a   suit   upto   the

valuation   of   Rs.1   lakh   w.e.f.   07.12.2015,   the   suit   in

question namely Small Causes Suit No.1 of 2010 which was

pending   in   the   Court   of   Additional   District   Judge,

Firozabad   continued   to   proceed   in   the   court   of

Additional   District   Judge.   None   of   the   parties   raised

any   objection   with   regard   to   hearing   of   suit   by

Additional District Judge, consequently, the Additional

District Judge heard the parties and by judgment dated

22.10.2016 decreed the suit for eviction and due rent &

compensation.   The   tenant   aggrieved   by   the   judgment   of

Additional District Judge filed a revision under
Section
25
25
of   Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,   1887,   before

the High Court.
21. One of the grounds taken before the High Court was

that   in   view   of   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,

2015, the Court of Additional District Judge ceased to

have jurisdiction to try suit between lessor and lessee

of value upto Rs.1 Lac w.e.f. 07.12.2015, assumption of

jurisdiction         subsequent        thereto,       is       without

jurisdiction.
22. The   High   Court   accepted   the   above   submissions

raised   by   learned   Counsel   for   the   respondent  vis­a­vis

and   decreed   the   suit   and   allowed   the   revision   by

remanding   the   suit   for   fresh   decision   before   Small

Causes   Court   presided   by   Civil   Judge,   Senior   Division.

Following   are   the   reasons   given   by   the   High   Court   for

allowing the revision:­


     “...The controversy as to the jurisdiction of
     the Judge Small Causes Court has been decided
     by this Court, vide judgment dated 29.08.2016
     passed   in   SCC   Revision   No.278   of   2016,
     Shobhit   Nigam   Vs.   Smt.   Batulan   and   another.
26
It   has   been   held   that   consequent   to   the
     amendment,   in
Section   15
of   the   Provincial
     Small Causes Court Act, an SCC Suit having a
     valuation   between   Rs.25,000/­   to   Rs.1   lac
     shall   lie   before   the   Small   Cause   Court
     presided   over   by   a   Civil   Judge(Senior
     Division).   The   suits   having   a   valuation   of
     more   than   Rs.1   Lac   would   lie   before   the
     Additional   District   Judge/District   Judge
     constituting a Small Causes Court.
Shri   Satendra   Kumar­I,   who   has   filed   their
     counter   affidavit   in   Court   today,   has   not
     been   able   to   effectively   rebut   the
     submissions   made   by   the   counsel   for   the
     revisionist.
Under   the   circumstances,   this   Court   finds
     that   the   order   impugned   is   without
     jurisdiction and is hereby set aside. The SCC
     revision is allowed...”
23. Now   we   proceed   to   consider   the   issues   which   have

arisen in the present appeals:­
ISSUE NO.1 & 2
24. Prior to Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment) Act,

2015,   as   per
Section   15(2)
of   Provincial   Small   Cause

Court, 1887 as applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh

in   relation   to   suits   by   lessor   for   eviction   of   lessee
27
from   building   after   determination   of   his   lease   after

recovering from him of rent, the Court of Small Causes

would have taken cognizance of suits value of which does

not   exceed   Rs.25,000/­.   The   suit   was   filed   with   the

valuation   of   Rs.21,175/­.   The   Suit   was   initially   filed

in   the   Court   of   Civil   Judge,   Senior   Division,   Small

Cause   Court,   Firozabad.   Plaintiff   filed   a   application

for amendment which was allowed permitting the valuation

to be enhanced to Rs.27,775/­. The suit thereafter was

transferred   to   the   Court   of   District   Judge   and   re­

numbered as S.C.C.Suit No.1 of 2010.
25. The   main   issue   to   be   answered   is   as   to   whether

after 07.12.2015, the court of Additional District Judge

where the suit in question was pending could still have

pecuniary jurisdiction to decide the suit or suit ought

to   have   been   transferred   back   to   the   court   of   Civil

Judge, Senior Division.
28
26. The   High   Court   while   in   allowing   the   revision   has

relied   on   an   earlier   judgment   of   the   High   Court   in

Shobhit Nigam vs. Smt.Batulan and another (supra).
27. In   above   case   also   the   valuation   of   small   causes

suit   was   Rs.44,000/­   and   the   suit   was   pending   in   the

court of Additional District Judge who after U.P. Civil

Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015 proceeded to decide the suit

wide   its   judgment   dated   24.05.2016.   S.C.C.   Revision

filed   in   the   High   Court,   the   same   very   argument   was

pressed that the order of Additional District Judge is

without   jurisdiction.   The   High   Court   noticed   the

provisions of Section 15 of the Provincial Small Causes

Courts   Act,   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015

and   had   also   taken   note   of   the   objects   and   reason   of

U.P.   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015.   The   High   Court

held that the phrase “institution” as occurring in the

objects and reasons does not confine to institution of

civil   suits   only   and   after   the   amendment   w.e.f.

07.12.2015,   rather,   District   Judge   and   Additional

District   Judge   could   have   no   jurisdiction   to   decide
29
suits having valuation of less than Rs.1 lac and their

jurisdiction   shall   be   only   with   regard   to   those   cases

which has valuation of over Rs.1 lac. The High Court in

Shobhit   Nigam’s   Case          held   that   assumption   of

jurisdiction   of   Additional   District   Judge   deciding   the

suit having valuation of Rs.44,000/­ is illegal and set

aside   the   judgment.   In  Shobhit   Nigam’s   case,   the   High

Court also directed that copy of judgment be circulated

to all District Judges of U.P. for necessary compliance

to   ensure   that   all   pending   suits   of   rent   and   eviction

from   a   building   after   determination   of   lease   falling

under   proviso   to
Section   15(2)
of   the   Act   upto   the

valuation   of   Rs.1,00,000/­   be   transferred   to   the   Small

Causes   Court   presided   over   by   the   senior   most   Civil

Judge,   Senior   Division   of   the   district   irrespective   of

the date of their institution.
28. Learned   Counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent

submitted that judgment of Shobhit Nigam's case does not

lay   down   the   correct   law.   He   has   relied   on   another

judgment   of   learned   Single   Judge   decided   on   30.08.2017
30
in S.C.C. Revision No.171 and 172 of 2017, Pankaj Hotel

and   others   vs.   Bal   Mukund   and   others.   Learned   Single

Judge   who   decided   the   case   of  Pankaj   Hotel   and   others

took   the   contrary   view   and   held   that   U.P.   Civil   Laws

(Amendment) Act, 2015 is only prospective in nature and

was   applicable   with   regard   to   institutions   of   fresh

suits only. In the suits pending, the Court of District

Judge/Additional   District   Judge   continued   to   have

pecuniary jurisdiction to decide Small Causes Suits upto

the   valuation   of   Rs.1   lac   even   after   U.P.   Civil   Laws

(Amendment)   Act,   2015   enforced   w.e.f.   07.12.2015.
Learned Single Judge referred to an earlier judgment in

S.C.C. Revision defective No. 76 of 2017,  Sanjay Sharma

alias
Pintu   vs.   Anil   Dua
alias   Titu,   decided   on

13.07.2017   where   learned   Singe   Judge   had   taken   a

contrary view to the judgment of learned Single Judge in

Shobhit Nigam’s Case (Supra).
29.   One of the issues, which has to be answered is as

to whether the Court of Additional District Judge, which

has been invested with the jurisdiction of Small Causes
31
Court   after   amendment   by   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws

(Amendment)   Act,   2015   could   still   have   proceeded   to

decide   the   Small   Causes   Suit   w.e.f.   07.12.2015,   which

suits became cognizable by a Judge Small Causes Court,

i.e., a Court presided by a Civil Judge.  For answering

the above issue, we need to find out the Scheme of Small

Cause Courts Act.
30.  As noticed above, Small Cause Courts were envisaged

to be Courts, which may expeditiously dispose of small

causes.   Small causes were contemplated to be disposed

of   by   the   Courts   by   following   the   procedure   less

cumbersome   as   compared   to   those   applicable   in   the

regular civil courts.   By U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972, the

cases   by   a   lessor   for   eviction   of   lessee   and   for

recovery of rent in respect of the period of occupation

was also taken in fold of small causes, which could be

taken   cognizance   by   Small   Causes   Court   after   amendment

of Clause (4) of
Second Schedule of the Provincial Small

Cause Courts Act, 1887
.   The amendment made in
Section

25
of the Bengal, Agra & Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 by
32
U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972 empowered the State Government

to confer upon any District Judge or Additional District

Judge   power   of   Judge   of   Small   Causes   Court   “for   the

trial of suits irrespective of their value by the lessor

for the eviction of lessee…..”   The above amendment was

necessitated since the Court of Small Causes presided by

Civil   Judge   could   have   entertained   small   causes   suits

having   value   of   only   five   thousand   rupees,   as   per

amendment by U.P. Act No. 37 of 1972 cases by lessor for

the   eviction   of   lessee   having   valuation   of   more   than

five   thousand   rupees   could   not   have   been   taken

cognizance   by   Civil   Judges,   who   were   designated   as

Judges   of   Small   Causes   Court   to   take   up   such   cases.

When Legislature treated all suits by the lessor for the

eviction   of   lessee   from   a   building   as   a   “Small   Cause

Suit”, a forum had to be created for deciding such cases

as small cause cases.   The expression “irrespective of

their   value”   used   in
Section   25
as   amended   was   with

clear   intention   that   irrespective   of   the   value,   the

cases   filed   by   the   lessor   for   the   eviction   of   lessee

should   be   treated   as   small   causes   cases   and   should   be
33
dealt as a small cause case.   By subsequent amendment,

the Small Causes Courts presided by Civil Judge become

empowered   to   decide   cases   of   small   cause   upto   twenty­

five   thousand   rupees   and   cases   above   twenty­five

thousand   rupees   by   lessor   against   lessee   were   to   be

taken cognizance by Court of Additional District Judges.

The   legislative   Scheme   contains   a   clear   dichotomy

between cases, which could have been taken cognizance by

small causes courts presided by Civil Judge and those of

small   cause   cases   presided   by   District   Judge   or

Additional District Judge.   The dividing line was only

valuation   of   small   cause   cases   relating   to   suits   by

lessor   against   the   lessee.     Necessity   to   empower   the

District Judge/Additional District Judge to decide small

cause   cases   relating   to   eviction   by   lessor   against

lessee was with the above intent. The Legislature never

intended   that   all   cases   pertaining   to   suits   by   lessor

against   the   lessee   of   any   valuation   could   be   filed   in

any Small Causes Court.
34
31.     It   is   true   that   District   Judge   or   Additional

District   Judge   functioning   as   Small   Causes   Courts   can

take   cognizance   of   all   suits   irrespective   of   their

value.     But   use   of   the   words   “irrespective   of   their

value”   was   in   contradiction   of   the   pecuniary   value,

which was given to Judge of Small Causes Courts presided

by   Civil   Judge.     The   fact   that   District   Judge   or

Additional   District   Judge   can   take   cognizance   of   all

suits irrespective of their value shall not whittle down

or dilute the line of separation between two courts in

taking cognizance of small cause cases.   The mere fact

that   District   Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge   can

take   cognizance   of   suits   of   unlimited   value   will   not

empower   them   to   take   cognizance   of   cases,   which,

according to statutory Scheme can be taken only by small

causes courts presided by Civil Judge.   It is relevant

to notice that the Allahabad High Court had occasion to

consider   the   provisions   of   the
Provincial   Small   Cause

Courts   Act,   1887
as   applicable   in   the   State   of   Uttar

Pradesh.  A reference is made to
M.P. Mishra Vs. Sangam

Lal Agarwal
, AIR 1975 Allahabad 425.   In
the above case
35
before the Allahabad High Court, a small cause suit was

decided   by   the   Additional   District   Judge,   which   had

valuation of more than five thousand rupees.   Arguments

were raised that valuation of small cause case is more

than   five   thousand   rupees,   hence   Additional   District

Judge   could   not   have   decided   the   case   as   small   cause

case   rather   it   ought   to   have   been   decided   as   a  normal

civil suit.  In the above context, provision of U.P. Act

No.   37   of   1972   and   U.P.   Act   No.   19   of   1973   by   which
Section 25
of Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act,

1887   was   amended   by   adding   another   sub­section,   i.e.

sub­section(4), and the notifications issued by the High

Court in above respect were noticed.   Paragraph Nos. 5

to 8, which are relevant are as follows:­   

      “5.  By   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws   Amendment   Act   of
      1973 (President's Act No. 19 of 1973) another
      sub­section, namely, Sub­section (4) was added
      to
Section 25
. The said Sub­section (4) reads
      as follows :
"Where   the   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge
            of   a   Court   of   Small   Causes   is
            conferred upon any District Judge or
            Additional   District   Judge   by
            notification   under   this   section,
            then,   notwithstanding   anything
            contained   in   Section   15   of   the
            Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,
36
1887   all   suits   referred   to   in   Sub­
     section   (2)   shall   be   cognizable   by
     Court   of   Small   Causes."
By virtue of
Section 1 (3)
of the said Act of
1973   it   shall   be   deemed   that   the   said   Sub­
section   (4)   came   into   force   on   the   20th
September,   1972,   i.e.   the   date   on   which   the
U.P.   Civil   Laws   Amendment   Act   of   1972   came
into force.
6.  Certain   notifications   which   have   been
issued may also be noticed here. Notification
No. 4111 (8)/VII­A­580/72, dated September 22,
1972,   published   in   Uttar   Pradesh   Gazette,
dated 30­9­72, Part I (Page 5252), issued by
the State Government lays down as under :
"In exercise of the powers conferred
     by Sub­section (3) of
Section 15
of
     the   Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts
     Act,   1887   (Act   IX   of   1887)   as
     amended   by   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws
Amendment Act, 1972 (U.P. Act No. 37
of   1972)   and   in   continuation   of
     Government   Notification   No.   1   (8)
     69­Nyaya   (Ka­II),   dated   September
     23, 1969, the Governor is pleased to
     direct,   that   subject   to   the
     exceptions   specified   in   the   Second
     Schedule to the first mentioned Act,
     and   to   the   Provisions   of   any
     enactment   for   the   time   being   in
     force, all suite referred to in the
     proviso   to   the   said   sub­section   of
     which the value does not exceed five
     thousand   rupees,   shall,   with   effect
     from the date of publication of this
     notification,   be   cognizable   by   the
     Courts   of   Judge.   Small   Causes,
     Bareilly,   Moradabad,   Meerut,
     Gorakhpur,   Aligarh,   Kanpur,
37
Allahabad,   Varanasi,   Agra,   Lucknow,
           and   the   Court   of   additional   Judge,
           Small Causes, Lucknow."
7.  The   State   Government   issued   another
     notification   on   the   same   day   i.e.   Sep.   22,
     1972   dated   September   22,   1972,   published   in
     Uttar Pradesh Gazette,  Part  I,  dated  October
     7,   1972   (page   No.   5973),   which   lays   down   as
     under :
"In   exercise   of   the   powers   under
           Sub­section (3) of
Section 25
of the
           Bengal,   Agra   and   Assam   Civil   Courts
           Act,   1887   (Act   XII   of   1887)   as
           amended   by   the   Uttar   Pradesh   Civil
           Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   1972,   (U.P.
           Act   No.   37   of   1972)   and   in
           supersession   of   all   earlier
           notifications issued in this behalf,
           the   Governor   is   pleased   to   delegate
           to   the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at
           Allahabad   the   powers   of   the   State
           Government under the said section."
8.  By   Notification   No.   525   dated   25­10­1972
     the   High   Court   conferred   "upon   all   the
     District   Judges   and   Additional   District
     Judges, the jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court
     of   Small   Causes   under   the
Provincial   Small
     Cause Courts Act, 1887
(Act IX of 1887), for
     the trial of all suits (irrespective of their
     value) of the nature referred to in the said
     Sub­section (2)."
32.  The High Court also noticed the object and purpose

of  Uttar   Pradesh   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   1972   and

High   Court   held   that  Additional   District   Judge   had
38
jurisdiction to take cognizance of cases of valuation of

more   than   five   thousand   rupees.     In   Paragraph   Nos.   11

and 12, following was stated:­

     “11. The amendments which were effected by the
     U.P.   Civil   Laws   Amendment   Act   of   1972   were
     motivated   by   a   consideration   that   the   suits
     for eviction filed by the lessors against the
     lessees of buildings took an unduly long time
     to be finally decided and, therefore, it was
     thought   advisable   that   such   suits   should   be
     tried as suits of the nature of small causes
     suits   so   that   they   could   be   disposed   of
     expeditiously   and   there   could   be   no   appeal
     against the decision of the trial Court. This
     change   was   sought   to   be   brought   about   by
     amending
Article 4
of the
Second Schedule of
     the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act
so that
     a   suit   by   a   lessor   for   the   eviction   of   a
     lessee from a building after the determination
     of his lease and for the recovery from him of
     compensation for the use and occupation of the
     buildings   after   such   determination   of   lease
     was no longer excepted from the cognizance of
     the   court   of   small   causes.   Such   suits,
     therefore,   became   triable   by   the   Courts   of
     Judge, Small Causes and by virtue of
Section
     16
of   the   Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act
     they   became   exclusively   triable   by   such
     courts.  Of  course,  the  limitation on  account
     of   the   valuation   of   the   suit   remained,   This
     limitation was contained in
Section 15(2)
and
     in
Section 15(3)
. Ordinarily, the jurisdiction
     of the Small Causes Court stretched up to Rs.
     1,000   under
Section   15(2)
of   the   Provincial
     Small   Cause   Courts   Act.   But   under
Section
     15(3)
the   State   Government   was   empowered   to
     raise the pecuniary limit of such jurisdiction
     to Rs. 5,000 in respect of suits between the
     lessors   and   the   lessees   for   eviction   of   the
39
latter   after   the   determination   of   their
tenancy   from   buildings.   This   result   was
brought about by the addition of the proviso
to
Section   15(3)
by   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws
Amendment Act, 1972. As has been stated, the
State   Government   issued   a   Notification   dated
Sept.   22,   1972,   whereby   the   Court   of   Judge,
Small Causes situated at Bareilly, Moradabad,
Meerut, Gorakhpur, Aligarh, Kanpur, Allahabad,
Varanasi,   Agra,   Lucknow   and   the   Court   of
Additional   Judge,   Small   Causes,   Lucknow   were
empowered   to   take   cognizance   of   the   suits
between   the   lessors   and   the   lessees   for   the
latter's   eviction   from   buildings   whose   value
does   not   exceed   Rs.   5,000.   In   view   of   the
addition of Sub­section (2) to
Section 25
of
the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act it
became   possible   to   confer   upon   the   District
Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge   the
jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   a   Court   of   Small
Causes for the trial of suits for eviction of
lessees and for recovery of rents and damages
(disregarding   some   minor   aspects   of   the
matter).   Such   a   jurisdiction   has   been
conferred   upon   the   District   Judges   and   the
Additional   District   Judges   by   the   aforesaid
Notification   dated   25­10­1972   issued   by   this
Court.
12.  In   view   of   the   aforesaid   amendments,   in
the   district   of   Allahabad   (from   where   this
revision   has   arisen)   the   Court   of   Judge   of
Small   Causes   had   a   jurisdiction   to   take
cognizance   of   the   suits   between   the   lessors
and   the   lessees   in   respect   of   the   latter's
eviction from buildings provided the valuation
of   such   suits   does   not   exceed   Rs.   5,000.   If
the valuation exceeds Rs. 5,000 then the court
of   the   District   Judge   and   the   Additional
District Judge who have been empowered to take
cognizance of such suits can try the same in
the manner in which suits of the Small Cause
40
Court nature are tried. In
Section 25(2)
, it
is clearly stated that the District Judge or
the   Additional   District   Judge   will   have   the
jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   a   Court   of   Small
Causes for the trial of the aforesaid variety
of   suits   irrespective   of   their   value.   In   my
view,   if   the   contention   on   behalf   of   the
applicant were to be accepted then it will be
doing   violence   to   the   said   expression.   Any
interpretation which seeks to put a limitation
on   the   valuation   of   the   Suits   cognizable   by
the District Judge or the Additional District
Judge will be contrary to the clear expression
used   in   Sub­section   (2)   of
Section   25
"irrespective of their value". Learned counsel
for   the   applicant   placed   reliance   on   the
pronouncement of the Supreme Court reported in
Raja   Soap   Factory   v.   S.   P.   Shantharaj
[AIR
(1965)   SC   1449.   In   my   view,   the   said
pronouncement does not support the contention
on   behalf   of   the   applicant.   Counsel   also
sought  to support his contention  by  inviting
my   attention   to   Sub­section   (4)   added   to
Section   25
by   the   U.P.   Civil   Laws   Amendment
Act of 1973. The said Sub­section (4) has been
reproduced above and in the concluding portion
thereof   the   words   used   are   ".........   all
suits referred to in Sub­section (2) shall be
cognizable   by   court   of   Small   Causes".   It   is
urged that  if the legislative intention  were
that   the   District   Judge   or   the   Additional
District Judge on whom the powers of a Judge
of a Court of Small Causes have been conferred
should   take   cognizance   of   the   aforesaid
variety   of   suits   between   the   lessor   and   the
lessee then in the concluding portion of Sub­
section   (4)   the   legislature   would   not   have
used   the   words   "Court   of   Small   Causes"   but
would have used the expression "District Judge
or   Additional   District   Judge,"   counsel
contended that there is a distinction between
a Court of Small Causes established under the
41
Provincial Small Causes Court and officers who
     are   invested   with   the   powers   of   a   Judge   of
     Court   of   Small   Causes.   In   my   opinion   this
     contention   is   not   valid.
In
Mt.   Sukha   v.
     Raghunath
(AIR 1917 All. 62);
D. D. Vidyarthi
     v.   Ram   Pearey   Lal
(AIR   1935   All   690);
Badal
     Chandra v. Srikrishna Dey
(AIR 1929 Cal 354);
     Bhagwan Das v. Keshwar Lal (AIR 1923 Pat 49)
     and   Narayan   Sitaram   v.   Bhagu   [(1907)   ILR   31
     Bom   314)]   it   has   been   laid   down   that   the
     Courts on which Small Cause Court's powers are
     conferred shall also be deemed to be Courts of
     Small   Causes.
Section   4
of   the   Provincial
     Small Cause Courts Act lays down as under:­­

           "In   this   Act,   unless   there   is
           something   repugnant   in   the   subject
           or   context,   "Court   of   Small   Causes"
means   a   Court   of   Small   Causes
           constituted   under   this   Act.   and
           includes   any   person   exercising
           jurisdiction   under   this   Act   in   any
           such Court."
It   is   clear   that   the   expression   "Court   of
     Small   Causes"   has   to   be   interpreted   in   the
     context in which the said expression is used.
     In   my   view,   the   expression   'Court   of   Small
     Causes' used at the end of subsection (4) of
Section   25
really   means   and   refers   to   a
     District Judge or Additional District Judge on
     whom   the   jurisdiction   of   a   Judge   of   Small
     Causes has been conferred.”
33.     The   Allahabad   High   Court   has   followed   the   above

judgment in several cases subsequently.
42
34.  Whether the Additional District Judge, in the facts

of the present case, had jurisdiction to take cognizance

of small causes suits having valuation upto Rs. 1 lakh

and could still have proceeded to decide the suit, whose

valuation was less than Rs. 1 lakh?  We may also notice

provision of
Section 15
of the Code of Civil Procedure,

which   provides   that   suits   shall   be   instituted   in   the

Court of the lowest grade competent to try it.
Section

15
of Code of Civil Procedure is as follows:­

     “Every suit shall be instituted in the Court
     of the lowest grade competent to try it.”
35.     The   purpose   of
Section   15
is   obvious   that   even

though more than one court has jurisdiction to try the

suit,   it   should   be   instituted   in   the   Court   of   lowest

grade. For example, a small cause case can be instituted

in Court of Small Cause presided by Civil Judge having

valuation of upto Rs. 1 lakh as on date and small cause

suit   having   valuation   of   more   than   Rs.   1   lakh   can   be

instituted in the Court of District Judge or Additional

District Judge.  As per
Section 15
of the Code of Civil

Procedure, suit of less than Rs. 1 lakh valuation has to
43
be   instituted   in   Small   Causes   Court   presided   by   Civil

Judge.   Although, District Judge or Additional District

Judge has unlimited pecuniary jurisdiction but under the

legislative   Scheme,   the   suit   is   not   to   be   taken

cognizance by the District Judge or Additional District

Judge, which has valuation upto Rs. 1 lakh.  Even though

if
Section   15
of   the   C.P.C.   is   a   provision,   which

regulate   the   institution   of   suits   and   does   not   affect

the   jurisdiction   of   Courts,   reading   the   provision   of
Section   15
alongwith   relevant   provisions   of   the
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887
and the
Bengal,

Agra,   Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   1887
,   the   legislative

Scheme is clear that small cause cases should be taken

cognizance by Small Cause Courts presided by Civil Judge

upto   the   valuation   of   Rs.   1   lakh   and   cases   having

valuation of more than Rs. 1 lakh by  District Judge or

Additional   District   Judge,   who   have   been   invested   with

the   power   of   Small   Cause   Courts.     Unless   the   above

legislative   intent   and   Scheme   is   followed,   there   shall

be   confusion   and   inconsistency.     The   legislative

provisions have to be interpreted in a manner, which may
44
advance the object and purpose of the Act.   When clear

dichotomy   regarding   taking   cognizance   of   small   causes

suits presided by Civil Judge and by District Judge or

Additional   District   Judge   have   been   provided   for,   the

said   dichotomy   and   separation   to   take   cognizance   of

cases   has   to   be   followed   to   further   the   object   and

purpose of legislation.
36.
In
Pankaj   Hotel
case   (supra),   the   Court   took   the

view   that   since   the   Court   of   District   Judge   or

Additional District Judge, which have been invested with

the power of small causes Court had unlimited pecuniary

jurisdiction,   they   can   validly   adjudicate   small   causes

suits   having   valuation   of   less   than   Rs.   1   lakh   even

after amendment by  Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment)

Act, 2015, we do not approve the above view.   When the

Court   of  District   Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge

could no longer take cognizance of small cause suits of

having less than Rs. 1 lakh valuation, it was no longer

in   the   competence   of   Small   Cause   Court   presided   by

District   Judge   or   Additional   District   Judge   to   proceed
45
to decide the suit of having valuation of less than Rs.

1 lakh.  Proper course was to transfer the cases before

a   competent   court   to   decide   the   suits.     It   is   a

different   matter   that   the   Court   of   District   Judge   or

Additional   District   Judge   when   proceeded   to   decide   the

small cause suits after 07.12.2015 of valuation of less

than Rs. 1 lakh and neither any objection was raised by

either   of   the   parties   nor   attention   of   the   Court   was

drawn towards the amendment,
Section 21
of the C.P.C. is

there to deal with such eventuality, which provision we

shall hereinafter deal separately.
37. Learned Single  Judge  in
Pankaj Hotels'
Case(Supra)

has referred to and relied on various judgments of this

Court which shall be referred to hereinafter.
38.
Section   15
of   the   Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts

Act, 1887 bears the title “Cognizance of Suits by Courts

of Small Causes”. Sub­section (1) of
Section 15
provides

that a Court of Small Causes shall not take cognizance

of   the   suits   specified   in   the   Second   Schedule   as   suit
46
excepted from the cognizance of Court of Small Causes.

Sub­section (2)(as applicable in Uttar Pradesh) provides

that   all   suits   of   the   civil   nature   of   which   the   value

does not exceed Rs.5,000/­  shall be cognizable by Court

of Small Causes.  As per the proviso to sub­section (2)

in   relation   to   suits   by   lessor   for   the   eviction   of

lessee   from   building   after   determination   of   lease,   the

reference   of   Rs.5,000/­   shall   be   construed   as   a

reference   to   Rs.25,000/­.   The   keyword   in   the   provision

is “shall be cognizable by Court of Small Causes.”  What

is   the   meaning   of   the   phrase   ‘Cognizable   by   Court   of

Small Causes’?
39. The   word   ‘Cognizance’   has   been   defined   in  Black’s

Law Dictionary in following manner: ­

            “Cognizance­

     (1) A court’s right and power to try and to
     determine cases; Jurisdiction,
         (2)   The   taking   of   judicial   or
         authoritative notice.
47
40. Advanced   Law   Lexicon   by   P.Ramanatha   Aiyar   defines

‘Cognizance’ in the following manner: ­

     “Cognizance.­   Judicial   notice   or   knowledge;
     the   judicial   recognition   or   hearing   of   a
     cause;   jurisdiction,   or   right   to   try   and
     determine causes. It is a word of the largest
     import:embracing   all   power,   authority   and
     jurisdiction.   The   word   “cognizance”   is   used
     in the sense of “right to take notice of and
     determine   a   cause.”   Taking   cognizance   does
     not   involve   any   formal   action,   or   indeed
     action of any kind, but occurs as soon as a
     Magistrate, as such, applies his mind of the
     suspected commission of an offence…..”
41. This Court in  (
2004) 2 SCC 349, State of Himachal

Pradesh   vs.   M.P.Gupta
,  had   occasion   to   consider   the

expression   ‘Cognizance’.   The   definition   of   word

‘Cognizance’   as   given   in   Black’s   Law   Dictionary   was

quoted with approval. In paragraph 10 of the judgment,

following was stated: ­

     “10……According   to   Black’s   Law   Dictionary   the
     word   “cognizance”   means   “jurisdiction”   or
     “the   exercise   of   jurisdiction”   or   “power   to
     try   and   determine   causes”.   In   common
     parlance, it means taking notice of. A court,
     therefore,   is   precluded   from   entertaining   a
     complaint   or   taking   notice   of   it   or
     exercising   jurisdiction   if   it   is   in   respect
     of   a   public   servant   who   is   accused   of   an
48
offence alleged to have been committed during
     discharge of his official duty.
42. The   statutory   provisions   of
Section   15(2)
of

Provincial   Small   Cause   Courts   Act,   1887   uses   the

expression   “shall   be   cognizable   by   the   Court   of   Small

Causes”. The word ‘Cognizable’ is a word of wide import.

It takes into its fold institution, hearing and decision

of   a   case   cognizable   by   it.   In
Pankaj   Hotels
Case,

learned   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   had   noted   the

statement of objects of U.P. Civil Laws (Amendment) Act,

2015   and   has   given   emphasis   on   word   “for   institution”

and   concluded   that   amendment   is   prospective   in   nature

and   is   applicable   only   to   suits   and   appeals   being

instituted after the amendment. When the plain word in

the   statute   i.e.
Section   15(2)
uses   the   word

“cognizable” whether “statements of objects and reasons”

which   uses   the   word   “institution”   shall   whittle   down,

the   word   ‘cognizable’   as   used   in
Section   15(2)
.   The

statement   of   objects   and   reasons   of   U.P.   Civil   Laws

(Amendment) Act, 2015, are to the following effect: ­
49
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

     WHEREAS   the   value   of   the   subject   matters
     brought   to   the   courts   has   increased
     substantially,   the   pecuniary   jurisdiction   of
     the   Civil   Courts   as   well   as   those   of   Small
     Cause   Courts   in   the   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh
     requires   to   be   raised   for   institution   of
     Civil   Suits   and   appeals.   It   has,   therefore,
     become   necessary   to   amend   the
Bengal,   Agra
     and   Assam   Civil   Courts   Act,   1887
and
     Provincial   Small   Cause   courts   Act,   1887   to
     increase   the   pecuniary   jurisdiction   of   Civil
     Courts and those of small Cause Courts in the
     State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   for   securing   better
     administration of Justice.
The Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws (Amendment)
     Bill, 2015 is introduced accordingly.”
43. It   is   true   that   statement   of   objects   noticed   that

value   of   subject   matters   brought   to   the   courts   has

increased   substantially,   hence,   pecuniary   jurisdiction

of the Civil Courts as well those of Small Causes Courts

in State of Uttar Pradesh requires to be raised for the

institution   of   civil   suits   and   appeals.   The   amendment

has   raised   pecuniary   limits   in
Provincial   Small   Cause

Courts   Act, 1887
. The statement of objects and reasons

explains   the   reason   for   increase   of   pecuniary

jurisdiction   but   use   of   word   ‘for   institution’   in
50
statement of object cannot control the express language

of the statutory provisions.
44. A three­Judge Bench of this Court in
S.S. Bola v.

B.D. Sardana
, (1997) 8 SCC 522, has held that statement

of objects and reasons of the statute can be looked into

only as extrinsic aid to find out the legislative intent

only   when   the   meaning   of   statute   by   its   ordinary

language   is   obscure   and   ambiguous.   In   paragraph   176,

following was laid down: ­

     “176…..But   it   is   a   cardinal   rule   of
     interpretation   that   the   Statement   of   Objects
     and Reasons of a statute is to be looked into
     as   an   extrinsic   aid   to   find   out   the
     legislative   intent   only   when   the   meaning   of
     the   statute   by   its   ordinary   language   is
     obscure   or   ambiguous.   But   if   the   words   used
     in   a   statute   are   clear   and   unambiguous   then
     the statute itself declares the intention of
     the   legislature   and   in   such   a   case   it   would
     not   be   permissible   for   a   court   to   interpret
     the   statute   by   examining   the   Statement   of
     Objects   and   Reasons   for   the   statute   in
     question.”
45. In Subha Ram vs. state of maharashtra, (2003) 1 SCC

506,   this   court   again   laid   down   that   statement   of

objects   and   reasons   can   be   looked   into   for   limited

purpose of ascertaining condition prevailing at the time
51
which   prompted   or   actuated   the   proposal   of   bill   to

introduce   the   same   and   the   extent   of   existing   evil   of

the   society.   Further,   in
Bhaiji   vs.   Sub­Divisional

Officer
,  (2003) 1 SCC 692, this court again reiterated

the following principles of statutory interpretation in

paragraph 11:­

     “11.  Reference   to   the   Statement   of   Objects
     and   Reasons   is   permissible   for   understanding
     the   background,   the   antecedent   state   of
     affairs,   the   surrounding   circumstances   in
     relation   to   the   statute,   and   the   evil   which
     the   statute   sought   to   remedy.   The   weight   of
     judicial   authority   leans   in   favour   of   the
     view   that   the   Statement   of   Objects   and
     Reasons cannot be utilized for the purpose of
     restricting and controlling the plain meaning
     of   the   language   employed   by   the   legislature
     in drafting a statute and excluding from its
     operation   such   transactions   which   it   plainly
     covers.   (See   Principles   of   Statutory
     Interpretation   by   Justice   G.P.   Singh,   8th
     Edn., 2001, pp. 206­09.)”
46. The   statement   of   object   of   U.P.   Civil   Laws

(Amendment)   Act,   2015   thus   explains   the   reason   for

bringing   the   amendment   for   increasing   the   pecuniary

jurisdiction   but   the   word   ‘institution’   used   in

statement   of   object   shall   not   control   the   expressed

language of
Section 15
. The expression ‘cognizance’ used
52
in
Section 15
shall mean and include institution hearing

and   decision   of   the   case.   When   statute   provides   that

cognizance   of   particular   cause   is   to   be   taken   by   a

particular court, no other court can take cognizance of

the   cause,   since   legislature   never   creates   or   provides

for   parallel   jurisdiction   in   two   different   courts   for

taking cognizance of a cause. When
Section 15
provides

that all suits of civil nature of which the value does

not   exceed   Rs.25,000/­   “shall   be   cognizable   by   the

Courts of Small Causes”, the cognizance shall be taken

by that very Court and no other Court.
47. As   noted   above,   the   proviso   to   sub­section   (2)

provides   that   figure   Rs.5,000/­   shall   be   construed   to

Rs.25,000/­.   By   U.P.   Civil   Laws   (Amendment)   Act,   2015,

the figure of Rs.25,000/­ stood substituted by Rs.1 lac.

Reading sub­section(2) read with proviso and U.P. Civil

Laws   (Amendment   Act),   2015   clearly   means   that   Small

Cause suits with valuation not exceeding Rs.1 lac shall

be   cognizable   by   Court   of   Small   Causes.   When   a   Small

Cause suit not exceeding value of Rs.1 lac is cognizable
53
by Court of Small Causes, obviously, no other court can

take cognizance. Additional District Judge to whom small

causes   suit   in   question   was   transferred   since   its

valuation was more than of Rs.25,000/­ was not competent

to   take   cognizance   of   the   suit   after   U.P.   Civil   Laws

(Amendment Act), 2015 w.e.f.07.12.2015, when the suit in

question   became   cognizable   by   Small   Causes   Court   i.e.

Court   of   Civil   Judge,   Senior   Division.   To   the   above

extent, the judgment of learned Single Judge in  Shobhit

Nigam’s Case  has to be approved and judgment of Single

Judge   in
Pankaj   Hotels
(Supra)  laying   down   that   even

after   07.12.2015,   the   Additional   District   Judge   had

jurisdiction   to   decide   the   suit   in   question   cannot   be

approved.
48. We   further   observe   that   learned   Single   Judge   in
Pankaj   Hotels
case  having   noticed   an   earlier   view   of

learned   Single   Judge   in  Shobhit   Nigam’s   case,   and   he

being of the opinion that judgment does not lay down the

correct   law,   appropriate   course   open   for   Single   Judge

was   to   refer   the   matter   for   consideration   by   a   larger
54
bench. The judgments of the High Court are relied on and

followed by all sub­ordinate courts in the State. It is

always   better   to   achieve   certainty   by   an   authoritative

opinion by the High Court instead of giving conflicting

views   by   different   learned   Single   Judges   which   may

confuse   the   litigants,   lawyers   and   sub­ordinate   courts

in applying the law.
ISSUE NO.3
49. It   is   the   submission   of   learned   counsel   for   the

appellant that even if the Additional District Judge was

not   competent   to   decide   the   small   causes   suit   on

22.10.2016,   the   judgment   of   the   Additional   District

Judge   was   not   liable   to   be   interfered   with   by   the

revisional   court   in   view   of
Section   21
of   the   Code   of

Civil   Procedure.
Section   21
of   the   Code   of   Civil

Procedure relates to objection to jurisdiction.
Section

21
of the Code of Civil Procedure is as follows:­

     “21. Objections to jurisdiction. —   [(1)] No
     objection   as   to   the   place   of   suing   shall   be
     allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court
     unless such objection was taken in the Court
55
of   first   instance   at   the   earliest   possible
     opportunity and in all cases where issues are
     settled   at   or   before   such   settlement,   and
     unless there has been a consequent failure of
     justice.
[(2)   No   objection   as   to   the   competence   of   a
     Court with reference to the pecuniary limits
     of   its   jurisdiction   shall   be   allowed   by   any
     Appellate   or   Revisional   Court   unless   such
     objection   was   taken   in   the   Court   of   first
     instance   at   the   earliest   possible
     opportunity,   and,   in   all   cases   where   issues
     are   settled,   at   or   before   such   settlement,
     and   unless   there   has   been   a   consequent
     failure of justice.
(3) No objection as to the competence of the
     executing   Court   with   reference   to   the   local
     limits   of   its   jurisdiction   shall   be   allowed
     by   any   Appellate   or   Revisional   Court   unless
     such   objection   was   taken   in   the   executing
     Court   at   the   earliest   possible   opportunity,
     and   unless   there   has   been   a   consequent
     failure of justice.]”
50. The   policy   underlying
Section   21
of   Code   of   Civil

Procedure   is   that   when   the   case   has   been   tried   by   a

court on merits and the judgment rendered, it should not

be   liable   to   be   reversed   purely   on   technical   grounds,

unless   it   has   resulted   in   failure   of   justice.   The

provisions   akin   to
Section   21
are   also   contained   in
Section 11
of the Suit Valuation Act, 1887 and
Section

99
of Code of Civil Procedure. This Court had occasion
56
to   consider   the   principle   behind
Section   21
,   Code   of

Civil   Procedure   and
Section   11
of   the   Suit   Valuation

Act,   1887   in  AIR   1954   SC   340,  Kiran   Singh   v.   Chaman

Paswan.   In   paragraph   7   of   the   judgment   following   was

laid down: ­

     “7……The policy underlying
Sections 21
and 99
     of the Civil Procedure Code and
Section 11
of
     the Suits Valuation Act is the same, namely,
     that when a case had been tried by a court on
     the   merits   and   judgment   rendered,   it   should
     not   be   liable   to   be   reversed   purely   on
     technical grounds, unless it had resulted in
     failure   of   justice,   and   the   policy   of   the
     legislature   has   been   to   treat   objections   to
     jurisdiction   both   territorial   and   pecuniary
     as technical and not open to consideration by
     an   appellate   court,   unless   there   has   been   a
     prejudice   on   the   merits.   The   contention   of
     the   appellants,   therefore,   that   the   decree
     and judgment of the District Court, Monghyr,
     should   be   treated   as   a   nullity   cannot   be
     sustained   under
Section   11
of   the   Suits
     Valuation Act.”
51. One   more   submission   which   was   raised   in   the   said

appeal   was   considered   by   this   Court.   One   of   the

submission of the appellant who had instituted the suit

in   the   subordinate   court   was   that   as   per   the   revised

valuation, the appeal against the decree of subordinate

judge did not lay before the District Court but to the
57
High Court, hence, the judgment of the District Judge in

appeal should be ignored. The appeal in the High Court

be   treated   as   first   appeal.   It   was   contended   that

appellant   has   been   prejudiced   in   the   above   manner.

Rejecting   the   above   submissions,   this   court   laid   down

following in paragraphs 11 and 12:­

     “11.………This   argument   proceeds   on   a
     misconception. The right of appeal is no doubt
     a substantive right, and its deprivation is a
     serious prejudice; but the appellants have not
     been deprived of the right of appeal against
     the judgment of the Subordinate Court. The law
     does  provide  an  appeal  against  that  judgment
     to the District Court, and the plaintiffs have
     exercised   that   right.   Indeed,   the
     undervaluation   has   enlarged   the   appellants’
     right of appeal, because while they would have
     had only a right of one appeal and that to the
     High   Court   if   the   suit   had   been   correctly
     valued,  by  reason of  the  undervaluation  they
     obtained   right   to   two   appeals,   one   to   the
     District Court and another to the High Court.
     The complaint of the appellants really is not
     that   they   had   been   deprived   of   a   right   of
     appeal against the judgment of the Subordinate
     Court, which they have not been, but that an
     appeal on the facts against that judgment was
     heard   by   the   District   Court   and   not   by   the
     High   Court.   This   objection   therefore   amounts
     to this that a change in the forum of appeal
     is   by   itself   a   matter   of   prejudice   for   the
     purpose of
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation
     Act.
12. The question, therefore, is, can a decree
     passed   on   appeal   by   a   court   which   had
58
jurisdiction to entertain it only by reason of
     undervaluation,   be   set   aside   on   the   ground
     that   on   a   true   valuation   that   court   was   not
     competent to entertain the appeal? Three High
     Courts   have   considered   the   matter   in   Full
     Benches, and have come to the conclusion that
     mere change of forum is not a prejudice within
     the   meaning   of
Section   11
of   the   Suits
     Valuation   Act.
Vide  Kelu   Achan  v.  Cheriya
     Parvathi Nethiar Mool Chand
v. Ram Kishan and
     Ramdeo Singh  v.  Raj Narain. In our judgment,
     the   opinion   expressed   in   these   decisions   is
     correct………”
52. The   above   principle   has   been   reiterated   by   this

Court in AIR (1962) SC 199, Hiralal vs. Kalinath and
AIR

1963   SC   634,   Bahrain   Petroleum   Co.   vs.   P.J.Pappu   and

Another
.
53. This   court   in  (
1993)   2   SCC   130,   R.S.D.V.   Finance

Company   Private   Limited   vs.   Shree   Vallabh   Glass   Works

Ltd.
had   again   considered
Section   21
of   the   Code   of

Civil   Procedure.   In   paragraphs   7   and   8,   following   has

been laid down: ­

     “7………It may be further noted that the learned
     Single   Judge   trying   the   suit   had   recorded   a
     finding   that   the   Bombay   Court   had
     jurisdiction   to   entertain   and   decide   the
     suit.   Sub­section   (1)   of
Section   21
of   the
     Code   of   Civil   Procedure   provides   that   no
     objection   as   to   the   place   of   suing   shall   be
59
allowed by any appellate or revisional court
unless such objection was taken in the court
of   first   instance   at   the   earliest   possible
opportunity and in all cases where issues are
settled   at   or   before   such   settlement   and
unless   there   has   been   consequent   failure   of
justice.   The   above   provision   clearly   lays
down   that   such   objection   as   to   the   place   of
suing   shall   be   allowed   by   the   appellate   or
revisional   court   subject   to   the   following
conditions:
(i) That such objection was taken in the
     court   of   first   instance   at   the   earliest
     possible opportunity;
(ii)   in   all   cases   where   issues   are
     settled then at or before such settlement
     of issues;
(iii) there has been a consequent failure
     of justice.
8.  In   the   present   case   though   the   first   two
conditions   are   satisfied   but   the   third
condition   of   failure   of   justice   is   not
fulfilled.   As   already   mentioned   above   there
was   no   dispute   regarding   the   merits   of   the
claim. The defendant has admitted the deposit
of Rs 10,00,000 by the plaintiff, as well as
the issuing of the five cheques. We are thus
clearly of the view that there is no failure
of   justice   to   the   defendant   by   decreeing   of
the   suit   by   the   learned   Single   Judge   of   the
Bombay   High   Court,   on   the   contrary   it   would
be   totally   unjust   and   failure   of   justice   to
the plaintiff in case such objection relating
to   jurisdiction   is   to   be   maintained   as
allowed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High
Court in its appellate jurisdiction.”
60
54.
In  (
2005)   7   SCC   791,  Harshad   Chiman   Lal   Modi   vs.

DLF   Universal   Ltd.
,   this   court   had   again   considered
Section   21
and   other   provisions
of   Code   of   Civil

Procedure
.   In   paragraph   30,   following   has   been   laid

down: ­


     “30…………The   jurisdiction   of   a   court   may   be
     classified   into   several   categories.   The
     important   categories   are   (i)   territorial   or
     local   jurisdiction;   (ii)   pecuniary
     jurisdiction; and (iii) jurisdiction over the
     subject­matter.   So   far   as   territorial   and
     pecuniary   jurisdictions   are   concerned,
     objection   to   such   jurisdiction   has   to   be
     taken   at   the   earliest   possible   opportunity
     and   in   any   case   at   or   before   settlement   of
     issues. The law is well settled on the point
     that   if   such   objection   is   not   taken   at   the
     earliest, it cannot be allowed to be taken at
     a   subsequent   stage.   Jurisdiction   as   to
     subject­matter,   however,   is   totally   distinct
     and   stands   on   a   different   footing.   Where   a
     court   has   no   jurisdiction   over   the   subject­
     matter   of   the   suit   by   reason   of   any
     limitation   imposed   by   statute,   charter   or
     commission,   it   cannot   take   up   the   cause   or
     matter.  An order passed by a court having no
     jurisdiction is a nullity.”
55. Again   in  (
2007)   13   SCC   650,  Subhash   Mahadevasa

Habib v. Nemasa Ambasa Dharmadas
, this court held that

there   is   distinction   between   lack   of   inherent

jurisdiction and objection to territorial and pecuniary
61
jurisdiction. This court noticed the amendments made in
Section   21
in   the   year   1976.   Following   was   stated   in

paragraph 34, 37 and 41:­

     “34. It may be noted that
Section 21
provided
     that   no   objection   as   to   place   of   the   suing
     can   be   allowed   by   even   an   appellate   or
     revisional   court   unless   such   objection   was
     taken   in   the   court   of   first   instance   at   the
     earliest   possible   opportunity   and   unless
     there   has   been   a   consequent   failure   of
     justice.   In   1976,   the   existing   section   was
     numbered   as   sub­section   (1)   and   sub­section
     (2)   was   added   relating   to   pecuniary
     jurisdiction   by   providing   that   no   objection
     as to competence of a court with reference to
     the   pecuniary   limits   of   its   jurisdiction
     shall   be   allowed   by   any   appellate   or
     revisional   court   unless   such   objection   had
     been   taken   in   the   first   instance   at   the
     earliest   possible   opportunity   and   unless
     there   had   been   a   consequent   failure   of
     justice………
37. As can be seen, Amendment Act 104 of 1976
     introduced   sub­section   (2)   relating   to
     pecuniary   jurisdiction   and   put   it   on   a   par
     with   the   objection   to   territorial
     jurisdiction   and   the   competence   to   raise   an
     objection   in   that   regard   even   in   an   appeal
     from the very decree. This was obviously done
     in the light of the interpretation placed on
Section   21
of   the   Code   as   it   existed   and
Section 11
of the Suits Valuation Act by this
     Court   in
Kiran   Singh   v.   Chaman   Paswan5
followed   by
Hiralal   Patni   v.   Kali   Nath6
and
Bahrein   Petroleum   Co.   Ltd.   v.   P.J.   Pappu4
.
     Therefore,   there   is   no   justification   in
     understanding the expression “objection as to
     place of suing” occurring in
Section 21
­A as
62
being   confined   to   an   objection   only   in   the
     territorial   sense   and   not   in   the   pecuniary
     sense.   Both   could   be   understood,   especially
     in the context of the amendment to
Section 21
brought   about   by   the   Amendment   Act,   as
     objection to place of suing.
41.  In   the   light   of   the   above,   it   is   clear
     that   no   objection   to   the   pecuniary
     jurisdiction of the court which tried OS No.
     61 of 1971 could be raised successfully even
     in an appeal against that very decree unless
     it   had   been   raised   at   the   earliest
     opportunity   and   a   failure   of   justice   or
     prejudice   was   shown.   Obviously   therefore,   it
     could   not   be   collaterally   challenged.   That
     too   not   by   the   plaintiffs   therein,   but   by   a
     defendant whose alienation was unsuccessfully
     challenged by the plaintiffs in that suit.”
56. Now,   reverting   back   to   facts   of   this   case   it   is

apparent   from   the   judgment   dated   22.10.2016   of

Additional   District   Judge,   that   no   objection   to   the

competence   of   Additional   District   Judge   to   decide   the

case   was   taken   by   any   of   the   parties.   No   objection

having been taken to the pecuniary jurisdiction of the

Additional   District   Judge,
Section   21
of   the   Civil

Procedure   Code   comes   into   play.   Sub­section   (2)   of
Section   21
provides   that   no   objection   as   to   the

competence of the Court with reference to the pecuniary
63
limits   of   the   jurisdiction   shall   be   allowed   by   any

Appellate   or   Revisional   Court   unless   conditions

mentioned   therein   are   fulfilled.   No   objection   having

been raised by respondent tenant regarding competence of

the Court. Sub­section (2) precludes the revisionist  to

raise   any   objection   regarding   competence   of   the   court

and further revisional court ought not to have allowed

such   objection   regarding   competence   of   Court   of

Additional   District   Judge   to   decide   the   suit.   The

respondent tenant did not raise any objection regarding

competence   of   the   Court   and   took   a   chance   to   obtain

judgments in his favour on merits, he cannot be allowed

to turn­round and contend that the court of Additional

District   Judge   had   no   jurisdiction   to   try   the   Small

Cause Suit and the judgment is without jurisdiction and

nullity.
Section 21
has been enacted to thwart any such

objection   by   unsuccessful   party   who   did   not   raise   any

objection regarding competence of court and allowed the

matter to be heard on merits.  Further, in deciding the

small   cause   suit   by   Additional   District   Judge,   the
64
tenant has not proved that there has been a consequent

failure of justice.
57. The   High   Court   in   the   impugned   judgment   has   not

adverted to
Section 21
of the Code of Civil Procedure.

In   judgment   of  Shobhit   Nigam(Supra)  also,   affect   of
Section 21
was neither considered nor raised.
Section 21
contains a legislative policy which policy has an object

and   purpose.   The   object   is   also   to   avoid   retrial   of

cases on merit on basis of technical objections.
58.   There   is   another   judgment   of   Single   Judge   of   the

High   Court   referred   to   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the

respondent i.e. SCC Revision No.305 of 2016, Tejumal vs.

Mohd.   Sarfraz,   2017   (121)   ALR   392.   In   the   above   case,

learned   Single   Judge   had   allowed   the   revision   under
Section 25
against the judgment dated 12.08.2016 passed

by Additional District and Sessions Judge on the ground

that   the   judgment   of   Additional   District   Judge   was

without   jurisdiction.
In   paragraph   6   of   the   judgment,

High   Court   had   noticed   judgment   of   this   court   in
65
R.S.D.V.   Finance   Company   Private   Limited   vs.   Shree

Vallabh Glass Works Ltd.
where it was held that in view

of
Section   21(1)
of   the   Code   of   Civil   Procedure,

objection   as   to   the   place   of   suing   should   be   taken   by

the   party   concerned   in   the   court   of   first   instance   at

the   earliest   possible   opportunity   and   the   objection   to

this   effect   shall   not   be   allowed   by   the   Appellate   or

Revisional   Court   but   relying   on   the   judgment   of   this

Court in
Kiran Singh Vs. Chaman Paswan
, learned Single

Judge held that defect of jurisdiction whether pecuniary

or territorial or to the subject matter cannot be cured

and can be set up at any stage of the proceeding.
59. We   are   of   the   view   that   the   above   view   of   the

learned Single Judge is neither in consonance with the

judgment   of   this   Court   in  Kiran   Singh’s   case  nor   with
R.S.D.V.   Finance   Company   Private   Limited
(supra)  which

has been noted and referred to by learned Single Judge.
Section   21
is   statutory   recognition   of   the   legislative

policy which cannot be ignored or given a go­by by the

litigants who challenges an unfavourable decision.
66
60.  We   thus   of   the   view   that   the   view   of   the   learned

Single Judge in  Tejumal Vs. Mohd. Sarfraj  does not lay

down the correct law and cannot be approved.
61. In   the   foregoing   discussion,   we   are   of   the   view

that High Court committed error in allowing the S.C.C.

Revision   filed   by   the   respondent   tenant   without   taking

into   consideration
Section   21
of   the   Civil   Procedure

Code.
62. We thus hold that even when the court of Additional

District   Judge   was   not   competent   to   decide   the   Small

Causes Suit in question on the ground that the pecuniary

jurisdiction   is   vested   in   Court   of   Small   Causes   i.e.

Civil   Judge,   Senior   Division   w.e.f.   07.12.2015,   no

interference   was   called   in   the   judgment   of   Additional

District   Judge   in   the   exercise   of   Revisional

Jurisdiction by High Court in view of the provisions of
Section 21
of Civil Procedure Code.
67
63. In result, the appeals are allowed. The judgment of

the   High   Court   dated   07.12.2016   is   set   aside.   Parties

shall bear their own costs.
.....................J.
                                               ( A.K. SIKRI )


                                         .....................J.
                                              ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )

NEW DELHI
October 12,2018.