[Cites
74
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Mohit Mineral Pvt Ltd on 3 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 730
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                               REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.  10177 Of 2018
                                (arising out of SLP(C)No.25415 of 2017)

     UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS

     MOHIT MINERAL PVT. LTD.                                   ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                                    WITH

                                   TRANSFERRED CASE (C) NO.9 OF 2018

     MOHIT MINERAL PVT. LTD.                                    ... PETITIONER(S)

                                           VERSUS

     UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                                    ... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10179 Of 2018
                                (arising out of SLP(C)No.7708 of 2018)

     UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS

     MOHIT MINERAL PVT. LTD.                                     ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                            J U D G M E N T

     ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
The validity of the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation
Date: 2018.10.03
16:22:40 IST
Reason:
to   States)   Act,   2017   enacted   by   Parliament   as   well   as   the

     Goods   and   Services   Tax   Compensation   Cess   Rules,   2017,   the
2
Rules   framed   by  the  Central  Government   in   exercise   of   power

under
Section 11
of the   Goods and Service Tax (Compensation

to States) Act, 2017 are under challenge in these cases.
3.   Civil   Appeal   arising   out   of   SLP(C)No.25415   of   2017   has

been filed by the Union of India challenging       ad interim

order   dated   25.08.2017   passed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the

Delhi High Court in Writ Petition (C) No.7459 of 2017 (
Mohit

Mineral Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India and another
). In the writ

petition validity of the
Goods and Services Tax (Compensation

to States) Act, 2017
as well as Rules framed thereunder were

under   challenge.   The   Division   Bench   passed   a   partial   ad

interim order providing that additional levy on the stocks of

coal   on  which   writ   petitioner   had   already   paid   Clean   Energy

Cess in terms of
Finance Act, 2010
, he shall not be required

to   make   any   further   payment.   However,   on   stocks   of   coal   on

which   no   Clean   Energy   Cess   under   the
Finance   Act,   2010
was

paid   any   payment   in   terms   of   the   impugned   Act   would   be

subject to the result of the writ petition.
4.   This   Court   issued   notice   in   the   SLP   on   22.09.2017   and

stayed impugned order passed by the High Court.
5.   Civil   Appeal   arising   out   of   SLP(C)No.7708   of   2018   has

been filed by Union of India challenging interim order dated
3
08.09.2017   passed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the   Delhi   High

Court in Writ Petition (C) No.7965 of 2017 (
Hind Energy and

Coal   Benefication   (India)   Ltd.   vs.   Union   of   India   and

another
). The Division Bench of the High Court passed interim

order   dated   08.09.2017   almost   in   the   similar   manner   as   was

passed   on   25.08.2017.   This   Court   passed   an   order   on

16.01.2018, while hearing SLP(C)No.25415 of 2017 filed against

interim   order   dated   25.08.2017,   on   oral   request   of   Attorney

General,   which   was   also   joined   by   the   learned     counsel

appearing   for   the   respondents­writ   petitioners,   transferred

Writ Petition (C) No.7459 of 2017 to this Court to be heard

along with SLP(C)No.25415 of 2017.
Transferred Case(C) No.9 of

2018 (
Mohit Mineral Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India and another
)

has been registered on transfer of Writ Petition (C)No.7459 of

2017 to this Court.
6.   The decision in Transferred Case (C)No.9 of 2018 by which

Writ Petition (C)No.7459 of 2018 is to be heard by this Court

shall dispose of the transferred writ petition as well as both

the civil appeals. With the consent of the learned counsel for

the   parties,   we   have   proceeded   to   hear   the   writ   petition

finally.
4
Facts in the Writ Petition (C) No.7459 of 2017
7.   Mohit Mineral Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the

'writ   petitioner')   is   a   Company   incorporated   under   the
Companies Act
which is a trader of imported and Indian coal.

The writ petitioner imports coal from Indonesia, South Africa

and  also   purchases   coal  from   Indian  mines.
The   Finance   Act,

2010
with   effect   from   01.07.2010   levied   Clean   Energy   Cess

which was in the nature of a duty of excise on the production

of coal and was being collected at the time of removal of raw

coal, raw lignite and raw peat from the mine to the factory.

The   Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   Twenty­Second   Amendment)

Bill, 2014 was introduced in the Lok Sabha to seek amendment

in   the   Constitution,   inter   alia,   providing   for   subsuming   of

various indirect taxes and Central and States surcharges and

cesses so far as they relate to supply of goods and services

both   on   inter­State   and   intra­State.
The    Constitution   (One

Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act,   2016
was   passed   to   levy

goods   and   services   tax.   Section   18   of   the   Amendment   Act

enabled   the   Parliament   to   levy   a   cess   for   five   years   to

compensate the States for the loss of revenue on account of

GST. On 12.04.2017, Parliament enacted three Acts, namely, (1)
The   Central   Goods   and   Services   Tax   Act,   2017
;   (2)
The

Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
; and (3) The Goods
5
and
Services   Tax   (Compensation   to   States)   Act,   2017
(hereinafter   referred   to   as   “Compensation   to   States   Act,

2017”). On 04.05.2017, the axation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017

was enacted, whereunder, several cesses including Clean Energy

Cess   was   repealed.   The   writ   petitioner   submitted   a

representation   to   the   GST   Council   seeking   set   off   of   Clean

Energy Cess against GST Compensation Cess. Writ Petition (C)

No.7459 of 2017 was filed by Mohit Minerals Pvt. Ltd. in Delhi

High Court praying for following reliefs:
"It   is   therefore,   most   respectfully   prayed   that
     this Hon'ble High Court be pleased to:
A)     issue   a   Writ   of   certiorari/mandamus   or   any
     other appropriate Writ/order/direction against the
     Respondents by quashing impugned
Goods and Services
     Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017
by declaring
     that   same   lack   legislative   competency   and
     unconstitutional;
B)     issue   a   Writ   of   certiorari/mandamus   or   any
     other appropriate Writ/order/direction against the
     Respondents   by   quashing   impugned   the   Goods   and
     Services   Tax   Compensation   Rules,   2017   under   the
     impugned   legislation   are   illegal   and
     unconstitutional;
C)     issue   a   Writ   of   certiorari/mandamus   or   any
     other appropriate Writ/order/direction against the
     Respondents   by   quashing   impugned   Notification
     No.1/2017 & 2/2017­Compensation Cess (Rate), dated
     28.06.2017 issued by the Respondent No.1 under the
     impugned   legislation,   are   illegal   and
     unconstitutional;
D)     issue   a   Writ   of   certiorari/mandamus   or   any
     other appropriate Writ/order/direction against the
     Respondent   No.2   by   declaring   that   the   Respondent
6
No.2   has   no   power   under
Article   279A
of
     Constitution   of   India   to   make   any   recommendation,
     whatsoever,   for   levy   and   collection   of   cess   as
     envisaged and levied under the impugned Goods and
     Services   Tax   (Compensation   to   States)Act,   2017   or
     framing of Rules and issuance of Notification under
     the said impugned legislation;
E)     issue   such   other   writ/order/direction   to   the
     Respondent No.2 to place before this Hon'ble Court
     the   records   of   the   recommendation   given   and   all
     decision taken in respect of levy and collection of
     cess   as   envisaged   and   levied   under   the   impugned
Goods   and   Services   Tax   (Compensation   to   States)
     Act,   2017
,   framing   of   Rules   and   issuance   of
     Notification under the said impugned legislation;
     F)     issue   such   other   writ/order/direction   and
     further orders as the Hon'ble Court may deem just
     and   proper   in   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the
     case.”
8.   The   Division   Bench   of   the   Delhi   High   Court   passed   ad

interim   order   on   25.08.2017.   In   the   interim   order   dated

25.08.2017, the Division Bench observed that there is a prima

facie case made out by the writ petitioner regarding lack of

legislative competence of Parliament to enact Compensation to

States Act, 2017. In paragraphs 8, 9, 13 and 14 of the interim

order following was observed:
“8.   The   Court   sees   prima   facie   merit   in   the
     contention of the Petitioner, based on the history
     of the abolition of the Clean Energy Cess and the
     introduction of the GST regime, that the power of
     Parliament   to   enact   the   impugned   Act   cannot   be
     traced   to   Section   18   of   the   COI   101st   Amendment
     Act. There is therefore a prima facie case made out
     as   regards   the   legislative   competence   of   the
     Parliament to enact the impugned Act.
7
9. Another aspect of the matter is that
Section 8
of the impugned Act contemplates levy of "a cess on
     such intra­State supplies of goods or services or
     both",   the   same   that   is   provided   in
Section   9
of
     the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ('
CGST
     Act
')   and   such   "inter­State   supply   of   goods   and
     services or both" as provided for in
Section 5
of
     the   Integrated   Goods   and   Services   Tax   Act,   2017
     ('
IGST Act
'). Therefore, it is clear that cess is
     being levied on the same taxable event that is the
     subject matter of the levy under the CGST and IGST
     Acts, viz., supply of goods and services.
...         ...         ...        …
13. The Court, at this stage, is of the view that,
     the Petitioner has made out a prima facie case for
     partial ad interim relief subject to conditions. As
     far as the additional levy on the stocks of coal on
     which it has already paid the Clean Energy Cess in
     terms of FA Act, 2010, the Petitioner should not be
     required to make any further payment. However, on
     stocks of coal on which no Clean Energy Cess under
     the FA, 2010 was paid, any payment made in terms of
     the impugned Act would be subject to the result of
     this petition. It is ordered accordingly.
14.   It   is   made   clear   that,   in   the   event   of   the
     Petitioner succeeding in the present petition, the
     Petitioner would be entitled to a refund of amounts
     of Clean Energy Cess paid under the Act and on such
     terms   as   the   Court   may   determine   in   the   final
     order.”
9.   On 08.09.2017, another interim order was passed in Writ

Petition (C) No. 7965 of 2017.
10. We have heard Shri J.K. Mittal, learned counsel appearing

for   the   writ   petitioner   and   Shri   K.K.   Venugopal   learned

Attorney General appearing for the Union of India.
8
11. Shri J.K. Mittal learned counsel for the writ petitioner

submits   that     the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment)   Act,  2016
was   enacted   by  the  Parliament   with  the

intent   to   consolidate   number   of   indirect   taxes   which   were

levied by the Union and States with the intention to reduce

the   Goods   and   Services   Tax   (GST)by   giving   concurring   taxing

power to Union and States for levying GST on every transaction

of   supply   of   goods   or   services   both.   There   was   a   clear

objective of the aforesaid constitutional amendment that with

the   introduction   of   Goods   and   Services   Tax,   not   only   the

indirect taxes but the cesses and surcharges levied on goods

and services shall also be subsumed in it.
12.
By Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017
various enactments

levying various types of cesses were repealed including Clean

Energy   Cess/Clean   Environment   Cess   which   was   levied   and

collected on coal.
13. The Compensation to States Act, 2017 is repugnant to and

transgress   the   mandate   of   the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and

First Amendment) Act, 2016
. It was the Parliament's conscious

decision   to   abolish   with   effect   from   01.07.2017   all   cesses

including   cess   levied   on   coal   as   per   mandate   of   the
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
. The

impugned   legislation   is   colourable   legislation   which   lacks
9
legislative competence. No power could be traced in Section 18

to   the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act,

2016
to amend Compensation to States Act, 2017.
Section 18
of

the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016

does   not   empower   the   Parliament   to   levy   cess   and   tax   as   it

provides Parliament to make any law to provide compensation to

the   States   for   loss   of   revenue   arising   on   account   of

implementation of GST for a period of 5 years. The impugned

legislation   is   a   colourable   legislation   which   lacks

legislative competence so far as collection of levy on cess is

concerned.
14. The impugned legislation defeat the very objective of the
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
. On

the   very   same   transaction   there   cannot   be   two   levies,   one

under Central GST Act and another under impugned legislation

as it would amount to double taxation as levied on the same

taxable event and same subject. Thus, there is an overlapping

in law which is not permissible.
15. The   writ   petitioner   suffered   cess   of   Rs.400   per   ton   on

the coal and under the impugned legislation the Union is again

levying and collecting cess at the rate of Rs.400 per ton on

the stock lying with the petitioner as on 30.06.2017 just on

eve of the day when all legislation related to GST including
10
impugned legislation was introduced, whereas on the same stock

of   coal,   cess   was   already   levied   and   collected   under   the

provisions   of
Chapter   VII   of   Finance   Act,   2010
.   Thus,   it

amounts to double collection of tax at the same rate on the

same stock. Even if the impugned legislation is found to be

within legislative competency, the petitioner may be permitted

to set off the cess of Rs.7.68 crores which was already paid

on   the   stock   lying   with   the   petitioner   on   30.06.2017.   Levy

under impugned legislation is tax and not a cess, hence, not

permissible in law.
16. Shri   K.K.   Venugopal,   learned   Attorney   General   submits

that   cess   is   nothing   but   a   special   kind   of   tax.   If   the

legislature is competent to levy the main tax, i.e. GST under
Article 246A
of the Constitution, then legislative competence

of levying the cess flows from the very same power to levy the

tax itself. The phrase used in
Article 246A
“with respect to”

has wide implication and will allow levy of cess also. Power

to levy a cess, in any case, can be traced back to
Article 270
of the Constitution. However, Entry 97 of List I of Seventh

Schedule to the Constitution grants a residuary power to levy

a tax to the Union. The Clean Energy Cess which was imposed by

the
Finance Act, 2010
and GST Compensation Cess are levied on

entirely   different   transactions   and   both   are   for   entirely
11
different purpose. The Clean Energy Cess was in the nature of

a   duty   of   excise   on   the   production   of   coal   and   was   being

collected at the time of removal of raw coal, raw lignite and

raw peat from the mine to the factory whereas GST Compensation

Cess   is   imposed   on   inter­State   and   intra­State   supply   of

specified goods and services. The Clean Energy Cess was levied

and   collected   for   the   purposes   of   financing   and   promoting

clean   energy   initiatives,   funding   research   in   the   area   of

clean energy, for any other purpose relating thereto whereas

GST Compensation Cess is collected to provide for compensation

to the States for the loss of revenue arising on account of

implementation of the goods and services tax.
17. The High Court committed an error in prima facie holding

that   credit   of   Clean   Energy   Cess   should   be   allowed   to   be

utilised   for   paying   GST   Compensation   Cess.   The   provision   of

credit and flow of credit is a purely policy decision of the

Executive. The Parliament does not lack legislative competence

to enact Compensation to States Act, 2017 nor the legislation

can be said to be colourable legislation. The Compensation to

States Act, 2017 in no manner transgressed
Constitution (One

Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
.
18. Learned counsel for both the parties have placed reliance

on   various   judgments   of   this   Court   in   support   of   their
12
respective   submissions   which   shall   be   referred   to   while

considering the submissions in detail.
19. From   the   submissions   of   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties   and   pleadings   following   issues   arise   for

consideration:
(1) Whether   the   Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   is

     beyond the legislative competence of Parliament?
(2) Whether     Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   violates
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
and   is   against   the   objective   of
Constitution   (One

     Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
?
(3) Whether  the     Compensation  to  States  Act,  2017  is  a

     colourable legislation?
(4) Whether levy of Compensation to States Cess and GST

     on the same taxing event is permissible in law?
(5) Whether on the basis of Clean Energy Cess paid by the

     petitioner   till   30th  June,   2017,   the   petitioner   is

     entitled   for   set   off   in   payment   of     Compensation   to

     States Cess?
20. We have considered the submissions of learned counsel for

the parties and have perused the records.
13
21. First,   we   need   to   notice   relevant   constitutional

provisions and the Parliamentary enactments relevant for the

issues raised in these cases.
22. Part XII of the Constitution deals with Finance.
Article

265
provides that no tax shall be levied or collected except

by   authority   of   law.
Article   366
contains   definitions.
Article   366(26A)
defines   “services”   as   “services   means

anything   other   than   goods”.     Whereas
Article   366   (29A)
contains   an   inclusive   definition   of   “tax   on   the   sale   or

purchase of goods”.   A Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha

namely,   the   Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   Twenty­Second

Amendment)   Bill,   2014   on   19.12.2014   proposing   constitutional

amendments   to   introduce   the   goods   and   services   tax   for

conferring   concurrent   taxing   powers  on   the   Union   as  well   as

the States including Union territory with Legislature to make

laws for levying goods and services tax on every transaction

of supply of goods or services or both.  Statement of Objects

and Reasons of the Bill are as follows:­


                   “STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
               The Constitution is proposed to be amended
     to   introduce   the   goods   and   services   tax   for
     conferring concurrent taxing powers on the Union as
     well as the States including Union territory with
     Legislature   to   make   laws   for   levying   goods   and
     services   tax   on   every   transaction   of   supply   of
     goods or services or both. The goods and services
14
tax shall replace a number of indirect taxes being
levied by the Union and the State Governments and
is intended to remove cascading effect of taxes and
provide for a common national market for goods and
services. The proposed Central and State goods and
services   tax   will   be   levied   on   all   transactions
involving   supply   of   goods   and   services,   except
those   which   are   kept   out   of   the   purview   of   the
goods and services tax.
2. The proposed Bill, which seeks further to amend
the Constitution, inter alia, provides for—
(a) subsuming of various Central indirect taxes and
     levies such as Central Excise Duty, Additional
     Excise   Duties,   Excise   Duty   levied   under   the
Medicinal   and   Toilet   Preparations   (Excise
     Duties)   Act,   1955
,   Service   Tax,   Additional
     Customs Duty commonly known as Countervailing
     Duty, Special Additional Duty of Customs, and
     Central   Surcharges   and   Cesses   so   far   as   they
     relate to the supply of goods and services;
(b) subsuming of State Value Added Tax/Sales Tax,
    Entertainment   Tax   (other   than   the   tax   levied
    by   the   local   bodies),   Central   Sales   Tax
    (levied   by   the   Centre   and   collected   by   the
    States),   Octroi   and   Entry   tax,   Purchase   Tax,
    Luxury   tax,   Taxes   on   lottery,   betting   and
    gambling;   and   State   cesses   and   surcharges   in
    so far as they relate to supply of goods and
    services;
(c) dispensing with the concept of ‘declared goods
    of special importance’ under the Constitution;
(d)   levy   of   Integrated   Goods   and   Services   Tax   on
      inter­State   transactions   of   goods   and
      services;
(e) levy of an additional tax on supply of goods,
    not exceeding one per cent. in the  course of
    inter­State trade or commerce to be collected
    by the Government of India for a period of two
    years,   and   assigned   to   the   States   from   where
    the supply originates;
(f) conferring concurrent power upon Parliament and
15
the State Legislatures to make laws governing
          goods and services tax;
(g)   coverage   of   all   goods   and   services,   except
           alcoholic   liquor   for   human   consumption,   for
           the levy of goods and services tax. In case of
           petroleum and petroleum products, it has been
           provided that these goods shall not be subject
           to the levy of Goods and Services Tax till a
           date   notified   on   the   recommendation   of   the
           Goods and Services Tax Council.
(h) compensation to the States for loss of revenue
         arising   on   account   of   implementation   of   the
         Goods and Services Tax for a period which may
         extend to five years;
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx”
23.
The   Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act,

2016
dated 08.09.2016 was passed to amend the Constitution of

India.
By Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act,

2016
,   new
Articles   246A
,   269A
and
279A
were   inserted.

Amendments were also made in
Articles 248
, 249
, 250
, 268
, 269
,

270
,   271
,   286
,   366
and
368.
Article   268A
was   omitted.

Amendments   were   also   made   in   Seventh   Schedule   of   the

Constitution in List I and List II.
Article 246A
and
269A
as

inserted   by
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)

Act, 2016
is as follows:­


     "246A.  Special provision with respect to goods and
     services   tax.­­  (1)   Notwithstanding   anything
     contained in
articles 246
and
254
, Parliament, and,
     subject   to   clause   (2),   the   Legislature   of   every
     State,   have   power   to   make   laws   with   respect   to
     goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by
     such State.
16
(2)   Parliament   has   exclusive   power   to   make   laws
with   respect   to   goods   and   services   tax   where   the
supply   of   goods,   or   of   services,   or   both   takes
place   in   the   course   of   inter­State   trade   or
commerce
  Explanation.—The   provisions   of   this   article,
shall,   in   respect   of   goods   and   services   tax
referred   to   in   clause   (5)   of
article   279A
,   take
effect from the date recommended by the Goods and
Services Tax Council.”.
269A. Levy and Collection of goods and services tax
in course of inter­State trade or commerce.­­  (1)
Goods and services tax on supplies in the course of
inter­State trade or commerce shall be levied and
collected by the Government of India and such tax
shall   be   apportioned   between   the   Union   and   the
States   in   the   manner   as   may   be   provided   by
Parliament   by   law   on   the   recommendations   of   the
Goods and Services Tax Council.
Explanation.—For   the   purposes   of   this   clause,
supply   of   goods,   or   of   services,   or   both   in   the
course of import into the territory of India shall
be deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or
both   in   the   course   of   inter­State   trade   or
commerce.
(2) The amount apportioned to a State under clause
(1) shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of
India.
(3) Where an amount collected as tax levied under
clause   (1)   has   been   used   for   payment   of   the   tax
levied by a State under
article 246A
, such amount
shall   not   form   part   of   the   Consolidated   Fund   of
India.
(4)   Where   an   amount   collected   as   tax   levied   by   a
State under
article 246A
has been used for payment
of   the   tax   levied   under   clause   (1),   such   amount
shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of the
State.
(5)   Parliament   may,   by   law,   formulate   the
principles for determining the place of supply, and
when   a   supply   of   goods,   or   of   services,   or   both
17
takes place in the course of inter­State trade or
     commerce.”.
24.
Article 270
of the constitution as amended by the above

Amendment Act is as follows:­


     “270.Taxes   levied   and   distributed   between   the
     Union   and   the   States.­  (1)   All   taxes   and   duties
     referred to in  the Union List, except the duties
     and   taxes   referred   to   in
Articles   268
,   269
and
269A
, respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties
     referred to in
Article 271
and any cess levied for
     specific purposes under any law made by Parliament
     shall be levied and collected by the Government of
     India   and   shall   be   distributed   between   the   Union
     and   the   States   in   the   manner   provided   in   clause
     (2).
...        ... ... ...”
25.
Section   18
and
Section   19
of   the   Constitution   (One

Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016 is also relevant, which

are to the following effect:­


     “18.  Compensation to States for loss of revenue on
     account   of   introduction   of   goods   and   services
     tax.­­  Parliament   shall,   by   law,   on   the
     recommendation   of   the   Goods   and   Services   Tax
     Council, provide for compensation to the States for
     loss   of   revenue   arising   on   account   of
     implementation of the goods and services tax for a
     period of five years.
19.   Transitional   provisions.­­    Notwithstanding
     anything   in   this   Act,   any   provision   of   any   law
     relating to tax on goods or services or on both in
     force   in   any   State   immediately   before   the
     commencement   of   this   Act,   which   is   inconsistent
     with the provisions of the Constitution as amended
     by   this   Act   shall   continue   to   be   in   force   until
18
amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or
     other   competent   authority   or   until   expiration   of
     one   year   from   such   commencement,   whichever   is
     earlier.
26. At this stage, it is also relevant to notice that in the

Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   Twenty­Second   Amendment)   Bill,

2014,   Clause   18   contain   a   provision   for   arrangement   for

assignment of additional tax on supply of goods to States for

two years or such other period recommended by Council, which

was to the following effect:­


           “18.   Arrangement   for   assignment   of  additional
     tax on supply of goods to States for two years or
     such   other   period   recommended   by   Council  (1)   An
     additional   tax   on   supply   of   goods,   not   exceeding
     one per cent. in the course of inter­State trade or
     commerce shall, notwithstanding anything contained
     in   clause   (1)   of
article   269A
,   be   levied   and
     collected by the Government of India for a period
     of two years or such other period as the Goods and
     Services   Tax   Council   may   recommend,   and   such   tax
     shall   be   assigned   to   the   States   in   the   manner
     provided in clause (2).
(2) The net proceeds of additional tax on supply of
     goods   in   any   financial   year,   except   the   proceeds
     attributable   to   the   Union   territories,   shall   not
     form part of the Consolidated Fund of India and be
     deemed   to   have   been   assigned   to   the   States   from
     where the supply originates.
(3) The Government of India may, where it considers
     necessary in the public interest, exempt such goods
     from the levy of tax under clause (1).
(4)   Parliament   may,   by   law,   formulate   the
     principles for determining the place of origin from
     where supply of goods take place in the course of
     inter­State trade or commerce.”
19
27. Clause   19   contain   compensation   to   States   for   loss   of

revenue on account of introduction of goods and services tax.

Clause 19 of the Bill is as follows:­         


     “19.  Compensation to States for loss of revenue on
     account   of   introduction   of   goods   and   services
     tax.­­  Parliament   may,   by   law,   on   the
     recommendation   of   the   Goods   and   Services   Tax
     Council, provide for compensation to the States for
     loss   of   revenue   arising   on   account   of
     implementation   of   the   goods   and   services   tax   for
     such period which may extend to five years.”
28. It   is,   however,   to   be   noticed   that   Constitution   (One

Hundred and Twenty­Second Amendment) Bill, 2014 was passed but

Clause 18 of the Bill was not incorporated and Clause 19 found

place as
Section 18
of the Constitution (One Hundred and First

Amendment)   Act,   2016.    After   the   aforesaid   Constitution

Amendment,  Parliament   enacted
Central   Goods   and   Services

Tax Act, 2017
(Act No.12 of 2017 dated 12.04.2017) to make  a

provision   for   levy   and   collection   of   tax   on   intra   State

supply of goods or services or both by the Central Government

and   for   matters   connected   therewith   or   incidental

thereto.   On   the   same   day,   another   enactment  namely   '
The

Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
'  (Act   No.   13   of

2017 dated 12.04.2017) was enacted  to   make   a   provision   for

levy and collection of tax on inter­State supply of goods or

services  or both  by the  Central   Government   and   for   matters
20
connected   therewith       or   incidental   thereto.   Another

enactment namely '
The  Union Territory Goods and Services Tax

Act, 2017
' (Act No. 14 of 2017) was passed on the same day to

make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra­State

supply   of   goods   or   services   or   both   by   the   Union

territories   and   for   matters   connected   therewith   or

incidental thereto. The Fourth Parliamentary enactment,  which

is subject matter of challenge in the present case  was   also

enacted   on   the   same   day,   i.e.   12.04.2017,   namely   '
The

Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to  States) Act, 2017
'

(Act   NO.   15   of   2017)   to   provide  for   compensation   to   the

States   for   the   loss   of   revenue  arising   on   account   of

implementation  of  the  goods and  services   tax   in   pursuance

of   the   provisions   of   the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and

First   Amendment)   Act,  2016
.   As   the   Preamble   indicate

(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 was enacted in pursuance of

 
the   provisions   of    the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

 
Amendment) Act,  
                 2016
. Section 8 of the Compensation to States

Act, 2017 provides for levy and collection of Cess, which is

as follows:­
8. Levy   and   collection   of   cess.­­(1)  There
     shall be levied a cess on such intra­State supplies
     of goods or services or both, as  provided   for   in
section 9
of the Central  Goods and Services Tax
     Act,   and   such   inter­State   supplies   of   goods   or
21
services or both  a s   p r o v i d e d   f o r   i n   s e c t i o n
5   o f   t h e
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act
,
and  c o l l e c t e d   i n   s u c h   m a n n e r   a s   m a y   b e
prescribed, on the recommendations of the Co unci l,
fo r   the   pu rpos es   of   pr ovid ing   co mpen sati on
to   the   Sta tes   for   loss   of   revenue   arising   on
account   of   implementation  of   the   goods   and
services   tax   with   effect  from   the   date   from
which   the   provisions   of  the
Central   Goods   and
Services   Tax   Act
is  brought   into   force,   for   a
period of five  years or for such period as may be
prescribed on the recommendations of the Council:
Prov ided   that   no   such   ce ss   sha ll   be
leviable   on  supplies   made  by   a  taxable  person  who
has   decided   to   opt   for   composition   levy  under
section   10
of   the   Central   Goods   and   Services   Tax
Act.
(2)   The   cess   shall   be   levied   on   such   supplies  of
goods   and   services   as   are   specified   in  column
(2)   of   the   Schedule,   on   the   basis   of  value,
quantity   or   on   such   basis   at   such   rate  not
exceeding   the   rate   set   forth   in   the
corresponding entry in column (4) of  ,the Schedule,
as   the   Central   Government   may,   on  th e
re comm enda tion s   of   the   Counc il,   by
notification   in   the   Official   Gazette,
specify:
Provided  that               where  the   cess   is
chargeable   on   any   supply   of   goods   or   services  or
both   with   reference   to   their   value,   for  e a c h
s u c h   s u p p l y   t h e   v a l u e   s h a l l   b e   determined
under
section   15
of   the   Central  Goods   and
Services   Tax   Act   for   all   intra­State   and
inter­State supplies of goods or services or both:
Provided   further   that   the   cess   on   goods
imported   into   India   shall   be   levied   and
collected   in   accordance   with   the   provisions  of
section 3
of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975  (51   of
1975),   at   the   point   when   duties   of  customs are
levied on the said goods under
section   12
of   the
Customs   Act,   1962   (52   of  1 9 62 ) ,   on   a   v a lu e
d e te r m in e d   un d er   t he
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
.
22
29.
Section 12(1)
empowers the Central Government to  make

rules   for   carrying   out   the   provisions   of   the   Act   on  the

recommendation of the Council. The Council is  defined in
Section   2(e)
of   the   Act   as   "Council   means   the  Goods   and

Services   Tax   Council   constituted   under   the  provision   of
Article   279A
of   the   Constitution".
The  Schedule   of   the

Act
read with
Section 8
contains  description of supply of

goods   or   services   in   column   2;   Tariff   item,   heading,

sub­heading, Chapter or supply of  goods or services, as the

case   may   be,   in   column   3   and  the  maximum   rate   at   which

 
goods   and   services
                        
                         tax
                             
                                       
                                       
                                      c ompensation
                                                      cess
                                                             may   be

collected 
           in   column   4.   The  Central Government, in exercise

of power under
Section 12
, has framed the rules namely "The

Central Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017".
30.   Parliament enacted the
Taxation Laws (Amendment)  Act,
2017
dated  04.05.2017  to  amend  the
Customs  Act,   1962
, the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
, the
Central Excise  Act, 1944
, the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
, the
Finance  Act,   2001
and   the
Finance Act, 2005
and to repeal  certain enactments.
31.
By Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017
, the
Finance  Act,

2010
, Chapter VII has been repealed.
The Finance   Act, 2010
,

Chapter VII provided for levy of Clean Energy Cess, which stood

repealed.
32.  We now proceed to consider the issues as noted above.
23
Whether   the   Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   is   beyond   the
legislative competence of Parliament? (Issue No.1)
33.     The   petitioners   have   challenged   the   legislative

competence of Parliament to enact Compensation to states Act,

2017.   The petitioners submits that impugned legislation has

transgressed   the   limits   of   its   power   granted   under   the

Constitution.     It   is   contended   that   although   the   impugned

legislation is described as for purpose of giving compensation

to States by Centres to States for loss of revenue but in fact

it impose tax (termed as cess), hence in pith and substance

the legislation does not belong to the subject falling within

the limits of its power but is outside it.
34.     Part   XI   of   the   Constitution   deals   with   the   relation

between   the   Union   and   the   States,   Chapter   I   of   which   deals

with   “Legislative   Relations”.
Article   245
deals   with

“Distribution   of   Legislative   Powers”.     The   Parliament   has

exclusive   power   to   make   laws   with   respect   to   any   of   the

matters   enumerated   in   List   I   in   Seventh   Schedule   of   the

Constitution.     The   Parliament,   and   subject   to   Clause(1)   of
Article   246
,   the   Legislature   of   a   State   also   have   power   to

make   laws   with   respect   to   any   of   the   matters   enumerated   in

List   III   of   the   Seventh   Schedule.
Article   248
deals   with
24
residuary power of Legislation in following manner:­
Article 248
– Residuary powers of legislation­­(1)
     Subject   to
article   246A
,   Parliament   has   exclusive
     power to make any law with respect to a matter not
     enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.

     (2)   Such   power   shall   include   the   power   of   making
     any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of
     those Lists.
35.
Article   246A
as   noticed   above   provides   that

“notwithstanding anything contained in
articles 246
and
254
,

Parliament,   and,   subject   to   clause(2),   the   Legislature   of

every State, have power to make laws with respect to goods and

services tax imposed by the Union or by such State”. In the

present   case,   we   are   concerned   with   a   cess   imposed   by

Compensation to States Act, 2017.
The Act
by
Section 8
levies

and authorizes collection of cess.   We need to first examine

nature   of   cess.     Cess   has   been   defined   in   Black’s   Law

Dictionary, Tenth Edition as “An assessment or tax.”
36.     P.   Ramanatha   Aiyar,   Advanced   Law   Lexicon,   3 rd  Edition

defines cess as follows:­


     “Cess”   is   “An   assessment   tax;   levy;   specifically:
(a) A rate or local tax…….(b) In Scotland, the land
     tax. (c) in India, a tax for a special object; as,
     a road cess”. (Webster) 


     The word “cess” is used in Ireland and is still in
     use in India although the word rate has replaced it
25
in England.   It means a tax and is generally used
     when   the   levy   is   for   some   special   administrative
     expense   which   the   name   (health   cess,   education
     cess, road cess, etc.) indicates.   When levied as
     an increment to an existing tax, the name matters
     not for the validity of the cess must be judged of
     in the same way as the validity of the tax to which
     is   an   increment.
Guruswamy   and   Co.   v.   State   of
     Mysore
, AIR 1967 SC 1512, per dissenting judge and
India Cement Ltd. v. State of T.N.
, AIR 1990 SC 85.
The word ‘cess’ means a tax and is generally used
     when   the   levy   is   for   some   special   administrative
     expense   which   the   name   (health   cess,   education
     cess, road cess, etc.) indicates.
Shinde Brothers
     v.   Hy.   Commissioner,   Raichur
,   AIR   1967   SC   1512,
     1525.”
37.  This Court had considered the expression “cess” in
Shinde

Brothers Etc. Vs. Deputy Commissioner, Raichur & Others
Etc.,

AIR 1967 SC 1512,  Justice M. Hidyatullah, as he then was in

his   dissenting   opinion   has   defined   the   cess   (“no   contrary

opinion   was   expressed   by   majority   in   that   regard”)   in

paragraph 39, which is to the following effect:­


        “39. Now the health cess is first assailed on the
     ground that there is no entry “health cess” as such
     in the legislative entries. The word “cess” is used
     in   Ireland   and   is   still   in   use   in   India   although
     the word rate has replaced it in England. It means
     a  tax  and  is   generally   used  when  the   levy  is   for
     some special administrative expense which the name
     (health cess, education cess, road cess etc.) indi­
     cates. When levied as an increment to an existing
     tax, the name matters not for the validity of the
     cess must be judged of in the same way as the va­
     lidity of the tax to which it is an increment. By
     Schedule A(1) read with
Section 3
of the Act, it is
     collected as an additional levy with a tax, which,
26
as   described   in   Schedule   A,   is   undoubtedly   one
     within the powers of the State Legislature and has
     been so even prior to the Constitution……………………”
38.
In the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
India

Cement Ltd. & Others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Others
, (1990)

1 SCC 12, the above definition given by Hidayatuallah, J. was

quoted with approval in Para 19, which is quoted as below:­=


     “19.  Here, we are concerned with cess on royalty.
One can have an idea as to what cess is, from the
     observations   of   Hidayatullah,   J.,   as   the   learned
     Chief Justice then was, in
Guruswamy & Co. v. State
     of Mysore9
where at page 571, the learned Judge ob­
     served :
“The word ‘cess’ is used in Ireland and is
       still in use in India although the word rate
       has   replaced   it   in   England.   It   means   a   tax
       and   is   generally   used   when   the   levy   is   for
       some special administrative expense which the
       name (health cess, education cess, road cess
       etc.) indicates. When levied as an increment
       to an existing tax, the name matters not for
       the validity of the cess must be judged of in
       the   same   way   as   the   validity   of   the   tax   to
       which it is an increment.”
39.     The   meaning   of   “cess”   as   noticed   above   was   again

reiterated   by   a   Two   Judge   Bench   judgment   of   this   Court   in
Vijayalashmi Rice Mill & Others Vs. Commercial Tax Officers,

Palakol & Others
, (2006) 6 SCC 763, in paragraph 13, following

has been laid down:­


       “13.  Hence ordinarily a cess is also a tax, but
     is a special kind of tax. Generally tax raises rev­
     enue which can be used generally for any purpose by
27
the State. For instance, the income tax or excise
     tax or sales tax are taxes which generate revenue
     which   can   be   utilised   by   the   Union   or   the   State
     Governments   for   any   purpose   e.g.   for   payment   of
     salary to the members of the armed forces or civil
     servants,   police,   etc.   or   for   development   pro­
     grammes, etc. However, cess is a tax which gener­
     ates revenue which is utilised for a specific pur­
     pose.   For   instance,   health   cess   raises   revenue
     which is utilised for health purposes e.g. building
     hospitals, giving medicines to the poor, etc. Simi­
     larly, education cess raises revenue which is used
     for   building   schools   or   other   educational   pur­
     poses.”
40.   The expression “cess” as held above means a tax levied

for some special purpose, which may be levied as an increment

to an existing tax.  The Scheme of Compensation to States Act,

2017 as noticed above indicate that the cess is with respect

to goods and services tax.  There are more than one reason to

uphold the legislative competence of Parliament to enact the

Compensation to States Act, 2017.  Constitution Bench of this

Court in
Union of India Vs. Harbhajan Singh Dhillon
, (1971) 2

SCC 779  held that only question to be asked while examining

the   legislative   competence   of   Parliament   with   regard   to   a

particular enactment is: Is the matter sought to be legislated

or included in List II or in List III or is the tax sought to

be levied mentioned in List II or in List III”.  In Para 21,

the Constitution Bench laid down following:­
28
“21. It seems to us that the function of
Article
     246(1)
, read with Entries 1­96, List I, is to give
     positive   power   to   Parliament   to   legislate   in   re­
     spect of these entries. Object is not to debar Par­
     liament from legislating on a matter, even if other
     provisions of the Constitution enable it to do so.
     Accordingly   we   do   not   interpret   the   words   “any
     other   matter”   occurring   in   Entry   97,   List   I,   to
     mean a topic mentioned by way of exclusion. These
     words really refer to the matters contained in each
     of the Entries 1 to 96. The words “any other mat­
     ter” had to be used because Entry 97, List I fol­
     lows   Entries   1­96,   List   I.   It   is   true   that   the
     field of legislation is demarcated by Entries 1­96,
     List I, but demarcation does not mean that if Entry
     97,   List   I   confers   additional   powers,   we   should
     refuse to give effect to it. At any rate, whatever
     doubt there may be on the interpretation of Entry
     97, List I is removed by the wide terms of Article
248. It is framed in the widest possible terms. On
     its terms the only question to be asked is: Is the
     matter sought to be legislated or included in List
     II or in List III or is the tax sought to be levied
     mentioned   in   List   II   or   in   List   III:   No   question
     has to be asked about List I. If the answer is in
     the   negative   then   it   follows   that   Parliament   has
     power to make laws with respect to that matter or
     tax.”
41.   When we pose the above question in context of impugned

legislation, i.e. Compensation to States Act, 2017, we do not

find   any   entry   in   List   II   or   List   III   of   Seventh   Schedule,

which may refer to levying of cess in question.
Article 248
read   with
Articles   246
and
246A
clearly   indicate   that

residuary power of legislation is with the Parliament.  In the

present case, we may notice that no contention has been raised

before   us   that   the   subject   matter   of   legislation   was   within
29
the competence of State Legislature, and that the Parliament

had no competence to legislate.   Applying the  H.S. Dhillon’s

test   (supra),   we   do   not   find   any   lack   of   legislative

competence in the Parliament.
42.     Learned   counsel   for   the   petitioner   relied   on   two

decisions of this Court namely
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. &

Others Vs. State of Bihar & Others
, (
1983) 4 SCC 45 and M.P.V.

Sundararamier & Co. Vs. State of A.P. & Others
, AIR 1958 SC

468 to contend that taxation is a distinct matter for purposes

of   legislative   competence   and   the   power   to   tax   cannot   be

deduced   from   a   general   legislative   entry   as   an   ancillary

power.     He   submits   that   State   Compensation   Cess   being   not

covered   by   any   taxing   entry,   the   legislation   is   beyond   the

competence   of   Parliament.
We   may   first   notice   the

proposition, which has been
laid down by
this court in
Hoechst

Pharmaceuticals  Ltd.
(supra).   This   Court
in
the   above  case
had   occasion   to   examine
Bihar   Finance   Act,   1981
,   by   which

surcharge   was   levied   on   certain   dealers   selling   essential

commodities   such   as   drugs.     Challenge   to   the   legislative

competence   of   the   State   was   raised.     In   the   above   context,

this Court had observed that taxation is considered to be a

distinct   matter   for   purposes   of   legislative   competence.     In

paragraphs 74, 75 and 76, following was laid down:­
30
“74. It is equally well settled that the various
entries in the three Lists are not ‘powers’ of leg­
islation, but ‘fields’ of legislation. The power to
legislate is given by
Article 246
and other Arti­
cles of the Constitution. Taxation is considered to
be   a   distinct   matter   for   purposes   of   legislative
competence. Hence, the power to tax cannot be de­
duced from a general legislative entry as an ancil­
lary   power.   Further,   the   element   of   tax   does   not
directly flow from the power to regulate trade or
commerce in, and the production, supply and distri­
bution   of  essential  commodities  under  Entry  33   of
List III, although the liability to pay tax may be
a matter incidental to the Centre’s power of price
control.
75.  “Legislative relations between the Union and
the   States   inter   se   with   reference   to   the   three
Lists   in   Schedule   VII   cannot   be   understood   fully
without examining the general features disclosed by
the  entries  contained  in   those   Lists”:  Seervai   in
his Constitutional Law of India, 3rd Edn., Vol. 1
at pp. 81­82. A scrutiny of Lists I and II of the
Seventh Schedule would show that there is no over­
lapping anywhere in the taxing power and the Con­
stitution gives independent sources of taxation to
the Union and the States. Following the scheme of
the
Government of India Act, 1935
, the Constitution
has made the taxing power of the Union and of the
States mutually exclusive and thus avoided the dif­
ficulties  which  have  arisen  in   some  other  Federal
Constitutions from overlapping powers of taxation.
76.  It   would   therefore   appear   that   there   is   a
distinction made between general subjects of legis­
lation and taxation. The general subjects of legis­
lation arc dealt with in one group of entries and
power   of   taxation   in   a   separate   group.
In
M.P.V.
Sundararamier & Co. v. State of A.P.43
this court
dealt with the scheme of the separation of taxation
powers between the Union and the States by mutually
exclusive   lists.   In   List   I,   Entries   1   to   81   deal
with general subjects of legislation; Entries 82 to
92­A deal with taxes. In List II, Entries 1 to 44
deal with general subjects of legislation; Entries
31
45 to 63 deal with taxes. This mutual exclusiveness
     is also brought out by the fact that in List III,
     the Concurrent Legislative List, there is no entry
     relating   to   a   tax,   but   it   only   contains   an   entry
     relating   to   levy   of   fees   in   respect   of   matters
     given in that list other than court­fees. Thus, in
     our Constitution, a conflict of the taxing power of
     the Union and of the States cannot arise. That be­
     ing so, it is difficult to comprehend the submis­
     sion that there can be intrusion by a law made by
     Parliament under Entry 33 of List III into a for­
     bidden   field   viz.   the   State’s   exclusive   power   to
     make a law with respect to the levy and imposition
     of a tax on sale or purchase of goods relatable to
     Entry   54   of   List   II   of   the   Seventh   Schedule.   It
     follows that the two laws viz. sub­section (3) of
Section 5
of the Act and para 21 of the Control Or­
     der issued by the Central Government under sub­sec­
     tion (1) of
Section 3
of the Essential Commodities
     Act,   operate   on   two   separate   and   distinct   fields
     and both are capable of being obeyed. There is no
     question of any clash between the two laws and the
     question of repugnancy does not come into play.”
43.     Levy   of   surcharge   was   upheld   referring   to   Entry   52   of

List   II   of   Seventh   Schedule.     Following   was
laid   down   in
paragraph 90:­


     “90.
The   decision   in   Fernandez   case,   AIR   1957   SC
     657   is   therefore   clearly   an   authority   for   the
     proposition   that   the   State   Legislature   notwith­
     standing
Article 286
of the Constitution while mak­
     ing a law under Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh
     Schedule can, for purposes of the registration of a
     dealer and submission of returns of sales tax, in­
     clude   the   transactions   covered   by
Article   286
of
     the Constitution. That being so, the constitutional
     validity of sub­section (1) of
Section 5
of the Act
     which   provides   for   the   classification   of   dealers
     whose   gross   turnover   during   a   year   exceeds   Rs   5
     lakhs for the purpose of levy of surcharge, in ad­
     dition   to   the   tax   payable   by   him,   is   not   assail­
32
able. So long as sales in the course of inter­State
     trade and commerce or sales outside the State and
     sales in the course of import into, or export out
     of the territory of India are not taxed, there is
     nothing to prevent the State Legislature while mak­
     ing a law for the levy of a surcharge under Entry
     54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to take into
     account the total turnover of the dealer within the
     State and provide, as has been done by sub­section
     (1)   of
Section   5
of   the   Act,   that   if   the   gross
     turnover   of   such   dealer   exceeds   Rs   5   lakhs   in   a
     year, he shall, in addition to the tax, also pay a
     surcharge at such rate not exceeding 10 per centum
     of the tax as may be provided. The liability to pay
     a surcharge is not on the gross turnover including
     the transactions covered by
Article 286
but is only
     on inside sales and the surcharge is sought to be
     levied on dealers who have a position of economic
     superiority………………”
44.  In
M.P.V. Sundararamier
(supra) this Court also laid down

that   the   tax   cannot   be   levied   under   general   entry.     The

present is a case where cess in question is levied in respect

of goods and services tax, the definition of cess as given in

Compensation to States Act, 2017 in
Section 2(c)
states “cess

means   the   goods   and   services   tax   compensation   cess   levied

under
section   8
”.
The   judgment   of   this   Court   relied   by

petitioner in
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) and
M.P.V.

Sundararamier
(supra) is not applicable to the present case.
45.  Entry 97 of List I also lead to the same conclusion, for

reference, which is quoted as below:­


     “97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or
33
List III including any tax not mentioned in either
     of those Lists.”
46.
Article 270
of the Constitution, both as it existed prior

to
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act,   2016
and   subsequent   to
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment) Act, 2016
uses the expression “any cess levied for

specific purposes under any law made by Parliament”.
Article

270(1)
as existed prior to
Constitution (One Hundred and First

Amendment) Act, 2016
, is as follows:­


            “Art.270.(1) All taxes and duties referred to
     in   the   Union   list,   except   the   duties   and   taxes
     referred   to   in   Arts.   268,   268A   and   269
     respectively,   surcharge   on   taxes   and   duties
     referred   to   in
Art.   271
and   any   cess   levied   for
     specific purposes under any law made by Parliament
     shall be levied and collected by the Government of
     India   and   shall   be   distributed   between   the   Union
     and   the   States   in   the   manner   provided   in   clause
     (2).”
47.
After Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act,

2016
,   as   per
Article   270
,   Parliament   can   levy   cess   for   a

specific purpose under a law made by it.
Article 270
, thus,

specifically   empowers   Parliament   to   levy   any   cess   by   law.

Lastly,
Section 18
of the Constitution (One Hundred and First

Amendment) Act, 2016 expressly empowers Parliament shall, “by

law”   on   the   recommendation   of   the   Goods   and   Services   Tax

Council,   provide   for   compensation   to   the   states  for  loss   of
34
revenue arising on account of implementation of the goods and

services   tax….”     When   Constitution   provision   empowers   the

Parliament to provide for Compensation to the States for loss

of   revenue  by   law,   the   expression   “law”   used   therein   is   of

wide   import   which   includes   levy   of   any   cess   for   the   above

purpose.  We, thus, do not find any merit in the submission of

the learned counsel for the petitioner that Parliament has no

legislative   competence   to   enact   the   Compensation   to   States

Act, 2017.
Answer to Issue No.1 is,thus, as follows:
The   Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   is   not   beyond   the

legislative competence of the Parliament. 


Issue No.2 and Issue No.3
48.        We   now   come   to   Issue   No.2   and   Issue   No.3,   which,

being interconnected, are taken up together.
49. The next attack on Compensation to States Act, 2017 is on

the   ground   that   the   Act   transgresses   the   mandate   of
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
.  It

is   submitted   that
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment) Act, 2016
does not permit levy of cess on supply of

goods   or   services   on   which   Goods   and   Services   Tax   has   been

levied.  Elaborating the submission, it is contended that the
35
clear   objective   of
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment) Act, 2016
was to subsume various Central and States

Taxes,   Central   and   States   surcharges   and   cesses,   so  far  as,

they relate to supply of goods and services. When all taxes,

surcharges and cesses were subsumed in by Goods and Services

Tax,  imposition of compensation to States cess clearly falls

foul   to   the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)

Act,   2016
.     The   Statements   of   Objects   and   Reasons   of

Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   Twenty­Second   Amendment)   Bill,

2014,   as   noticed   above,   was   to   subsume   various   Central

Indirect   Taxes   and   levy   of   Service   Tax,   Additional   Customs

Duty, Special Additional Duty of Customs, Central Surcharges

and Cesses so far as they relate to the supply of goods and

services.
50.  One of the objectives as noticed in Statements of Objects

and   Reasons   was   “conferring   concurrent   taxing   powers   upon

Parliament and the State Legislature to make laws for levying

goods and services tax”.
Article 246A
sub­article(1) empowers

the   Parliament   to   “make   laws   with   respect   to   goods   and

services   tax”.     The   word   “with   respect   to”   is   word   of

expansion.   Similar expressions namely, “pertaining to”, “in

relation to” came to be considered before this Court in  M/s.
Doypack Systems Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Union of India & Others
, (1988)
36
2 SCC 299,  where this Court held that the above expressions

are used in the expansive sense.  Following has been
laid down

in
paragraphs 48 and 49:­


     “48………………….The   expressions   “pertaining   to”,   “in
     relation   to”   and   “arising   out   of”,   used   in   the
     deeming provision, are used in the expansive sense,
     as   per   decisions   of   courts,   meanings   found   in
     standard dictionaries, and the principles of broad
     and   liberal   interpretation   in   consonance   with
Article 39(b)
and (c) of the Constitution.
49.  The   words   “arising   out   of”   have   been   used   in
     the sense that it comprises purchase of shares and
     lands   from   income   arising   out   of   the   Kanpur
     undertaking. We are of the opinion that the words
     “pertaining to” and “in relation to” have the same
     wide meaning and have been used interchangeably for
     among other reasons, which may include avoidance of
     repetition of the same phrase in the same clause or
     sentence,  a  method   followed  in   good  drafting.  The
     word   “pertain”   is   synonymous   with   the   word
     “relate”,   see   Corpus   Juris   Secundum,   Volume   17,
     page 693.”
51. Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on

judgment of this Court in
Dewan Chand Builders and Contractors

Vs.   Union   of   India   and   Others
,   (2012)   1   SCC   101.    The

Parliament   had   enacted   Building   and   Other   Construction

Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service)

Act, 1996 and
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare

Cess Act, 1996
.  The constitutional validity and competence of

Parliament was challenged before the Delhi High Court.  Delhi
37
High   Court   upheld   the   validity   of   Building   and   Other

Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employment and Conditions

of   Service)   Central   Rules,   1998   holding   the   levy   under   the

impugned enactment as a fee referable to Entry 97 of List I of

Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.   Before this Court, it

was contended that cess in question was a tax and not a cess

since no element of quid pro quo exists and if it is a tax,

then it is a tax on “lands and buildings” falling within the

ambit of Schedule VII List II Entry 49.  Argument was noticed

in paragraph 23 to the following effect:­     

       “23. It is evident from the contentions raised on
     behalf of the appellant that there is a two­pronged
     attack on the legislative competence of Parliament
     to enact the
Cess Act
: (i) it is a “tax” and not a
     “cess”   because   no   element   of   quid   pro   quo   exists
     between the payer of the cess and the beneficiary,
     and   (ii)   if   it   is   a   “tax”   then   it   is   a   tax   on
     “lands   and  buildings”  falling  within  the   ambit   of
     Schedule   VII   List   II   Entry   49   (the   State   List),
     ousting the legislative competence of Parliament.”
52.   This Court noticed the distinction between fee and tax

and referred to earlier judgments including judgment of this

Court in
Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras Vs.

Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt
, AIR 1954

SC 282.   This Court upheld the cess as fee and not tax.   In

paragraph 31, reasons for upholding levy as fee has been given

by this Court, which is to the following effect:­
38
“31.  There   is   no   doubt   in   our   mind   that   the
    Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Cess Act,
    clearly spells out the essential purpose the enact­
    ment seeks to achieve i.e. to augment the Welfare
    Fund  under  the
BOCW  Act
.  The   levy  of   cess  on   the
    cost  of  construction  incurred  by  the   employers   on
    the   building   and   other   construction   works   is   for
    ensuring sufficient funds for the Welfare Boards to
    undertake social security schemes and welfare mea­
    sures for building and other construction workers.
    The   fund,   so   collected,   is   directed   to   specific
    ends spelt out in the
BOCW Act
. Therefore, applying
    the principle
laid down in
the aforesaid decisions
    of this Court, it is clear that the said levy is a
    “fee” and not “tax”. The said fund is set apart and
    appropriated   specifically   for   the   performance   of
    specified purpose; it is not merged in the public
    revenues for the benefit of the general public and
    as such the nexus between the cess and the purpose
    for which it is levied gets established, satisfying
    the   element   of   quid   pro   quo   in   the   scheme.   With
    these features of the
Cess Act
in view, the subject
    levy has to be construed as “fee” and not a “tax”.
    Thus, we uphold and affirm the finding of the High
    Court on the issue.”
53.  The above judgment has no application in the facts of the

case.  The case of the Union is not that cess is a fee. Rather

contention is that it is increment to the goods and services

tax.   We having already held that State compensation cess is

“with respect to” goods and services tax, it is a tax.
54.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has further relied on

certain decisions on distinction between tax and fee. But the

levy of cess, in the present case, not even claimed as fee, it
39
is not necessary to refer to above cases which reiterate the

well established principles emanating from
Commissioner, Hindu

Religious   Endowments,   Madras   Vs.   Sri   Lakshmindra   Thirtha

Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt
(supra).
55.     The   expression   used   in
Article   246A
is   “power   to   make

laws with respect to goods and services tax”.   The power to

make   law,   thus,   is   not   general   power   related   to   a   general

entry   rather   it   specifically   relates   to   goods   and   services

tax.  When express power is there to make law regarding goods

and services tax, we fail to comprehend that how such power

shall   not   include   power   to   levy   cess   on   goods   and   services

tax.     True,   that
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment)   Act,   2016
was   passed   to   subsume   various   taxes,

surcharges   and   cesses   into   one   tax   but   the   constitutional

provision   does   not   indicate   that   henceforth   no   surcharge   or

cess shall be levied.
56. Learned   counsel   for   the   petitioner   has   referred   to
Section 18
of the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty­Second

Amendment)   Bill,   2014,   where   an  additional   tax   on   supply   of

goods not exceeding one per cent was contemplated, which did

not   find   place   in
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment)   Act,   2016
.     He   submits   that   the   additional   tax,

which   was   proposed   by   the   Constitution   (One   Hundred   and
40
Twenty­Second   Amendment)   Bill,   2014   was   not   allowed   to   find

place in
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act,

2016
, it is to be accepted that Constitution Amendment did not

contemplate levy of additional tax on services and goods tax.

The above submission in so far as not continuing an additional

tax on supply of goods in the
Constitution (One Hundred and

First   Amendment)   Act
is   concerned,   the   submission   of   the

learned counsel for the petitioner is correct that additional

tax, which was contemplated by Clause 18 of the Bill did not

find place in Constitution Amendment Act. Further, Clause 19

of the Bill find place as
Section 18
of the Constitution (One

Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act,   2016.     Thus,   power   of

Parliament   to   make   law   providing   for   compensation   to   the

States   for   loss   of   revenue   was   expressly   included   by

constitutional provision.
57. Further, the Preamble of Compensation to States Act, 2017

expressly        mentions       the        Act       to       provide       for

compensation to the States for the loss of revenue arising on

account   of   implementation   of   the   goods   and   services   Tax   in

pursuance of the provisions of the
Constitution (One Hundred

and   First   Amendment)   Act,   2016
.   Thus,   the   Compensation   to

States   Act,   2017   has   been   enacted   under   the   express
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016
.  We,
41
thus,   also   do   not   find   any   force   in   the   submission   of   the

learned counsel for the petitioner that Compensation to States

Act, 2017 transgresses the
Constitution (One Hundred and First

Amendment) Act, 2016
.
58. Due to above reasons, we do not find any substance in the

submission of the petitioner that Compensation to States Act,

2017   is   a   colourable   legislation.     We   having   held   that

Parliament   has   full   legislative   competence   to   enact   the   Act

and the Act having been enacted to implement the
Constitution

(One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)   Act
and   the   object   being

clearly   to   fulfill   the
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

Amendment)   Act
’s   objective,   we   reject   the   submission   of   the

petitioner   that   Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   is   a

colourable legislation.  We, thus, answer Issue No.2 and Issue

No. 3 in following manner:­


Ans. 2 ­     The   Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   does   not

             violate
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First

             Amendment)   Act,   2016
nor   is   against   the   objective

             of
Constitution   (One   Hundred   and   First   Amendment)

             Act, 2016
.
Ans.3 ­      The Compensation to States Act is not a colourable

             legislation.
42
Whether   levy   of   Compensation   to   States   Cess   and   GST  on  the
same taxing event is permissible in law? (Issue No.4)
59. The petitioner elaborating his contention submits that as

per
Section 8
of impugned legislation there shall be levied a

cess on intra­State supply of goods and services as provided

in
Section 9
of the CGST Act whereas
CGST Act
has been enacted

to   levy   tax   as   provided   under
Article   246A
of   the

Constitution.   This   is   also   true   in   respect   of   the   cesses

imposed on inter­State supplies of goods and services covered

by
Section 5
of IGST Act, 2017. Therefore, on the same very

transaction there cannot be two levies, one under
CGST Act
and

another   under   impugned   legislation   as   it   would   amount   to

double taxation as levy is on the same taxable event and same

subject.   Thus,   there   is   an   overlapping   on   law   which   is   not

permissible. The petitioner contends that goods and services

tax   being   already   imposed   by   three   enactments   of   2017   as

noticed above imposition of States Compensation Cess is levied

on the same taxing event and has overlapping effect.
60.  The   principle   is   well   settled   that   two   taxes/imposts

which are separate and distinct imposts and on two different

aspects of a transaction are permissible as “in law there is
43
no overlapping”.
61. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Federation of Hotel

& Restaurant Associate of India, Etc. Vs. Union of India and

others
, (1989) 3 SCC 634,  held that a law with respect to a

subject might incidentally affect another subject in some way,

but that is not the same thing. There might be overlapping but

the   overlapping   must   be   in   law.   The   fact   that   there   is   an

overlapping does not detract from the distinctiveness of the

aspects.   Therefore,   if   the   taxes   are   separate   and   distinct

imposts and levied on the different aspects, then there is no

overlapping in law. Following was
laid down in
paragraph 31:
“31. Indeed,   the   law   'with   respect   to'   a
     subject might incidentally 'affect' another subject
     in some way; but that is not the same thing as the
     law   being   on   the   latter   subject.   There   might   be
     overlapping;   but   the   overlapping   must   be   in   law.
     The   same   transaction   may   involve   two   or   more
     taxable   events   in   its   different   aspects.   But   the
     fact that there is an overlapping does not detract
     from   the   distinctiveness   of   the   aspects,   Lord
     Simonds in Governor General in Council v. Province
     of   Madras   [1945]   FCR   179   P.C.   at   193,   in   the
     context of concepts of Duties of Excise and Tax on
     Sale of Goods said:
“...The   two   taxes,   the   one   levied   on   a
           manufacturer in respect of his goods, the
           other on a vendor in respect of his sales,
           may, as is there pointed out, in one sense
           overlap.   But   in   law   there   is   no
           overlapping.   The   taxes   are   separate   and
           distinct imposts. If in fact they overlap,
           that may be because the taxing authority,
           imposing   a   duty   of   excise,   finds   it
44
convenient   to   impose   that   duty   at   the
           moment   when   the   excisable   article   leaves
           the factory or workshop for the first time
           on the occasion of its sale....””
62. Justice   Krishna   Iyer   in  Avinder   Singh   and   others   Vs.

State of Pubjab and others, (1979) 1 SCC 137,  laid down that

if on the same subject­matter the legislature chooses to levy

tax twice over there is no inherent invalidity in the fiscal

adventure   unless   there   are   some   other   prohibitions.   In   the

above   case   Government   of   Punjab   had   issued   a   notification

under
Section 90(4)
of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act,

1976 imposing tax at the rate of Rupee 1 per bottle on Indian

made   Foreign   Liquor   within   the   Municipal   Corporation   of

Ludhiana. One of the contentions raised was that tax imposed

is   on   sale,   hence,   beyond   Government   power.   In   paragraph   4

following was laid down:
"4.......A feeble plea that the tax is bad because
     of the vice of double taxation and is unreasonable
     because   there   are   heavy   prior   levies   was   also
     voiced.   Some   of   these   contentions   hardly   merit
     consideration,   but   have   been   mentioned   out   of
     courtesy   to   counsel.   The   last   one,   for   instance,
     deserve   the   least   attention.   There   is   nothing   in
Article 265
of the Constitution from which one can
     spin   out   the   constitutional   vice   called   double
     taxation. (Bad economics may be good law and vice
     versa).   Dealing   with   a   somewhat   similar   argument,
     the   Bombay   High   Court   gave   short   shrift   to   it   in
     Wester   India   Theatres   (AIR   1954   Bom   261).  Some
     undeserving     contentions   die   hard,   rather   survive
     after death. The only epitaph we may inscribe is :
45
Rest in peace and don't be re­born ! If on the same
     subject­matter the legislature chooses to levy tax
     twice over there is no inherent invalidity in the
     fiscal   adventure   save   where   other   prohibitions
     exist.”
63. Goods   and   Services   Tax   imposed   under   the   2017   Acts   as

noticed above and levy of cess on such intra­State   supply of

goods and services or both as provided under
Section 9
of the

CGST Act and such supply of goods and services or both as part

of
Section 5
of IGST Act is, thus, two separate imposts in law

and are not prohibited by any law so as to declare it invalid.
64. We,   thus,   do   not   find   any   substance   in   the   submission

that levy of Compensation to States Cess on same taxable event

is not permissible.
We, thus, answer Issue No.4 in the following manner:
Levy   of   Compensation   to   States   Cess   is   an   increment   to

goods and services tax which is permissible in law.



Issue No.5
65. The last submission of the petitioner is that he having

paid Clean Energy Cess till 30.06.2017 on the stocks of coal,

he is at least entitled to set off in payment of Compensation

to   States   Cess.   As   noticed   above     Clean   Energy   Cess   was

imposed under the
Finance Act, 2010
. The Clean Energy Cess and
46
the   States   Compensation   Cess   are   collected   for   wholly

different   purposes.  As   per   sub­section   (3)   of
Section   83
of

the Finance Act, 2010, the Clean Energy Cess was levied and

collected   for   the   purposes   of   financing   and   promoting   clean

energy   initiatives,   funding   research   in   the   area   of   clean

energy   or   for   any   other   purpose   relating   thereto   whereas

States   Compensation   Cess   is   collected   to   “provide   for

compensation to the States for the loss of revenue arising on

account of implementation of the goods and services tax”.
66. The   distribution   between   the   Union   and   States   of   the

Clean Energy Cess and GST Compensation Cess so collected are

also different. Under
Section 83(6)
of the Finance Act, 2010

the Clean Energy Cess was to be used for the purposes of the

Union and not to be distributed to the States whereas States

Compensation   Cess   has   to   be   wholly   distributed   amongst   the

States to compensate the States.
67. The petitioner's submission that the petitioner should be

given the credit to the extent of payment of Clean Energy Cess

upto 30.06.2017 also cannot be accepted. The Clean Energy Cess

and States Compensation Cess are entirely different from each

other, payment of Clean Energy Cess was for different purpose

and   has   no   bearing   or   connection   with   States   Compensation

Cess. Giving credit or set off in the payment is legislative
47
policy   which   had   to  be   reflected   in  the  legislative  scheme.

Compensation   to   States   Act,   2017   or   Rules   framed   thereunder

does not indicate giving of any credit or set off of the Clean

Energy Cess already paid till 30.06.2017. Thus, claim of the

petitioner   that   he   is   entitled   for   set   off   in   payment   of

Compensation to States Cess to the extent he had already paid

Clean Energy Cess cannot be accepted.
We, thus, answer Issue No.5 in the following manner:
The   petitioner   is   not   entitled   for   any   set   off   of

payments   made   towards   Clean   Energy   Cess   in   payment   of

Compensations to States Cess.
68. In view of the foregoing discussions, we do not find any

merit   in   the   writ   petition.  The  writ   petition   is   dismissed.

The transferred case is accordingly dismissed. Both the civil

appeals are allowed. Parties shall bear their own costs.
..........................J.
                                                 ( A.K. SIKRI )


                                          ..........................J.
                                                 ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 03, 2018.