[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Vice Chancellor Ranchi University vs Jharkhand State Housing Board Th ... on 23 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5202, 2019 (1) AJR 427, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 794, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 349, (2018) 14 SCALE 193, (2019) 1 RENTLR 431, (2019) 132 ALL LR 259, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 219 (SC), (2019) 2 ICC 668, (2018) 4 JLJR 345, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 294
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.8113 OF 2009


                         THE VICE CHANCELLOR, RANCHI
                         UNIVERSITY & ORS.              ….Appellant(s)


                                                  VERSUS


                         JHARKHAND STATE HOUSING
                         BOARD & ORS.                   …Respondent(s)




                                           J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final

                         judgment and order dated 21.11.2006 passed

                         by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in

                         L.P.A.   No.   440   of   2006,   whereby   the   High
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.10.23
Court   setting   aside   the   order   of   the   Single
17:25:51 IST
Reason:
1
Judge   allowed   the   L.P.A.   filed   by   the

respondent Nos.9 and 10 herein.
2.     In order to appreciate the issues involved

in   this   appeal,   it   is   necessary   to   set   out   the

facts in detail hereinbelow.
3.     The appellant is the University at Ranchi

(hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the   University”)

whereas respondent no.1 is the State Housing

Board   (hereinafter  referred to  as “the  Board”)

created under the State Law.
4.     On   05.07.1976,   the   Board   allotted   192

Flats to the University for the residence of the

University's   employees   known   as   “Ranchi

University   Housing   Colony”   for   a   total

consideration of Rs.42,24,000/­.
5.     In terms of the allotment agreement, the

University was required to pay 10% of the total

consideration   to   the   Board   and   the   balance
2
money   was   to   be   paid   in   180   monthly

installments ­ each for Rs.31,195.30.
6.    The   University   paid   10%   of   the   total

consideration   and   started   paying   monthly

installments,   which   they   paid   up   to   the   year

1991   regularly.     However,   there   were   some

defaults   made   by   the   University   in   paying

remaining installments.
7.    The   University   in   the   meantime   got

possession   of   the   flats   and   they   allotted   few

flats   to   its   employees.   The   University   also   in

the meantime converted some flats for its use

as   Girls   Hostel   Block.   In   the   meantime,   the

University paid lump sum Rs.5 Lakh towards

monthly   installments   to   the   Board   towards

total consideration.
8.    The   Board   on   19.10.1989,   however,

raised   a   demand   of   Rs.2,62,44,149/­   on   the
3
University,   which   included   partly   balance

money   towards   principal   amount   and

remaining   towards   interest   accrued   on   the

defaulted   sum.   Since   the   University   did   not

satisfy/pay   the   demand   of   Rs.2,62,44,149/­,

the   Board   cancelled   the   allotment   by   order

dated 29.11.1992 and decided to allot the flats

to some of the occupants (employees) who were

by   that   time   retired but  continued to  occupy

the   flats.   This   allotment   was   made   on   the

request made by the University to the Board.
9.    The   University,   however,   on   29.01.1993

realized at their end that there was some foul

play behind sending of the letter of allotment

from the University to the Board for allotment

of   the   flats   to   its   employees   which   was   done

apparently at the instance of some occupants.

The   University,   therefore,   immediately
4
cancelled   the   request   letter   and   warned   the

concerned employees that they should not act

upon the request earlier sent by the University

to   the   Board   and   nor   should   make   any

payment   to   the   Board   to   obtain   allotment   of

flats in their personal capacity. The employees

were   also   warned   not   to   enter   into   any

independent   transaction   with   the   Board   in

relation   to   the   flats   in   question,   else   erring

employees   would   have   to   face   disciplinary

action. The University also wrote to the Board

on 30.01.1993 that the University is also on its

part   requesting   the   State   to   arrange   for

payment   of   balance   money   to   the   Board   to

enable   them   to   complete   the   transaction   in

terms of the allotment order.
10.   Despite   this,   19   employees   deposited

Rs.10,000/­ for allotment of the flats to them.
5
In   the   meantime,   the   University   also   paid

Rs.one   lakh,   Rs.five   lakh   and   some   more

money   towards   the   sale   consideration   to   the

Board   on   different   dates.   The   Board   also

accepted   the   said   money   paid   by   the

University.
11.     It is with these background facts, three

writ   petitions,   namely,   Writ   Petition   (C)

No.3652/1996, Writ Petition (C) No.3442/2002

and Writ Petition (C) No.1342/2002 were filed

by the employees­occupants against the Board

and the University seeking therein a prayer for

issuance of the writ of mandamus directing the

Board to execute the lease deed of the flats in

question and allot the said flats in their favour.

The   University   contested   these   writ   petitions

on several grounds.
6
12.   By   order   dated   08.08.2006,   the   learned

Single Judge dismissed the said writ petitions.

It   was   held   that   the   writ   petitioners   were   in

unauthorized   occupation   of   the   flats   in   as

much   as   they   had   no   right   whatsoever   to

either remain in occupation or to ask for any

relief in relation to the flats except to pay penal

rent   to   the   University   for   their   wrongful   use

and occupation of the flats.
13.   The   writ   petitioners   felt   aggrieved   and

filed   intra­court   appeal   before   the   Division

Bench of the High Court. By impugned order,

the   Division   Bench   allowed   the   appeal,   set

aside the order of the learned Single Judge and

while allowing the writ petitions issued a writ

of   mandamus   directing   the   Board   to   execute

the lease deed of the flats in question in favour

of   each   occupant   on   the   basis   of   terms   and
7
conditions as prevailing today and as may be

mutually agreed between them.
14.   It is against this order; the University has

felt aggrieved and filed the present appeal by

way of special leave to appeal in this Court.
15.   Heard Mr. Gopal Prasad, learned counsel

for   the   appellant   and   Mr.   Pradeep   Kant,

learned senior counsel for the respondent(s).
16.   Having heard the learned counsel for the

parties   and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the

case, we are constrained to allow the appeal,

set aside the impugned order and restore that

of the learned Single Judge as indicated below.
17.   In our considered opinion, the approach,

reasoning and the conclusion arrived at by the

Learned   Single   Judge   was   just,   legal   and

proper   as   against   that   of   the   Division   Bench

for the reasons mentioned hereinbelow.
8
18.   Firstly,   it   is   not   in   dispute   that   the

original   allotment   of   the   flats   made   by   the

Board   was   in   favour   of   the   University.

Secondly,   it   is   also   not   in   dispute   that   the

University had made substantial part payment

to the Board pursuant to the allotment order,

which the Board had accepted.   Thirdly, it is

also   not   in   dispute   that   the   writ   petitioners

were   the   employees   of   the   University,   and

therefore   they   were   allotted   flats   by   the

University   by   virtue   of   their   employment

conditions.  In other words, the writ petitioners

came in occupation of the flats through their

employer   i.e.   University.     If   they   were   not   in

the employment of the University, they would

not   have   been   able   to   occupy   these   flats   in

their individual right at that point of time for

want of any privity of contract with the Board.
9
19.     In   our   considered   opinion,   the   writ

petitioners’ (respondent nos. 4 and 5) right to

remain in lawful occupation of the flats could

subsist   only   so   long   as   they   were   in   the

employment of the University, and that too on

payment of house rent fixed by the University

as   per   their   policy.   In   other   words,   the   writ

petitioners   could   exercise   their   right   of

occupation   qua   the   University   only   during

their service tenure subject to fulfillment of the

requisite terms and conditions and their right

of occupation was terminable on their service

tenure coming to an end.
20.   The day on which their services came to

an   end,   whether   due   to   their   tendering   the

resignation,   or   on   attaining   the   age   of

superannuation or for any other reasons, their

right   to   continue   in   occupation   of   the   flats
10
came to an end.   Their possession in the flats

became   unlawful   and   unauthorized.     They

were under contractual and legal obligation to

handover   vacant   and   peaceful   possession   of

the flats to their employer i.e. the University so

as to enable the University to allot the flats to

other   employees   who   were   eligible   for

allotment.
21.   It   is   not   in   dispute   that   the   writ

petitioners   (respondent   nos.   4   and   5)   had

retired   long   back   from   their   services   and   yet

they retained unlawful possession of the flats

in question.
22.   In our opinion, the learned Single Judge

has rightly held that respondent nos. 4 and 5

(writ   petitioners)   were   in   unauthorized

occupation   of   the   flats   from   the   date   they

ceased   to   be   in   the   employment   of   the
11
University and hence were liable to be evicted

from the flats and were also liable to pay penal

rent   to   the   University   for   their   use   and

occupation till the date of their eviction.  So far

it has not been done.
23.   We are not impressed by the submission

of   the   learned   Senior   counsel   for   the

respondent   nos.   4   and   5   (writ   petitioners)

when   he   contended   that   since   the   writ

petitioners   (Respondent   Nos.   4   and   5)

deposited   some   money   with   the   Board   for

allotment of the flats in their personal capacity

pursuant   to   the     decision   of   the   University

taken   by   them   in   that   behalf,     a   right   had

accrued   in   their   favour   to   remain   in

occupation   of   the   flats   even   after   they   had

ceased   to   be   in   the   employment   of   the

University in their individual rights.
12
24.   This submission is wholly untenable and

deserves rejection for more than one reason.
25.   First,   It   is   not   in   dispute   that   the

University had withdrawn its decision to allot

the flats to its employees immediately and also

warned them not to enter into any transaction

with the Board directly in relation to the flats,

else   they   will   have   to   face   the   disciplinary

action.   This   was   sufficient   indication   to   the

employees   not  to  deal  with  the  Board  in any

manner in their individual capacity: Second, it

is also not in dispute that the University even

after cancellation of the initial allotment order

went on paying monthly installments in lump

sum to the Board and the Board in turn also

went   on   accepting   the   money   as   and   when

paid   by   the   University.   The   acceptance   of

payment   from   the   University   subsequent   to
13
cancellation   by   the   Board   amounted   to

revocation   of   the   cancellation   order   and

resulted in restoration of the initial allotment

made   in   favour   of   the   University:   Third,   the

issue in the writ petitions was between the writ

petitioners   (employees)   and   the   University

because   the   writ   petitioners   had   come   into

possession of the flats through the University.

They had, therefore, no independent cause of

action in relation to the issue of flats qua the

Board; Fourth, the writ petitioners did not file

any   suit   for   specific   performance   of   contract

against   the   Board   for   enforcement   of   their

alleged   independent   contractual   right   in

relation to the flats. Their alleged disputes qua

the Board in relation to flats, therefore, could

not have been gone into in these proceedings:
Fifth,   in   any   event,   mere   payment   of
14
Rs.10,000/­   to   the   Board   by   the   writ

petitioners contrary to the directions issued by

the University did not create any independent

right   in   their   favour   and   nor   such   payment

even   if   made   by   the   employees   impaired   the

rights   of   the   University   in   any   manner   in

relation to the allotment of flats qua Board and

lastly, the cancellation having been revoked on

account   of   acceptance   of   payment   from   the

University by the Board, the original allotment

dated   05.07.1976   stood   restored   in   favour   of

the University .
26.   In   the   light   of   the   foregoing

discussion/reasons,   we   cannot   concur   with

the   reasoning   and   the   conclusion   of   the

Division Bench and are inclined to agree with

that of the learned Single Judge.
15
27.   The appeal thus succeeds and is allowed.

The impugned order is set aside, and that of

the   learned   Single   Judge   restored.   The   writ

petitions   out   of   which   this   appeal   arises   is

accordingly dismissed.
28.   Needless to observe, the University would

be   at   liberty   to   proceed   against   the   writ

petitioners seeking their eviction from the flats

in   question   by   filing   appropriate   proceedings

before   the   Competent   Authority   under   the
Public   Premises   (Eviction   of   Unauthorised

Occupants)   Act,   1971
and   also   claim   in   the

said proceedings arrears of penal rent payable

by   the   writ   petitioners   from   the   date   their

possession   became   unauthorized   in   the   flats

and University till their delivery.
29.   The University is also at liberty to finalize

the   issue   of   allotment   of   the   flats   with   the
16
Board   with   the   intervention   of   the   State

expeditiously.   It  will  be  for   the  benefit  of  the

University and its employees, in service.
30.   Likewise,   the   writ   petitioners   and   other

employees (occupants) would also be at liberty

to   take   refund   from   the   Board   of   their   paid

amount, which they claimed to have deposited

with the Board for allotment of the flats along

with interest at a reasonable rate.
31.    On such request being made by the writ

petitioners, the Board will refund the money to

the   writ   petitioners   and   any   such   employees

within three months from the date of making a

demand after verification as an outer limit.
17
32.   In the light of this order, the intervention

application   and   impleadment   application

stands disposed of.
…...……..................................J.
                          [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                       .………...................................J.
                          [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
October 23, 2018.
18