[Cites
69
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Star India Private Limited vs Department Of Industrial Policy And ... on 30 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 1005, 2019 (2) SCC 104, (2018) 14 SCALE 651, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 838
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7326-7327 OF 2018


                STAR INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED                            …APPELLANT

                              VERSUS

                DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY
                AND PROMOTION & ORS.                                  …RESPONDENTS

                                                      WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7328-7329 OF 2018



                                                 JUDGMENT
R.F. NARIMAN, J.
1. The present civil appeals raise a challenge to certain

                         clauses of the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable)

                         Services Interconnection (Addressable Systems) Regulations,
Signature Not Verified
2017 (hereinafter referred to as the “Regulation”) notified on
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.10.30
16:35:32 IST
Reason:
3.3.2017 and the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable)
1
Services (Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff Order, 2017

(hereinafter referred to as the “Tariff Order”) dated 3.3.2017

made under the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act,

1997
(hereinafter referred to as the “
TRAI Act
”).               Since

regulations made under the
TRAI Act
were under challenge, a

writ petition was filed before the Madras High Court in which the

main issues that arose before the Division Bench were as

follows:-
a.    Whether the Telecom Regulatory Authority of

      India (hereinafter referred to as “TRAI”) has the

      power to regulate only the ‘means of transmission’,

      viz. the ‘carriage’ aspect of broadcasting, and does

      not have the power to regulate the ‘content’ of the

      broadcast (i.e. the channel and/or its constituent

      programmes)?
b.    Whether the impugned clauses, in fact, and in

      effect, regulate the content of the broadcast (i.e. the

      channel and/or its constituent programmes)?
2
c.    Whether the impugned clauses have a direct

     effect on the pricing and marketing of a television

     channel by the broadcaster and hence is an illegal

     interference with the content of the broadcast (i.e.

     the channel and/or its constituent programmes)?
The appellants have contended that the impugned clauses

have the effect of regulating programmes and television

channels, their pricing and their marketing and manner of

offering/ bundling in the following illustrative manner, which is

beyond the scope of TRAI’s jurisdiction of regulating “means of

transmission”:
a.    TRAI has effectively fixed a uniform maximum

     retail price for each TV channel at INR 19/-;
b.    TRAI has stipulated that a television channel,

     which is individually priced at more than INR 19/-
cannot be included in a collection of television

     channels (commonly referred to as a “bouquet”) and
3
can only be offered on an individual/ a-la-carte/

stand-alone basis;
c.    TRAI has stipulated that the price of a

bouquet of television channels shall not be less than

85% of the sum of a-la-carte prices of television

channels comprised in the bouquet;
d.    TRAI has stipulated that the sum of discount

on television channels and the distribution fee paid

by broadcasters to a distributor of television

channels, cannot exceed 35% of the maximum

retail price of the television channel;
e.    Television     channels     cannot     be     priced

differently for different distribution platforms;
f.    Channels of one broadcaster cannot be

offered by another broadcaster in their bouquet of

television channels, even after obtaining due

authorization;
4
g.    Promotional schemes (i) can only be offered

      on a-la-carte prices for offering television channels

      and not on bouquet prices, (ii) cannot exceed 90

      days at a time, and (iii) can be offered only twice in

      a year;
h.    High    definition   and   standard   definition

      channels cannot be in the same bouquet of

      television channels;
i.    Pay channels and free to air channels cannot

      be in the same bouquet.
2. The Division Bench consisting of M. Sundar, J. and Chief

Justice Indira Banerjee differed in their conclusions. As per M.

Sundar, J., it was held:-
“8(a). Owing to the narrative, discussion and all that
      have been set out supra, those of the impugned
      provisions in the said regulations and said tariff
      order which touch upon content of the programmes
      of broadcasters are liable to be struck down as not
      in conformity with the parent Act / plenary Act.
      Therefore, clauses 6(1), second proviso to 6(1),
      proviso to 7(2), 7(4), first proviso to 7(4) and 10(3)
      of the said Regulations and clauses 3(1), 3(2)(b),
      second proviso to 3(2)(b), first proviso to 3(3),
5
second proviso to 3(3), third proviso to 3(3), fourth
     proviso to 3(3), fifth proviso to 3(3), sixth proviso to
     3(3) and 3(4) of the said tariff order are struck down
     as not in conformity with the parent act, i.e.,
TRAI
     Act
.
8(b). With regard to the other two impugned
     provisions, as we were given to understand in the
     course of the hearing that they are relevant and
     necessary for some other clauses also other than
     those which have been put in issue in the instant
     writ petitions, they deserve to be saved to the extent
     they survive and serve the purpose other than
     serving implementation or any other purpose of the
     provisions which we have struck down. Therefore,
     the other impugned provisions, i.e., clause 11(2) in
     the said Regulations as also clause 4(2) in the said
     tariff order will continue to be in the books, but
     cannot be pressed into service for anything to do
     with the provisions which we have struck down
     supra. In other words, these provisions, i.e., clause
     11(2) in the said Regulations as also clause 4(2) in
     the said tariff order can be operated if it can be
     operated for other provisions of the said
     Regulations and said tariff order, other than those
     which we have struck down.”
3. Differing from M. Sundar, J., the learned Chief Justice held:-
“69. I am unable to agree with the conclusion of M.
     Sundar, J. that the provisions of the impugned
     Regulation and the impugned Tariff Order are not in
     conformity with the
TRAI Act
. In my view the
     impugned provisions neither touch upon the content
     of programmes of broadcasters, nor liable to be
     struck down. However, the clause putting cap of
     15% to the discount on the MRP of a bouquet is
6
arbitrary. The said provision is, in my view, not
     enforceable. In my considered view, the challenge
     to the impugned Regulation and the impugned Tariff
     Order fail.
70. Since we have not been able to agree, the writ
     petitions may be placed before a third Judge. Since
     the Chief Justice has delivered the dissenting
     judgment, the matter may be placed before the next
     available Judge in order of seniority for nomination
     of the Judge before whom the matter may be
     placed.”
4. The third Judge who therefore resolved the controversy in

favour of the present respondents was M.M. Sundresh, J. After

an exhaustive analysis of the arguments and the Acts in

question, the third learned Judge sided with the Hon’ble Chief

Justice and held:-
“27.1. In her short, yet clear decision, the Hon'ble
     Chief Justice has held that there is sufficiency of the
     power under the
TRAI Act
as against the
Indian
     Copyright Act, 1957
. They travel in their respective
     paths, not intended to cross. The scope of the
     amendments made in the year 2012 along with
Section 37
was correctly dealt with. This Court is of
     the view that the
Copyright Act
has rightly taken
     note of being the one which gives succour to the
     copyright holder as against the licensee, who may
     also be a BRR holder. It was rightly held that the
     provisions deal with the protection of the right of the
     copyright holder. It is rather pertinent to keep in
     mind the discussion on the
Copyright Act, 1957
,
7
which is to be seen contextually qua the issue i.e.,
     field being occupied. This Court also does not find
     anything wrong with the finding given on the so
     called concession given by the learned counsel for
     the TRAI being inconsequential, as the very
     jurisdiction of the Act itself was taken for
     consideration. The finding has to be seen
     contextually along with the other issues including
     the overall stand taken in the counter affidavit of
     respondents 1 to 4. Similarly the self imposed
     restrictions while invoking the extraordinary
     jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
     India, deserves to be concurred with.
     27.2. Though a submission has been made on the
     decision arrived at with respect to the fixation of cap
     at 15% discount on the MRP of the bouquet and the
     discounts given under the tariff order, the aforesaid
     decision cannot be a ground to hold that the
     ultimate conclusion arrived at on the other issues
     would necessarily follow suit. After all, as a
     reference Court, this Court is concerned with the
     views expressed by either of the learned Judges on
     the points of difference. Accordingly, the dissenting
     judgment stands concurred.
28. In the result, this reference qua points of
     difference stands ordered concurring with the
     dissenting judgment. No costs.”
5. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the appellants, has referred to several statutes and

judgments in the course of his detailed submissions. According

to the learned Senior Advocate, the TRAI Act was amended in
8
2000, as a result of which the
TRAI Act
was extended to

broadcasting services which were undefined.       By a Central

Government notification dated 9.1.2004, the
TRAI Act
was

expressly extended to broadcasting services, and certain

functions were allocated to TRAI in addition to those contained

in
Section 11(1)(a)
of the TRAI Act, as also to specify norms

and periodicity of revision of rates of pay channels. According

to   the   learned   Senior   Advocate,     the   definition   of

“telecommunication service” contained in
Section 2(1)(k)
of the

TRAI Act only enables TRAI to regulate transmission or

reception of broadcasting services, which essentially relates to

regulatory measures taken for carriage of these signals.
According to the learned Senior Advocate, his clients, namely,

broadcasters, do not have to obtain the permission of the

Government of India for uplinking their programmes with a

particular satellite at a particular frequency, after which

permission has to be obtained for downlinking such channels.
At this point, the broadcaster, post downlinking, sends the

signal to a multi-system operator (hereinafter referred to as an
9
“MSO”), who in turn sends the signal to a cable TV operator

from which it is beamed to the ultimate consumer watching the

television programmes. For this, the broadcasters pay a

distribution fee and a carriage fee for transportation of such

signal, then send the signals to the MSO, who in turn sends it

on to the cable TV operator, who beams the signal to the

ultimate   consumer.   Distribution   fee,   carriage   fee   and

networking capacity fee are all payable by the broadcaster, with

which the broadcaster can have no quarrel.         Equally, in a

situation where direct to home services are provided, instead of

the MSO one has persons, like, for example, TATA Sky, who

then beam the signal directly to the consumer via satellite. TRAI

under the
TRAI Act
cannot restrict pricing, bundling or

packaging done by the broadcaster, as TRAI’s functions kick in

under the
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995
(hereinafter referred to as the “Cable TV Act”) only after the

signal reaches the Cable TV operator. According to the learned

Senior Advocate, at a stage anterior to the Cable TV operator

beaming signals to the consumers, the broadcasters’ rights are
10
not covered by the
TRAI Act
, which regulates only carriage, but

by the
Copyright Act, 1957
, which regulates content.            Dr.

Singhvi took us through the Statement of Objects and Reasons

for the
TRAI Act
, the Preamble thereof, and in particular
Sections 2(1)(k)
,
11
and
36
, to contend that this Act is

“carriage-centric”, and is thus limited to regulation of service in

transmission alone and does not extend to or include the

subject matter or content of the transmission.
The Copyright

Act
, on the other hand, is “content-centric” and deals with

intellectual property rights which broadcasters have in the form

of both copyright, as well as broadcast reproduction right inter

alia under
Section 37
of the Copyright Act. He relied heavily on

the 2012 amendment to the
Copyright Act
, and in particular on

Chapter 8 of the said Act. According to him, tariff, which relates

to content, is governed by the
Copyright Act
and not by the
TRAI Act
, whereas transmission and delivery to the consumer,

namely,   carriage,   alone   pertains   to   TRAI’s   jurisdiction.
According to him, the impugned clauses of the Regulation as

well as the Tariff Order impact and have the effect of regulating
11
pricing and terms and conditions of licensing of TV channels,

including their packaging, bundling and other manner of offering

the said channels and their underlying programmes, being

films, TV shows, etc., which are all aspects of intellectual

property rights covered by the
Copyright Act
. He relied heavily

upon the Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with

Prasar Bharati) Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the

“
Sports Act
”), by way of contrast, and stated that in this Act the

definitions   of   “broadcaster”, “broadcasting”, “broadcasting

service” and “content” made it clear that the reach of this Act

was not merely confined to transmission of signal but extended

to content as well, and argued that the difference therefore in

the definitions contained in the
Sports Act
would show that the

reach of the
TRAI Act
in contrast was limited and did not go to

content. He also relied strongly upon the Cable TV Act and in

particular on the definitions of “broadcaster” and “cable

operator” therein, as well as Section 4A and
5
thereof, read with

the Rules framed thereunder, which would show that “content”

could certainly be regulated by TRAI under the
Sports Act
, but
12
only in the manner provided by that Act and from the stage of

the cable TV operator to the consumer and not before. It is

thus clear that this being the case, the aforesaid regulations are

outside the power of TRAI under the
TRAI Act
and must thus

be struck down.
6. Shri P. Chidambaram, learned Senior Advocate appearing

on behalf of some of the appellants, argued in support of Dr.

Singhvi.   He referred, in particular, to the definitions contained

in
Sections 2(dd)
and
2(ff)
of the Copyright Act and stated that

“broadcast” would only mean keeping in readiness a set of TV

channels, which may or may not be further carried by the MSO

of the Cable TV Operator. According to him, in substance, the

impugned Regulation and Tariff Order went beyond the

jurisdiction of TRAI under the
TRAI Act
in that they sought to

regulate “content” which would mean the original work such as

a book, which could then be made into a film and finally

broadcast by the appellants. Anything which impinges upon the

aforesaid “content” in terms of making, buying, packaging or

marketing, including licensing and assignment, would directly
13
be covered by the
Copyright Act
and would, therefore, be

outside the jurisdiction of the
TRAI Act
. He also strongly relied

upon the judgment of this Court in
Petroleum and Natural Gas

Regulatory Board v. Indraprastha Gas Ltd.
, (2015) 9 SCC

209, to state that in a parallel fact circumstance, no tariff could

be fixed by the Board for the commodity in question, but only

for carriage of the said commodity through pipelines.
7. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Advocate appearing

on behalf of TRAI, countered each of these submissions.
According to the learned Senior Advocate, a reading of the
TRAI Act
, together with the Statement of Objects and Reasons,

would show that it was an Act conceived in the public interest in

order to protect the interests of both service providers like the

broadcasters here, as well as the consumers. Interest of the

consumers of broadcasting services is therefore one of the

paramount considerations when one comes to the authority or

jurisdiction of TRAI under the said Act.        According to the

learned Senior Advocate, from the stage of the teleport from

which a TV channel is uplinked by a broadcaster to a satellite
14
and then downlinked to an MSO, permissions of the Central

Government have to be taken for both uplinking and

downlinking, under guidelines issued, which he took us through.
The said guidelines would show that content is certainly

regulated at this stage, as TV channels which are contrary to

the security of the state, for example, would not be allowed to

be beamed.     According to him, regardless of whether the

teleport from which the broadcaster’s signal is uplinked to a

satellite is owned by the broadcaster, or is beamed by a person

other than the broadcaster, a licence under
Section 4
of the

Telegraph Act and
Section 5
of the Wireless Telegraphy Act is

a sine qua non for operating a teleport and that therefore it is

wholly fallacious to say that broadcasters need not be licencees

under the
Telegraph Act
when they broadcast signals, either

from their own teleport, or in conjunction with the owner of a

teleport, which reach the ultimate consumer in India. According

to the learned Senior Advocate, therefore, a constricted reading

of the
TRAI Act
would stultify the nature of the beneficial

legislation contained therein, which is to look after consumer
15
interests as well.   It is clear therefore that the definition of

“telecommunication service” in
Section 2(1)(k)
cannot be read

in the manner suggested by Dr. Singhvi, and would include,

when it comes to broadcasters, beaming and transmission of

signals from the teleport onwards right up till the stage of the

MSO and the cable TV operator thereafter. He stressed upon
Section 11(1)(b)
in particular and stated that in order to ensure

effective interconnection between different service providers, it

was necessary to lay down regulations made under
Section 36
of the Act that balanced the interest of broadcasters with the

interest of consumers. He was at pains to point out that at no

stage does either the Regulation or the Tariff Order seek to

regulate, directly or indirectly, the content of the matter

contained in the television channel that is beamed.       As an

example, he stated that neither the Regulation nor the Tariff

Order interferes with what could be beamed by the broadcaster,

but only to the manner of such beaming, keeping the interest of

both the broadcaster as well as the ultimate consumer in mind.
He also took us through the consultation papers which
16
preceded the draft regulation which was framed, and pointed

out that most of what was contained in the impugned

Regulation and Tariff Order, was either requested by the

broadcasters themselves or suggested by them to safeguard

their interests, which TRAI has in principle followed. What is

interesting to note is that it was only at a later stage, before the

draft regulation was made, that references to content and the
Copyright Act
were made solely as an afterthought. He also

relied upon the Cable TV Act and stated that it was important to

note that it was the same regulator, namely, TRAI, who had to

regulate the same signal from broadcaster to MSO, MSO to

Cable TV operator and Cable TV operator to consumer. It

would be extremely anomalous to find that from Cable TV

operator onwards regulations such as those made by TRAI in

the present case would pass muster, but not from the stage of

broadcaster to MSO and MSO to Cable TV operator. He made

it clear that the
Sports Act
would have no application in the

present case as it dealt with the compulsory broadcast of

certain sports events by broadcasters, which was why content
17
was referred to in the said Act. He reiterated that at no stage

does TRAI seek to or in fact regulate content of what is

broadcasted so that any reference to this Act would be wholly

irrelevant for the purpose of deciding this case.       He also

strongly relied upon
Sections 3AA
and
4
of the Telegraph Act to

buttress his submission. According to him, since the
Copyright

Act
operates in a distinct and separate field from the
TRAI Act
,

equally the red herring of the
Copyright Act
would have no real

relevance to the powers and functions of TRAI acting under the
TRAI Act
. He also cited certain decisions which will be referred

to later in this judgment.
8. Shri Vikas Singh, learned Senior Advocate also appearing

on behalf of TRAI, referred to
Section 2(1)(k)
of the TRAI Act in

order to explain that the main provision and the proviso had to

be harmonised in the manner suggested by the Delhi High

Court in Star India Pvt. Ltd. v. TRAI, (2018) 146 DLT 455, and

that, so harmonised, it is clear that the main provision did not

include broadcasting services only for the time being.      The

proviso which was added by the Amendment Act of 2000 made
18
it clear that the time had come to include broadcasting services

as well. He further argued that the appellants in the present

case had been taking contradictory stands throughout. As an

example of such stand, he referred to an Order of the

Competition Commission of India dated 27.2.2018, in which he

referred to the stand of the appellants stating that the

Competition Commission had no jurisdiction to look into pricing

and the manner of offering TV channels, which lies in the

domain of the sectoral regulator TRAI and is, therefore, an

occupied field. He also referred to how the analogue system

led to great leakages which led to less revenue and how the

movement towards digitisation, therefore, gave broadcasters a

great fillip in their revenue.      He also referred to the

consultations that went on between all stakeholders and

consumers which led up to the impugned Regulation, which

was a Regulation which balanced the interests of broadcasters

and consumers.
9. Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned Senior Advocate appearing

on behalf of the multi-system operators, placed strong reliance
19
on Regulations 3(1) and 3(2) of the impugned Regulation,

which, according to him, have not been challenged by the

appellants.   These   regulations   make     it   clear   that   the

broadcasters have to offer TV channels on a non-discriminatory

basis.    The only reason why pricing is referred to in the

impugned Regulation is to fulfil
Regulation 3(2)
, which is to

ensure that the offer made is non-discriminatory and, therefore,

the Regulation and the Tariff Order read as a whole would, in

fact, not impact content at all but be regulations for carriage of

the signals stricto senso. He relied on judgments which held

that TRAI’s regulatory powers are extremely wide.          He also

relied upon several provisions of the
Copyright Act
, including

Section 52(1)(b), which made it clear that there would be no

infringement of copyright, assuming the arguments of the

appellants to be correct, when there is transient or incidental

storage of a work or performance purely in the technical

process of electronic transmission or communication to the

public.
20
10.   Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate, appeared on

behalf of direct-to-home companies. He referred to and relied

upon various provisions of the
Copyright Act
, in particular,
Section 37
thereof, making it clear that the broadcast

reproduction right referred to is born only after the broadcast

which has passed down from the broadcaster through the MSO

to the cable operator to the consumer and/or through the DTH

service provider to the consumer is over. He stressed the fact

that this right comes in only when a re-broadcast or a

subsequent second broadcast takes place after the original

broadcast, which would not be covered by the Regulation or the

Tariff Order in the present case.
11.   Shri Krishnan Venugopal, learned Senior Advocate

appearing for some of the consumers, referred to the Standing

Committee of Parliament, in which it was pointed out that

digitisation of cable TV services, by switching from the older

analogue system in phases from 2012 onwards, had greatly

increased the revenue of broadcasters and stated that these

benefits could not possibly be denied by the broadcasters. In
21
addition, the selfsame broadcasters have been regulated

throughout and are raising questions relating to jurisdiction only

after the present Regulation and Tariff Order have been made

largely with their consent. He also cited certain decisions on

the reach of TRAI under the
TRAI Act
.
12.   Having heard learned counsel for the parties, it is

important to first deal with the
TRAI Act
. In Secretary, Ministry

of Information & Broadcasting, Govt. of India & Ors. v.
Cricket Association of Bengal, (1995) 2 SCC 161, this Court

referred to the pressing need to create a comprehensive

enactment regulating airwaves, being public property. Public

interest demanded that service providers be regulated and the

usage of the airwaves through frequencies be regulated.         A

direction was thus issued to the Government of India to

formulate a comprehensive enactment            after noting the

inadequacies that were felt in the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
.
This Court stated:
22
“Per Sawant, J.:
78. There is no doubt that since the
airwaves/frequencies are a public property and are
also limited, they have to be used in the best
interest of the society and this can be done either by
a central authority by establishing its own
broadcasting network or regulating the grant of
licences to other agencies, including the private
agencies. What is further, the electronic media is
the most powerful media both because of its audio-
visual impact, and its widest reach covering the
section of the society where the print media does
not reach. The right to use the airwaves and the
content of the programmes therefore, needs
regulation for balancing it and as well as to prevent
monopoly of information and views relayed, which is
a potential danger flowing from the concentration of
the right to broadcast/telecast in the hands either of
a central agency or of few private affluent
broadcasters. That is why the need to have a
central agency representative of all sections of the
society free from control both of the Government
and the dominant influential sections of the society.
xxx xxx xxx
120. … Hence every citizen has a right to use the
best means available for the purpose. At present,
electronic media, viz., T.V. and radio, is the most
effective means of communication. …
xxx xxx xxx
122. We, therefore, hold as follows:
[i] The airwaves or frequencies are a public
     property. Their use has to be controlled and
     regulated by a public authority in the interests
     of the public and to prevent the invasion of
     their rights. Since the electronic media
23
involves the use of the airwaves, this factor
     creates an in-built restriction on its use as in
     the case of any other public property.
     [ii] The right to impart and receive information
     is a species of the right of freedom of speech
     and expression guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution. A citizen has the
     fundamental right to use the best means of
     imparting and receiving information and as
     such to have an access to telecasting for the
     purpose. However, this right to have an
     access to telecasting has limitations on
     account of the use of the public property, viz.,
     the airwaves, involved in the exercise of the
     right and can be controlled and regulated by
     the public authority. This limitation imposed by
     the nature of the public property involved in
     the use of the electronic media is in addition to
     the restrictions imposed on the right to
     freedom of speech and expression under
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution.
[iii] The Central Government shall take
     immediate steps to establish an independent
     autonomous public authority representative of
     all sections and interests in the society to
     control and regulate the use of the airwaves.
     [iv] Since the matches have been telecast
     pursuant to the impugned order of the High
     Court, it is not necessary to decide the
     correctness of the said order.
Per Jeevan Reddy J.:
201.1.(b) Airwaves constitute public property and
must be utilised for advancing public good. No
individual has a right to utilise them at his choice
24
and pleasure and for purposes of his choice
      including profit…
      201.1.(c) Broadcasting media is inherently different
      from Press or other means of communication/
      information. The analogy of press is misleading and
      inappropriate. This is also the view expressed by
      several Constitutional Courts including that of the
      United States of America.
xxx xxx xxx
      201.4.
The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
is totally
      inadequate to govern an important medium like the
      radio and television, i.e., broadcasting media.
The
      Act
was intended for an altogether different purpose
      when it was enacted. This is the result of the law in
      this country not keeping pace with the technological
      advances in the field of information and
      communications. While all the leading democratic
      countries have enacted laws specifically governing
      the broadcasting media, the law in this country has
      stood still, rooted in the
Telegraph Act
of 1885.
Except
Section 4(1)
and the definition of telegraph,
      no other provision of the Act is shown to have any
      relevance to broadcasting media. It is, therefore,
      imperative that the parliament makes a law placing
      the broadcasting media in the hands of a
      public/statutory corporate or the corporations, as the
      case may be. This is necessary to safeguard the
      interests of public and the interests of law as also to
      avoid uncertainty, confusion and consequent
      litigation.”
13.   Accordingly, the Government formulated a National

Telecom Policy in 1994 and then decided to promulgate an
25
ordinance which led to the enactment of the
TRAI Act
. The

Statement of Objects and Reasons of this Act stressed:
“1. In the context of the National Telecom Policy,
     1994, which amongst other things, stresses on
     achieving the universal service, bringing the quality
     of telecom services to world standards, provisions
     of wide range of services to meet the customers
     demand at reasonable price, and participation of the
     companies registered in India in the area of basic as
     well as value added telecom services as also
     making arrangements for protection and promotion
     of consumer interest and ensuring fair competition,
     there is a felt need to separate regulatory functions
     from service providing functions which will be in
     keeping with the general trend in the world. In the
     multi-operator situation arising out of opening of
     basic as well as value added services in which
     private operator will be competing with Government
     operators, there is a pressing need for an
     independent telecom regulatory body for regulation
     of telecom services for orderly and healthy growth
     of telecommunication infrastructure apart from
     protection of consumer interest.
2. In view of above, it was proposed to set up an
     independent Telecom Regulatory Authority as a
     non-statutory body and for that purpose the Indian
     Telegraph (Amendment) Bill, 1995 was introduced
     and then passed by Lok Sabha on 6th August, 1995.
At the time of consideration of the aforesaid Bill in
     Rajya Sabha, having regard to the sentiments
     expressed by the Members of Rajya Sabha and of
     the views of the Standing Committee on
     Communication which expressed a hope that steps
     will be taken to set up a Statutory Authority, it is
26
proposed to set up the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India as a statutory authority.
3. The proposed Authority will consist of a
Chairperson and minimum two and maximum four
members. A person who is or has been a Judge of
the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court
will be eligible to be appointed as a Chairperson of
the authority. A member shall be a person who has
held as the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary
to the Government of India or any equivalent post in
the Central Government or the State Government
for minimum period of three years.
4. The powers and functions of the Authority, inter
alia, are-
(i) ensuring technical compatibility and
     effective inter-relationship between different
     service providers;
(ii) regulation of arrangement amongst service
     providers of sharing their revenue derived
     from providing telecommunication service;
(iii) ensuring compliance of licence conditions
     by all service providers;
(iv) protection of the interest of the consumers
     of telecommunication service;
(v) settlement of disputes between service
     providers;
(vi)  fixation  of  rates   for   providing
     telecommunication service within India and
     outside India;
(vii) ensuring effective compliance of universal
     service obligations.
27
5. The Authority shall have an inbuilt dispute
      settlement mechanism including procedure to be
      followed in this regard as well as a scheme of
      punishment in the event of non-compliance of its
      order.
6. The Authority will have to maintain transparency
      while exercising its powers and functions. The
      powers and functions would enable the Authority to
      perform a role of watchdog for the telecom sector in
      an effective manner.
7. In order that the Authority functions in a truly
      independent manner and discharges its assigned
      responsibilities effectively, it is proposed to vest the
      Authority with a statutory status.
8. As the Parliament was not in session, the
      President promulgated the Telecom Regulatory
      Authority of India Ordinance, 1996 on the 27th
      January, 1996 for the aforesaid purpose.
9. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied.)
14.   The said Act was amended by Act 2 of 2000, which

substituted the Preamble of the TRAI Act thus:
“
An Act
to provide for the establishment of
      the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India and the
      Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
      Tribunal to regulate the telecommunication services,
      adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals and to
      protect the interests of service providers and
      consumers of the telecom sector, to promote and
28
ensure orderly growth of the telecom sector and for
      matters connected therewith or incidental thereto”
                                     (Emphasis supplied.)
15.   The Amendment Act of 2000 added a proviso to the

definition of “telecommunication service” under
Section 2(1)(k)
,

permitting the Central Government to notify other services to be

telecommunication services including broadcasting services.
The relevant provisions of the
TRAI Act
are, therefore, set out

hereinbelow:
“2(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
      requires,-
xxx xxx xxx
(e) “licensee” means any person licensed under
      sub-section (1) of
Section 4
of the Indian Telegraph
      Act, 1885 (13 of 1885) for providing specified public
      telecommunication services;
(ea) “licensor” means the Central Government or
      the telegraph authority who grants a licence under
      Section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885;
      xxx xxx xxx
(j) “service provider” means the Government as a
      service provider and includes a licensee;
(k) “telecommunication service” means service of
      any description (including electronic mail, voice
      mail, data services, audio tax services, video tax
29
services, radio paging and cellular mobile telephone
services) which is made available to users by
means of any transmission or reception of signs,
signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence
of any nature, by wire, radio, visual or other
electromagnetic means but shall not include
broadcasting services.
Provided that the Central Government may notify
other service to be telecommunication service
including broadcasting services.
xxx xxx xxx
11. Functions of Authority.— (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 (13 of 1885), the functions of the Authority
shall be to—
(a) make recommendations, either suo motu or on a
request from the licensor, on the following matters,
namely:—
(i) need and timing for introduction of new
     service provider;
(ii) terms and conditions of licence to a service
     provider;
(iii) revocation of licence for non-compliance
     of terms and conditions of licence;
(iv) measures to facilitate competition and
     promote efficiency in the operation of
     telecommunication services so as to facilitate
     growth in such services;
(v) technological improvements in the services
     provided by the service providers;
30
(vi) type of equipment to be used by the
     service providers after inspection of
     equipment used in the network;
(vii) measures for the development of
     telecommunication technology and any other
     matter relatable to telecommunication industry
     in general;
(viii) efficient   management    of   available
     spectrum;
(b) discharge the following functions, namely:—
(i) ensure compliance of terms and conditions
     of licence;
(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in the
     terms and conditions of the licence granted
     before the commencement of the Telecom
     Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment)
     Act, 2000, fix the terms and conditions of
     inter-connectivity   between    the    service
     providers;
(iii) ensure technical compatibility and
     effective inter-connection between different
     service providers;
(iv) regulate arrangement amongst service
     providers of sharing their revenue derived
     from providing telecommunication services;
(v) lay-down the standards of quality of
     service to be provided by the service
     providers and ensure the quality of service
     and conduct the periodical survey of such
     service provided by the service providers so
     as to protect interest of the consumers of
     telecommunication service;
31
(vi) lay-down and ensure the time period for
      providing local and long distance circuits of
      telecommunication between different service
      providers;
(vii) maintain register of inter-connect
      agreements and of all such other matters as
      may be provided in the regulations;
(viii) keep register maintained under clause
(vii) open for inspection to any member of
      public on payment of such fee and compliance
      of such other requirement as may be provided
      in the regulations;
(ix) ensure effective compliance of universal
      service obligations;
(c) levy fees and other charges at such rates and in
respect of such services as may be determined by
regulations;
(d) perform such other functions including such
administrative and financial functions as may
entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the recommendations of the Authority
specified in clause (a) of this sub-section shall not
be binding upon the Central Government:
Provided further that the Central Government shall
seek the recommendations of the Authority in
respect of matters specified in sub-clauses (i) and
(ii) of clause (a) of this sub-section in respect of new
licence to be issued to a service provider and the
Authority shall forward its recommendations within a
period of sixty days from the date on which that
Government sought the recommendations:
32
Provided also that the Authority may request the
Central Government to furnish such information or
documents as may be necessary for the purpose of
making recommendations under sub-clauses (i) and
(ii) of clause (a) of this sub-section and that
Government shall supply such information within a
period of seven days from receipt of such request:
Provided also that the Central Government may
issue a licence to a service provider if no
recommendations are received from the Authority
within the period specified in the second proviso or
within such period as may be mutually agreed upon
between the Central Government and the Authority:
Provided also that if the Central Government,
having considered that recommendation of the
Authority, comes to a prima facie conclusion that
such recommendation cannot be accepted or needs
modifications, it shall refer the recommendation
back to the Authority for its reconsideration, and the
Authority may, within fifteen days from the date of
receipt of such reference, forward to the Central
Government its recommendation after considering
the reference made by that Government. After
receipt of further recommendation if any, the Central
Government shall take a final decision.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885
(13 of 1885), the Authority
may, from time to time, by order, notify in the Official
Gazette the rates at which the telecommunication
services within India and outside India shall be
provided under this Act including the rates at which
messages shall be transmitted to any country
outside India:
Provided that the Authority may notify different rates
for different persons or class of persons for similar
telecommunication services and where different
33
rates are fixed as aforesaid the Authority shall
record the reasons therefor.
(3) While discharging its functions under sub-
section (1), or sub-section (2) the Authority shall not
act against the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign States, public order, decency
or morality.
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while
exercising its powers and discharging its functions.
xxx xxx xxx
36. Power to make regulations.— (1) The
Authority may, by notification, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely :—
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority
and the procedure to be followed at such meetings
under sub-section (1) of
Section 8
, including
quorum necessary for the transaction of business;
(b) the transaction of business at the meetings of
the Authority under sub-section (4) of
Section 8
;
(c) [* * *]
(d) matters in respect of which register is to be
maintained by the Authority under sub-clause (vii) of
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 11
;
(e) levy of fee and lay down such other
requirements on fulfilment of which a copy of
34
register may be obtained under sub-clause (viii) of
      clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 11
;
(f) levy of fees and other charges under clause (c)
      of sub-section (1) of
Section 11
.”
16.   The proviso to
section 2(1)(k)
was challenged in the Delhi

High Court, which challenge was repelled by the Delhi High

Court in Star India Private Limited v. TRAI & Ors., (supra.).
An SLP from the said judgment was also dismissed. Acting

under
Section 2(1)(k)
, the Central Government issued two

notifications on 9.1.2004. S.O.44(E) reads as follows:-
“S.O. 44(E). – In exercise of the powers conferred
      by the proviso to clause (k) of sub-section (1) of
section 2
of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
      India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997), the Central
      Government hereby notifies the broadcasting
      services    and     cable     services    to    be
      telecommunication service.
[Notification No. 39 issued by Ministry of
      communication and Information Technology dated 9
      January 2004. S.O. No. 44(E) issued by TRAI, vide
      F.No. 13-1/2004]”

S.O.45(E) reads as follows:-
“S.O.45(E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by
      clause (d) of sub-clause (1) of
section 11
of the
      Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24
      of 1997) (hereinafter referred to as the Act), the
35
Central Government hereby entrusts the following
additional functions to the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India, established under Sub-section (1)
of
Section 3
of the Act, in respect of broadcasting
services and cable services, namely:-
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained
in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 11
of the
Act, to make recommendation regarding –
(a) the terms and conditions on which the
     ‘addressable systems’ shall be provided to
     customers.
Explanation – For the purposes of this clause,
‘addressable system’ with its grammatical variation,
means an electronic device or more than one
electronic devices put in an integrated system
through which signals of cable television network
can be sent in encrypted or unencrypted form,
which can be decoded by the device or devices at
the premises of the subscriber within the limits of
authorisation made, on the choice and request of
such subscriber, by the cable operator for that
purpose to the subscriber.
(b) the parameters for regulating maximum
     time for advertisements in pay channels as
     well as other channels.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (2) of
section 11
of the Act, also to specify
standard norms for, and periodicity of, revision of
rates of pay channels, including interim measures.
[Notification No. 39 issued by Ministry of
Communication and Information Technology, dated
9 January 2004, S.O. No. 45(E) issued by TRAI,
vide F.No. 13-1/2004]”
36
17.   We are concerned with the impugned Regulation that was

framed on 3.3.2017 under
Section 36
of the Act together with

the Tariff Order made on the same date. The regulations with

which we are directly concerned are set out hereunder:
“3. General obligations of broadcasters.— (1) No
      broadcaster shall engage in any practice or activity
      or enter into any understanding or arrangement
      including exclusive contracts with any distributor of
      television channels that prevents any other
      distributor of television channels from obtaining
      signals of television channel of such broadcaster for
      distribution.
(2) Every broadcaster shall, within sixty days of
      receipt of written request from a distributor of
      television channels for obtaining signals of
      television channel or within thirty days of signing of
      interconnection agreement with the distributor, as
      the case may be, provide, on non-discriminatory
      basis, the signals of television channel to the
      distributor or convey the reasons in writing for
      rejection of the request if the signals of television
      channel are denied to such distributor:
Provided that imposition of any term or condition by
      the broadcaster, which is unreasonable, shall be
      deemed to constitute a denial of request:
      Provided further that this sub-regulation shall not
      apply to a distributor of television channels, who
      requests signals of a particular television channel
      from a broadcaster while at the same time demands
      carriage fee for distribution of that television channel
      or who is in default of payment to the broadcaster
      and continues to be in such default.
37
(3) If a broadcaster, proposes or stipulates for,
directly or indirectly, placing the channel in any
specified position in the electronic programme guide
or assigning a particular channel number, as a pre-
condition for providing signals, such pre-condition
shall also amount to imposition of unreasonable
condition.
Explanation: For removal of doubt, it is clarified that
if a pay broadcaster offers discount, in non-
discriminatory manner, through its reference
interconnect offer on the maximum retail price of
pay channel, within the limit as specified in sub-
regulation (4) of regulation 7, to distributors of
television channels for placing the channel in any
specified position in the electronic programme guide
or assigning particular channel number, such offer
of discount shall not be considered a pre-condition.
(4) No broadcaster shall propose, stipulate or
demand for, directly or indirectly, packaging of the
channel in any particular bouquet offered by the
distributor of television channels to subscribers.
(5) No broadcaster shall propose, stipulate or
demand for, directly or indirectly, guarantee of a
minimum subscriber base or a minimum
subscription percentage for its channel or bouquet.
Explanation: For removal of doubt, it is clarified that
the subscription percentage of a channel or bouquet
refers to the percentage of subscribers subscribing
to a specific channel or bouquet out of average
active subscriber base of a distributor.
xxx xxx xxx
6. Compulsory offering of channels on a-la-carte
basis. - (1) Every broadcaster shall offer all its
television channels on a-la-carte basis to the
distributors of television channels:
38
Provided that the broadcaster may also offer its pay
channels, in addition to offering of pay channels on
a-la-carte basis, in form of bouquet:
Provided further that such bouquet shall not
contain—
(a) any ‘free-to-air channel’; and
(b) High definition (HD) and Standard
     Definition (SD) variants of the same channel.
7. Publication of reference interconnection offer
by broadcaster for pay channels.— (1) Every
broadcaster shall publish, on its website, reference
interconnection offer, in conformance with the
regulations and the tariff orders notified by the
Authority, for providing signals of all its pay
channels to the distributor of television channels—
(a) within sixty days of commencement of
     these regulations; and
(b) before launching of a pay channel. and
     simultaneously submit, for the purpose of
     record, a copy of the same to the Authority.
(2) The reference interconnection offer, referred to
in sub-regulation (1), shall contain the technical and
commercial terms and conditions relating to,
including but not limited to, maximum retail price per
month of pay channel, maximum retail price per
month of bouquet of pay channels, discounts, if any,
offered on the maximum retail price to distributors,
distribution fee, manner of calculation of
'broadcaster’s share of maximum retail price', genre
of pay channel and other necessary conditions:
Provided that a broadcaster may include in its
reference interconnection offer, television channel
or bouquet of pay channels of its subsidiary
39
company or holding company or subsidiary
company of the holding company, which has
obtained, in its name, the downlinking permission
for its television channels from the Central
Government, after written authorization by them.
Explanation: For the purpose of these regulations,
the definition of “subsidiary company” and “holding
company” shall be the same as assigned to them in
the
Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013).
(3) Every broadcaster shall declare a minimum
twenty percent of the maximum retail price of pay
channel or bouquet of pay channels, as the case
may be, as the distribution fee:
Provided that the distribution fee declared by the
broadcaster shall be uniform across all the
distribution platforms.
(4) It shall be permissible to a broadcaster to offer
discounts, on the maximum retail price of pay
channel or bouquet of pay channels, to distributors
of television channels, not exceeding fifteen percent
of the maximum retail price:
Provided that the sum of distribution fee declared by
a broadcaster under sub-regulation (3) and
discounts offered under this sub-regulation in no
case shall exceed thirty five percent of the
maximum retail price of pay channel or bouquet of
pay channels, as the case may be:
Provided further that offer of discounts, if any, to
distributors of television channels, shall be on the
basis of fair, transparent and non-discriminatory
terms:
Provided also that the parameters of discounts shall
be measurable and computable.
40
(5) Every broadcaster of pay channel shall mention
in its reference interconnection offer the names of
persons, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses
designated to receive request for receiving
interconnection from distributors of television
channels and grievance redressal thereof.
(6) The terms and conditions mentioned in the
reference interconnection offer shall include all
necessary and sufficient provisions, which make it a
complete interconnection agreement on signing by
other party, for distribution of television channels.
(7) The Authority, suo-motu or otherwise, may
examine the reference interconnection offer
submitted by a broadcaster and on examination if
the Authority is of the opinion that the reference
interconnection offer is not in conformance with the
provisions of the regulations and the tariff orders
notified by the Authority, it may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to such broadcaster,
direct such broadcaster to modify the said reference
interconnection offer and such broadcaster shall
amend reference interconnection offer accordingly
and publish the same within fifteen days of receipt
of the direction.
(8) Any amendment to the reference interconnection
offer shall be published in the same manner as
provided under the sub-regulations (1), (2), (3), (4),
(5) and (6) of this regulation.
(9) In the event of any amendment to the reference
interconnection offer by a broadcaster under sub-
regulation (8), the broadcaster shall give an option
to all distributors, with whom it has written
interconnection agreements in place, within thirty
days from the date of such amendment and it shall
be permissible to such distributors to enter into
fresh interconnection agreement in accordance with
41
the amended reference interconnection offer, within
thirty days from the date of receipt of such option, or
continue     with the      existing    interconnection
agreement.
xxx xxx xxx
10.     Interconnection    agreement         between
broadcaster and distributor of television
channels.— (1) No broadcaster shall provide
signals of pay channels to a distributor of television
channels without entering into a written
interconnection agreement with such distributor of
television channels.
(2) No distributor of television channels shall
distribute pay channels of any broadcaster without
entering into a written interconnection agreement
with such broadcaster.
(3) It shall be mandatory for a broadcaster and a
distributor of television channels to enter into written
interconnection agreement on a-la-carte basis for
distribution of pay channels.
xxx xxx xxx
11. Territory of interconnection agreement.— (1)
The interconnection agreement signed between a
broadcaster and a multi-system operator shall
include the following details for describing the
territory for the purpose of distribution of signals of
television channels –
(a) the registered area of operation of the
      multi-system operator as mentioned in the
      registration   granted  by   the    Central
      Government;
(b) the names of specific areas for which
      distribution of signals of television channels
42
has been agreed, initially, at the time of
     signing of the interconnection agreement; and
(c) the names of the corresponding states/
     union territories in which such agreed areas
     as referred in clause (b) of this sub-regulation
     are located.
(2) It shall be permissible to the multi-system
operator to distribute the channels beyond the areas
agreed under sub-regulation (1), by giving a written
notice to the broadcaster, after thirty days from the
date of receipt of such written notice by the
broadcaster and the said notice shall deemed to be
an addendum to the existing interconnection
agreement:
Provided that such areas fall within—
(a) the registered area of operation of the
     multi-system operator; and
(b) the states or union territories in which the
     multi-system operator has been permitted to
     distribute the signals of television channels
     under the interconnection agreement.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-regulation (2) shall
apply if written objections with reasons from the
broadcaster have been received by the multi-
system operator during the said thirty days notice
period: Provided that any objection by the
broadcaster, which is unreasonable, shall be
deemed to constitute a denial of provisioning of
signals beyond the areas agreed under the clause
(b) of sub-regulation (1).”
43
18.   The relevant clauses of the Tariff Order with which we are

directly concerned are set out hereunder:
“3. Manner of offering of channels by
      broadcasters.--- (1) Every broadcaster shall offer
      all its channels on a-la-carte basis to all distributors
      of television channels.
(2) Every broadcaster shall declare ----
(a) the nature of each of its channel either as
            ‘free-to-air’ or ‘pay’; and
(b) the maximum retail price, per month,
            payable by a subscriber for each of its pay
            channel offered on a-la-carte basis:
Provided that the maximum retail price of a pay
      channel shall be more than ‘zero’:
Provided further that the maximum retail price of a
      channel shall be uniform for all distribution
      platforms.
(3) It shall be permissible for a broadcaster to offer
      its pay channels in the form of bouquet(s) and
      declare the maximum retail price(s), per month, of
      such bouquet(s) payable by a subscriber:
Provided that, while making a bouquet of pay
      channels, it shall be permissible for a broadcaster to
      combine pay channels of its subsidiary company or
      holding company or subsidiary company of the
      holding company, which has obtained, in its name,
      the downlinking permission for its television
      channels, from the Central Government, after
      written authorization by them, and declare
      maximum retail price, per month, for such bouquet
      of pay channels payable by a subscriber:
44
Provided that such bouquet shall not contain any
pay channel for which maximum retail price per
month is more than rupees nineteen:
Provided further that the maximum retail price per
month of such bouquet of pay channels shall not be
less than eighty five percent of the sum of maximum
retail prices per month of the a-la-carte pay
channels forming part of that bouquet:
Provided further that the maximum retail price per
month of such bouquet of pay channels shall be
uniform for all distribution platforms:
Provided further that such bouquet shall not contain
any free-to-air channel:
Provided also that such bouquet shall not contain
both HD and SD variants of the same channel.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Order, the
definition of “subsidiary company” and “holding
company” shall be the same as assigned to them in
the
Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013).
(4) It shall be permissible for a broadcaster to offer
promotional schemes on maximum retail price(s)
per month of its a-la-carte pay channel(s):
Provided that period of any such scheme shall not
exceed ninety days at a time:
Provided further that the frequency of any such
scheme by the broadcaster shall not exceed twice
in a calendar year:
Provided further that the price(s) of a-la-carte pay
channel(s) offered under any such promotional
scheme shall be considered as maximum retail
price(s) during the period of such promotional
scheme:
45
Provided also that the provisions of Regulations and
Tariff Orders notified by the Authority shall be
applicable on the price(s) of a-la-carte pay
channel(s) offered under any such promotional
scheme.
(5) Every broadcaster, before making any change in
the nature of a channel or in the maximum retail
price of a pay channel or in the maximum retail
price of a bouquet of pay channels or in the
composition of a bouquet of pay channels, as the
case may be, shall follow the provisions of all the
applicable Regulations and Orders notified by the
Authority, including but not limited to the publication
of Reference Interconnection Offer.
4. Declaration of network capacity fee and
manner of offering of channels by distributors
of television channels.--- (1) Every distributor of
television channels shall declare network capacity
fee, per month, payable by a subscriber for availing
a distribution network capacity so as to receive the
signals of television channels:
Provided that the network capacity fee, per month,
for network capacity upto initial one hundred SD
channels, shall, in no case, exceed rupees one
hundred and thirty, excluding taxes:
Provided further that the network capacity fee, per
month, for network capacity in the slabs of twenty
five SD channels each, beyond initial one hundred
channels capacity referred to in first proviso to sub-
clause (1), shall, in no case, exceed rupees twenty
excluding taxes:
Provided also that one HD channel shall be treated
equal to two SD channels for the purpose of
calculating number of channels within the
distribution network capacity subscribed.
46
(2) Every distributor of television channels shall
offer all channels available on its network to all
subscribers on a-la-carte basis and declare
distributor retail price, per month, of each pay
channel payable by a subscriber:
Provided that the distributor retail price, per month,
payable by a subscriber to a distributor of television
channels for subscribing to a pay channel shall, in
no case, exceed the maximum retail price, per
month, declared by the broadcasters for such pay
channel.
(3) Every distributor of television channels shall
offer to all subscribers each bouquet of pay
channels offered by a broadcaster, and for which
interconnection agreement has been signed with
that broadcaster, without any alteration in its
composition and declare the distributor retail price,
per month, for such bouquet payable by a
subscriber:
Provided that the distributor retail price, per month,
payable by a subscriber to a distributor of television
channels for subscribing to a bouquet of pay
channels offered by the broadcaster shall in no case
exceed the maximum retail price, per month,
declared by the broadcasters for such bouquet of
pay channels:
Provided further that such bouquet shall not contain
any pay channel for which maximum retail price per
month declared by the broadcaster is more than
rupees nineteen:
Provided further that such bouquet shall not contain
any free-to-air channel:
Provided also that such bouquet shall not contain
both HD and SD variants of the same channel.
47
(4) It shall be permissible for a distributor of
television channels to offer bouquet(s) formed from
pay channels of one or more broadcasters and
declare distributor retail price(s) , per month, of such
bouquet(s) payable by a subscriber:
Provided that such bouquet shall not contain any
pay channel for which maximum retail price per
month declared by the broadcaster is more than
rupees nineteen:
Provided further that the distributor retail price per
month of such bouquet of pay channels shall not be
less than eighty five percent of the sum of distributor
retail prices per month of a-la-carte pay channels
and bouquet(s) of pay channels forming part of that
bouquet:
Provided further that the distributor retail price per
month of a bouquet of pay channels offered by a
distributor of television channels shall, in no case,
exceed the sum of maximum retail prices per month
of a-la-carte pay channels and bouquet(s) of pay
channels, declared by broadcasters, forming part of
that bouquet:
Provided further that such bouquet shall not contain
any free-to-air channel:
Provided also that such bouquet shall not contain
both HD and SD variants of the same channel.
Explanation: For the removal of doubt it is hereby
clarified that a distributor of television channels
while forming bouquet under this clause shall not
break a bouquet of pay channels offered by a
broadcaster to form two or more bouquet(s) at
distribution level.
48
(5) It shall be permissible for a distributor of
television channels to offer bouquet(s) formed from
free-to-air channels of one or more broadcasters.
(6) No distributor of television channels shall charge
any amount, other than the network capacity fee,
from its subscribers for subscribing to free-to-air
channels or bouquet(s) of free-to air channels.
(7) Within the distribution network capacity
subscribed, in addition to channels notified by
Central Government to be mandatorily provided to
all the subscribers, a subscriber shall be free to
choose any free-to-air channel(s), pay channel(s),
or bouquet(s) of channels offered by the
broadcaster(s) or bouquet(s) of channels offered by
distributors of television channels or a combination
thereof:
Provided that if a subscriber opts for pay channels
or bouquet of pay channels, he shall be liable to pay
an amount equal to sum of distributor retail price(s)
for such channel(s) and bouquets in addition to
network capacity fee.
(8) Subject to sub-clause (1) of clause 4, a
distributor of television channels shall not increase
the network capacity fee for a period of six months
from the date of such notification: Provided that a
distributor of television channels, before making any
change in the network capacity fee, shall at least
thirty days prior to the scheduled change---
(a) inform the Authority; and
(b) inform the subscribers by running scroll on
     the channel.”
49
19.   In the judgment of Sundar,J., in the Division Bench of the

Madras High Court, a useful table is set out which not only

states the provisions that have been challenged, but the

specific ground on which they have been challenged.               We,

therefore, reproduce this table in our judgment:-
“Provisions of the Interconnection Regulation which
      Regulate content
      Sl.   Provision                  Ground
      No.
1.    6(1) All channels (pay     Impinges upon broadcaster's
            channels and free-to-air   ability to package a TV
            channels) to be offered    channel. No such restriction on
            on a-la-carte basis.       broadcaster under
Copyright
                                       Act
.
2.    Second proviso to 6(1)     Impinges upon broadcaster's
-    Bouquet     of   pay ability to package a TV
            channels shall not have channel. No such restriction on
            free-to-air channels.      broadcaster under Copyright
- HD and SD variant of Act.
same channel cannot be
            in same bouquet.
3.    Proviso      to  7(2)    - Impinges upon broadcaster's
            Bundling of third party ability to package a TV
            channels prohibited.       channel. No such restriction on
                                       broadcaster under
Copyright
                                       Act
.
4.    7(4) - Broadcaster can Directly regulates the pricing of
            offer     discounts     to a TV channel, thereby also
            distributor not exceeding regulating pricing of individual
            15% of MRP.                programmes.
5.    First proviso to 7(4) - Directly regulates the pricing of
            Sum of discount under a TV channel, thereby also
            7(4) and distribution fee regulating pricing of individual
            under 7(3) shall not programmes.
exceed 35% of MRP.
50
6.    10(3)   r/w    6(1)   -      Impinges upon broadcaster's
      Mandatory to enter into      freedom to offer pay channels
      agreement with DPO on        only as a part of bouquet and
      an a-la-carte basis for      not as a-la-carte. No such
      pay channels.                restriction    on      broadcaster
                                   under
Copyright Act
.
7.    11(2)     -      Deemed      Directly impinges the
      extension               of   broadcaster's right under 19(2)
      geographical territory.      to designate the geographical
                                   territory of exploitation.
Provisions of the Tariff Order which regulate content
Sl.   Provision                    Ground
No.
1.    3(1) - All channels to be    Impinges upon broadcaster's
      offered on a-la-carte        ability to package a TV
      basis                        channel. No such restriction
                                   on       broadcaster    under
Copyright Act
.
2.    3(2)(b) - Declaration of     Impinges upon broadcaster's
      MRP      of    a-la-carte    freedom to offer pay channels
      channel                      only as a part of bouquet and
                                   not as a-la-carte. No such
                                   restriction on broadcaster
                                   under
Copyright Act
.
3.    Second     proviso     to    Under Section 33A read with
      3(2)(b) - MRP of all pay     Rule 56 of the Copyright
      channels to be uniform       Rules, 2013, broadcaster has
      across       distribution    the right to decide separate
      platforms.                   MRP for different category of
                                   audience.
4.    First proviso to 3(3) -      Impinges upon broadcaster's
      Bundling of third party      ability to package a TV
      channels prohibited.         channel. For example, third
                                   party channels cannot be part
                                   of the same bouquet. No
                                   such        restriction     on
                                   broadcaster under
Copyright
                                   Act
.
5.    Second proviso to 3(3) -     Directly regulates the pricing
      MRP of pay channel in        of a TV channel, thereby also
51
bouquet not to exceed         regulating pricing of individual
             INR 19/-                      programmes.
6.     Third proviso to 3(3) -       Directly regulates the pricing
             Bouquet price shall not       of a TV channel, thereby also
             be less than 85% of the       regulating pricing of individual
             sum of a-la-carte prices      programmes.
of individual channels in
             the bouquet.
7.     Fourth proviso to 3(3) -      Under Rule 56 of the
             MRP of all bouquets to        Copyright      Rules,      2013,
             be      uniform     across    broadcaster has the right to
             distribution platforms.       decide separate MRP for
                                           different      category        of
                                           audience.
8.     Fifth proviso to 3(3) -       Impinges upon broadcaster's
             Bouquet of pay channels       ability to package a TV
             shall not have free-to-air    channel. No such restriction
             channels.                     on      broadcaster        under
Copyright Act
.
9.     Sixth proviso to 3(3) -       Impinges upon broadcaster's
             HD and SD variant of          ability to package a TV
             same channel cannot be        channel. No such restriction
             in same bouquet.              on      broadcaster        under
Copyright Act
.
10.    3(4) - Restriction on         All these restrictions impinge
             promotion of bouquets,        broadcaster's      ability     to
             restriction     on    time,   commercially monetize his
             restriction on frequency.     content.
11.    4(2) - Distributor to offer   Indirectly impinges upon the
             all channels on a-la-carte    broadcaster's right to offer his
             basis.                        channels to the customers
                                           only as a bouquet and not as
                                           a-la-carte.”
20.   Since the Regulation made under
Section 36
of the said

Act is under challenge, it must first be stressed that a restrictive

meaning cannot be given to the words “regulation” or “regulate”,

as otherwise the very object of the Act would be stultified.
In
52
Deepak Theater v. State of Punjab
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 684,

a case which related to the
Punjab Cinemas (Regulation) Act,

1952
and Rules, this Court referred to the power of licensing

and regulation under the said Act as follows:
“5. Witnessing a motion picture has become an
     amusement to every person; a reliever to the weary
     and fatigued; a reveller to the pleasure seeker; an
     imparter of education and enlightenment enlivening
     to news and current events; disseminator of
     scientific knowledge; perpetuator of cultural and
     spiritual heritage, to the teeming illiterate majority of
     population. Thus, cinemas have become tools to
     promote welfare of the people to secure and protect
     as effectively as it may a social order as per
     directives of the State policy enjoined under
Article
     38
of the Constitution. Mass media, through motion
     picture has thus become the vehicle of coverage to
     disseminate cultural heritage, knowledge, etc. The
     passage of time made manifest this growing
     imperative and the consequential need to provide
     easy access to all sections of the society to seek
     admission into theatre as per his paying capacity.
Though the right to fix rates of admission is a
     business incident, the appellant having created an
     interest in the general public therein, it has become
     necessary for the State to step in and regulate the
     activity of fixation of maximum rates of admission to
     different classes, as a welfare weal. Thereby
     fixation of rates of admission became a legitimate
     ancillary or incidental power in furtherance of the
     regulation under the Act. Access to and admission
     into theatre is a facility and concomitant right to a
     cinegoing public. Classification of seats and fixation
     of rates of admission according to paying capacity
53
of a cinegoer is also an integral power of regulation.
Power to fix rates of admission includes power to
      amend and revise the rates from time to time. The
      statute vests that power in the licensing authority
      subject to control by the State Government. The
      fixation of the rates of admission has thus become
      an integral and essential part of the power and
      regulation of exhibition of cinematograph.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied.)
21.   In BSNL v. TRAI, (2014) 3 SCC 222, this Court held:
“80. After the Amendment of 2000, TRAI can either
      suo motu or on a request from the licensor make
      recommendations on the subjects enumerated in
Sections 11(1)(a)(i)
to (viii). Under
Section 11(1)(b)
,
      TRAI is required to perform nine functions
      enumerated in sub-clauses (i) to (ix) thereof. In
      these clauses, different terms like “ensure”, “fix”,
      “regulate” and “lay down” have been used. The use
      of the term “ensure” implies that TRAI can issue
      directions on the particular subject. For effective
      discharge of functions under various clauses of
Section 11(1)(b)
, TRAI can frame appropriate
      regulations. The term “regulate” contained in sub-
      clause (iv) shows that for facilitating arrangement
      amongst service providers for sharing their revenue
      derived from providing telecommunication services,
      TRAI can either issue directions or make
      regulations.
xxx xxx xxx
83.
In
K.   Ramanathan v. State       of     T.N. [K.
      Ramanathan
v. State of T.N., (1985) 2 SCC 116 :
1985 SCC (Cri) 162] , this Court interpreted the
      word “regulation” appearing in
Section 3(2)(d)
of the
      Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and observed:
      (SCC pp. 130-31, paras 18-20)
54
“18. The word ‘regulation’ cannot have any
rigid or inflexible meaning as to exclude
‘prohibition’. The word ‘regulate’ is difficult to
define as having any precise meaning. It is a
word of broad import, having a broad
meaning, and is very comprehensive in scope.
There is a diversity of opinion as to its
meaning and its application to a particular
state of facts, some courts giving to the term a
somewhat restricted, and others giving to it a
liberal, construction. The different shades of
meaning are brought out in Corpus Juris
Secundum, Vol. 76 at p. 611:
‘“Regulate” is variously defined as
      meaning to adjust; to adjust, order, or
      govern by rule, method, or established
      mode; to adjust or control by rule,
      method, or established mode, or
      governing principles or laws; to govern;
      to govern by rule; to govern by, or
      subject to, certain rules or restrictions; to
      govern or direct according to rule; to
      control, govern, or direct by rule or
      regulations.
“Regulate” is also defined as meaning to
      direct; to direct by rule or restriction; to
      direct or manage according to certain
      standards, laws, or rules; to rule; to
      conduct; to fix or establish; to restrain; to
      restrict.’
(See also Webster's Third New International
Dictionary, Vol. 2, p. 1913 and Shorter Oxford
Dictionary, Vol. 2, 3rd Edn., p. 1784.)
19. It has often been said that the power to
regulate does not necessarily include the
power to prohibit, and ordinarily the word
55
‘regulate’ is not synonymous with the word
‘prohibit’. This is true in a general sense and
in the sense that mere regulation is not the
same as absolute prohibition. At the same
time, the power to regulate carries with it full
power over the thing subject to regulation and
in absence of restrictive words, the power
must be regarded as plenary over the entire
subject. It implies the power to rule, direct and
control, and involves the adoption of a rule or
guiding principle to be followed, or the making
of a rule with respect to the subject to be
regulated. The power to regulate implies the
power to check and may imply the power to
prohibit under certain circumstances, as
where the best or only efficacious regulation
consists of suppression. It would therefore
appear that the word ‘regulation’ cannot have
any inflexible meaning as to exclude
‘prohibition’. It has different shades of
meaning and must take its colour from the
context in which it is used having regard to the
purpose and object of the legislation, and the
Court must necessarily keep in view the
mischief which the legislature seeks to
remedy.
20. The question essentially is one of degree
and it is impossible to fix any definite point at
which ‘regulation’ ends and ‘prohibition’
begins. We may illustrate how different minds
have differently reacted as to the meaning of
the word ‘regulate’ depending on the context
in which it is used and the purpose and object
of the legislation. In Slattery v. Naylor [(1888)
LR 13 AC 446 (PC)] the question arose before
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
whether a bye-law by reason of its prohibiting
internment altogether in a particular cemetery,
56
was ultra vires because the Municipal Council
     had only power of regulating internments
     whereas the bye-law totally prohibited them in
     the cemetery in question, and it was said by
     Lord Hobhouse, delivering the judgment of the
     Privy Council: (AC p. 447)
              ‘A rule or bye-law cannot be held as
              ultra vires merely because it prohibits
              where empowered to regulate, as
              regulation often involved prohibition.’”
xxx xxx xxx
87. Reference in this connection can also be made
to the judgment in
U.P. Coop. Cane Unions
Federations v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Assn.
[(2004)
5 SCC 430] In that case, the Court interpreted the
word “regulation” appearing in the
U.P. Sugarcane
(Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
and
observed: (SCC pp. 454-55, para 20)
     “20. … ‘Regulate’ means to control or to
     adjust by rule or to subject to governing
     principles. It is a word of broad impact having
     wide meaning comprehending all facets not
     only specifically enumerated in the Act, but
     also embraces within its fold the powers
     incidental to the regulation envisaged in good
     faith and its meaning has to be ascertained in
     the context in which it has been used and the
     purpose of the statute.”
88. It is thus evident that the term “regulate” is
elastic enough to include the power to issue
directions or to make regulations and the mere fact
that the expression “as may be provided in the
regulations” appearing in clauses (vii) and (viii) of
Section 11(1)(b)
has not been used in other clauses
of that sub-section does not mean that the
57
regulations cannot be framed under
Section 36(1)
on the subjects specified in sub-clauses (i) to (vi) of
Section 11(1)(b)
. In fact, by framing regulations
under
Section 36
, TRAI can facilitate the exercise of
functions under various clauses of
Section 11(1)(b)
including sub-clauses (i) to (vi).
89. We may now advert to
Section 36
. Under sub-
section (1) thereof TRAI can make regulations to
carry out the purposes of the
TRAI Act
specified in
various provisions of the
TRAI Act
including
Sections 11
,
12
and
13
. The exercise of power
under
Section 36(1)
is hedged with the condition
that the regulations must be consistent with the
TRAI Act
and the rules made thereunder. There is
no other restriction on the power of TRAI to make
regulations. In terms of
Section 37
, the regulations
are required to be laid before Parliament which can
either approve, modify or annul the same.
Section
36(2)
, which begins with the words “without
prejudice to the generality of the power under sub-
section (1)” specifies various topics on which
regulations can be made by TRAI. Three of these
topics relate to meetings of TRAI, the procedure to
be followed at such meetings, the transaction of
business at the meetings and the register to be
maintained by TRAI. The remaining two topics
specified in clauses (e) and (f) of
Section 36(2)
are
directly referable to
Sections 11(1)(b)(viii)
and
11(1)(c)
. These are substantive functions of TRAI.
However, there is nothing in the language of
Section 36(2)
from which it can be inferred that the
provisions contained therein control the exercise of
power by TRAI under
Section 36(1)
or that
Section
36(2)
restricts the scope of
Section 36(1)
.”
                                (Emphasis supplied.)
58
22.   However, learned counsel for the appellants relied upon

Cellular Operators Assn. of India v. TRAI, (2016) 7 SCC 703

and, in particular, paragraph 41 thereof, which reads as follows:
“41. We find that the impugned Regulation is not
      referable to
Sections 11(1)(b)(i)
and (v) of the Act
      inasmuch as it has not been made to ensure
      compliance with the terms and conditions of the
      licence nor has it been made to lay down any
      standard of quality of service that needs
      compliance. This being the case, the impugned
      Regulation is dehors
Section 11
but cannot be said
      to be inconsistent with
Section 11
of the Act. This
      Court has categorically held in BSNL [BSNL
      v. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, (2014) 3
      SCC 222] judgment that the power under
Section
      36
is not trammelled by
Section 11
. This being so,
      the impugned Regulation cannot be said to be
      inconsistent with
Section 11
of the Act. However,
      what has also to be seen is whether the said
      Regulation carries out the purpose of the Act which,
      as has been pointed out hereinabove, under the
      amended Preamble to the Act, is to protect the
      interests of service providers as well as consumers
      of the telecom sector so as to promote and ensure
      orderly growth of the telecom sector. Under
Section
      36
, not only does the Authority have to make
      regulations consistent with the Act and the Rules
      made thereunder, but it also has to carry out the
      purposes of the Act, as can be discerned from the
      Preamble to the Act. If, far from carrying out the
      purposes of the Act, a regulation is made contrary
      to such purposes, such regulation cannot be said to
      be consistent with the Act, for it must be consistent
      with both the letter of the Act and the purposes for
      which the Act has been enacted. In attempting to
59
protect the interest of the consumer of the telecom
      sector at the cost of the interest of a service
      provider who complies with the leeway of an
      average of 2% of call drops per month given to it by
      another Regulation, framed under
Section
      11(1)(b)(v)
, the balance that is sought to be
      achieved by the Act for the orderly growth of the
      telecom sector has been violated. Therefore, we
      hold that the impugned Regulation does not carry
      out the purpose of the Act and must be held to be
      ultra vires the Act on this score.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied.)
23.   What is important to note from this judgment is that the

balance that was sought to be maintained between protecting

the interest of service providers and consumers was destroyed

by the impugned regulations. What is important from our point

of view, however, is that under
Section 36
of the TRAI Act, the

Authority is empowered to carry out the purposes of the said

Act as can be discerned from the Preamble to the Act. What is

clear from the amended Preamble to the Act is that the

interests of service providers and consumers are of paramount

importance, both of which have a role to play when regulations

are framed under
Section 36
.
60
24.   Learned counsel for the appellants also relied upon

Petroleum     and    Natural     Gas    Regulatory      Board     v.
Indraprastha Gas Ltd. (supra.). In this case, the
Petroleum

and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006
was the subject

matter of discussion by this Court. This Court, after construing

the Act, held that where there is a cassus omissis, such lacuna

cannot be filled up by the judicial interpretative process. Thus,

entities which are neither “common carriers” nor “contract

carriers” within the tariff regulating powers of the Board under

the Act were not held amenable to regulation.          Further, the

reach of the Act, as is clear from a reading of
Sections 20
to
22
would make it clear that transportation tariffs for common

carriers and contract carriers alone could be regulated by the

Board. This would naturally not include a regulation which will

pertain to network tariff for city or local gas distribution network

as such a network is neither a common carrier nor a contract

carrier covered by the Act.     Further, the laying down of the

compression charge for CNG gas would also, therefore, be

wholly outside the reach of the said Act. This judgment again
61
has no application to the facts of the present case, given the

fact that the Preamble read with
Section 11(2)
makes it clear

that the Regulation and Tariff Order made thereunder would

both be within the reach of TRAI under the
TRAI Act
.
25.   At this stage, it is also important to set out some of the

provisions of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
.
This Act
was

amended in 2004 to include
Section 3(1AA)
. The relevant

sections of this Act are set out hereinbelow:
“3.(1AA) “telegraph” means any appliance,
      instrument, material or apparatus used or capable
      of use for transmission or reception of signs,
      signals, writing, images, and sounds or intelligence
      of any nature by wire, visual or other electro
      magnetic emissions, Radio waves or Hertzian
      waves, galvanic, electric or magnetic means;
      Explanation.- “Radio waves” or “Hertzian waves”
      means electro magnetic waves of frequencies lower
      than 3,000 giga-cycles per second propagated in
      space without artificial guide.
xxx xxx xxx
4. Exclusive privilege in respect of telegraphs,
      and power to grant licences.— (1) Within India,
      the Central Government shall have the exclusive
      privilege of establishing, maintaining and working
      telegraphs:
Provided that the Central Government may grant a
      license, on such conditions and in consideration of
62
such payments as it thinks fit, to any person to
establish, maintain, or work a telegraph within any
part of India:
Provided further that the Central Government may,
by rules made under this Act and published in the
Official Gazette, permit, subject to such restrictions
and conditions as it thinks fit, the establishment,
maintenance and working—
(a) of wireless telegraphs on ships within
      Indian territorial waters and on aircrafts within
      or above India, or Indian territorial waters, and
(b) of telegraphs other than            wireless
      telegraphs within any part of India.
Explanation.— The payments made for the grant of
a licence under this sub-section shall include such
sum attributable to the Universal Service Obligation
as may be determined by the Central Government
after considering the recommendation made in this
behalf by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
established under sub-section (1) of
Section 3
of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24
of 1997).
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, delegate to the telegraph
authority all or any of its powers under the first
proviso to sub-section (1).
The exercise by the telegraph authority of any
power so delegated shall be subject to such
restrictions and conditions as the Central
Government may, by the notification, think fit to
impose.”
63
26.
Sections 2(2)
and
5
of the Indian Wireless Telegraphy

Act, 1933 are also set out hereinbelow:
“2(2) “wireless telegraphy apparatus” means any
      apparatus, appliance, instrument or material used or
      capable of use in wireless communication, and
      includes any article determined by rule made under
      Section 10 to be wireless telegraphy apparatus, but
      does not include any such apparatus, appliance,
      instrument or material commonly used for other
      electrical purposes, unless it has been specially
      designed or adapted for wireless communication or
      forms part of some apparatus, appliance, instrument
      or material specially so designed or adapted, nor
      any article determined by rule made under Section
      10 not to be wireless telegraphy apparatus;
      xxx xxx xxx
5. Licenses.—The telegraph authority constituted
      under the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
(13 of 1885),
      shall be the authority competent to issue licenses to
      possess wireless telegraphy apparatus under this
      Act, and may issue licenses in such manner, on
      such conditions and subject to such payments as
      may be prescribed.”
27.   It is clear that only a person who is licensed under
Section 5
of the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act can use a

teleport from India from which a TV channel is to be uplinked to

a satellite. Equally, to be uplinked to a satellite and thereafter

downlinked from such satellite to an MSO, permission would be
64
required from the Central Government. This would be clear

from a reading of the separate guidelines for uplinking and

downlinking channels issued by the Government of India.
28.   So far as the uplinking guidelines are concerned, on

5.12.2011, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting

(Broadcasting Wing) set out detailed conditions by which the

uplinking of TV channels may be made. Under Clause 5.9 of

the said guidelines, the Government of India shall have the right

to suspend the permission of a company for a specified period

in the public interest, or in the interest of national security, to

prevent misuse.
29.   Similarly, insofar as the policy guidelines for downlinking

of TV channels is concerned, the Ministry has given detailed

guidelines of the same date, i.e., 5.12.2011.       Among other

things, it is stated:-
“2.4. No News and Current Affairs channel shall be
      permitted to be downlinked if it does not meet the
      following additional conditions:
2.4.1. That it does not carry any advertisements
             aimed at Indian viewers;
65
2.4.2. That it is not designed specifically for Indian
       audiences;
2.4.3. That it is a standard international channel;
2.4.4. That it has been permitted to be telecast in the
       country of its uplinking by the regulatory
       authority of that country;
Provided that the Government may waive/modify
the condition under clause 2.4.1 on a case-by-case
basis.
xxx xxx xxx
5.    BASIC CONDITIONS/OBLIGATIONS
5.1. The Company permitted to downlink
registered channels shall comply with the
Programme and Advertising Code prescribed under
the
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995
.
5.2. The company shall ensure compliance of the
provisions of Sports Broadcasting Signals
(Mandatory sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act 11 of
2007 and the Rules, Guidelines, Notifications issued
thereunder.
5.3. The applicant company shall adhere to any
other    Code/Standards       guidelines/restrictions
prescribed by Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting, Government of India for regulation of
content on TV channels from time to time.
5.4. The applicant company shall submit audited
annual accounts of its commercial operations in
India.
5.5. The applicant company shall obtain prior
approval of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting before undertaking any upgradation,
66
expansion or any other changes in the downlinking
and distribution system/network configuration.
5.6. The applicant company shall provide Satellite
TV Channel signal reception decoders only to
MSO/Cable Operators registered under the
Cable
Television Networks (Regulation) Act
1995 or to a
DTH operator registered under the DTH guidelines
issued by Government of India or to an Internet
Protocol Television (IPTV) Service Provider duly
permitted under their existing Telecom License or
authorized by Department of Telecommunications
or to a HITS operator duly permitted under the
policy guidelines for HITS operators issued by
Ministry   of   Information    and   Broadcasting,
Government of India to provide such service.
5.7. The applicant company shall ensure that any
of its channels, which is unregistered or prohibited
from being telecast or transmitted or re-transmitted
in India, under the
Cable Television Networks
(Regulation) Act
1995 or the DTH guidelines or any
other law for the time being in force, cannot be
received in India through encryption or any other
means.
5.8. The Union Government shall have the right to
suspend the permission of the company/registration
of the channel for a specified period in public
interest or in the interest of National security to
prevent the misuse of the channel. The company
shall immediately comply with any direction issued
in this regard.
5.9. The applicant company seeking permission to
downlink a channel shall operationalise the
channels within one year from the date of the
permission being granted by the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting failing which the
permission will liable to be withdrawn without any
67
notice in this regard. However, the company shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard
before such a withdrawal.
5.10. The company/channel shall adhere to the
norms, rules and regulations prescribed by any
regulatory authority set up to regulate and monitor
the Broadcast Services in the country,
5.11. The applicant company shall give intimation to
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting regarding
change in the directorship, key executives or foreign
direct investment in the company, within 15 days of
such a change taking place. It shall also obtain
security clearance for such changes in its directors
and key executives.
5.12. The applicant company shall keep a record of
programmes downlinked for a period of 90 days and
to produce the same before any agency of the
Government as and when required.
5.13. The applicant company shall furnish such
information as may be required by the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting from time to time.
5.14. The applicant company shall provide the
necessary monitoring facility at its own cost for
monitoring of programmes or content by the
representative of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting or any other Government agency as
and when required.
5.15. The applicant company shall comply with the
obligations and conditions prescribed in the
downlinking guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, and the specific
downlinking permission agreement and registration
of each channel.
68
5.16. In the event of any war, calamity/national
      security concerns, the Government shall have the
      power to prohibit for a specified period the
      downlinking/reception/transmission     and     re-
      transmission of any or all channels. The Company
      shall immediately comply with any such directions
      issued in this regard.”
30.   We are of the view that the provisions of the
TRAI Act
have to be viewed in the light of protection of the interests of

both service providers and consumers. This being so, it is clear

that no constricted meaning can be given to the provisions of

this Act.   It is important to remember that under
Section

11(1)(a)(iv)
, one of the functions of the Authority, though

recommendatory, is to facilitate competition and promote

efficiency in the operation of telecommunication services (which

includes broadcasting services) so as to facilitate growth in

such services. What is also clear from
Section 11(1)(b)
, is that

terms and conditions of interconnectivity between different

service providers have to be fixed, which necessarily includes

terms that relate not only to carriage simpliciter as submitted by

Dr. Singhvi, but to all terms and conditions of interconnectivity

between broadcaster, MSO, Cable TV operator and the
69
ultimate consumer, so as to ensure that the object of the Act is

carried out, namely, that both broadcasters and consumers get

a fair deal. Towards this end,
Section 11(2)
makes it clear that

the Authority may, from time to time, notify the rates at which

telecommunication services, including broadcasting services,

within India and outside India, shall be provided under this Act.
Dr. Singhvi argued that the literal language of this sub-section,

which would undoubtedly bring in rates laid down in the Tariff

Order, would have to be constricted by the language of the last

part of the provision, viz., “including the rates at which

messages shall be transmitted to any country outside India”.
We are afraid that this is against basic canons of construction,

as the expression “including” would only refer to a part of what

precedes the expression and cannot therefore constrict the part

that has gone before.     The plain literal language of
Section

11(2)
makes it clear that rates at which broadcasting services

are offered within and outside India can be fixed by TRAI. It is

clear therefore that when rates are fixed after several rounds of

consultations   between     various   service   providers    and
70
consumers, looking to the interest of each, it is impossible to

say that any broadcaster’s rights have been impinged upon.
Shri Dwivedi is absolutely right in saying that at no stage is

content of a TV channel sought to be regulated, and that pricing

relating to TV channels laid down in the Regulation and Tariff

Order is a balancing act between the rights of broadcasters and

the interests of consumers, which we may hasten to add has

not been impugned on the ground that any right or fundamental

right is violated, but only on the ground that the Regulation as

well as the Tariff Order are outside the “jurisdiction” of TRAI.
Dr. Singhvi’s argument on this score must therefore fail.
31.
In fact, in
Avishek Goenka v. Union of India
, (2012) 5

SCC 275, this Court has already held:
“18. If one examines the powers and functions of
      TRAI, as postulated under
Section 11
of the Act, it
      is clear that TRAI would not only recommend, to
      DoT, the terms and conditions upon which a licence
      is granted to a service provider but has to also
      ensure compliance with the same and may
      recommend revocation of licence in the event of
      non-compliance with the regulations. It has to
      perform very objectively one of its main functions
      i.e. to facilitate competition and promote efficiency
      in the operation of the telecommunication services,
71
so as to facilitate growth in such services. It is
      expected of this regulatory authority to monitor the
      quality of service and even conduct periodical
      survey to ensure proper implementation.”
32.   We must also hasten to add that the power under
Section

36(1)
of the Act is very wide and not constricted by the

provisions of
Section 11
, as was held in BSNL v. TRAI (supra.).
33.   Equally, in
Hotel & Restaurant Assn. v. Star India (P)

Ltd.
, (2006) 13 SCC 753, this Court has held:-
“24.
Section 11
of the TRAI Act provides for the
      functions of TRAI. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 11
of the TRAI Act empowers TRAI to make
      recommendations either suo motu or on the request
      from the licensor, on the matters enumerated
      therein. Clause (b) thereof empowers it inter alia to
      fix the terms and conditions of interconnectivity
      between the service providers.
25. Sub-section (2) of
Section 11
of the TRAI Act
      contains a non obstante clause providing
      that TRAI may frame from time to time by order(s)
      notified in the Official Gazette the rates at which the
      telecommunication services within India and outside
      India shall be provided under the said Act including
      the rates at which messages shall be transmitted to
      any country outside India. Proviso appended to sub-
section (2) thereof empowers TRAI to notify different
      rates for different persons or class of persons for
      similar telecommunication services and where
      different rates are fixed as aforesaid TRAI shall
      record the reasons therefor.
72
xxx xxx xxx
55. TRAI exercises a broad jurisdiction. Its
      jurisdiction is not only to fix tariff but also laying
      down terms and conditions for providing services.
      Prima facie, it can fix norms and the mode and
      manner in which a consumer would get the
      services.
56. The role of a regulator may be varied. A
      regulation may provide for cost, supply of service on
      non-discriminatory basis, the mode and manner of
      supply making provisions for fair competition
      providing for a level playing field, protection of
      consumers' interest, prevention of monopoly. The
      services to be provided for through the cable
      operators are also recognised. While making the
      regulations, several factors are, thus required to be
      taken into account. The interest of one of the
      players in the field would not be taken into
      consideration throwing the interest of others to the
      wind.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied.)
34.   It is interesting to note, as has been stated by Shri

Dwivedi, that in Star India’s response to the consultative paper

of 29.1.2016, Star India itself has requested that the Regulation

and Tariff Order be fixed on the basis of the principles that are

now contained therein. For example, Star India’s response to

whether a reasonable wholesale price cap can be ensured for

mass genres, was as follows:-
73
“Reasonable wholesale price cap to be ensured
for the mass genres
  • Channels need to be incentivized for creating
    diverse and innovative content
  • Incumbent flagship channels have been
    suffering from legacy price and bouquet
    freeze.
• All channels should earn fair share of
    consumers’ ARPU.
• Our research findings reveal that basis current
    ARPUs, share of viewership of flagship
    channels, and existing revenue share of the
    broadcasters in the addressable market, the
    value attributed by the market to the flagship
    channels is significantly more than the existing
    wholesale list prices of these channels.
  • Accordingly, the retail value ascribed to
    flagship    entertainment     channels     by
    consumers, translate into a wholesale price of
    Rs.11/- to Rs.28/-. For details refer to
    Annexure A.
  • Therefore, the wholesale cap should be
    Rs.28/- to allow for optimum monetization of
    the flagship channels. If the channel values
    are allowed to be corrected basis consumer
    demand the share of the channel in the
    ARPUs shall be realigned to reflect their true
    value proposition without leading to any
    arbitrary or perverse price hikes. Further the
    proposed discount cap will effectively
    eliminate pricing distortions.
• However, in the interest of enabling a smooth
    and seamless transition to full addressability
    without creating any unnecessary chaos we
74
are proposing the following caps, in the
            transition phase. Any lower cap will not only
            stifle investments in innovative content but
            also continue to restrict incumbent channels
            whose rates were frozen in 2003-2004 from
            realizing their real value.
Mass Genre                    Proposed
                                       Price
                                       Cap (Rs.)
      General                          12.00
      Entertainment
      (Hindi & Regional)


      Movies (Hindi &                  10.00
      Regional)


      Sports                           18.00
• These caps should be subject to automatic
           annual revision, basis inflation.”


While answering whether broadcasters should offer wholesale

discounts to distribution platform operators (hereinafter referred

to as a “DPO”) which should be transparently available as part

of the reference interconnect offer (hereinafter referred to as

“RIO”), Star India has stated:
75
“Wholesale discounts to be subject             to a
      maximum overall cap of 33%
         • As explained above, there are wide variety of
           parameters that a single broadcaster may
           want to drive basis various business
           requirements
         • 33% discount will be sufficient to effectively
           drive only a few business requirements
         • Any discounting cap lower than 33% will
           render       the    discounting structure
           ineffective/unworkable.”


Similarly, so far as high definition channels are concerned, Star

India had this to say:
“1. HD channels offer a viewer experience that is
      distinctly different from SD channels
- The production, transmission and re-
            transmission of HD channels entail substantial
            investments.
- HD channels offer distinctly superior audio and
            video quality to the viewers through cutting
            edge technology used right from shooting of
            content,       production,     post-production,
            transmission & re-transmission. For detailed
            explanation refer to Annexure B.
- The consumption of HD channel requires
            significant investment by the consumer in an
            HD TV and HD set-top box. As such, these
            channels are aspirational and for affluent
            audiences who demand better content &
            quality offering and have the capacity to pay
            for it.
76
2. Price forbearance for HD channels should
continue
- HD channel can be subscribed by only those
     subscribers who can afford specialized HD
     set-top box as well as HD TV, which comes at
     a premium.
- The HD channel market has witnessed a
     robust growth and has allowed broadcasters to
     invest in quality and innovative content. Over
     the last four years market forces have enabled
     the channels to discover their real prices and
     desired penetration.
- This has been possible because of the
     laudable decision of the Authority to keep HD
     channels outside the regulatory purview. With
     upcoming 3D, 4D and virtual reality it would
     indeed be a regressive step if the Authority
     were to now regulate HD channels thereby
     sending out a negative signal to potential
     investments in these technologies.
- Hence we recommend that the Authority
     should continue to keep HD channels outside
     the regulatory ambit.
- In order to protect the interest of subscribers
     and to foster further growth in this segment,
     we recommend that HD channels should
     adhere to twin conditions and discounting caps
     at the wholesale and retail.
- Discount on wholesale prices should be
     capped at 33% to ensure a viable a-la-carte
     fallback option for DPOs.
- Retail a-la-carte prices should be linked to
     wholesale prices (same linkage multiplier as
     used for SD channels).
- Discount at retail level also to be limited to
     33% to ensure a viable a-la-carte fallback
     option for consumer.
77
3. Bundling of HD and SD channels should not
     be allowed, both at wholesale and retail levels.
4. Charging of access fee for HD channels
     should not be allowed at retail level.
5. DPOs free to sell HD channels as a-la-carte as
     well as bouquet(s) of HD channels.
6. Consumers and DPOs should have a choice
     to subscribe to only HD channels or only SD
     channels or both combined but purchased
     separately.”


Equally, insofar as whether free to air and pay channel

bouquets are concerned, Star India itself stated that they

should not be bundled together thus:-
“FTA and Pay channels should not be bundled
     together
- As has been highlighted in the Preamble, we
           believe that FTA channels should be free to
           consumer.
- Pay and FTA channels should not be bundled
           in the same bouquet.
- The declaration of a-la-carte rate is only with
           regard to pay channels, as per existing
           regulations. Allowing a-la-carte pricing of FTA
           channels is thus not in accordance with the
           extent regulatory constructs.
- Pricing FTA channels at retail level and
           bundling them with Pay channels leads to
           price distortions by bloating the bouquet size
           and price, which is not in consumer interest.
78
▪ Creating separate pay bouquets will ensure
              consumers are provided true visibility of
              pay channel pricing.”
35.   It is only when TRAI issued a second consultation paper

dated 4.5.2016 that Star India submitted its response in June,

2016 where it raised for the first time the issue relating to the
Copyright Act
as an afterthought. What is important to notice is

that even in this response, Star India reiterated that discount

caps should be provided for as this checks discriminatory

behavior during negotiation and will facilitate designing of

discount criteria based on intelligible differentia which will help

serve the diverse needs of consumers. In a third response to

the draft regulations and tariff order, Star India raised

jurisdictional issues of TRAI.
36.   Pursuant to these and other inputs, TRAI has in its

explanatory memorandum given reasons for the Tariff Order as

follows:-
“64. The Authority has noted that at present the
      uptake of channels on a-la-carte basis is negligible
      as compared to the bouquet subscriptions. Analysis
      yields that the prime reason for such poor uptake of
79
a-la-carte channels is that the a-la-carte rates of
channels are disproportionately high as compared
to the bouquet rates and further, there is no well
defined relationship between these two rates. As
per data available with TRAI, some bouquets are
being offered by the distributors of television
channels at a discount of upto 80%-90% of the sum
of a-la-carte rates of pay channels constituting
those bouquets. These discounts are based on
certain eligibility criteria/conditions to be fulfilled by
the distributor of television channels in order to
avails those discounts from broadcasters. Such high
discounts force the subscribers to take bouquets
only and thus reduce subscriber choice. As a result,
while technically, a-la-carte rates of channels are
declared, these are illusive and subscribers are left
with no choice but to opt for bouquets. Bouquets
formed by the broadcasters contain only few
popular channels. The distributors of television
channels are often asked to take the entire bouquet
as otherwise they are denied the popular channels
altogether or given such popular channels at RIO
rates. To make the matters worse, the distributors of
television channels have to pay as if all the
channels in the bouquet are being watched by the
entire subscriber base, when in fact only the popular
channels will have high viewership. In such a
scenario, at the retail end, the distributors of
television channels somehow push these channels
to maximum number of subscribers so as to recover
costs. This marketing strategy based on bouquets
essentially results in ‘perverse pricing’ of bouquets
vis-à-vis the individual channels. As a result, the
customers are forced to subscribe to bouquets
rather than subscribing to a-la-carte channels of
their choice. Thus, in the process, the public, in
general, end up paying for “unwanted” channels and
this, in effect, restricts subscriber choice. Bundling
80
of large number of unwanted channels in bouquets
also result in artificial occupation of distributors'
network capacity. This acts as an entry barrier for
newer TV channels.
65. In order to facilitate subscribers to exercise their
options in line with intention of lawmakers to choose
individual channels, in the new framework the
broadcasters will declare to customers/subscribers
the MRP of their a-la-carte channels and bouquets
of pay channels. In order to ensure that prices of the
a-la-carte channels are kept reasonable, the
maximum discount permissible in formation of a
bouquet has been linked with the sum of the a-la-
carte prices of the of pay channels forming that
bouquet. A broadcaster can offer a maximum
discount of 15% while offering its bouquet of
channels over the sum of MRP of all the pay
channels in that bouquet so as to enable customer
choice through a-la-carte offering and also prevent
skewed a-la-carte and bouquet pricing (refer
example 1). The bouquet(s) offered by the
broadcasters to subscribers shall be provided by the
distributors of television channels to the subscribers
without any alteration in composition of the
bouquet(s). In case a broadcaster feels that more
discount can be provided in formation of the
bouquet, it indirectly means that a-la-carte prices at
the first stage has been kept high and there is a
need to revise such a-la-carte prices downwardly.
Full flexibility has been given to broadcasters to
declare price of their pay channels on a-la-carte
basis to correct such situations, if it may come.
66. Some stakeholders are of the opinion that
limiting the discount to subscribers while forming
bouquets is anti subscriber. In this regard, while the
Authority wants to facilitate the availability of a-la-
carte choice to customers/subscribers, it does not
81
intend to encroach upon the freedom of
broadcasters and distributors to do business. During
the discussions in the Parliament on the motion for
consideration of the Cable Television Networks
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2011, the then
Minister    of    Information     and    Broadcasting
emphasised the need to establish a system for
subscribers to choose a-la-carte channels of choice.
The Authority has also made several attempts in
this regard, but for one or the other reason could not
succeed. Here it is important to understand that the
Authority has not been able to do pricing of
channels in the absence of pricing of content.
Present trends indicate that majority of channels are
priced much below the prevailing ceiling, but higher
ceilings were prescribed to give flexibility to
broadcasters to monetise their channels and
freedom to do business. Further, different channels
even in the same genre may have varying cost of
production and potential to monetise, but within the
framework. A broadcaster may price even non-
driver channels at a much higher value that they
can command. Non-discovery of reasonable price of
a channel in a market is one of the constraints that
can be manipulated and misused to price a channel
in a-la-carte from which is illusionary. Such high a-
la-carte prices permits broadcasters/distributors to
provide high discounts to push non-drivers channels
in form of bouquets to the subscribers while
reducing the probability of choosing the a-la-carte
channels of choice as required by the lawmakers in
the Parliament. The possibility to forcing bouquets
over a-la-carte choice by using higher discounts can
be further understood by following example, where
a broadcaster has a total of 35 pay channels out of
which only 5 are driver channels:
82
Channel                       Discount   Discount   Discount   Discount   Discount
                              75%        60%        45%        30%        15%

Channel 1 a-la-carte price    19         19         19         19         19

Channel 2 a-la-carte price    10         10         10         10         10

Channel 3 a-la-carte price    12         12         12         12         12
Channel 4 a-la-carte price    5          5          5          5          5
Channel 5 a-la-carte price    4          4          4          4          4
Sum of a-la-carte prices of 5 50         50         50         50         50
driver pay channels



Sum of a-la-carte prices of 30 30        30         30         30         30
non-driver pay channels (@
Re 1)

Total price of 35 a-la-carte 80          80         80         80         80
pay channels



Price of bouquet of 35 pay 20            32         44         56         68
channels (with discount on
sum of a-la-carte prices)




The above table clearly indicates that in case the
amount of discount offered by the broadcaster, over
the sum of a-la-carte prices of pay channels, while
forming the bouquet of those pay channels is very
high (75%), the price of bouquet becomes much
lower than the sum of a-la-carte prices to the extent
that it is almost equal to a-la-carte price of one
driver channel. Such amount of discount is anti
customer/subscriber as it discourages a-la-carte
selection of channels. As the amount of discount on
formation of bouquet decreases, the difference
between the prices of bouquet and the sum of a-la-
carte prices also decreases. In case the amount of
discount is fixed at 15%, the price of bouquet
becomes higher than the sum of a-la-carte prices of
driver channels; thereby encouraging a subscriber
to choose a-la-carte channels of his choice.
83
67. In the present regulatory framework incidences
have come to the knowledge where discount upto
90% on the declared RIO prices has been given by
broadcasters. Obviously such efforts kill competition
and reduce a-la-carte choice which is anti-
subscriber. Accordingly, the Authority has
prescribed a discount of 15% to be provided by
broadcasters at wholesale level and further 15% to
be provided by distributors at retail level. The net
effect to subscribers at retail level will be a discount
of approximately 30% on the bouquets of channels.
Therefore flexibility of formation of bouquet has
been given to broadcasters and MSOs both to such
an extent that total permissible discount does not kill
the a-la-carte choice. The Authority has been
careful in prescribing a framework which does not
encourage non-driver channel to be pushed to
subscribers against their choice. Non-driver
channels which are provided as part of bouquets
not only kill choice of the ala-carte channels but also
eat away the channel carrying capacity available
with distributors which may result in artificial
capacity constraints at distribution platforms for
launch of new/competitive channels. Such
restrictions are anti-subscriber and have to be
carefully handled. Accordingly, the Authority has
consciously decided the present framework of
prescribing relationship between a-la-carte and
bouquet       prices     to    protect     interest   of
customers/viewers and as well as those of service
providers. However, the Authority will keep a watch
on the developments in the market and may review
the maximum permissible discount while offering a
bouquet, in a time period of about two years.
68. A broadcaster is free to offer its pay channels in
the form of bouquet(s) to customers. While
subscribing to bouquet, a customer may not be
aware of the price of each channel forming the
84
bouquet. Abnormal high price of a pay channel may
      result in higher price of a bouquet leading to
      adverse impact on subscribers' interests. It is an
      established fact that bundling of channels
      complicates and obscures their pricing. Prices are
      obscured because subscribers do not always
      understand the relationship between the bundle
      price and a price for each component. However, the
      bundling of channels offers convenience to the
      subscribers as well as services providers in
      subscription management. Keeping in view these
      realties and to protect the interests of subscribers,
      the Authority has prescribed a ceiling of Rs. 19/- on
      the MRP of pay channels which can be provided as
      part of a bouquet. Therefore, any pay channel
      having MRP of more than Rs. 19/- cannot become
      part of any bouquet. The amount of Rs. 19/- has
      been prescribed keeping in view the prevailing
      highest genre wise ceilings of Rs. 15.12 for all
      addressable systems between broadcaster & DPOs
      at wholesale level and further enhancing it 1.25
      times to account for DPOs distribution fee.
      Broadcasters also have complete freedom to price
      their pay channels which do not form part of any
      bouquet and offered only on a-la-carte basis.
      Similar conditions will also be applicable to DPOs
      for formation of the bouquets. However, the
      Authority will keep a watch on the developments in
      the market and may review the manner in which a
      channel can be provided as part of a bouquet, in a
      time period of about two years.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied.)
37.   It can thus be seen that both the Regulation as well as the

Tariff Order have been the subject matter of extensive
85
discussions between TRAI, all stake holders and consumers,

pursuant to which most of the suggestions given by the

broadcasters themselves have been accepted and incorporated

into the Regulation and the Tariff Order.       The Explanatory

Memorandum shows that the focus of the Authority has always

been the provision of a level playing field to both broadcaster

and subscriber. For example, when high discounts are offered

for bouquets that are offered by the broadcasters, the effect is

that subscribers are forced to take bouquets only, as the a-la-
carte rates of the pay channels that are found in these

bouquets are much higher. This results in perverse pricing of

bouquets vis-à-vis individual pay channels. In the process, the

public ends up paying for unwanted channels, thereby blocking

newer and better TV channels and restricting subscribers’

choice.   It is for this reason that discounts are capped. While

doing so, however, full flexibility has been given to broadcasters

to declare the prices of their pay channels on an a-la-carte

basis. The Authority has shown that it does not encroach upon

the freedom of broadcasters to arrange their business as they
86
choose. Also, when such discounts are limited, a subscriber

can then be free to choose a-la-carte channels of his choice.
Thus, the flexibility of formation of a bouquet, i.e., the choice of

channels to be included in the bouquet together with the

content of such channels, is not touched by the Authority. It is

only efforts aimed at thwarting competition and reducing a-la-
carte choice that are, therefore, being interfered with. Equally,

when a ceiling of INR 19 on the maximum retail price of pay

channels which can be provided as a part of a bouquet is fixed

by the Authority, the Authority’s focus is to be fair to both the

subscribers as well as the broadcasters.           INR 19 is an

improvement over the erstwhile ceiling of INR 15.12 fixed by

the earlier regulation which nobody has challenged.              To

maintain the balance between the subscribers’ interests and

broadcasters’ interests, again the Authority makes it clear that

broadcasters have complete freedom to price channels which

do not form part of any bouquet and are offered only on an a-la-
carte basis. As market regulator, the Authority states that the

impugned Regulation and Tariff Order are not written in stone
87
but will be reviewed keeping a watch on the developments in

the market.   We are, therefore, clearly of the view that the

Regulation and the Tariff Order have been made keeping the

interests of the stakeholders and the consumers in mind and

are intra vires the regulation power contained in
Section 36
of

the TRAI Act. Consequently, we agree with the conclusion of

the learned Chief Justice and the third learned Judge of the

Madras High Court that these writ petitions deserve to be

dismissed.
38.   Since submissions have been made by Dr. Singhvi on the

reach of various other Acts, it is a little important to deal with

the same.
39.   Dr. Singhvi relied heavily upon the
Sports Act
. The

Statement of Objects and Reasons of this Act makes it clear

that the distribution of broadcasting signals of sporting events of

public interest is not disseminated to persons who do not have

access to satellite and Cable TV, most of whom are in rural

areas. Since the downlinking and uplinking policy guidelines of

the Government have been challenged in courts as lacking
88
statutory sanction, it has become necessary that sporting

events of national importance reach the general public on a free

to air basis.    It is for this reason that the definitions of

“broadcaster”, “broadcasting”, etc. refer to content. The

following are certain relevant terms as defined under the
Sports

Act
:
“2.(1)(a) “broadcaster” means any person who
       provides a content broadcasting service and
       includes a broadcasting network service provider
       when he manages and operates his own television
       or radio channel service;
(b) “broadcasting” means assembling and
       programming any form of communication content,
       like signs, signals, writing, pictures, images and
       sounds, and either placing it in the electronic form
       on electro-magnetic waves on specified frequencies
       and transmitting it through space or cables to make
       it continuously available on the carrier waves, or
       continuously streaming it in digital data form on the
       computer networks, so as to be accessible to single
       or multiple users through receiving devices either
       directly or indirectly; and all its grammatical
       variations and cognate expressions;
(c) “broadcasting service” means assembling,
       programming and placing communication content in
       electronic form on the electro-magnetic waves on
       specified    frequencies   and    transmitting    it
       continuously through broadcasting network or
       networks so as to enable all or any of the multiple
       users to access it by connecting their receiver
89
devices to their respective broadcasting networks
and includes the content broadcasting services and
the broadcasting network services;
(d) “broadcasting networks service” means a
service, which provides a network of infrastructure
of cables or transmitting devices for carrying
broadcasting content in electronic form on specified
frequencies by means of guided or unguided
electro-magnetic waves to multiple users, and
includes the management and operation of any of
the following:
(i) Teleport/Hub/Earth Station;
(ii) Direct-to-Home      (DTH)     Broadcasting
     Network,
(iii) Multi-system Cable Television Network,
(iv) Local Cable Television Network,
(v) Satellite Radio Broadcasting Network,
(vi) any other network service as may be
     prescribed by the Central Government;
xxx xxx xxx
(h) “content” means any sound, text, data, picture
(still or moving), other audio-visual representation,
signal or intelligence of any nature or any
combination thereof which is capable of being
created,     processed,    stored,     retrieved   or
communicated electronically;
(i) “content broadcasting service” means the
assembling, programming and placing content in
electronic form and transmitting or retransmitting the
same on electro-magnetic waves on specified
frequencies, on a broadcasting network so as to
make it available for access by multiple users by
90
connecting their receiving devices to the network,
      and includes the management and operation of any
      of the following:
(i) terrestrial television service,
(ii) terrestrial radio service,
(iii) satellite television service,
(iv) satellite radio service,
(v) cable television channel service,
(vi) community radio service,
(vii) any other content broadcasting services
            as may be prescribed by the Central
            Government.”


The heart of the
Sports Act
is contained in
Sections 3
and
5
thereof, which state as follows:-
“3. Mandatory sharing of certain sports
      broadcasting signals.—(1) No content rights
      owner or holder and no television or radio
      broadcasting service provider shall carry a live
      television broadcast on any cable or Direct-to-Home
      network or radio commentary broadcast in India of
      sporting events of national importance, unless it
      simultaneously shares the live broadcasting signal,
      without its advertisements, with the Prasar Bharati
      to enable them to re-transmit the same on its
      terrestrial networks and Direct-to-Home networks in
      such manner and on such terms and conditions as
      may be specified.
91
(2) The terms and conditions under sub-section (1)
      shall also provide that the advertisement revenue
      sharing between the content rights owner or holder
      and the Prasar Bharati shall be in the ratio of not
      less than 75:25 in case of television coverage and
      50:50 in case of radio coverage.
(3) The Central Government may specify a
      percentage of the revenue received by the Prasar
      Bharati under sub-section (2), which shall be utilised
      by the Prasar Bharati for broadcasting other
      sporting events.
xxx xxx xxx
5. Power of the Central Government to issue
      Guidelines.—The Central Government shall take
      all such measures, as it deems fit or expedient, by
      way of issuing Guidelines for mandatory sharing of
      broadcasting signals with Prasar Bharati relating to
      sporting events of national importance:
Provided that the Guidelines issued before the
      promulgation of the Sports Broadcasting Signals
      (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Ordinance,
      2007 (Ord. 4 of 2007) shall be deemed to have
      been issued validly under the provision of this
      section.”
40.   Shri Dwivedi is therefore right that the object of the
Sports

Act
has nothing to do with the validity of the Regulation and

Tariff Order made by TRAI under the
TRAI Act
. Content is

referred to in the
Sports Act
only for the reason stated in the

Objects and Reasons. Secondly, as has correctly been argued
92
by Shri Dwivedi and as has been held by us above, the
TRAI

Act
, as well as the Regulation and Tariff Order, do not in any

manner affect the content of the TV channels that are

broadcast by the broadcasters in these cases.
41.   Dr. Singhvi then relied upon the Cable TV Act as follows:
“2.(a-i) “Authority” means the Telecom Regulatory
      Authority of India established under sub-section (1)
      of
Section 3
of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
      India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997);
(a-ii) “Broadcaster” means a person or a group of
      persons, or body corporate, or any organisation or
      body providing programming services and includes
      his or its authorised distribution agencies;
      (a-iii) “cable operator” means any person who
      provides cable service through a cable television
      network or otherwise controls or is responsible for
      the management and operation of a cable television
      network and fulfils the prescribed eligibility criteria
      and conditions;
(b) “cable service” means the transmission by
      cables of programmes including re-transmission by
      cables of any broadcast television signals;
(c) “cable television network” means any system
      consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
      associated     signal    generation,   control   and
      distribution equipment, designed to provide cable
      service for reception by multiple subscribers;
xxx xxx xxx
93
4-A. (3) If the Central Government is satisfied that it
is necessary in the public interest so to do, and if
not otherwise specified by the Authority, it may
direct the Authority to specify, by notification in the
Official Gazette, one or more free-to-air channels to
be included in the package of channels forming
basic service tier and any one or more such
channels may be specified, in the notification,
genre-wise for providing a programme mix of
entertainment, information, education and such
other programmes and fix the tariff for basic service
tier which shall be offered by the cable operators to
the consumers and the consumer shall have the
option to subscribe to any such tier:
Provided that the cable operator shall also offer the
channels in the basic service tier on a la carte basis
to the subscriber at a tariff specified under this sub-
section.
(4) The Central Government or the Authority may
specify in the notification referred to in sub-section
(3), the number of free-to-air channels to be
included in the package of channels forming basic
service tier for the purposes of that sub-section and
different numbers may be specified for different
States, cities, towns or areas, as the case may be.
xxx xxx xxx
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) “addressable system” means an electronic
      device (which includes hardware and its
      associated software) or more than one
      electronic device put in an integrated system
      through which signals of cable television
      network can be sent in encrypted form, which
      can be decoded by the device or devices,
      having an activated Conditional Access
94
System at the premises of the subscriber
within the limits of authorisation made,
through the Conditional Access System and
the subscriber management system, on the
explicit choice and request of such subscriber,
by the cable operator to the subscriber;
(b) “basic service tier” means a package of
free-to-air channels to be offered by a cable
operator to a subscriber with an option to
subscribe, for a single price to subscribers of
the area in which his cable television network
is providing service;
(c) “encrypted”, in respect of a signal of cable
television network, means the changing of
such signal in a systematic way so that the
signal would be unintelligible without use of an
addressable system and the expression
“unencrypted” shall be construed accordingly;
(d) “free-to-air channel”, in respect of a cable
television network, means a channel for which
no subscription fee is to be paid by the cable
operator to the broadcaster for its re-
transmission on cable;
(e) “pay channel”, in respect of a cable
television network, means a channel for which
subscription fees is to be paid to the
broadcaster by the cable operator and due
authorisation needs to be taken from the
broadcaster for its re-transmission on cable;
(f) “subscriber management system” means a
system or device which stores the subscriber
records and details with respect to name,
address and other information regarding the
hardware being utilised by the subscriber,
channels or bouquets of channels subscribed
95
to by the subscriber, price of such channels or
               bouquets of channels as defined in the
               system, the activation or deactivation dates
               and time for any channel or bouquets of
               channels, a log of all actions performed on a
               subscriber's record, invoices raised on each
               subscriber and the amounts paid or discount
               allowed to the subscriber for each billing
               period.
xxx xxx xxx
5. Programme code.—No person shall transmit or
      re-transmit through a cable service any programme
      unless such programme is in conformity with the
      prescribed programme code:
[***]”
42.   He then referred to Rule 6 of the Cable Television

Networks Rules, 1994, as follows:-
“6. Programme Code. –
      (1) No programme should be carried in the cable
      service which:-
(a) Offends against good taste or decency:
(b) Contains criticism of friendly countries;
(c) Contains attack on religions or
               communities   or     visuals   or   words
               contemptuous of religious groups or which
               promote communal attitudes;
96
(d) Contains anything obscene, defamatory,
deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos
and half truths;
(e) Is likely to encourage or incite violence or
contains anything against maintenance of law
and order or which promote-anti-national
attitudes;
(f) Contains anything amounting to contempt
of court;
(g) Contains aspersions against the integrity
of the President and Judiciary;
(h) Contains anything affecting the integrity of
the Nation;
(i) Criticises, maligns or slanders any
individual in person or certain groups,
segments of social, public and moral life of the
country ;
(j) Encourages superstition or blind belief;
(k) Denigrates women through the depiction in
any manner of the figure of a women, her form
or body or any part thereof in such a way as to
have the effect of being indecent, or
derogatory to women, or is likely to deprave,
corrupt or injure the public morality or morals;
(l) Denigrates children;
(m) Contains visuals or words which reflect a
slandering, ironical and snobbish attitude in
the portrayal of certain ethnic, linguistic and
regional groups;
(n) Contravenes the provisions           of    the
Cinematograph Act, 1952
.
97
(o) is not suitable for unrestricted public
     exhibition
Provided that no film or film song or film promo or
film trailer or music video or music albums or their
promos, whether produced in India or abroad, shall
be carried through cable service unless it has been
certified by the Central Board of Film Cetification
(CBFC)) as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition
in India.
Explanation – For the purpose of this clause, the
expression “unrestricted public exhibition” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it in the
Cinematograph Act, 1952
(37 of 1952);
(2) The cable operator should strive to carry
programmes in his cable service which project
women in a positive, leadership role of sobriety,
moral and character building qualities.
(3) No cable operator shall carry or include in his
cable service any programme in respect of which
copyright subsists under the
Copyright Act, 1972
(14 of 1972) unless he has been granted a licence
by owners of copyright under the Act in respect of
such programme.
(4) Care should be taken to ensure that
programmes meant for children do not contain any
bad language or explicit scenes of violence.
(5) Programmes unsuitable for children must not be
carried in the cable service at times when the
largest numbers of children are viewing.
(6) No cable operator shall carry or include in his
cable service any television broadcast or channel,
which has not been registered by the Central
Government for being viewed within the territory of
India
98
PROVIDED that a cable operator may continue to
      carry or include in his cable service any Television
      broadcast or channel, whose application for
      registration to the Central Government was made
      on or before 11th May, 2006 and is under
      consideration, for a period upto 31st May, 2008 or
      till such registration has been granted or refused,
      whichever is earlier
      PROVIDED further that channels uplinking from
      India, in accordance permission for uplinking
      granted before 2nd December, 2005, shall be
      treated as registered television channels and can be
      carried or included in the cable service.”
43.   The argument of Dr. Singhvi is that since this Act

regulates content downstream from the Cable TV operator to

the consumer, its absence in the
TRAI Act
is eloquent

testimony to the fact that content cannot be the subject matter

of the
TRAI Act
. As has been held by us hereinabove, the

same answer must obtain, namely, that this Act is also

irrelevant in the present case as the
TRAI Act
does not, as has

been held by us above, regulate the content of the TV channels

that are broadcasted by the broadcaster.
44.   The main thrust of the arguments of both Dr. Singhvi and

Mr. Chidambaram were also by copious reference to the
99
Copyright Act, 1957
, which, according to them, showed that

once the
Copyright Act
steps in, TRAI must necessarily step

out. They referred to certain provisions of this Act stage-wise.
The Copyright Act, 1957
as originally enacted stated in its

Objects and Reasons that: “it is necessary to enact an

independent self-contained law on the subject of copyright in

the light of growing public consciousness of the rights and

obligations of authors and in the light of experience gained in

the working of the existing law during the last forty years. New

and advanced means of communications like broadcasting,

litho-photography, etc., also call for certain amendments in the

existing law”, as a result of which certain rights akin to copyright

are conferred on broadcasting authorities in respect of

programmes broadcast by them.           In this Act, as originally

enacted,
Section 2(v)
defined “radio-diffusion” as follows:
“2(v). “radio-diffusion” includes communication to
      the public by any means of wireless diffusions
      whether in the form of sounds or visual images or
      both.”
100
45.
Section 37
, as originally enacted, recognised a broadcast

reproduction right by radio-diffusion only by the Government or

any other Authority of Government as follows:
“37. Broadcast Reproduction Right
      (1) Where any programme is broadcast by radio-
diffusion by the Government or any other
      broadcasting authority, a special right to be known
      as “broadcast reproduction right” shall subsist in
      such programme.
(2) The Government or other broadcasting
      authority, as the case may be, shall be the owner of
      the broadcast reproduction right and such right shall
      subsist until twenty-five years from the beginning of
      the calendar year next following the year in which
      the programme is first broadcast.
(3) During the continuance of a broadcast
      reproduction right in relation to any programme, any
      person, who,-
(a) without the licence of the owner of the
           right-
(i)   rebroadcasts the programme in
                 question or any substantial part thereof
                 or
(ii) causes the programme in question
                 or any substantial part thereof to be
                 heard in public; or
(b) without the licence of the owner of the
           right to utilise the broadcast for the purpose of
           making a record recording the programme in
           question or any substantial part thereof,
101
makes any such record, shall be deemed to
           infringe the broadcast reproduction right.”
46.
Section 38
, as originally enacted prescribed as under :
“38. Other provisions of this Act to apply to
      broadcast reproduction rights.
(1)
Sections 18
,
19
,
30
, 53, 55, 58, 64, 65 and 66
      shall, with any necessary adaptations and
      modifications, apply in relation to the broadcast
      reproduction right in any programme as they apply
      in relation to the copyright in a work :
xxx xxx xxx”
47.
Sections 18
and
19
of the Copyright Act deal with

assignment of copyright and royalty or other consideration

payable to the owner for such assignment.
Section 30
of the

Copyright Act refers to the right to licence any interest in

copyright by the author or his duly authorised agent.
48.   By the 1983 amendment to the
Copyright Act
,
Section

2(v)
defining radio-diffusion was deleted and instead
Section

2(dd)
was inserted defining “broadcast” as follows:
“2(dd). “broadcast” means communication to the
      public –
102
(i) By means of wireless diffusion, whether in
            any one or more of the forms or signs, sounds
            or visual images; or
(ii) By wire,
      and includes re-broadcast.”
49.
Section 2(ff)
was also inserted, defining “communication

to the public” as follows:
“2(ff) “communication to the public” means
      communication to the public in whatever manner,
      including communication through satellite.”
50.   Consequently,
Section 37
was also amended so as to

replace the expression “radio-diffusion” with the expression

“broadcast”.
51.   In 1994, consequent to treaty obligations imposed upon

India, broadcast reproduction rights were expanded to include

private broadcasting organisations. The Statement of Objects

and Reasons for the aforesaid amendment made it clear that:
“… The law relating to copyright and related rights
      has been under comprehensive review of the
      Government for some time, taking into account the
      difficulties expressed by different groups of
      copyright owners and others, the experience gained
      from the administration of the existing law and the
103
situation created by various             technological
      developments that have taken place.
2.
The Copyright Act, 1957
amended and
      consolidated the law relating to copyright in India. It
      was     further   amended      by the       Copyright
      (Amendment) Acts of 1983 and 1984 and certain
      improvements were effected.
By the Copyright
      (Amendment) Act, 1992
the term of copyright was
      further extended by a period of ten years. Now, it is
      considered appropriate to further amend the
      provisions of the
Copyright Act, 1957
-
xxx xxx xxx
            to further clarify the law in respect of cable,
            satellite and other means of simultaneous
            communication of works to more than one
            household or private place of residence,
            including the residential rooms of a hotel or
            hostel.
xxx xxx xxx
            to further improve the functioning of the
            Copyright Board;
to simplify and improve the law relating to
            copyright and related rights, in the interests of
            the general public, and in particular of the
            users as well as the owners of such rights.”
52.
Section 2(ff)
defining “communication to the public” was

substituted with a more comprehensive definition as follows:
“2(ff) “communication to the public” means making
      any work available for being seen or heard or
      otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or by any
104
means of display or diffusion other than by issuing
      copies of such work regardless of whether any
      member of the public actually sees, hears or
      otherwise enjoys the work so made available.
      Explanation: For the purpose of this clause,
      communication through satellite or cable or any
      other means of simultaneous communication to
      more than one household or place of residence
      including residential rooms or any hotel or hostel
      shall be deemed to be communication to the public.”
53.
Section 37
was entirely recast as follows :
“37. Broadcast reproduction right. - (1) Every
      broadcasting organisation shall have a special right
      to be known as ‘‘broadcast reproduction right’’ in
      respect of its broadcasts.
(2) The broadcast reproduction right shall subsist
      until twenty-five years from the beginning of the
      calendar year next following the year in which the
      broadcast is made.
(3) During the continuance of a broadcast
      reproduction right in relation to any broadcast, any
      person who without the licence of the owner of the
      right does any of the following acts of the broadcast
      or any substantial part thereof, -
(a) re-broadcasts the broadcast; or
(b) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen
           by the public on payment of any charges; or
(c) makes any sound recording or visual
           recording of the broadcast; or
(d) makes any reproduction of such sound
           recording or visual recording where such initial
105
recording was done without licence or, where
           it was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged
           by such licence; or
(e) sells or hires to the public, or offers for
           such sale or hire, any such sound recording or
           visual recording referred to in clause (c) or
           clause (d),
      shall, subject to the provisions of
section 39
, be
      deemed to have infringed the broadcast
      reproduction right.”
54.
Section 38
was substituted with a new Section 39A as

follows:
“39A. Other provisions applying to broadcast
      reproduction right and performer’s right.
(1)
Sections 18
,
19
,
30
, 53, 55, 58, 64, 65 and 66
      shall, with any necessary adaptations and
      modifications, apply in relation to the broadcast
      reproduction right in any broadcast and the
      performers’ right in any performance as they apply
      in relation to copyright in a work:
xxx xxx xxx”
55.
Sections 33
and 33A, which have been relied upon by the

learned counsel for the appellants, read as follows:
“33. Registration of copyright society.— (1) No
      person or association of persons shall, after coming
      into force of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994
commence or, carry on the business of issuing or
106
granting licences in respect of any work in which
copyright subsists or in respect of any other rights
conferred by this Act except under or in accordance
with the registration granted under sub-section (3):
Provided that an owner of copyright shall, in his
individual capacity, continue to have the right to
grant licences in respect of his own works
consistent with his obligations as a member of the
registered copyright society:
Provided further that the business of issuing or
granting licence in respect of literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works incorporated in a
cinematograph films or sound recordings shall be
carried out only through a copyright society duly
registered under this Act:
Provided also that a performing rights society
functioning in accordance with the provisions of
Section 33
on the date immediately before the
coming into force of the
Copyright (Amendment)
Act, 1994
shall be deemed to be a copyright society
for the purposes of this Chapter and every such
society shall get itself registered within a period of
one year from the date of commencement of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994
.
(2) Any association of persons which fulfils such
conditions as may be prescribed may apply for
permission to do the business specified in sub-
section (1) to the Registrar of Copyrights who shall
submit the application to the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to
the interests of the authors and other owners of
rights under this Act, the interest and convenience
of the public and in particular of the groups of
persons who are most likely to seek licences in
respect of the relevant rights and the ability and
107
professional competence of the applicants, register
such association of persons as a copyright society
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall not
ordinarily register more than one copyright society
to do business in respect of the same class of
works.
(3-A) The registration granted to a copyright society
under sub-section (3) shall be for a period of five
years and may be renewed from time to time before
the end of every five years on a request in the
prescribed form and the Central Government may
renew the registration after considering the report of
Registrar of Copyrights on the working of the
copyright society under
Section 36
:
Provided that the renewal of the registration of a
copyright society shall be subject to the continued
collective control of the copyright society being
shared with the authors of works in their capacity as
owners of copyright or of the right to receive royalty:
Provided further that every copyright society already
registered before the coming into force of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012
shall get itself
registered under this Chapter within a period of one
year from the date of commencement of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012
.
(4) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied
that a copyright society is being managed in a
manner detrimental to the interest of the authors
and other owners of right concerned, cancel the
registration of such society after such inquiry as
may be prescribed.
(5) If the Central Government is of the opinion that
in the interest of the authors and other owners of
right concerned or for non-compliance of Section
108
33-A, sub-section (3) of
Section 35
and
Section 36
or any change carried out in the instrument by
      which the copyright society is established or
      incorporated and registered by the Central
      Government without prior notice to it, it is necessary
      so to do, it may, by order, suspend the registration
      of such society pending inquiry for such period not
      exceeding one year as may be specified in such
      order under sub-section (4) and that Government
      shall appoint an administrator to discharge the
      functions of the copyright society.
33A. Tariff scheme by copyright societies.— (1)
      Every copyright society shall publish its tariff
      scheme in such manner as may be prescribed.
      (2) Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff
      scheme may appeal to the Appellate Board and the
      Board may, if satisfied after holding such inquiry as
      it may consider necessary, make such orders as
      may be required to remove any unreasonable
      element, anomaly or inconsistency therein:
Provided that the aggrieved person shall pay to the
      copyright society any fee as may be prescribed that
      has fallen due before making an appeal to
      the Appellate Board and shall continue to pay such
      fee until the appeal is decided, and the Board shall
      not issue any order staying the collection of such
      fee pending disposal of the appeal:
Provided further that the Appellate Board may after
      hearing the parties fix an interim tariff and direct the
      aggrieved parties to make the payment accordingly
      pending disposal of the appeal.”
56.   Equally,
Section 39
, as substituted by the amending Act

of 1994, reads as follows:
109
“39. Acts not infringing broadcast reproduction
      right or performer's right.— No broadcast
      reproduction right or performer's right shall be
      deemed to be infringed by—
(a) the making of any sound recording or
           visual recording for the private use of the
           person making such recording, or solely for
           purposes of bona fide teaching or research; or
(b) the use, consistent with fair dealing, of
           excerpts of a performance or of a broadcast in
           the reporting of current events or for bona fide
           review, teaching or research; or
(c) such other acts, with any necessary
           adaptations and modifications, which do not
           constitute infringement of copyright under
           Section 52.”
57.   The 2012 amendment to the
Copyright Act
was relied

upon and placed with great emphasis by learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellants.       The Statement of

Objects and Reasons of this amendment Act stated as follows :
“
The Copyright Act, 1957
was enacted to amend
      and consolidate the law relating to copyrights in
      India. To meet with the national and international
      requirements and to keep the law updated, the Act
      has been amended five times since then, once each
      in the years 1983, 1984, 1992, 1994 and 1999. The
      1994 amendment was a major one which
      harmonized the provisions of the Act with the Rome
      Convention, 1961 by providing protection to the
      rights of performers, producers of phonographs and
110
broadcasting organizations. It also introduced the
concept of registration of Copyright Societies for
collective management of the rights in each
category of copyrighted works. The last amendment
in 1999 introduced a few minor changes to copy
with the obligations under the Trade Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).
2.
The Act
is now proposed to be amended with
the object of making certain changes for clarity, to
remove operational difficulties and also to address
certain newer issues that have emerged in the
context of digital technologies and the Internet. The
two World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO)
Internet Treaties, namely, WIPO Copyright Treaty
(WCT), 1996 and WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT), 1996 have set the
international standards in these spheres. The WCT
and the WPPT were negotiated in 1996 to address
the challenges posed to the protection of Copyrights
and Related Rights by digital technology,
particularly with regard to the dissemination of
protected material over digital networks such as the
Internet. The member countries of the WIPO
agreed on the utility of having the Internet treaties in
the changed global technical scenario and adopted
them by consensus. In order to extend protection of
copyright material in India over digital networks
such as internet and other computer networks in
respect of literary, dramatic, musical and artistic
works, cinematograph films and sound recordings
works of performers, it is proposed amend the Act
to harmonise with the provisions of the two WIPO
Internet Treaties, to the extent considered
necessary and desirable. The WCT deals with the
protection for the authors of literary and artistic
works such as writings, computer programmes;
original databases; musical works; audiovisual
works; works of fine art and photographs. The
111
WPPT protects certain “related rights” which are the
      rights of the performers and producers of
      phonograms. However, India has not yet signed the
      above-mentioned two treaties. Moreover, the main
      object to make amendments to the Act is that it is
      considered that in the knowledge society in which
      we live today, it is imperative to encourage creativity
      for promotion of culture of enterprise and innovation
      so that creative people realize their potential and it
      is necessary to keep pace with the challenges for a
      fast growing knowledge and modern society.
      xxx xxx xxx
            (xvii) make provision for formulation of a tariff
            scheme by the copyright societies subject to
            scrutiny by the Copyright Board.”
58.   By this amendment,
Section 2(ff)
defining “communication

to the public” was replaced as follows:-
“2(ff) “communication to the public” means making
      any work or performance available for being seen or
      heard or otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or
      by any means of display or diffusion other than by
      issuing physical copies of it, whether simultaneously
      or at places and times chosen individually,
      regardless of whether any member of the public
      actually sees, hears or otherwise enjoys the work or
      performance so made available.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,
      communication through satellite or cable or any
      other means of simultaneous communication to
      more than one household or place of residence
      including residential rooms or any hotel or hostel
      shall be deemed to be communication to the public.”
112
59.   Certain amendments were made to
Section 37(3)(e)
.
Section 39A was amended to extend the provisions of
Sections

33
and 33A to owners of the broadcast reproduction rights as

follows:-
“39A. Other provisions applying to broadcast
      reproduction right and performer’s right.
(1)
Sections 18
,
19
,
30
, 30A,
33
, 33A,
34
,
35
,
36
,
      53, 55, 58, 63, 64, 65, 65A, 65B and 66 shall, with
      any necessary adaptations and modifications, apply
      in relation to the broadcast reproduction right in any
      broadcast and the performers’ right in any
      performance as they apply in relation to copyright in
      a work.
xxx xxx xxx”
60.   A reading of the aforesaid provisions, according to the

learned Senior Advocates for the appellants, makes it clear that

broadcasters may, in fact, be the owners of the original

copyright of a work – for example, if they themselves have

produced a serial.   They may also be the copyright owners of

the broadcast of this serial which is a separate right under the

Copyright Act which they are able to exploit, and if there is a re-
broadcast of what has already been copyrighted, this again is
113
protected by
Chapter VIII of the Copyright Act
. The argument,

therefore, is that content that is carried by transmission from the

broadcasters to the ultimate consumer is, therefore, regulated

only by the
Copyright Act
and any royalties that can be charged

for exploitation of the three rights as aforesaid are governed

only by the
Copyright Act
.         Further, the right to band

themselves into a society is by virtue of
Section 33
, which

mutatis mutandis applies to broadcasters alone.         The tariff,

therefore, that may be charged under
Section 33A
of the

Copyright Act read with Rule 56 of the Copyright Rules is

nothing but compensation that is payable to broadcasters for

parting with their copyright in the manner indicated above.
This being the case, when TRAI fixes rates and/or interferes

with content, it is trespassing into the exclusive domain set out

by Parliament under the
Copyright Act
.       Since the TRAI Act

and the Copyright Act, both being Acts passed by Parliament,

have to be harmonised, such harmony can only be maintained

if TRAI is kept out altogether from the domain covered by the
Copyright Act
. Learned counsel for the appellants also strongly
114
relied upon the observations contained in
Entertainment

Network (India) Ltd. v. Super Cassette Industries Ltd.
,

(2008) 13 SCC 30, in which this Court explained as under:
“125. Are the terms “royalty” and “compensation”
     not     synonymous?       “Royalty”      means     the
     remuneration paid to an author in respect of the
     exploitation of a work, usually referring to payment
     on a continuing basis (e.g. 10% of the sale price)
     rather than a payment consisting of a lump sum in
     consideration of acquisition of rights. It may also be
     applied to payment to performers. [See World
     Copyright Law, (2nd Edn.) by J.A.L. Sterling.]
126. The word “compensation”, however, must have
     been used keeping in view the fact that if it is a
     statutory grant; it is a case of statutory licence. We
     are not unmindful of the fact in cases of other
     statutory licences, the word “royalty” has been used.
Even the word “usually” has been used. Mr Divan
     himself has referred to Rule 11-A and Form II-A
     appended to the Rules of 1958. Clauses (10) and
     (11) of the form which have validly been made used
     the word “royalty”.
“10. Rate of royalty, which the applicant
           considers reasonable, to be paid to the
           copyright owner.
11. Means of the applicant for payment of the
           royalty.”
127. The legislature therefore for all intent and
     purport equates “compensation” with “royalty”. In
     the context of the Act, royalty is a genus and
     compensation is a species. Where a licence has to
     be granted, it has to be for a period. A
115
“compensation” may be paid by way of annuity. A
      “compensation” may be held to be payable on a
      periodical basis, as apart from the compensation,
      other terms and conditions can also be imposed.
      The compensation must be directed to be paid with
      certain other terms and conditions which may be
      imposed.”
61.   Rule 56 of the Copyright Rules, 2013, also relied upon, is

set out hereunder:
“56. Tariff Scheme.— (1) As soon as may be, but
      in no case later than three months from the date on
      which a copyright society has become entitled to
      commence its copyright business, it shall frame a
      scheme of tariff to be called the “Tariff Scheme”
      under
section 33A
of the Act setting out the nature
      and quantum of royalties which it proposes to
      collect in respect of the right or the set of rights in
      the specific categories of works administered by it.
      (2) Every copyright society shall display its Tariff
      Scheme by posting it on its website.
(3) The Tariff Scheme shall indicate the separate
      rates for-
(a) different categories of users;
(b) different media of exploitation, such as
            telephone, broadcast or internet;
(c) different types of exploitation whether by
            an individual or by groups or whether single or
            multiple use or for advertising;
(d) different durations of use and territory; and
116
(e) any other differentiation factor indicated by
      the society, as it may deem fit.
(4) While fixing the tariff the copyright society shall
follow the guidelines issued by any Court or the
Board, if any, and may consult the user groups.
(5) The copyright society shall collect the royalties
from a licensee in advance where the Tariff Scheme
provides for lump sum payment of royalties. In
cases where the Tariff Scheme provides for
payments in installments, each installment shall be
collected in advance. However, in cases where the
Tariff Scheme provides for the payment of royalties
based on actual use, the copyright society may
collect an advance at the time of issue of licence
and settle the final payment based on actual use at
the end of the period for which the licence is issued
or granted.
Provided that the copyright society shall not receive
any payment in the nature of minimum guarantee
from a licensee whose royalty payments are based
on actual use which are to be settled with the
society at the end of the licence period except
where, any exceptional circumstances are
specifically included in the Tariff Scheme and the
individual case has been approved by the
Governing Council.
(6) The copyright society may revise the Tariff
Scheme periodically but not earlier than a period of
twelve months by following the rules. It shall publish
the date of coming into of the revised Tariff Scheme
at least before two months in advance and the
same shall be posted on its website.”
117
62.   At this juncture, it is of a little importance to compare and

contrast
Section 2(dd)
of the Copyright Act with “broadcasting

services” as defined in the impugned Regulation and Tariff

Order.     By Clause 2(j) of        the   impugned Regulation,

“broadcasting services” is defined as follows:
“2(j)    “broadcasting      services”   means    the
      dissemination of any form of communication like
      signs, signals, writing, pictures, images and sounds
      of all kinds by transmission of electro-magnetic
      waves through space or through cables intended to
      be received by the general public either directly or
      indirectly and all its grammatical variations and
      cognate      expressions      shall   be   construed
      accordingly;”
63.   When the definitions of “broadcast” in
Section 2(dd)
of the

Copyright Act and of “broadcasting services” in Clause 2(j) of

the impugned Regulation are compared, what is clear is that

the words “intended to be received by the general public either

directly or indirectly” are completely missing from the definition

of “broadcast” contained in the
Copyright Act
.      Also,
Section

52(1)(b)
of the Copyright Act indicates that transient or

incidental storage of a work or performance purely in the

technical process of electronic transmission or communication
118
to the public is not an act that would constitute infringement of

copyright.
Section 52(1)(b)
reads as follows:
“52. Certain acts not to be infringement of
      copright.- (1) The following acts shall no constitute
      an infringement of copyright, namely:-
xxx xxx xxx
(b) the transient or incidental storage of a work or
      performance purely in the technical process of
      electronic transmission or communication to the
      public;”
64.   The picture that, therefore, emerges is that copyright is

meant to protect the proprietary interest of the owner, which in

the present case is a broadcaster, in the “work”, i.e. the original

work, its broadcast and/or its re-broadcast by him. The interest

of the end user or consumer is not the focus of the
Copyright

Act
at all. On the other hand, the
TRAI Act
has to focus on

broadcasting services provided by the broadcaster that impact

the ultimate consumer. The focus, therefore, of TRAI is that of

a regulatory authority, which looks to the interest of both

broadcaster and subscriber so as to provide a level playing field

for both in which regulations can be laid down which affect the

manner and carriage of broadcast to the ultimate consumers.
Once the relative scope of both the enactments is understood
119
as above, there can be no difficulty in stating that the two Acts

operate in different fields. We do not find on a reading of the

impugned Regulation as well as the Tariff Order made that

TRAI has transgressed into copyright land.       This is for the

reason, as has been stated hereinabove, that regulations which

allegedly impact packaging TV channels, pricing of TV

channels and the broadcaster’s right to arrange his business as

he pleases, all have to be viewed with the lens of a regulatory

authority, which is to provide a level playing field between

broadcaster and subscriber.     We have also noted how the

broadcaster is free to provide whatever content he chooses for

the TV channels that he chooses to transmit to the ultimate

consumer. We have also noted how the broadcaster is free to

arrange pricing of his TV channels so long as they are non-
discriminatory and do not otherwise have the effect of

unreasonably restricting the choice of a subscriber to choose

bouquet or a-la-carte channels as has been held hereinabove.
We are satisfied that the impugned Regulation and Tariff Order

have been passed by a regulatory authority after applying its
120
mind to the objections of the various stakeholders involved after

which the Regulation and Tariff Order have been laid down

which have, by and large, been initially acceded to by the

broadcasters themselves. In this view of the matter, we are of

the view that the
Copyright Act
will operate within its own

sphere, the broadcaster being given full flexibility to either

individually or in the form of a society charge royalty or

compensation for the three kinds of copyright mentioned

hereinabove.   TRAI, while exercising its regulatory functions

under the
TRAI Act
, does not at all, in substance, impinge upon

any of these rights, but merely acts, as has been stated

hereinabove, as a regulator, in the public interest, of

broadcasting services provided by broadcasters and availed of

by the ultimate consumer.
65.   As Dr. Singhvi has repeatedly stressed that fixation of

rates under
Section 11(2)
would directly impinge upon

compensation payable for copyright to the broadcasters, it is

important to note that both the
Copyright Act
as well as the
TRAI Act
are central enactments which do not expressly
121
provide that the one overrides the other. In this situation, a

basic principle of interpretation of statutes is that both Acts be

harmonized in the event of any clash/conflict between the two

so that both may be given effect to. In fact,
Section 38
of the

TRAI Act reads as under:-
“38. Application of certain laws. – The provisions
      of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of
      the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
(13 of 1885) and the
Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933
(17 of 1933)
      and, in particular, nothing in this Act shall affect any
      jurisdiction, powers and functions required to be
      exercised or performed by the Telegraph Authority
      in relation to any area falling within the jurisdiction of
      such Authority.”
66.   Since the Telegraph Authority, acting under the
Telegraph

Act and the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act
, is required to act in

public interest, the jurisdiction of the said Authority is left

untrammeled by the provisions of the
TRAI Act
. It can thus be

seen that TRAI and the Telegraph Authority both act in public

interest.   The TRAI Act, the Telegraph Act and the Indian

Wireless Telegraphy Act, being statutes in pari materia, form a

Code, insofar as wireless telegraphy and broadcasting is

concerned.
122
67.   We are, therefore, clearly of the view that if in exercise of

its regulatory power under the
TRAI Act
, TRAI were to impinge

upon compensation payable for copyright, the best way in

which both statutes can be harmonized is to state that, the
TRAI Act
, being a statute conceived in public interest, which is

to serve the interest of both broadcasters and consumers, must

prevail, to the extent of any inconsistency, over the
Copyright

Act
which is an Act which protects the property rights of

broadcasters. We are, therefore, of the view that, to the extent

royalties/compensation payable to the broadcasters under the
Copyright Act
are regulated in public interest by TRAI under the
TRAI Act
, the former shall give way to the latter. As there is no

merit in these appeals, the same are, therefore, dismissed.
…………………………..J.
                                    (R.F. Nariman)



                                    …………………………..J.
                                    (Navin Sinha)
New Delhi;
October 30, 2018.
123