[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Subhash Malhari Muneshwar . vs Arvind Anandrao Kadam (Dead) Through ... on 10 October, 2018
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
R. Banumathi
1

                                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.       6254 OF 2010


         SUBHASH MALHARI MUNESHWAR & ANR.                                     ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

        ARVIND ANANDRAO KADAM (D) THR. LRS. & ANR.                            ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                             J U D G M E N T
R. BANUMATHI,J.
1.         This   appeal     arises   out   of    the   Judgment    dated

                      08.04.2005 in Second Appeal No. 360 of 1988 passed by the

                      High Court of Bombay, Nagpur Bench, in and by which the High

                      Court reversed the judgment of the First Appellate Court

                      holding that the Exhibit P-33/document in question was a

                      sale with condition to repurchase.
2.         The case of the appellants-plaintiff(s) is that

                      an amount of Rs.3,000/- was borrowed from the respondent and

                      in security the property was mortgaged under Exhibit P-33

                      (15.02.1975) with condition that if the amount is paid on or

                      before   15.03.1980,   the     property     can    be   redeemed.    The

                      appellants–plaintiff(s) filed the suit for redemption of the
Signature Not Verified
mortgage alleging that the document (Exhibit P-33) was a
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2019.01.24
15:35:38 IST
Reason:
mortgage by conditional sale and not a sale with condition

                      for reconveyance.
2
3.      The Trial Court dismissed the suit holding that the

document Exhibit P-33 was not a mortgage with conditional

sale; but a sale deed with condition for repurchase. The

first Appellate Court reversed the judgment of the Trial

Court   holding        that   the    Exhibit      P-33     is    a    mortgage     by

conditional sale as defined under
Section 58(c)
of Transfer

of Property Act and not a sale with condition to repurchase.

The High Court in Second Appeal, reversed the judgment of

the First Appellate Court by holding that Exhibit P-33 was a

sale with condition to repurchase and not a mortgage by

conditional sale.
4.      We have heard Ms. Astha Deep, Advocate appearing for

the appellants as well as Mr. Akshat Shrivastava, learned

amicus appearing on behalf of the respondent(s) and perused

the impugned judgment and materials on record.
5.      Learned     counsel         appearing       for     the      appellant(s)

submitted    that       the   condition      embodied       in       the    document

Exhibit P-33 to re-purchase the property clearly indicates

that it is a mortgage by conditional sale as defined under
Section   58(c)
of    the    Transfer      of   Property         Act.    It   was

submitted that even if the condition that the respondent-

defendant(s) are to enjoy the property in lieu of interest

were not incorporated in Exhibit P-33, the same would not

take away the character of the document, namely, that it is

a    mortgage     by     conditional        sale.     In    support         of    her

contention,       learned       counsel     has     placed        reliance        upon
3
judgment of this Court in Patel Ravjibhai Bhulibhai (D)

Thr.
Lrs vs. Rahemanbhai M.Shaikh (D) Thr
. Lrs. & Ors.

reported in 2016 (12) SCC 216.
6.     Per   contra,       learned        counsel     appearing      for     the

respondent(s) submitted that recitals in the documents are

clear indication that Exhibit P-33 is only a sale with

condition to repurchase. Placing reliance upon judgment of

this Court in Vanchalabai Raghunath Ithape (Dead) by Lrs.

And Shankarrao Baburao Bhilare (Dead) by Lrs. and Others

reported in (2013) 7 SCC 173, the learned counsel submitted

that based on the recitals in document Exhibit P-33 and the

evidence of the parties and considering the intention of the

parties, the High Court rightly held that it was a sale with

condition to repurchase and the impugned judgment warrants

no interference.
7.     We have considered the rival contentions and perused

the impugned judgment and materials on record.
8.     To determine the nature of the document whether it is

a mortgage by conditional sale or a sale deed with condition

for   reconveyance,       the   recitals     in     the   document   and     the

intention    of    the    parties    are    relevant.     The   Trial      Court

extracted the relevant clause in Exhibit P-33 and pointed

out that it was a sale deed with condition for repurchase.

To    appreciate    the    contentions       of     the   parties,    we     may

usefully refer to relevant recitals in Exhibit P-33 which

reads as under:
In the year 1975, for the reasons stated
4
below execute this conditional sale deed as
          under:-
We have received from you in the presence
          of the Registrar’s office a sum of Rs.3,000/-
          and in consideration of the said amount we
          hereby give this land with the structures to
          you under this conditional sale deed. We have
          also delivered the possession of land without
          crops to you.
……………….
We have given this land to you under this
          conditional sale deed and the possession is
          also given. You are absolutely entitled to
          use the land according to your desire and the
          possession is not with us. There is no charge
          of anybody on the said land and in case it is
          found we will be responsible for the same. We
          will have no objection for your changing the
          name in the Revenue Record’.
9.     As pointed out by the High Court, the recitals in the

document that transfer of interest with vesting of absolute

rights upon the respondents are clear indications that the

document is only a sale with condition for repurchase. As

pointed out by the High Court as well as the Trial Court,

the clauses in the deed clearly indicate that it is a sale

deed   with      condition   to   repurchase    and   not     a    sale      with

conditional mortgage as stipulated under
Section 58(c)
of the

Property    of    Transfer   Act.   As    rightly   pointed       out   by   the

learned    counsel    appearing     for   the   respondent-defendant(s)

that Exhibit P-33 document does not contain any recital as to

enjoyment of the property in lieu of the interest payable on

the amount. Any oral evidence adduced in this regard cannot

be looked into       in view of the prohibition under
Section 92
of the Indian Evidence Act.
5
10.   Admittedly   pursuant   to   Exhibit   P-33   possession   was

    handed over to the respondent(s) vesting on them the absolute

    right to enjoy the property. Exhibit P-33 does not show that

    the amount of Rs.3,000/- was taken as a debt or loan; nor

    does the document show that the income from the land was to

    be appropriated towards the interest by the respondent(s). We

    do not find any ground warranting interference with impugned

    judgment. In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
11.   The parties are to bear their respective costs.
12.   We place on record the valuable assistance rendered by

    learned amicus, Mr. Akshat Shrivastava        appearing on behalf

    of the respondent(s).
….......................J.
                                          [R. BANUMATHI]


                                          …......................J.
                                          [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
10th OCTOBER, 2018