[Cites
9
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Govindammal (Dead) By Lrs. And Ors. vs Vaidiyanathan And Ors. on 23 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 710, (2018) 14 SCALE 198, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 223, (2018) 2 ORISSA LR 1002, (2018) 3 ALL RENTCAS 643, (2018) 4 CURCC 504, (2019) 127 CUT LT 245, (2019) 132 ALL LR 232, (2019) 143 REVDEC 94, (2019) 1 ALL WC 51, (2019) 1 CAL HN 104, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 657, (2019) 1 CLR 215 (SC), (2019) 1 CURCC 52, (2019) 1 GUJ LH 64, (2019) 1 JCR 193 (SC), (2019) 1 MAD LW 385, (2019) 1 PUN LR 220, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 17, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1566
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N.V. Ramana
Reportable
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5276 OF 2008


Govindammal (Dead) By Lrs. and Ors.      ...Appellants


                                   Versus
Vaidiyanathan and Ors.                                     ...Respondents


                            J U D G M E N T


MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
The   legal   representatives   of   the   original   defendant   in   O.S

No.45/85 on the file of the Subordinate Judge, Cuddalore are the

appellants   before   this   Court.   For   the   sake   of   convenience,   the

parties are referred by their status before the Trial Court.


2     The   suit   was   filed   by   the   respondents   herein,   seeking   a

declaration  that  ‘A  schedule’ property (as described in the plaint)

belongs to them or in the alternative for partition of half share in ‘B
1
schedule’ property (as described in the plaint) of which ‘A schedule’

is   a   part.   According   to   the   plaintiffs   (respondents   herein),   the

properties   originally   belonged   to   two   brothers   namely,  Pazanivelu

Mudaliar   and   Chokalingam;   Pazanivelu   Mudaliar   had   two   sons,

namely, Narayanaswamy Mudaliar and Manickam. Narayanaswamy

had   a   son   named   Gnanasambandam   Mudaliar.  The  plaintiffs  are

the   grandsons   of   Narayanaswamy   being   the   sons   of

Gnanasambandam. On 21.7.1912, partition took place between the

branches of Pazanivelu and Chokalingam, and the same was signed

by   Narayanaswamy   (since   Pazanivelu   had   expired   by   then)   and

Chokalingam.   In   the   said   partition,   ‘A   schedule’   property   was

allotted to Narayanaswamy and Manickam (who was then a minor),

while   the   remaining   50% of  the  property   left  in  ‘B  schedule’ was

allotted to Chokalingam. It is relevant to note here itself that the

suit property totally measured 3.18 acres at the time of partition in

1912,   which   subsequently   got   reduced   to   2.72   acres   in   view   of

natural   calamities,   sale   of   certain   portions   and   resettlement   etc.

Thus, the  share of  each branch was reduced to 1.36 acres each.

The   property   consisted   of   Survey   No.   67.   Narayanaswamy   and
2
Manickam   being   the   sons   of   Pazanivelu   Mudaliar   partitioned   the

property allotted to the branch of their father in such a manner so

as   to   allot   the   entire   ‘A   Schedule’   property   to   Manickam,   on

5.4.1933, as per Exhibit A­39. The said property allotted in favour

of   Manickam   was   sold   by   him   to   one   Appavu   Mudaliar   on

11.9.1940     as   per     Exhibit     A­2.   On   26.2.1942,   the   property

purchased   by   Appavu   Mudaliar  was   in   turn   sold   in   favour   of

Sambandam   Mudaliar.   On   9.2.1950,   the   property   purchased   by

Sambandam Mudaliar was sold to Narayanaswamy Mudaliar as per

Exhibit   A­3.   After   the   death  of   Narayanaswamy     Mudaliar   in   the

year   1965,   the   plaintiffs   being   the   grandsons   of   Narayanaswamy

Mudaliar inherited the whole ‘A schedule’ property.
Meanwhile,   Chokalingam’s   half   share   was   sold   in   a   court

auction   on   21.12.1933   and   was   purchased   by   the   original

defendant’s   father.   There   are   no   records   to   show   that   there   was

delivery   of  possession  pursuant to the court auction sale; at any

rate, the court sale could not confer more than the right, title and

interest   of   the   judgment   debtor,   namely   Chokalingam’s   half

interest,   which   is   1.36   acres   out   of   2.72   acres   recorded   in   the
3
resettlement. Unfortunately, the entire ‘B Schedule’ property which

was   partitioned   in   1912   was   never   demarcated   inasmuch   as   the

same   was   always   used   as   a   house   site.   Since   the   resettlement

proceedings   in   1976,   this   property   comprises   3   pattas   numbers.

The plaintiffs’ father had also been paying house tax. The defendant

had no right in ‘A schedule’ property. The defendant’s father and

consequently the defendant did not have any right over the property

in   excess   of   Chokalingam’s   half   share,   i.e.,   1.36   acres.   On

5.11.1978, in the partition in the family of the plaintiffs and their

father, the ‘A Schedule’ property was allotted to Plaintiff No.2 as per

Exhibit  A­40.   Since   the  defendant  attempted to  trespass into the

south   western   portion   of   the   suit   property   (which   falls   under   ‘A

Schedule’) and prevented the plaintiffs from enjoying the same, the

suit came to be filed.
The   case   of   the   defendant   is   that   his   father   purchased   the

entire   extent   of   Survey   Number   67,   i.e.,   2.72   acres   in   a   court

auction   (in   execution   of   the   decree   in   O.S.No.   20   of   1918)   on

21.12.1933,   which   was   confirmed   on   29.9.1934,   and   possession

was delivered to him; after his father’s death in 1940, the defendant
4
continued   to   be   in   possession.   In   the   year   1975,   Shri

Puthumariamman   Temple,   Kurinjipadi   filed   O.S.   No.   66   of   1975

against the defendant and Gnanasambandam Mudaliar (the father

of the plaintiffs) in respect of the said property. The said suit came

to   be   dismissed,   holding   that   the   temple   had   no   right   to   the

property and that the defendant and his father were entitled to the

same.  The   appeal  filed   by  the temple also came to be dismissed.

Thus, the title of the defendant and his father was upheld in the

litigation   wherein   the   father   of   the   plaintiffs   was   a   co­defendant

along with the defendant as stated above. Subsequently, the SKV

High School filed O.S. No. 1289/1974 for declaration of its title over

the property, claiming that it had got title over the entire property.

The   defendant   filed   O.S.   No.   1290/1974   against   the   SKV   High

School. The father of the plaintiffs was one of the defendants in O.S.

No.1289/1974 filed by the school whereas he was not made party

by the defendant in O.S. No.1290/1974.  After joint trial in both the

suits, the suit filed by the present defendant was decreed declaring

his title over the suit property, and the suit filed by the school was

dismissed.   Such   judgment   of   the   Trial   Court   was   confirmed   in
5
appeal.   The   defendant   denied   the   validity   of   the   subsequent   sale

deeds dated 11.9.1940 and 9.2.1950 in his written statement. Even

the   later   partition   dated   5.11.1978   was  attacked   as  a  fraudulent

and collusive transaction. The defendant claimed to be in exclusive

possession of the entire property from the date of the court auction,

i.e.,   from   1933   continuously,   and   that   he   had   acquired   right   by

adverse possession.  It was also pleaded by the defendant that the

defendant’s title has already been declared twice by the Civil Court

as mentioned supra and therefore, the present suit is barred by the

principles   of  res   judicata.   The   claim   of   joint   possession   by   the

plaintiffs was denied by the defendant.
3.    On   a   full­fledged   trial,   the   Trial   Court   decreed   the   suit   and

granted the alternative relief of partition. In the first appeal filed by

the defendant, the learned Single Judge reversed the judgment of

the Trial Court and dismissed the suit. The Letters Patent Appeal

filed by the plaintiffs was allowed by the impugned judgment and

consequently the suit came to be decreed by the Division Bench of

the High Court.
6
4.    Shri  V. Prabhakar, appearing on behalf of the appellants/LRs

of   the   defendant   submitted   that   the   suit   for   partition   is   not

maintainable inasmuch as even according to the plaintiffs, partition

had taken place way back in the year 1912 between the branches of

their ancestor Pazanivelu Mudaliar and his brother Chokalingam.

The auction sale conducted by the court in the year 1933 remained

unquestioned   by   the   plaintiffs   and   their   predecessors;   since   the

entire property was sold in the auction sale, the defendant being the

purchaser of the property was entitled to the entire property. It was

submitted that in the earlier litigations filed by the temple and the

school in respect of the entire property, the father of the plaintiffs

was a co­defendant along with the father of the defendant and had

pleaded or given evidence to the effect that the entire property was

purchased by the father of the defendant by way of court auction,

and that the father of the defendant was in possession as the owner

of the same. Such disputes were decided in favour of the father of

the defendant, upholding his title, and therefore by operation of the

principles of  res judicata  as well as estoppel, it could be said that

the defendant and his father had the right to own the property and
7
consequently, the plaintiffs did not have any right over ‘A Schedule’

property. It was also contended that the defendant and his father

had remained in uninterrupted possession and had been asserting

the right consistently and openly from 1933 onwards, and therefore

it could be safely said that the defendant had perfected his title by

virtue of adverse possession.
Per   contra,   Smt.   V.   Mohana,   learned   Senior   Advocate,

appearing   on   behalf   of   the   respondents/plaintiffs   submitted   that

the   question   of   any   conflict   regarding  inter   se  title   between   the

plaintiffs’ father and the defendant’s father had not been in issue in

any of the earlier litigations and, therefore, there was no question of

attracting the principles of res judicata with respect to the plaintiffs’

claim. Similarly, the admission of the plaintiffs’ father regarding the

right of the defendant’s father could not operate as an estoppel as it

could not be said that the defendant and his father had acted to the

detriment   of   their   interest   on   the   basis   of   any   admission   of   the

plaintiffs’ father; even otherwise, such admission could be explained

satisfactorily. Since the partition between the branches of the two

brothers Pazanivelu and Chokalingam which occurred in the year
8
1912 through a registered partition deed was not in dispute, 50% of

the share vested with the legal heirs of Pazanivelu Mudaliar, i.e.,

the plaintiffs. It was for the defendant to plead and prove that he

had remained in exclusive possession in respect of such 50% of the

property to the exclusion of the plaintiffs, adverse to the interest of

the   plaintiffs   for   the   requisite   period;   otherwise   the   question   of

acquiring right by adverse possession would not arise.
5.     It is not in dispute that the entire property of 3.18 acres (now

reduced to 2.72 acres) was owned by two brothers, Pazanivelu and

Chokalingam. It is also not in dispute that a partition took place

between the families of the two brothers i.e., Chokalingam and his

brother’s son namely Narayanaswamy Mudaliar on 21.7.1912 (since

Pazanivelu   had   expired   by   then)   through   a   registered   partition

under which each of them got 50% of the property which ultimately

amounted to 1.36 acres each. It is needless to observe that the said

Narayanaswamy   Mudaliar   is   the   son   of   Pazanivelu   Mudaliar.

Subsequently, further partition took place between the two sons of

Pazanivelu namely, Narayanaswamy and Manickam on 5.4.1933 in

respect   of   aforementioned   1.36   acres,   i.e.,   ‘A’   Schedule   property
9
allotted to their branch, which was entirely allotted to Manickam in

the   partition   of   1933.   This   share   was   subsequently   alienated   by

Manickam,   and   eventually   repurchased   by   his   brother

Narayanaswamy. Thus, it is clear that 50% of the entire property

had fallen to the share of the sons of Pazanivelu Mudaliar and the

remaining  50%  remained with Chokalingam.   It is not in dispute

that the plaintiffs are the grandsons of Narayanaswamy Mudaliar.

Thus they have inherited 50% of the property, i.e., to the extent of

1.36 acres. It seems Chokalingam fell into debt and his property in

question  was  brought  to sale through court auction. The auction

was held on 21.12.1933 and Subbaraya Mudaliar, i.e., father of the

defendant was the purchaser in this court auction. Said Subbaraya

Mudaliar died in the year 1940 leaving behind the defendant. Thus,

what could be sold in the court auction was only 50% of 2.72 acres

which   was   held   by   Chokalingam,   i.e.   1.36   acres.   The   remaining

50%   of   the   property   (i.e.   ‘A’   Schedule)   which   vested   with

Narayanaswamy   and   his   family   could   not   be   sold   in   the   court

auction. The order relating to the confirmation of sale in Execution

Proceeding Registration No. 2/33 was produced and marked before
10
the   Trial   Court,   which   contains   the   schedule   of   the   property.

Unfortunately,   none   of   the   parties   have   produced   the   judgment

passed in O.S. No. 20/1918 which ultimately ended in court sale in

E.P. No.2/33. Thus, this Court is not in a position to say exactly as

to whether the entire property was the subject matter of the court

sale or not. Be that as it may, since Chokalingam was the judgment

debtor, at most only his share in the property could be sold and it is

not open for the purchaser to contend that he purchased the entire

property though only 50% of the property belonged to the judgment

debtor. The purchaser can not get a higher right, title or interest in

the   property   than   what   vested   with   the   seller.     Ultimately   the

purchaser takes the risk, if he purchases the property which does

not   belong   to   the   judgment   debtor.   The   purchaser   at   an   auction

sale takes the  property subject to all the defects of title, and the

doctrine of caveat emptor (let the purchaser beware) applies to such

a purchaser. Therefore, even assuming that the court auction sale

was held in respect of the entire property, it cannot be said that

such sale was valid to the entire extent. At most, it can be said that

it was valid to the extent of the property which was owned by the
11
judgment debtor i.e. Mr. Chokalingam, i.e. 1.36 out of 2.72 acres.

The   remaining   50%,   i.e.,   schedule   ‘A’   property   was   owned   by

Narayanaswamy Mudaliar and his legal representatives.
6.    The suit out of which this appeal arises is not a mere suit for

partition. On the other hand, primarily it is a suit for declaration of

the   plaintiffs’   title   to   the   suit  property,  i.e.,  ‘A  schedule’ property

and   for   permanent   injunction   restraining   the   defendants   from

entering the possession of ‘A schedule’ property, which is nothing

but 50% of the entire ‘B Schedule’ property which fell to the share

of   Narayanaswamy   Mudaliar.   Alternatively,   it   was   prayed   by   the

plaintiffs that if the plaintiffs and defendant are found to be in joint

possession,   they   be   granted   the   relief   of   partition   and   separate

possession to the plaintiffs’ half share in ‘B schedule’ property. It is

relevant to note here itself that ‘B schedule’ property measures 2.72

acres   in   its   entirety,   whereas   ‘A   schedule’   property   is   50%   of   ‘B

schedule’ property, measuring 1.36 acres, which fell to the share of

Narayanaswamy   Mudaliar   in   the   partition   of   1912.   Since   the

partition   had   taken   place   in   1912   between   Chokalingam   and

Narayanswamy Mudaliar (being the son of Pazanivelu), and as the
12
plaintiffs   inherited   the   property   from   Narayanaswamy   Mudaliar,

they are entitled to 50% of the share in ‘B schedule’ property.  The

Division Bench has rightly held that the plaintiffs are entitled to ‘A

Schedule’ property, which is the half share allotted to their branch

in   the   partition   of   1912,   out   of   ‘B   Schedule’   property.   Thus,   the

question of maintainability raised by the defendant fails.
7.    The  plaintiffs   need  not question the auction sale which  was

conducted   in   1933   inasmuch   as,   firstly,   they   are   not   parties   to

those   proceedings   including   the   execution   proceedings   and   court

auction. Secondly, by virtue of auction sale, the purchaser would

get   only   the   share   vested   with   Chokalingam   inasmuch   as

Chokalingam alone was the judgment debtor. The property which is

not   owned   by   the   judgment   debtor   could   not   be   sold   at   all   and

therefore, even assuming that the sale certificate is wrongly issued

in   respect   of   the   entire   property,   the   same   does   not   bind   the

plaintiffs inasmuch they continued to be the owner of 50% of the

whole of the property.
8.    It is no doubt true that in the suit filed by the temple against

the   father   of   the   defendant,   the   father   of   the   plaintiffs   was   also
13
arrayed as Defendant No. 2. It is also not in dispute that the father

of   the   plaintiffs   and   the   father   of   the   defendant   by   engaging   a

common advocate filed a common written statement pleading that

the temple was not the owner of the property and that Defendant

No.1 was the owner of the property. It is also not in dispute that the

father of the plaintiffs admitted in the said suit that Defendant No.1

in the said suit, namely, the father of the defendant herein, was the

owner of the property. So also, in the suit filed by the school, the

father of the plaintiffs was also arrayed as one of the defendants

along   with   the   father   of   the   defendant.   In   the   said   suit   also,   a

common written statement was filed. Even in the suit filed by the

school,   the   defendants   therein,   i.e.,   the   father   of   the   plaintiffs

herein and father of the defendant herein jointly pleaded that the

school was not the owner of the property and that the defendants

were the owners. Both the suits filed by the temple and the school

came to be dismissed, holding that the temple as well as the school

were not the owners of the property. From the aforementioned facts

and the pleadings as well as the evidence recorded in the said suits,

it   is   amply   clear   that   there   was   no   dispute  inter   se  between   the
14
defendants.   In   other   words,   there   was   no   dispute   whatsoever

regarding title between the father of the plaintiffs and the father of

the defendant in those two suits. The main question to be decided

in those suits was whether the third parties who had claimed rights

were   entitled   the   property.   Since   the   question   of  inter   se  title

between the defendant’s father and the plaintiffs’ father was not in

issue and was also not required to be decided in the disputes then

raised,   obviously,   the   doctrine   of  res   judicata  cannot   be   applied

between such co­defendants.
9.    However, there exist certain situations in which principles of

res judicata  may apply as between co­defendants.   This has been

recognized  by the   English Courts as well as our Courts for  more

than a century. The requisite conditions to apply the principle of

res  judicata  as  between co­defendants are that (a) there must be

conflict of interest between the defendants concerned, (b) it must be

necessary   to   decide   this   conflict   in   order   to   give  the   plaintiff   the

relief he claims and (c) the question between the defendants must

have   been   finally   decided.   All   the   three   requisite   conditions   are

absent   in   the   matter   on   hand.   Firstly,   there   was   no   conflict   of
15
interest between the defendants in the suits filed by the temple and

the   school.
Secondly,   since   there   was   no   conflict,   it   was   not

necessary  to  decide  any  conflict between the defendants in those

suits in order to give relief to the temple or the school, which were

the plaintiffs. On the other hand, the father of the plaintiffs and the

father of the defendant were colluding in those suits filed by Temple

and School.  Both of them unitedly opposed those suits.  In view of

the same, the principles of  res judicata would not apply. The Privy

Council in the case of
Mt. Munni vs. Tirloki Nath
, AIR 1931 PC 114

has observed thus:
“The doctrine of res judicata finds a place in S.11 Civil
       P.C., 1908, but it has been held by this Board on many
       occasions   that   the   statement   of   it   there   is   not
       exhaustive; the latest recognition of this is to be found
       in Kalipada De v. Dwijapada Das [AIR 1980 PC 22]. For
       the general principles upon which the doctrine should
       be applied it is legitimate to refer to decisions in this
       country:   see   Soorjamonee   Dayee   v.   Suddamund
       Mahapatter [I.A. Sup, Vol. 212], Krishna Behari Roy v.
       Banwari Lal Roy [(1874) 1 Cal. 144], Raja Run Bahadur
       Singh   v.   Mt.   Lachoo   Koer   [(1885)   11   Cal.   301].   That
       there   may   be   res   judicata   as   between   co­defendants
       has   been   recognized  by  the  English  Courts  and  by  a
       long course of Indian decisions. The conditions under
       which this branch of the doctrine should be applied are
       thus stated by Wigram V.C., in Cottingham v. Earl of
       Shrewsbury [ (1843) 3 Hare 627] at 638:
16
“If a plaintiff cannot get at his right without trying
           and   deciding   a   case   between   co­defendants,   the
           Court   will   try   and   decide   that   case,   and   the   co­
           defendants will be bound, but if the relief given to
           the plaintiff does not require or involve a decision
           of   any   case   between   co­defendants,   the   co­
           defendants   will   not   be   bound   as   between   each
           other  by any  proceeding which may be necessary
           only to the decree the plaintiff obtains.”

      This statement of the law has been accepted and followed
      in   many   Indian   cases:   see
Ahmad   Ali   v.   Najabat   Khan
[(1895)   18   All.   65],   Ramchandra   Narayan   v.Narayan
      Mahadev   [(1887)   11   Bom.
216],
Magniram   v.   Mehdi
      Hossein Khan
[(1904) 31 Cal. 95]. It is, in their Lordships’
      opinion, in accord with the provisions of S. 11, Civil P.C.,
      and they adopt it as the correct criterion in cases where it
      is sought to apply the rule of res judicata as between co­
      defendants. In such a case therefore three conditions are
      requisite: (1) There must be a conflict of interest between
      the   defendants   concerned;   (2)   it   must   be   necessary   to
      decide this conflict in order to give the plaintiff the relief
      he claims; and (3) the question between the defendants
      must have been finally decided.”
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)
10.    Once   again,   the   very   principles were restated  in the  case of

Syed   Mohammad   Saadat   Ali   Khan   vs.   Mirza   Wiquar   Ali   Beg   and

others,    AIR   (30)   1943   Privy   Council   115,   in   which   the   following

observations were made:
“In order that a decision should operate as res judicata
      between   co­defendants   three   conditions   must   exist:   (1)
17
There   must   be   a   conflict   of   interest   between   those   co­
      defendants; (2) it must be necessary to decide the conflict
      in order to give the plaintiff the relief he claims; and (3)
      the question between the co­ defendants must have been
      finally decided.   There can be no doubt that in the case
      under   consideration  the first and  third conditions  were
      fulfilled.   Whether   the   second   condition   existed   is   the
      question to be answered. The Chief Court held that it did
      not   exist   for   the   reasons   appearing   in   the   following
      extract from their judgment.”
11.    Almost   the   same   principles   were   reiterated   in   the   case   of
Chandu Lal vs. Khalilur Rahaman
, AIR (37) 1950 Privy Council 17,

in which the following observations were made:
“In Munni Bibi and Another vs. Tirloki Nath
, 58 I.A. 158:
[AIR (18) 1931 PC 114] the conditions for the application
      of   the   doctrine   of   res   judicata   as   between   parties   who
      have been co­defendants in a previous suit are thus laid
      down: there must be (1) a conflict of interest between the
      co­defendants, (2) the necessity to decide that conflict in
      order to give the plaintiff the appropriate relief, and (3) a
      decision   of   that   question   between   the   co­defendants.  It
      may be added that the doctrine may apply even though
      the party, against whom it is sought to enforce it, did not
      in the previous suit think fit to enter an appearance and
      contest the question. But to this the qualification must
      be   added   that,   if   such   a   party   is   to   be   bound   by   a
      previous judgment, it must be proved clearly that he had
      or must be deemed to have had notice that the relevant
      question was in issue and would have to be decided.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
18
In  the   case   of  Md.  Saadat   Ali  (supra),  though  the  first  and   third

conditions were fulfilled, the second condition was not fulfilled and

hence it was held that the principles of res judicata will not apply,

meaning thereby that all the three conditions should be fulfilled in

order to apply the principles of res judicata.
12.   It is true that under
Section 11
of the CPC, when the matter

has been directly or substantially in issue in a former suit between

the   same   parties   or   between   parties   under   whom   they   or   any   of

them claim, litigating under the same title, the decree in the former

suit   would   operate   as  res   judicata  between   the   plaintiff   and   the

defendant   or   as   between   the   co­plaintiffs   or   co­defendants.   For

instance, if in a suit by P against D1 and D2, the matter is directly

and   substantially   in   issue   between   D1   and   D2   and   adjudication

upon that matter was necessary to determine the suit to grant relief

to P, the adjudication would operate as res judicata  in subsequent

suits   between   D1   and   D2   in   which   either   of   them   is   plaintiff   or

defendant.  In other words, if a plaintiff cannot get his claimed relief

without trying and deciding a case between the co­defendants, the

court   will   try   and   decide   the   case   in   its   entirety   including   the
19
conflict   of   interest   between   the   co­defendants   and   the   co­

defendants will be bound by the decree. But if the relief given to the

plaintiff does not require or involve a decision of any case between

co­defendants,   the   co­defendants   will   not   be   bound   as   between

each   other.   This   Court   in   the   case   of
Mahboob   Sahab   vs.   Syed

Ismail and others
, (1995) 3 SCC 693, considering the applicability of

the   doctrine   of  res   judicata  between   co­defendants   held   that   the

following four conditions must be satisfied, namely,


    “(1)   there   must   be   a   conflict   of   interest   between   the
    defendants concerned;
(2) it must be necessary to decide the conflict in order to
    give the reliefs which the plaintiff claims;
(3) the question between the defendants must have been
    finally decided; and 
    (4) the co­defendants were necessary or proper parties in
    the former suit.”


    To   reach   the   conclusion   mentioned   above,   this   Court   relied

upon the judgments in the cases of  Syed. Mohd. Saadat Ali Khan

vs. Mirza Wiquar Ali Beg, AIR 1943 PC 115;
Shashibushan Prasad

Mishra   vs.   Babuji   Rai
,
AIR   1970   SC   809   and  Iftikhar   Ahmed   vs.

Syed Meharban Ali
, (1974) 2 SCC 151.
20
13.   Coming   to   the   question   of   estoppel   as   argued   by   the

defendant’s   counsel   based   on   the   admission   of   the   father   of   the

plaintiffs in the pleadings and in his deposition regarding the title of

the father of the defendant in the aforementioned earlier litigations,

it is no doubt true that an admission is the best piece of evidence.

However,   an   admission  can  always be explained, unless such an

admission   gives   rise   to   the  principle  of estoppel. The principle of

estoppel could have arisen if the father of the defendant had acted

to   his   detriment   on   the   basis   of   the   representation   made   by   the

plaintiffs’ father as the basic requirement for attracting the principle

of estoppel, is that the person to whom the representation has been

made   must   have   acted   on   the   basis   of   such   representation,   and

particularly to his own detriment. In the matter on hand, the father

of the defendant knew about the correct position on facts and he

very well knew that he was the owner to the extent of 50% of the

property only, and as he did not act to his detriment, the question

of estoppel does not arise. As mentioned supra, it is well settled that

in an auction purchase, the auction purchaser does not acquire any

right   over   the   property   higher   than   that   of   the   judgment   debtor.
21
Since the principles of  res judicata  between co­defendants are not

applicable   in   this   case,   and   since   a   mere   admission   does   not

operate as an estoppel, such admission does not create or pass any

title   in   favour   of   the   defendant’s   father   and   consequently   to   the

defendant. On the other hand, it is apparent that the defendant’s

father had right over only half of the property in question, which he

had purchased.
14.   The Division Bench has rightly negated the contention of the

defendant   relating   to   adverse   possession.   From   the   evidence   on

record, the  trial Court and the Division Bench of the High Court

have come to the conclusion that the defendant has failed to prove

that   he   and   his   predecessor­in­interest   had   possession   over   the

entire   property   to   the   exclusion   of   the   plaintiffs   and   their

predecessor.     No   material   is  found   on   record  which   emphatically

discloses   that   the   physical   delivery   of   possession   of   the   property

was given to the auction purchaser by evicting or in exclusion of all

the persons including the plaintiffs’ father and the plaintiffs. In the

absence of such material, the Trial Court and the Division Bench

have   rightly   concluded   that   there   was   symbolic   delivery   of
22
possession   in   favour   of   the   auction   purchaser.   However,   the

subsequent documents show joint possession of the plaintiffs and

the defendant. Even now the names of both the parties are found in

the   revenue   records.   The   documents   do   not   show   exclusive

possession of either of the parties, but would indicate that they are

in joint possession. Exhibits A­7, A­8 and A­9 are the pattas which

disclose the names of both the parties in the revenue records. Even

the house tax receipts are in the name of the plaintiffs’ predecessor.

‘A schedule’ property has already been subjected to partition  inter

se  among the plaintiffs after the death of Narayanswamy Mudaliar

and the allotment of property in question, i.e. ‘A Schedule’ has been

made   in   favour   of   the   second  plaintiff   as  per     Exhibit   A­40.   The

aforementioned records and certain other material on record would

negative   the   contention   of   the   defendant   relating   to   adverse

possession.   The plaintiffs have proved satisfactorily that they are

the   owners   of   ‘A   Schedule’   property,   i.e.,   50%   of   the   property

partitioned in 1912, which had ultimately fallen in the share of Mr.

Narayanaswamy (grandfather of plaintiffs) as mentioned supra.
23
15. In view of the same, we do not find any reason to interfere with

the   impugned   judgment   of   the  Division   Bench   of  the   High  Court

passed   in   L.P.A.   No.   70/2002   dated   29.01.2007.     The   instant

appeal accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed.
……..………………………………….J.
                                        [N.V. RAMANA]




NEW DELHI;                          …….……………………………………J.
OCTOBER 23, 2018.                   [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]
24