[Cites
5
, Cited by
108
]
Supreme Court of India
Jharkhand State Housing Board vs Shri Didar Singh on 9 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 720
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N. V. Ramana
NON­ REPORTABLE



                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8241 OF 2009


         JHARKHAND STATE HOUSING BOARD                                      …  APPELLANT

         VERSUS

         DIDAR SINGH & ANR.                                               …RESPONDENTS

                                                JUDGMENT 
         N.V. RAMANA, J.
This   appeal   by   special   leave   is   directed   against   the

         impugned   judgment   and   decree   dt.   12.10.2001   passed   by   the

         High   Court   of   Jharkhand   at   Ranchi   in   Second   Appeal

         No.88/2000 whereby the High Court dismissed the appeal filed

         by the Board by confirming the concurrent findings of the courts

         below.
2.                Brief   facts   in   nutshell   for   proper   adjudication   of   the

         dispute involved in the present appeal are, the plaintiff has filed a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
suit for permanent injunction alleging that suit schedule property
Date: 2018.10.24
15:41:54 IST
Reason:
originally belongs to Raja A.P. Singh Deo of estate of Seraikella.
1
Later the property was purchased by Kumar Subodh Singh Deo

vide registered Sale Deed No.3201 dated 4.12.1989.  He, in turn,

sold the property to the plaintiff vide registered Sale Deed dated

8.8.1990 for a consideration of Rs.12,000/­ and since then he is

in   peaceful   possession   and   enjoyment   of   the   property   by

constructing a residential building in the land.  While that being

so, the defendant­Board has issued notice dated 4.1.1992 asking

the plaintiff to quit and give vacant possession of the suit land

and   threatened   the   plaintiff   to   dispossess   from   the   suit   land

without any right and title over the same.  Hence the plaintiff has

come up with the present suit to protect his possession.
3.           The   defendant   has   filed   the   written   statement

contending that the plaintiff vendor has no legal right and title

over the suit schedule property and the sale deed executed by his

vendor will not confer any right or title to the plaintiff. Further

the   suit   schedule   property   along   with   other   properties   was

acquired   by   the   defendants   by   way   of   land   acquisition

proceedings   in   the   year   1965   and   the   possession   was   handed

over   to   them.   As   such,   except   the   defendant,   no   one   else   has

right or title over the property.  The defendant has taken several
2
other grounds with regard to maintainability of the suit on the

ground of misjoinder of proper and necessary parties to the suit,

on the ground of limitation, under section 92 of the B.S.H.B. Act

and Rules, as no prior notice was issued before instituting the

suit.  Also under
Section 62
of the CNT Act, it is the case of the

defendant   that   the   present   Suit   is   not   maintainable   without

seeking   the   relief   of   declaration   of   title.     The   suit   schedule

property was recorded in the revenue records in the name of the

defendant. Without seeking right, title, possession and correction

of entries in record of right, plaintiff cannot maintain the suit for

injunction and hence sought for dismissal of the suit.
4.          The trial court has decreed the suit holding that suit is

not barred under any of the provisions of the B.S.H.B. Act, CNT

Act and the Limitation Act.   Though Court took note of Ex.­B –

letter   of   giving   possession   to   the   defendant   has   come   to   the

conclusion that  the  evidence on record does not establish that

the   land   acquisition   proceedings   have   attained   finality.     With

regard   to  maintainability   of a suit for  injunction, Court gave a

finding that as the plaintiff is able to prove his possession by oral
3
and documentary evidence, he can maintain a simplicitor suit for

injunction without seeking the relief of declaration.
5.          The   unsatisfied   defendant   approached   the   1 st

Additional District Judge, Singhbhum (West) at Seraikella by way

of Title Appeal No.46/1995.   The 1 st  Appellate Court dismissed

the   appeal   by   holding   that   the   mere   suit   for   injunction   is

maintainable as the Board threatened to demolish the plaintiff’s

house and the proceeding under the
Land Acquisition Act
are not

successfully   proved   by   the   defendant   by   adducing   cogent

evidence.   The defendant further carried the matter to the High

Court   by   way   of   second   appeal   and   that   also   ended   up   in

dismissal.  The High Court also observed that as the plaintiff is in

possession of the property, he can protect his possession against

any interference and it is not necessary to prove his title to the

property.
6.          The unsuccessful defendant is before us by way of this

appeal.
7.          The   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant­Board   has

argued   that  the   disputed  property  was  part  of the Government

land   acquired   through   land   acquisition   proceedings   and   the
4
possession of the same lies with the appellant­Board.   The claim

of the respondents­plaintiffs over the suit land was hence illegal

and they were enjoying the same unlawfully and without a valid

title.   The   appellant­Board   therefore   sought   to   evict   the

respondents­plaintiffs from the suit land. Further, they claimed

that the suit is barred under
Section 92
and
Section 62
of the

Bihar State Housing Board Act and Rules. The plaintiff’s suit for

mere injunction is not maintainable without seeking the relief of

declaration of title and hence the Courts below erred in decreeing

the suit.
8.           On   the   other   hand,   the  counsel   for   the   respondents

has   submitted   that   the   suit   land   was   a   private   property   and

respondent  No.1  herein got the ownership rights by virtue of a

registered sale deed No. 2343 executed on 7 th  August, 1990 and

since   then   the   property   has   been   in   his   possession.   He   could

prove   his  possession  and  prima facie  title to the property. It is

further   stated   that   without   claiming   the   relief   of   declaration   of

title,   he   can   maintain   the   suit   for   mere   injunction   and   Courts

below   have   rightly   and   concurrently   found   that   he   is   in

possession of the property.
5
9.           We  have  heard the learned counsel for the appellant

and the respondent and perused the material available on record.

In view of the concurrent finding of facts by the courts below we

are conscious of the limited scope of adjudication in this appeal.
10.          The issue that fall for our consideration is: “Whether

the   suit   for   permanent   injunction   is   maintainable   when   the

defendant disputes the title of the plaintiff?”
11.          It   is   well   settled   by   catena   of   Judgments   of   this

Court   that   in   each   and   every   case   where   the   defendant

disputes the title of the plaintiff it is not necessary that in all

those  cases  plaintiff has  to seek the relief of declaration.   A

suit for mere injunction does not lie only when the defendant

raises   a   genuine   dispute   with   regard   to   title   and   when   he

raises a cloud over the title of the plaintiff, then necessarily in

those circumstances, plaintiff cannot maintain a suit for bare

injunction.
12.          In the facts of the case the defendant­Board by relying

upon   the   land   acquisition   proceedings   and   the   possession

certificate   could   successfully   raise   cloud   over   the   title   of   the
6
plaintiff   and   in   those   circumstances   plaintiff   ought   to   have

    sought for the relief of declaration.   The Courts below erred in

    entertaining the suit for injunction.
13.         Hence in view of the above discussion, we are of the

    considered   opinion   that   the  judgment   and   decree  impugned   in

    the appeal deserves to be set aside and accordingly we set aside

    the same.   However, a request was made at the time of hearing

    on behalf of the plaintiff to direct the parties to maintain status

    quo for a period of three months to enable the plaintiff to avail

    the appropriate remedies available under law. In view of the long

    pending litigation, we deem it appropriate to direct the parties to

    maintain   status   quo   with   regard   to   possession   for   a   period   of

    three months. Resultantly, the appeal is allowed with the above

    observations   by   setting   aside   the   judgment   and   decree   dt.

    12.10.2001 but in the circumstances without costs.
………………….……………………..J.
                                                 (N. V. RAMANA)


                                       ………………….……………………..J.
                                      (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR) 

NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 09, 2018.
7
NON­ REPORTABLE



                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8242 OF 2009


JHARKHAND STATE HOUSING BOARD                               …  APPELLANT

VERSUS

ANIRUDH KUMAR SAHU & ORS.                                …RESPONDENTS


                                JUDGMENT 


N.V. RAMANA, J.
In   this   appeal   the   unsuccessful   defendant   impugned

the judgment and decree passed by the High Court of Jharkhand

at Ranchi in second appeal in 273/2003  dt. 26/8/2004 whereby

the   High   Court   has   confirmed   the   concurrent   findings   of   the

courts below by decreeing the suit.
2.          A   close   scrutiny   of   the   plaint   is   necessary   for

adjudication of the dispute involved in the present appeal. The

plaintiff has filed title suit no. 5 of 1992 on the file of the Munsif

court at Seraikella.   In the plaint after the cause title, he stated
1
that the suit is for declaration of title, confirmation of possession

and permanent injunction and the suit is valued at Rs. 20,000/­.

Then the plaint starts with the description of facts that the suit

schedule property belongs to Raja Adithya Pratap Singh Deo of

the   estate   of   Seraikella   and   subsequently   it   is   purchased   by

Kumar Subodh Singh by registered sale deed dated 24­08­1990,

he in turn sold the suit schedule property to the plaintiff by way

of registered sale deed dt 21­10­1990 for a consideration of Rs.

20,000/­ and ever since than he has been in possession of the

property   by   constructing   a   residential   building.   The   defendant

has sent notice dated 04­01­1992 asking the plaintiff to quit and

deliver   vacant   possession   of   the   suit   land   and   for   payment   of

amount   and   further   threatened   the   plaintiff   to   dispossess   him

from the land.  Hence he came up with the present suit seeking

the   relief   of   permanent   injunction   restraining   the   defendants

from interfering with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of

the plaintiff.
3.          The defendant has filed the written statement alleging

that the suit is barred under the principles of waiver, estopple,

acquisition,   under
Section 38
of Specific Relief Act  and  on the
2
ground of not impleading the proper and necessary parties to the

suit,   and   also   on   the   ground   of   not   issuing   the   notice   under

Section 62 and 92 of the BSHB Act. Further it was stated that

the mere suit for perpetual injunction without claiming any relief

of declaration as to the entry in the record of right, declaration of

title and for confirmation of possession, is not at all maintainable

either   in   law   or   in   facts.   In   fact,   the   plaintiff   in   the   suit   is

indirectly seeking the declaratory relief which is not permissible.
4.            It is further averred in the written statement that the

plaintiff’s   vendor   has   no   right   and   title   to   the   property   as   the

property is in possession of the defendant since 1965 and prior to

that it was in possession of the State of Bihar. The property was

acquired   through   land   acquisition   proceedings   and   possession

was delivered way back in 1965 and hence sought dismissal of

the suit.
5.            We have gone through the judgment of the trial Court,

1st  Appellate court and the High Court. The Courts below have

entertained the suit as if the suit is filed for declaration of title

which   is   evident   from   the   judgments   wherein   they   have

categorically   observed   that   the   Suit   is   for   declaration   of   title,
3
confirmation of possession and also for perpetual injunction. The

trial Court has framed the issue with regard to the title and gave

a finding that plaintiff has proved his title and possession over

the suit land and constructed a house over the same, as there is

interference, he has come up with the present suit, as such he is

entitled to maintain the suit in the present form. The trial Court

has framed several issues and held all the issues in favour of the

plaintiff but only granted the relief of permanent injunction to the

plaintiff.   The unsuccessful defendant approached the appellate

Court and the appeal was dismissed. In the second appeal, the

High Court also went ahead with the same assumption that it is

a   declaratory   suit   and   dismissed   the   appeal   by   observing   that

both the Courts concurrently found that plaintiff has valid right,

title and interest.
6.          We have heard the learned counsel on either side and

perused   the   material   available   on   record.   We   are   very   much

surprised at the way the suit was dealt with by the Courts below

contrary   to   the   pleadings   and   contrary   to   the   settled   legal

position.   In the plaint, plaintiff has clearly averred that as the

defendants   are   interfering   with   his   possession,   the   necessity
4
arose to file the  suit for permanent injunction and particularly

sought the prayer for permanent injunction.  The trial Court has

framed   several   issues   and   held   all   the   issues   in   favour   of   the

plaintiff including the issue with regard to title but granted only

the relief of injunction.  The trial Court has given several findings

with regard to the title and observed that plaintiff has got right

and title to the property.   Even the 1 st  appellate Court has also

made   specific   observation  with  regard  to  title and  gave  a clear

finding   that   plaintiff   has   asked   for   declaration.     High   Court

mechanically confirmed the judgment and decree of the Courts

below without appreciating both the legal and factual aspects.
7.    We have given our anxious consideration and we are of the

considered   opinion   that   the   Courts   below   misconstrued   the

pleadings and went on a premise that the suit is for declaration

of   title   when   the   same   is   for   bare   injunction   and   in   a   way

declared the title of the plaintiff. Even before this Court plaintiff

filed the counter and stated that his suit is only for the relief of

injunction. The learned counsel has also submitted that the relief

sought is only for injunction. The copy of the plaint filed before

us also strengthens the same. The judgment and decree under
5
appeal deserves to be set aside and accordingly appeal is allowed.

    It was brought to our notice that plaintiff is continuing with the

    possession of the property during the pendency of the litigation.

    In view of the same we deem it appropriate to direct the parties to

    maintain status quo for a period of 3 months and if so advised, to

    avail the remedy available under law. Resultantly, the appeal is

    allowed   with   the   above   observations   by   setting   aside   the

    judgment   and   decree   dated   26th  August,   2004,   in   the

    circumstances without costs.
………………….……………………..J.
                                             (N. V. RAMANA)



                                   ………………….……………………..J.
                                  (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR) 

NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 09, 2018.
6