[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Kamal Nath vs Election Commission Of India on 12 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 336, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 699, (2018) 13 SCALE 822, (2019) 1 JCR 145 (SC), 2019 (2) KCCR SN 75 (SC), 2019 (2) SCC 260, (2019) 5 MAH LJ 24, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 836
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                        REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                            WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 935 OF 2018



                         KAMAL NATH                                              .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                        VERSUS

                         ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
                         AND OTHERS                                            .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                        WITH


                                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1000 OF 2018




                                                           JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 is filed by the petitioner,

                                 who is the President of the Madhya Pradesh Congress
Signature Not Verified
Committee, claiming the following reliefs:
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.10.12
“(a) Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to the
15:24:19 IST
Reason:
Respondents to issue directions for conducting VVPAT
                                        verification at least 10% randomly selected polling stations
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 1 of 22
2
in each assembly constituency/assembly segment to
               ensure free and fair elections;
(b)    issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to the
               Respondents to publish voter list in text format as per rules,
               and to expeditiously decide all complaints qua final
               publication of voter list under Rules 22(1)(c) of the
               Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 and to prohibit
               deletion of voters from the voter list without intimation to
               political parties;
(c)     issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to the
               Respondents to issue fresh guidelines qua VVPAT whilst
               considering the grounds/issues raised in the present writ
               petition, including but not limited to random VVPAT checks,
               mock polls and recounting, quality of Thermal Paper and
               printing, collection of Paper Trails and storage, unique
               identification numbers on VVPAT and paper trail collection
               boxes, transportation of EVMs and VVPAT before and after
               polls, First Level Checking (FLC) of VVPAT and posting of
               officials; and
(d)   any such further and other order/orders be passed
               as may be necessary and deemed fit and proper in the
               facts and circumstances of the case to subserve the
               interest of justice.
2.      As can be seen from the aforesaid prayer clause, essentially two

        reliefs are prayed for. First relief is for issuance of directions for

        conducting Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) verification

        on random basis for 10% of the votes.             In the second place,

        direction is sought to provide to the petitioner soft copies of the

        draft electoral rolls published on July 31, 2018 in text format; to

        decide complaints pertaining to voter list expeditiously; and to
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                           Page 2 of 22
3
prohibit deletion of voters from the voter list without intimation to

        the political parties.
3.      In Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1000 of 2018, similar reliefs were

        pressed. However, the facts as they appear in Writ Petition (Civil)

        No. 935 of 2018 are taken note of.
4.      We would like to place on record, at the outset, that the detailed

        arguments which were advanced by the petitioner were highly

        concentrated on the second prayer, that too for providing soft

        copies of the draft electoral rolls in text format. Insofar as the first

        relief is concerned, objection was raised by Mr. Vikas Singh,

        learned senior counsel appearing for respondent No.1 – Election

        Commission of India (hereinafter referred to as ‘ECI’), to the

        maintainability of such a prayer on the ground that this issue has

        already been dealt with by this Court. We will take note of the

        respective submissions on this aspect at the appropriate stage.

        Since, the second prayer has become the bone of contention, in

        the first instance, we would like to deal with that aspect.
5.      The main reason for which the petitioner is seeking direction to

        the respondents to publish voter list in text format and supply the

        same is that it is necessitated to ensure that the voter list is
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 3 of 22
4
properly and fairly drawn, which includes all the eligible voters on

        the one hand and also excludes the duplicate, fake or incorrect

        voters. It is stated by the petitioner that he along with senior

        leaders from the State of Madhya Pradesh submitted a detailed

        representation on June 03, 2018 highlighting various duplicate,

        repeat, multiple, illegal, invalid and false entries/voters in the

        electoral rolls of Madhya Pradesh for Assembly Elections, 2018

        and the ECI was requested to address the same. As per the

        petitioner, there is an increase by 40% in numbers of voters vis-a-

        vis population numbers of electors in the State of Madhya

        Pradesh since the last Assembly Election, i.e. in the last five

        years. It is contended that if voters/electors with birth year 1991-

        2001 will attain age of 18 years between 2008-2018, it can be

        reasonably expected that new voters added in the years 2008-

        2018 would be similar to the increase in population i.e.

        1,18,18,290. However, it is shocking and alarming to see that

        increase in total number of voters i.e. 1,45,13,404 (more than

        40% increase) in the corresponding increase in population during

        2008-2018. Therefore, this additional increase over and above

        the population increase i.e. 26.95 lakhs of votes in the State of

        Madhya Pradesh seems inconceivable and incalculable.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 4 of 22
5
6.      The petitioner, accordingly, made representations to the ECI to

        take appropriate action to rectify the mistakes.           The ECI sent

        letter dated July 16, 2018 to the All India Congress Committee

        (AICC), inter alia, stating that the allegations made in the

        representation dated June 03, 2018 preferred by the petitioner

        are not substantiated.             At the same time, the ECI had also

        admitted, to the following effect, that there were some duplicate

        and fake entries in the voter list:
“(a) INTRA AC – 9664 were found in the repeated entry
(b) INTER AC – 8278 cases were found in the repeated
               entry
(c) Photo Entries – 2,37,234 photo entries found to be
               suspicious/unclear/blank photos;”
7.      The petitioner also submits that the ECI has, thereafter, dropped

        more than twenty four lakh voters from the voter list of the State

        of Madhya Pradesh published in January 2018. The ECI has also

        admitted that 2,37,234 photo entries are found to be suspicious,

        unclear and blank photos.                  On the aforesaid premise, the

        petitioner submits that the political parties should be provided

        voter list in text format so that they are in a position to

        electronically scan the same and find out whether there are any

        duplicate or fake voters in the voter list prepared by the ECI.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                           Page 5 of 22
6
8.      In support of the aforesaid demand of supply of electoral roll in

        PDF form in text mode, Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel,

        referred to Clause 11.2.2.2 of Chapter XI of the Election Manual

        2016 which reads as under:
“11.2.2.2 Putting draft roll on website:- Additionally, the
               draft roll shall be put in public domain, at Chief Electoral
               Officer’s website, in a PDF format on the same day. The
               draft roll shall be put on website in a text mode and no
               photographs would appear against the elector’s details.
               Instead it would indicate in the box meant for the
               photograph of elector whether the photograph is available
               or not.”
9.      It was argued that as per the aforesaid clause contained in the

        Election Manual itself, the ECI was required to prepare the draft

        roll in text mode, al beit without photographs. The purpose was

        to enable the political parties to analyse and scrutinise the data

        and based thereupon to give any suggestions that are needed or

        submit objections if it is found that there are duplicate or fake

        voters. As against the aforesaid mandate, the ECI has provided

        Compact Discs (CDs) containing draft electoral roll published on

        July 31, 2018 in PDF non-editable form for all 230 constituencies

        of the State of Madhya Pradesh. Such scanned copies are in fact

        images and, therefore, inadequate for the purpose of scrutiny

        wherein data cannot be analysed. It is also stated that in 2013
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 6 of 22
7
Assembly Elections in Madhya Pradesh, draft electoral rolls were

        provided in text mode. Similarly, draft electoral rolls, as published

        on July 31, 2018 for the State of Rajasthan, have also been

        provided in text mode. Departure made in the instant case is

        questioned as unreasonable.
10.     The ECI has filed a detailed counter affidavit. It is stated that the

        ECI has put the voter list on website in text mode and even

        images on the website are in text mode. However, the ECI has

        taken a conscious decision not to give copies of these voter list to

        the political parties in scannable text mode keeping in view the

        issue of privacy of voters. Various averments in the writ petition

        are strongly refuted in the counter affidavit. The ECI has stated

        that the petitioner had submitted a representation dated June 03,

        2018 regarding various duplicate, repeat, multiple entries/voters

        in the electoral rolls of Madhya Pradesh for Assembly elections.

        As per the complaint received, 26.76 lakh records were submitted

        for ‘Within AC’ of 91 Constituencies and 26.74 lakh records of

        ‘Across AC’ of 101 Constituencies. All these entires have been

        verified physically in a door-to-door campaign.         In physical

        verification, 23,67,487 electors were found present, 2,34,596

        electors were either deleted already or not found enrolled in the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                       Page 7 of 22
8
respective constituencies. In 46,859 cases, electors were found

        to be absent and 16,675 electors were found to be deceased. In

        all such cases, the action for deletion has already been taken. It

        is emphasised that only 8,728 cases were found in the repeated

        entry category against which appropriate action has already been

        initiated as per law.
11.     The ECI accepts that during the process of continuous updation

        from January 19, 2018 to July 31, 2018, there was a net deletion

        of around 24 lakhs entries from the electoral roll and it is also

        correct that more than 2 lakh photo entries were flagged as being

        unclear/blank/repeated photos but out of these entries, 1,04,284

        entries were found to be valid and only 97,687 entries had to be

        corrected during the aforementioned continuous updation of the

        electoral roll. Explanation given is that electoral roll updation is a

        continuous and ongoing process and the          ECI as well as the

        office of the Chief Electoral Officer, Madhya Pradesh are

        committed to ensuring the purity and correctness of the electoral

        roll through continuous addition or deletion of names of electors

        on the basis of door-to-door survey by Block Level Officers

        (BLOs) and by processing all sort of information gathered through
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 8 of 22
9
NSVP, CEO website or complaints received through the helpline

        number (1950), etc.
12.     It is also claimed that the ECI has been taking transparency

        measures in electoral registration.        The recognized political

        parties are supplied, free of cost, two copies (one hard copy in

        pdf with image of electors and another in soft copy without image

        of electors) of the electoral roll of the constituencies at the time of

        draft publication and final publication under the provision of Rule

        11(c) and 22(c) of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960.

        Further, the unrecognized registered political parties/NGOs/public

        can obtain soft copy of the electoral roll (without images of

        electors) in a CD in pdf format on a nominal price of Rs.100/- only

        per CD, containing the electoral roll of an Assembly Constituency,

        on request. In addition to the above, as per the ECI’s existing

        instructions, image PDF of electoral rolls are published on

        website of Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned so as to

        be placed in the public domain for view of general public. The

        general public can access such image PDF of electoral rolls

        through captcha containing alphabet, numeral and special

        characters.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 9 of 22
10
13.     On the basis of the aforesaid averments, Mr. Vikas Singh argued

        that the ECI itself does the exercise of de-duplication which was

        informed to the political parties also in the meeting which was

        conducted by it.             He also submitted with vehemence that

        representation dated June 03, 2018 of the petitioner was replied

        on June 08, 2018 wherein it was clearly stated that corrections

        had already been carried out. According to him, these corrections

        took place on May 25, 2018 itself, i.e. even before the

        representation dated June 03, 2018 was submitted by the

        petitioner.       It was duly communicated on June 08, 2018.

        Thereafter, draft voter list was published on July 31, 2018 wherein

        all the concerns have already been taken care of. Highlighting

        the issue of privacy of voters, it was argued by Mr. Vikas Singh

        that in case voter list is supplied in text form, it will enable data

        mining of various nature. For this reason, there was a re-look into

        the matter and the ECI had decided to provide the list in image

        form.     It was submitted that Clause 11.2.2.2 of Chapter XI of

        Election Manual 2016, on which reliance was placed, does not

        require supply of draft voter list in searchable text mode.
In any

        case, it was only an administrative manual and had no statutory

        force. This can always be suitably amended by the ECI having
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 10 of 22
11
regard to the exigencies.              Therefore, there was a conscious

        decision in the form of instructions dated January 4, 2018 to

        supply non-searchable text mode in view of the safety and

        privacy concerns of the voters. Mr. Vikas Singh submitted that

        right to privacy has now been recognised as a fundamental right

        in
K.S. Puttaswamy and Another v. Union of India and Others
1

        and it becomes the duty of the ECI to take care of that.
14.     It can be discerned that the real issue is whether voter list is to be

        supplied to the political parties in text mode; albeit in PDF form.

        Therefore, our discussion concentrates on this issue.
15.     There is no doubt about the bona fides of the ECI. It is a matter

        of record that in the last 25-30 years, ECI has built up the

        reputation of an impartial body which strives to hold fair elections.

        It is a Constitutional Authority and has been discharging its

        functions quite satisfactorily. People of this country, by and large,

        trust this institution for its impartial manner of discharging its

        functions. That is absolutely essential as well in a democratic

        polity where ‘We, the people’ elect the representatives to the

        legislative assemblies of the State as well as Parliament at the
1   (2017) 10 SCC 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                         Page 11 of 22
12
Centre. It is the will of the people which should be truly translated

        into reality. In that sense, the function of ECI becomes very

        important and it is supposed to discharge the same with utmost

        integrity, impartiality and objectivity. In re: Special Reference No.

        1 of 20022, this Court emphasised the importance of Election

        Commission in the following manner:
“105. ...The duty of the Election Commission is to conduct
               fresh election and see that a democratically elected
               Government is installed at the earliest and any decision by
               the Election Commission, which is intended to defeat this
               very avowed object of forming an elected Government can
               certainly be challenged before the Court if the decision
               taken by the Election Commission is perverse,
               unreasonable or for extraneous reasons and if the decision
               of the Election Commission is vitiated by any of these
               grounds the Court can give appropriate direction for the
               conduct of the election.”
16.     In the process of conducting fair elections, the ECI is also

        supposed to ensure that only genuine voters cast their votes. It

        has to ensure that there are no duplicate, fake or incorrect voters

        in the voting list prepared by it. It has also to ensure that genuine

        voters are not left out. Voter list should, therefore, be genuine in

        all respects. It is for this reason the ECI prepares draft voter list.
While doing so, it attempts to remove duplicate, repeat or fake

        voters. It also endeavours to include all genuine voters. This
2   (2002) 8 SCC 237
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                        Page 12 of 22
13
process is not only undertaken with the aid of mechanical

        devices, namely, computer etc. but by sending its manpower on

        door-to-door basis. For the same reason, namely, to ensure that

        voter lists are flawless, these lists are put on the website for the

        voters to see and those who are excluded can make

        grievance/representation about the same. Likewise, for the same

        reason, the copies of the voter lists are supplied to the political

        parties as well and their objections are invited. This is done to

        give chance to the political parties to go through these lists so

        that they are able to point out any errors, if any, in these lists.

        The ECI even holds all party meetings for this purpose where

        such issues are discussed.
17.     The ECI claims that it has taken all necessary steps in this behalf.
18.     It is stated by the ECI on affidavit that draft electoral roll of

        January 19, 2018 was rectified by ECI around May 25, 2018,

        whereas the first complaint of the petitioner and the political party

        to which he is affiliated regarding duplication/multiplication of

        voters is dated June 03, 2018. Thereafter, ECI gave a detailed

        reply to the petitioner and his political party on June 08, 2018,

        June 15, 2018 and July 16, 2018, pointing out that the electoral
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                      Page 13 of 22
14
rolls had been rectified. Furthermore, ECI also supplied a copy of

        the rectified draft electoral roll to the petitioner, and the political

        party to which he is affiliated, on July 31, 2018. It was also stated

        at the bar that ECI has also now published the Final Electoral Roll

        on September 27, 2018 and supplied a copy of the same to the

        petitioner        (and      his      political      party)      wherein         all     such

        defects/discrepancies find no place as they have already been

        rectified earlier.          The ECI has explained that revision and

        updation of the electoral roll is a continuous process, which the

        ECI is diligently pursuing continuously3.
19.     In the aforesaid context, we need to examine the demand of the

        petitioner for supply of electoral roll in text format. This demand

        is based upon Clause 11.2.2.2 of the Election Manual which has

        already been reproduced above. This clause places an obligation

        on the ECI to put the draft roll on its website in PDF format. The

        purpose is to bring it in public domain so that each voter is able to

3   It may be mentioned that Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel, appearing for the ECI took
    strong exception to the production of documents from a private website on September 20, 2018
    and handing over the same to the Court during hearing wherein on the basis it was sought to be
    demonstrated that there were mistakes in the electoral rolls inasmuch as same face was shown
    against as many as 36 voters. He submitted that it was done to prejudice and mislead this Court
    as the aforesaid error pointed out by the petitioner had already been rectified around May 25,
    2018 and this fact is informed to the petitioner as well. According to him, thereafter there was no
    cause in filing the present petition and, in any case, no reason to submit the said document. Mr.
    Sibal, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, on the other hand, contended that the
    purpose of producing the aforesaid document was to show that glaring mistakes of this kind
    have been committed earlier, which could be rectified only after the petitioner pointed out these
    mistakes. Be that as it may, we leave the matter at that.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                                            Page 14 of 22
15
access the same and find out whether his/her name is correctly

        shown and in case of any error, the said voter is in a position to

        get the same rectified. Likewise, in case a particular voter is

        missing from the list, that individual would be in a position to take

        up the matter with the ECI for inclusion of his/her name. A copy

        thereof is also given to the political parties as well, because these

        political parties have equal interest in ensuring that the aforesaid

        mistakes are removed.                  They can additionally check as to

        whether there are duplicate or fake voters also in the list and seek

        correction thereof. To this extent, there is no quarrel. However,

        the second part of the aforesaid clause mentions that draft roll

        would be put in a ‘text mode’. It also states that no photograph

        would appear against the electors’ details. The entire dispute

        hinges upon the meaning that is to be assigned to ‘text mode’.

        The argument of the petitioner is that ‘text mode’ is the one which

        provides searching techniques as well.                 For this purpose,

        following description of ‘full text search’ from Wikipedia is

        produced:
“In text retrieval, full-text search refers to techniques for
               searching a single computer-stored document or a
               collection in a full-text database. Full-text search is
               distinguished from searches based on metadata or on
               parts of the original texts represented in databases (such
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 15 of 22
16
as titles, abstracts, selected sections, or bibliographical
               references).
In a full-text search, a search engine examines all of the
               words in every stored document as it tries to match search
               criteria (for example, text specified by a user). Full-text-
               searching techniques became common in online
               bibliographic databases in the 1990s. Many websites and
               application programs (such as word processing software)
               provide full-text-search capabilities. Some web search
               engines, such as AltaVista, employ full-text-search
               techniques, while others index only a portion of the web
               pages examined by their indexing systems.
20.     Refutation of Mr. Vikas Singh is that ‘text mode’ in Clause

        11.2.2.2 of the Election Manual relates to the ‘content’ of the draft

        electoral roll and not its ‘format’. It is argued that prescription in

        the aforesaid clause of the Manual requires putting the draft

        electoral roll in text mode which would mean that it should contain

        only the text of the elector’s details such as his name, address,

        age, etc. and not his/her photograph. It is explained that any PDF

        document generally contains two kinds of content: (i) Text and (ii)

        Pictures/Photographs/Pictorial Content.         Any elector’s details

        would include his name, age, address, etc. (i.e. ‘the text part’) as

        well as his photograph (i.e. ‘the photograph/picture/pictorial

        content part’). Thus, the use of the phrase ‘text mode’ in Clause

        11.2.2.2 of the Election Manual only means that the draft electoral

        roll put up on the Chief Electoral Officer’s website shall only
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                         Page 16 of 22
17
contain      ‘text’    of    the       elector’s   details   and   not   his/her

        ‘photographs/pictures/pictorial content’. It is also explained that

        every PDF document, whether it is a searchable or non-
searchable/Image PDF and which contains any text content in a

        ‘Text Mode’ is PDF in that sense. It is further submitted that there

        is nothing called a ‘Text Mode’ format of a PDF document. A

        simple ‘Google search’ in that regard would also clearly and

        conclusively establish the same.
21.     We find force in the submission of the ECI. Clause 11.2.2.2 of

        the Election Manual uses the expression ‘text mode’. The draft

        electoral roll in that mode, i.e. text mode, has been supplied to

        the petitioner. The clause nowhere says that the draft electoral

        roll has to be put up on the Chief Electoral Officer’s website in a

        ‘searchable PDF’.            Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim, as a

        right, that the draft electoral roll should be placed on the website

        in a ‘searchable mode’. It has only to be in ‘text mode’ and it is so

        provided.
22.     The document from Wikipedia relied upon by the petitioner

        relates to ‘full text search’ and not ‘text mode’. Obviously, when

        the said document explains how ‘full text search’ is to be
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                                 Page 17 of 22
18
undertaken, the explanation would be that it is a search engine

        which examines all of the words in every stored documents and

        would provide full text searching techniques as well. However,

        the absence of the words ‘search’ in Clause 11.2.2.2 of the

        Election Manual would make all the difference.
23.     It is rightly explained by the ECI that PDF documents are

        primarily of two types/formats, namely:
(i)      “Image-only” or Scanned PDFs – When scanning hard copy

        documents on MFPs and office scanners, or when converting a

        camera image, jpg, tiff or screenshot into a PDF, the content is

        “locked” in a snapshot-like image, without an underlying text

        layer.      Such image-only PDF documents contain just the

        scanned/photographed images of pages. Image-only PDF files

        are not searchable, and their text usually cannot be selected,

        searches or copied.
(ii)     Searchable PDFs – In Searchable PDFs, a text layer is

        added to the image layer, usually placed underneath. Such PDF

        files are almost indistinguishable from the original documents and

        are fully searchable. Text in searchable PDF documents can be

        selected, searched and copied.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                   Page 18 of 22
19
24.     Once we find that Clause 11.2.2.2 does not entitle the petitioner

        to get the draft electoral roll in the text mode which is searchable

        as well viz. in ‘full text search’ form, it is for the ECI to decide

        about the format in which the draft electoral roll is to be published.

        ECI has given the reasons for not adhering to the request of the

        petitioner in providing draft electoral roll in searchable PDF

        format. According to it, issues of privacy of voters are involved

        and the move of ECI is aimed at prevention of voter profiling and

        data mining. According to ECI, ensuring free and fair elections, to

        which it is committed, also necessitates that ECI is duty bound to

        protect the privacy and profiling of electors. Therefore, it is duty

        bound to take all precautionary measures.           However, it is not

        necessary to go into this aspect.
25.     One we read and interpret Clause 11.2.2.2 of the Election Manual

        in the aforesaid manner, the decision taken by the ECI which is

        contained in its Instructions dated January 4, 2018 becomes

        relevant. In those Instructions, ECI has directed its field level

        functionaries to put only the ‘Image PDF’ of electoral roll in the

        public domain. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the format in

        which the draft electoral roll is supplied to the petitioner fulfills the

        requirement contained in the Election Manual. It may be added
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                         Page 19 of 22
20
that if the petitioner so wants, he can always convert it into

        searchable mode which, of course, would require him to put his

        own efforts.
26.     Other relief which is claimed by the petitioner is to seek directions

        for conducting VVPAT verification at least 10% randomly selected

        polling stations in each assembly constituency/assembly segment

        to ensure free and fair elections. In this behalf, our attention was

        drawn by the respondents to Rule 56(d). It was also submitted by

        the respondents that this issue cannot be raised by the petitioner

        having regard to the orders passed on earlier occasions in few

        writ petitions which were filed on this aspect. The respondents

        referred to orders passed in
Prakash Joshi v. Election

        Commission of India4
. In that case also, where identical prayer

        was made, the petition was disposed of by orders dated October

        30, 2017 in the following manner:
“Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General submits that
               as far as Prayer (a) is concerned, the Election Commission
               of India has already implemented the same. The situation
               is accorded to by Mr. Amit Sharma, learned counsel for the
               Election Commission of India. As far as Prayer (b) is
               concerned, it is urged by Mr. K.K. Venugopal that
               guidelines have already been brought by the Election
               Commission of India. The same is disputed by Mr. Kapil
               Sibal and Mr. Vivek Tankha, learned senior counsel
               appearing for the petitioner. We leave it to the discretion of

4   Decided on October 30, 2017 in W.P. (C) No. 983 of 2017
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                          Page 20 of 22
21
the Election Commission of India, as we are not inclined to
               enter into the said arena. As far as Prayer (c) is concerned,
               it is submitted by Mr. K.K. Venugopal that the Election
               Commission of India has issued appropriate guidelines,
               and this Court may say that no officer/official against whom
               disciplinary proceedings have been initiated shall be
               posted in any key positions.
Having heard Mr. K.K. Venugopal, we direct that the
               Election Commission of India shall not post any
               officer/official against whom the disciplinary proceedings
               has been initiated in any key position in any district.
As far as prayer (d) concerning installation of CCTV
               cameras inside the polling booth to watch the mobility of
               persons inside the polling booth and display of such
               videograph alongwith the number of votes poll outside the
               polling booth on a display board is concerned, we are of
               the considered opinion that the same is not permissible
               and accordingly, the said prayer stands rejected.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.”
27.     Another writ petition being W.P.(C) No. 1012 of 2017 5 was filed

        before this Court in October 2017 itself, with almost identical

        prayer. This was dismissed in limine on November 20, 2017. In

        the counter affidavit, ECI has also referred to similar writ petitions

        filed in the High Court of Gujarat, which met the same fate.
28.     In view of the orders dated October 30, 2017 passed in W.P.(C)

        No. 983 of 2017 and on the basis of statement given by the ECI

        in the Court, we do not intend to entertain this relief.



5
Manubhai Chavada v. Election Commission of India & Ors
.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                            Page 21 of 22
22
The writ petitions are accordingly dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                                                (A.K. SIKRI)


                                                    .............................................J.
                                                                  (ASHOK BHUSHAN)

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 12, 2018
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 935 of 2018 & Anr.                                      Page 22 of 22