[Cites
3
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. Amit Kumar vs Dr. Sonila on 26 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 5312, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 378, 2019 (1) ABR 369, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 237 (SC), (2018) 3 DMC 684, (2018) 14 SCALE 362, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 237, (2018) 4 CURCC 460, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 944, (2018) 6 ALL WC 5927, (2018) 8 MAD LJ 744, 2019 (12) SCC 711, (2019) 132 ALL LR 221, (2019) 143 REVDEC 87, (2019) 1 ANDHLD 110, (2019) 1 CAL HN 62, (2019) 1 CIVILCOURTC 130, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 815, (2019) 1 HINDULR 1, (2019) 1 JCR 234 (SC), (2019) 1 JLJR 243, (2019) 1 MAD LW 689, (2019) 1 PAT LJR 312, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 8
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                          CIVIL APPEAL No. 10771 of 2018
                                        [Arising out of SLP(C) No.21786/2018]



                         DR. AMIT KUMAR                                 ….APPELLANT


                                                        versus



                         DR. SONILA & ORS.                              ….RESPONDENTS



                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    The appellant and respondent No.1 were married according to

                           Hindu rites on 7.5.2004 and, from the wedlock were born a son
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
(respondent No.2) and a daughter (respondent No.3), who are now about
Date: 2018.10.26
17:12:43 IST
Reason:
1
11 years and 8 years respectively. It appears that the marriage ran into

problem at some stage and all endeavours for reconciliation failed. The

appellant and respondent No.1, both, are qualified doctors, who were

deployed with the CRPF throughout, which position exists even today.
3.    The appellant and respondent No.1 ultimately agreed for a decree

of divorce by mutual consent and filed a petition under
Section 13B
of

the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The first motion was filed in June, 2016

and after the expiry of the statutory period of six (6) months, the second

motion was passed and a decree of divorce was granted on 9.12.2016.
4.    The two relevant terms of the decree of divorce for the purposes of

this present appeal are extracted as under:
“5) That, petitioner No.1 and 2 are at liberty to marry with any
          other person of their choice. In future petitioner No.1 has no
          any right of husband over petitioner No.2, so also petitioner
          No.2 has lost right as wife over petitioner No.1 today.
6) That, petitioner No.1 and 2 both are agree to custody of both
         the children’s residing with petitioner No.1. Petitioner No.1
         will provide education, medicines, and marriage of Aarokya
         Kumar s/o Amit Kumar.           Petitioner No.2 will provide
         education, medicines and marriage of Riya Kumar d/o Amit
         Kumar.”
5.    A perusal of the aforesaid shows that para 5 was a natural corollary
2
to the decree of divorce, i.e., that either parties could re-marry. Clause 6

provides for an agreement inter se the appellant and respondent No.1 qua

the issue of custody of both the children, which was agreed to be with the

appellant. However, possibly in view of their similar financial strength,

it was agreed that the appellant would provide for education, medicines

and marriage of the son while respondent No.1 would do the likewise for

the daughter.
6.    The parties at the relevant time were posted in Nanded and, thus,

initially the arrangement for custody worked out fine.          The issue,

however, arose once the appellant was transferred out of Nanded. The

appellant was transferred to Jammu, which apparently necessitated him

to make arrangements for admission of respondent Nos.2 & 3 to a

boarding school in Pune, while he assessed the possibility of bringing the

children to live with him in Jammu. The undisputed fact is that at no

point of time did respondent No.1 make any financial contributions

towards her obligations, in terms of the decree of divorce by mutual

consent. The appellant sent a legal notice dated 28.3.2017 to respondent

No.1 pointing out this fact and demanding the payment of unpaid

amounts, apart from the amount required for securing admission and
3
meeting the living expenses of the daughter in the boarding school at

Pune. It is this demand which seems to have triggered off the present

dispute.
7.    Respondent No.1 sent a reply to the aforesaid notice through her

counsel on 15.4.2017. The said reply raised the issue that the consent

decree was not acceptable to her, and hence her counsel had advised her

to seek a modification of the terms & conditions of the decree regarding

the custody of the children. It was also alleged that the transfer of

respondent Nos.2 & 3 to the boarding school was a unilateral act of the

appellant and that the expenses quoted were exorbitant.
8.    Respondent No.1 filed an application dated 31.5.2017 under
Section 6
of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, seeking

custody of her minor children. In the application, it is alleged that

respondent No.1 was mentally disturbed regarding the future of

respondent Nos.2 & 3, who are of a tender age, and that at the time of the

divorce, the appellant forced and coerced the applicant “to dance on his

tunes though not acceptable to the applicant.” It is further pleaded that

respondent No.1 had not asked for absolute custody of the children only
4
so that they do not get disturbed in their education. This application also

admits that the trigger has been the notice dated 28.3.2017, sent by the

appellant through his counsel, whereby respondent No.1 was for the first

time informed that the children were being put in a boarding school. A

reference has also been made to the communication, where it was alleged

by the appellant that the respondent No.1 wanted to get rid of the custody

and responsibility of the children and that is the reason why she had

given their custody to the appellant as respondent No.1 had decided to

get re-married. There are certain other allegations made qua the problem

of the visiting rights of respondent No.1 vis-a-vis the appellant but they

are not germane to the controversy in question.
9.    The aforesaid application was resisted by the appellant by filing a

reply where it was sought to be emphasised that the terms of the decree

had been agreed upon, six months’ time period had been granted to the

parties to have a thought over the same, and only thereafter had they been

incorporated in the decree of divorce. In the reply it has also been

pointed out that though the marriage between the appellant and

respondent No.1 was a love marriage, issues arose on account of an

alleged affair between respondent No.1 and her school boyfriend, as
5
named in the reply. It was also alleged that she was caught red-handed,

but on her begging forgiveness, the appellant decided to maintain the

relationship. This, however, it is alleged, did not bring the liaison to an

end. Not only this, in March 2016, she is alleged to have started an affair

with a person working in the same organisation, who has been named in

the application, and that on being found out, respondent No.1 even

attempted to commit suicide on that account, for which medical records

are available. The divorce is stated to have been agreed upon without

making these allegations against respondent No.1, in order to maintain

the dignity of the parties in the society at large. The District Judge

disposed of the application on 04.09.2017. The court noticed that the

paramount consideration was the interest of the children. The court took

into consideration that both the parties were well qualified and enjoyed

an equal occupation and status, and had mutually agreed to the terms and

conditions of the decree for divorce after the completion of the statutory

period of six months. There was, thus, no reason to deprive the appellant

of the custody of the children, but visiting right arrangements were made

in view of the fact that the two parties were based in different stations.
10.   This order was assailed by respondent No.1 before the High Court
6
in WP No.12432/2017 in September, 2017. While the writ petition was

still pending, respondent No.1 filed a civil suit for declaration that the

decree of divorce by mutual consent passed by the Family Court had

been obtained by coercion, fraud and misrepresentation and was, thus,

null and void, and hence did not affect the marriage between the parties.

This suit is stated to be still pending.
11.    During the proceedings, mediation was also endeavoured, but it

failed. The learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court passed an

order on 12.6.2018, after having interacted with the children.         The

learned Judge took note of the subsequent development that the appellant

had married recently, prior to the order, and that there was a biological

son of his second wife, borne out of her first wedlock, who is residing

with them, currently. The appellant had also got the children admitted to

a school in Jammu, by that point in time. The interaction with the

children is stated to have led the Judge to the conclusion that the son and

daughter desire to live with respondent No.1, but that they also love their

father equally.    The learned Judge gave preference to the desire of

respondent No.1, as a mother, and directed that the children would

remain in the custody of the mother for a period of one year to take
7
education at a school in which they would acquire admission, at the place

where their mother lives and that the father would have visiting rights. A

number of directions were passed qua the implementation of the visiting

rights.
12.       The appellant, aggrieved by this order, preferred SLP (Civil)

No.16667/2018. Leave was granted and this appeal No.6500/2018 was

disposed of on 11.7.2018, by making a reference to the clauses in the

consent decree, which had not been noticed by the High Court, while

passing the order. The matter was then remitted to the High Court for

fresh consideration.
13.       Based on the interaction with the children, the learned Single

Judge of the Bombay High Court by the impugned order dated

25.7.2018, once again, directed the custody of the children to be with the

mother, with visiting rights given to the father. The High Court after

noticing the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the

condition in the divorce decree had not been varied till date, posted the

matter on 19.3.2019, to be reviewed after a year.
14.       We had directed the personal presence of the appellant and the
8
respondents with whom we interacted. Learned counsel for the appellant

drew our attention to certain pleadings which would show that

proceedings had been initiated against the officer with whom the liaison

of respondent No.1 was alleged. The Memorandum dated 14.3.2017

issued by the Directorate General, CRPF referred to the imputations of

misconduct in support of the article of charges and it is specifically

alleged that the said officer had used immoral texts during office hours

while communicating with respondent No.1. The details of the same

have also been set out. The inquiry is stated to be still pending. In the

course of the Court’s interaction, it came to light that as per the appellant

and his second wife, the matrimonial arrangement was with the

understanding that Respondent Nos.2 and 3 would stay with the

appellant, and the second wife of the appellant would take care of them.

The second wife of the appellant is an MBA graduate and was previously

working with a bank, but resigned to take care of domestic

responsibilities. The appellant also stated that while on the one hand no

financial aid had been given by respondent No.1 to the appellant for the

daughter, as per the obligations in the consent decree on other hand she

had been transferring substantive amounts to the person with whom she
9
allegedly had a liaison. On the Court’s query, respondent No.1 initially

took offence to the fact that the appellant had access to her bank details,

but on a pointed query admitted that she did transfer the funds to her

colleague, but stated that the same was her own business. She sought to

plead that it was immaterial whether she was or was not a good wife, but

that she was indeed a good mother, as had become apparent in the

interaction of the children with the learned Single Judge.
15.   We have given deep thought to the matter. The issue is not so

simple as it involves the interests of these young children, respondent

Nos.2 & 3, which is of paramount concern. While saying so, it has been

kept in mind that these children are still young and are of an

impressionable age and the interaction can only be one of the factors to

be taken into account.
16.   In our view, it clearly emerges that the decision to give custody to

the appellant, of the two children, was a conscious decision taken by the

parties at the relevant stage and can hardly be categorised as a decision

under force, pressure or fraud. Respondent No.1 is well-educated and is

a medical practitioner. There was a six (6) months’ hiatus period for the
10
parties to think over the terms of the settlement before the grant of the

decree of divorce, which is the statutory period available for the parties

to have a re-think, if they so deem it appropriate. The parties had clearly

agreed as per clause 5 that they were free to re-marry. As per the terms

of the custody, the said marriage does not have any effect on the custody

rights, at least in the terms between the parties. The appellant has also

borne all the expenses for both the children, as respondent No.1 even

initially failed to contribute anything towards the expenses for the

daughter, contrary to the agreement inter se the parties.
17.   The trigger for respondent No.1 claiming custody of the children

only arose when the appellant asked her to contribute financially. It was

not a case of financial difficulty, but the unwillingness of respondent

No.1 to contribute for her own daughter, while simultaneously

transferring amounts to a colleague of hers. It does appear that the

proceedings initiated initially for the custody and thereafter for seeking

cancellation of the decree of divorce were clearly an endeavour to

pressurise the appellant to not claim any amounts. We may also invite

attention to
Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908

specifying that where a plaintiff intentionally relinquishes, any portion of
11
his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so

relinquished.   Respondent No.1 had relinquished her rights to claim

custody and the suit filed by her, thus, is also highly doubtful.
18.   We may hasten to add that it is not as if there can be no eventuality

where such terms may require modification, but that would arise if the

interests of the children so desire, and more specifically if the appellant

had failed to honour his commitments, or look after the children. The

second marriage of the appellant cannot be put against him, nor can the

factum of the child of his second wife residing with him deprive him of

the custody rights of his two children, which has been specifically

conferred on him with the consent of respondent No.1.
19.   A perusal of the impugned order shows that it is not as if the

appellant was not looking after the children.         The children showed

affection for their father. It was due to the exigencies of the appellant’s

service condition that the children had to be put in a boarding school for

some time, which exigency also does not remain at present. It was

known to the parties that they were in a transferable job. A conscious

decision was taken by the parties to give the sole custody to the
12
appellant, in the interest of the children. The second wife of the appellant

is an educated lady. Merely because the appellant has decided to go

ahead in life, and has had a second marriage, it provides no ground

whatsoever to deprive him of the custody of the children as agreed upon

between the appellant and respondent No.1, especially when he has been

looking after the children and has not gone back on any of his

commitments. Respondent No.1, in order to avoid the financial liability

started these proceedings, resulting in the impugned order, as also a

separate suit proceeding.      One fails to appreciate what is it that

respondent No.1 wants by filing the suit now, by claiming that the decree

of divorce is null and void, when there is admission of a mutual consent

for divorce and the appellant has already re-married. We are not going

into the details of the allegations against respondent No.1’s liaison with

another man in the same service, as the inquiry is still pending and, it

may not be appropriate also, to do so in the present proceedings. We,

however, see no reason why the appellant has been compelled to go

through this unnecessary litigation when the parties, at the threshold,

after deep deliberation, and for the interest of the children, have given the

custody to the appellant.
13
20.      We are of the view that the learned Single Judge has given undue

importance to the conversation with the children at a time when naturally

they would prefer to stay with a parent rather than a boarding school.

Respondent No.1 cannot be permitted to take advantage of the visiting

rights granted for the vacation period to now claim that the children

should continue to stay with her.
21.      We are, thus, of the unequivocal view that the interference by the

learned Single Judge, vide impugned order dated 25.7.2018, was

unjustified, and the order of the Family Court dated 9.12.2016 was in

order.
22.      Insofar as any further facilitative directions, for the purpose of

visiting rights of respondent No.1 are concerned, it would be open for the

Family Court or High Court to make necessary arrangements.

Respondent Nos.2 & 3 should be returned to the appellant by respondent

No.1, along with all relevant documents of the children, within thirty (30)

days from today, before the Family Court. In case the appellant is unable

to make arrangement for a mid-term admission for the children, he may
14
inform respondent No.1 and in that eventuality the children will continue

  to study in the same school at present and continue to stay with

  respondent No.1 till the end of the session. This is in order to ensure that

  the study of the children are not disturbed. We also make it clear that the

  rights and obligations as envisaged in the decree of divorce by mutual

  consent will bind both the appellant and respondent No.1. Needless to

  say that after the children attain the age of majority, they would have

  their own choice.
23.   The appeal is accordingly allowed, leaving the parties to bear their

  own costs.
..….….…………………….J.
                                                       [Kurian Joseph]




                                             ...……………………………J.
                                                  [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]
New Delhi.
October 26, 2018.
15