[Cites
0
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajit Kr. Bhuyan . vs Debajit Das . on 23 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 492, 2019 (12) SCC 275, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 401, 2019 LAB IC 1039, (2018) 14 SCALE 168, (2018) 4 SCT 648, (2019) 1 ALL WC 253, (2019) 1 JCR 186 (SC), (2019) 1 SERVLR 304, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1346
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE



                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10662 OF 2018
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 25770 OF 2015)


                         AJIT KR. BHUYAN AND OTHERS                                .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         DEBAJIT DAS AND OTHERS                                  .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                                   WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10663   OF 2018
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 29168 OF 2015)

                                                                    AND

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10664   OF 2018
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 17329 OF 2017)



                                                         JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.10.23
2.     These appeals were heard together and are being disposed of by
18:07:22 IST
Reason:
this judgment because of commonality of issues therein. The
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                Page 1 of 20
judgment impugned is also the same, i.e., judgment dated August

       07, 2015 passed by the High Court of Gauhati.
3.     Mr. Debajit Das (respondent No.1 herein) was appointed as an

       Assistant      Engineer       in    the    Public Works     Department     on

       September 30, 1996 and on completing six years of service he

       was promoted to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer in

       December 2002. Subsequently, a post for ex-cadre Executive

       Engineer was created and he was promoted to the said post vide

       Notification dated April 02, 2005. Respondent No.1 was granted

       regular promotion by encadering him on the recommendation of

       the Selection Committee pursuant to its meeting dated July 27,

       2005.
4.     On October 14, 2014, an inter se seniority list of Executive

       Engineers was published and within three days a Selection

       Committee meeting was convened for promotion to the post of

       Superintending          Engineer.         Although   the   Selection   Board

       proceeded on the basis that there were thirteen vacancies for the

       post of Superintending Engineers on that date, the appellants

       herein contend that the number of available vacancies were only

       ten (six for the year 2011 and four for the year 2014).                   The

       appellants have also contended that this increased number of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                     Page 2 of 20
vacancies was shown only to accommodate respondent No.1

       who was at Serial No. 52 in the seniority list. As per the Selection

       Committee, however, one Ajit Kr. Kakati was promoted from

       Superintending Engineer to Assistant Superintending Engineer;

       one Jiauddin Ahmed had suffered the punishment of compulsory

       retirement and one Kamkhya Prasad Bezbarua was sent on

       deputation.       Thus, three new vacancies arose.          With thirteen

       vacancies, respondent No. 1                was brought within the zone of

       consideration and was recommended for promotion to the post of

       Superintending Engineer on October 28, 2014 and the promotion

       order was issued.
5.     Respondent No.11 herein had filed the writ petition being Writ

       Petition (Civil) No. 5470 of 2014 before the Gauhati High Court

       challenging the promotion of respondent No.1 to the post of

       Superintending Engineer.                 Subsequently, the Assam PWD

       Engineers Service Association submitted a representation to the

       Chief Minister of Assam, who by endorsement dated November

       11, 2014 directed the Additional Chief Secretary (Personnel

       Department) to conduct an inquiry into the matter and submit a

       report.     Pursuant thereto, an inquiry was conducted and the

       report was forwarded to the Commissioner and Special Secretary
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                  Page 3 of 20
to the Government of Assam (PWD) which mentioned grave

       irregularities and illegalities committed in promoting respondent

       No.1. Thereafter, the PWD (Confidential Cell), Government of

       Assam, issued a letter dated December 24, 2014 to various

       officials of the Personnel Department informing them that a

       Review Selection Board meeting would be held on January 02,

       2015 regarding the promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer

       (Civil) and Superintending Engineer (Civil).
6.     Respondent No.1 also approached the Gauhati High Court by

       filing Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5 of 2015. During its pendency, an

       order of demotion was passed against respondent No.1 demoting

       him to the ex-cadre post of Executive Engineer.
7.     The learned Single Judge of the High Court held that the

       respondent No.1’s encadrement to the post of Executive

       Engineer was illegal.              It was also held that the Selection

       Committee erred in holding the number of vacancies as thirteen

       as against ten. The learned Single Judge also found respondent

       No.1 guilty of committing fraudulent acts in getting his promotion

       to the post of Executive Engineer which was also contrary to the

       Service Rules as he had not put in minimum of five years service.

       While holding so, the learned Single Judge negatived the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015               Page 4 of 20
contention of respondent No.1 that the writ petitions filed by the

       appellants herein suffered from delay and laches.
8.     Aggrieved by the same, respondent No.1 filed the appeal. Vide

       the impugned judgment dated August 07, 2015, the Division

       Bench of the High Court has set aside the order of the Single

       Judge thereby permitting respondent No.1 to hold the post of

       Superintending         Engineer       (PWD).     The   appellants,   being

       aggrieved of the same, have filed the instant appeals.
9.     We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The issues

       involved in these appeals are: (a) whether the promotion of

       respondent No.1 to the ex-cadre post of Executive Engineer, and

       encadrement thereof subsequently, is illegal?; (b) whether the

       delay and laches will come in the way of appellant No.3 in

       challenging the order of promotion of respondent No.1?; and (c)

       whether the Government was right in conducting an inquiry when

       the writ petitions were pending before the Court and whether

       subsequent demotion of respondent No.1 to the ex-cadre post of

       Executive Engineer is illegal?
10.    The issue pertains to the promotion of respondent No.1 and his

       seniority vis-a-vis the three appellants in the appeal arising out of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                  Page 5 of 20
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 25770 of 2015. The other two

       appeals are by the State of Assam as well as Assam PWD

       Engineers Service Association who are supporting the three

       appellants in the aforesaid appeal. For this reason, they also

       assailed the impugned judgment dated August 07, 2015 of the

       High Court. However, for the sake of convenience, the parties

       shall be referred to with reference to the appeal arising out of

       Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 25770 of 2015, i.e. the

       appellants and respondent No.1 respectively.
11.    Before proceeding further, it would be apt to discuss the manner

       in which the Division Bench of the High Court has proceeded with

       the matter resulting into the aforesaid outcome. After taking note

       of the seminal facts which have already been stated above, the

       High Court summarised the findings of the learned Single Judge

       in the following manner:
“(i)    The encadrement of the appellant to the post of EE
               is illegal. As the date when the appellant was promoted
               from the post of AEE to the post of an excadre EE and
               thereafter within five months when he was encadred to the
               post of EE he had not completed the required five years of
               qualifying service and that he had put in only three years of
               service.
(ii)  The learned Single Judge relied on the inquiry report
               to come to the conclusion that the number of vacancy in
               the cadre of SE on the date when the selection was made
               was only 10, therefore the selection committee grossly
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                  Page 6 of 20
erred in holding the number of vacancy as 13 as against
10.
(iii) The learned Single Judge found that the selection
               made at the review DPC and promoting the respondent 11
               as SE consequent to the others passed in the enquiry by
               the government is legal and valid. The learned Single
               Judge also found that the appellant herein is guilty of
               committing fraudulent acts in getting his promotion to the
               post of EE out-of-turn and contrary to the service rules
               when he has not put in minimum five years of service the
               encadrement to the post of EE is not gazetted and that the
               records were concocted to show that the said promotion
               was said to have been gazetted.
(iv) The learned Single Judge negatived the plea of the
               appellant that the inquiry committee has committed gross
               error in not giving him an opportunity of hearing before
               passing the order of his demotion.
(v)     The learned Single Judge also negatived the
               contention of the appellant that the writ petitions filed by the
               respondents suffer from delay and laches and held that
               there was a systematic manipulation at various stages to
               which complicity of the appellant cannot be ruled out. In
               the result the learned Single Judge upheld the order of the
               government in demoting the appellant to the post of EE
               (ex-cadre). The appellant aggrieved by the said order has
               filed this appeal.”
12.    Thereafter, the Court took note of the submission of the counsel

       for respondent No.1 (appellant in the said appeal) and also

       recorded the contentions of the Advocate General for the State of

       Assam and the counsel for the appellants herein. On the basis of

       the arguments and counter arguments noted by it, as well as the

       subject matter of the controversy, the High Court mentioned that

       seven propositions arise for consideration. These propositions
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                    Page 7 of 20
and answers thereto are given in paragraph 18 of the impugned

       judgment and we deem it apposite to extract the said paragraph

       which will give the flavour and essence of the judgment of the

       High Court:
“18. On thoughtful consideration of the rival contentions
               the following propositions are arising for consideration:
(i)    Whether the promotion of the appellant to the post of
               ex-cadre EE and en-cadre subsequently is illegal and, if it
               is so, whether the delay and laches will come in the way of
               respondent 12 challenging the order of promotion of the
               appellant.
The first part of the question is answered in the
               affirmative and the second part is in the negative.
(ii)   Whether the government was right in conducting an
               inquiry when the writ petitions were pending before the
               Court?
The question is answered in the negative.
(iii) Whether the inquiry committee was wrong in
               breaching the principles of natural justice in not giving an
               opportunity of hearing to the appellant?
The question is answered in the affirmative.
(iv) Whether the Association has any locus standi in the
               matter?
The question is answered in the negative.
(v)   Whether the findings to the inquiry committee that
               there are only 10 vacancies available for promotion to the
               post of SE and consequent to the demotion of the
               appellant to the post of EE (ex-cadre)?
The question is answered in the affirmative.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                 Page 8 of 20
(vi) Whether the order of the government in upsetting the
               order of promotion of the appellant and reverting him to the
               post of EE (ex-cadre) is illegal?
The question is answered in the affirmative.
(vii)   Whether the appellant is entitled to any equities?
As per the final order?”
13.    A glance at the aforesaid questions and answers thereto would

       amply demonstrate that the High Court has affirmed the finding of

       the learned Single Judge that the promotion of respondent No.1

       herein to the post of ex-cadre Executive Engineer and his

       encadrement thereafter was illegal. The Division Bench of the

       High Court has also given a categorical finding that there were

       only ten vacancies available for promotion at that time. However,

       at the same time, it observed that the order of the Government in

       upsetting the promotion of respondent No.1 and reverting him to

       the ex-cadre post of Executive Engineer was illegal. The reason

       for setting aside the demotion order of respondent No.1, in spite

       of specific finding to the effect that calculation of thirteen

       vacancies was incorrect and further that respondent No.1 was

       given undue favour while promoting him to the post of

       Superintending Engineer is captured in paragraph 26 of the

       impugned judgment, which is reproduced below:
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                   Page 9 of 20
“26. It may be that the notification of July 1997 which
               declares that if a person overstays on deputation beyond
               the five years is deemed to have been absorbed may be
               illegal because the person on deputation will have lien in
               the post in the parent department until the lien gets
               terminated and the said post cannot be considered as
               vacant, but nonetheless a government order was there and
               based on the material the bureaucracy have worked out
               the vacancy as 13. The government notification of July
               1997 was issued much prior to the dispute in question.
               Based on the said notification when the authorities have
               worked out the vacancy position and the PWD Minister has
               also approved it the Court should not expect the
               bureaucracy to apply the strict judicial standards and legal
               acumen in interpreting notifications and the provisions of
               law while discharging their duties. Any mistakes on the
               part of the bureaucracy in interpretation should be
               considered only as a bona fide error and not as a
               deliberate mistake. In that view the calculation of 13
               vacancies may be incorrect but considering the position
               today when Kamakhya Bezbaruah is repatriated there will
               be still four vacancies of SE available. Therefore there
               does not appear to be any difficulty for Kamakhya
               Bezbaruah on his repatriation to get back to the post of SE.
               Therefore we find that in fitness of things it is a case where
               although the appellant took some undue favour in the year
               2005 on the ground of delay and laches it is not proper to
               upset his position and also his promotion to the post of SE
               having been worked out on the basis that there are 13
               vacancies which appears to be a bona fide mistake. In
               view of subsequent developments new vacancies of SE
               have arisen. Kamakhya Bezbaruah who is repatriated will
               continue to hold the post of SE and he would be senior to
               appellant. With the above observations the writ appeal is
               disposed of.”
14.    The argument of the appellants, including the State of Assam, is

       that even when the Division Bench concurred with the findings of

       the learned Single Judge that it was a case of total favouritism

       shown to respondent No.1 in giving him promotion to the ex-

       cadre post in the first instance and thereafter encadring him and
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                 Page 10 of 20
the same were found to be contrary to the Rules; the writ petitions

       of the appellants were dismissed on the purported ground of

       delays and laches.
15.    Mr. Nalin Kohli, learned counsel who appeared for the State of

       Assam, gave the following details to show that respondent No.1

       was much junior to the three appellants and still allowed to

       stealmarch over them, which was cearly impermissible:
Party                Assistant Assistant        Executive
                                        Engineer Executive         Engineer
                                                  Engineer
              Appellant No.1               1980         1989         2002
              Appellant No.2               1981         1988         2002
              Appellant No.3               1992         1999   Yet to be promoted
            Respondent No.1                1996         2002          2005
                                                               (within 3 years, as
                                                                per Rule it has to
                                                                   be 5 years)
He submitted that the learned Single Judge of the High

       Court had, therefore, rightly interfered with the orders of

       promotion and encadrement of respondent No.1, which was

       upset by the Division Bench on spacious grounds.
16.    The reply of Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing

       for respondent No.1, was that the course of action adopted by the

       Division Bench was quite reasonable and equitable.                       He
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                  Page 11 of 20
submitted that the promotion was given to respondent No.1 as

       Executive Engineer way back in the year 2005 against an ex-

       cadre post. Thereafter, he was encadred also in the same year.

       Respondent No.1, thus, had been working on this post since

       2005. Thereafter, he stood promoted as Superintending Engineer

       with effect from October 17, 2014. It would, therefore, be unjust

       to upset the applecart.
17.    For appropriately dealing with the contentions of the counsel for

       the parties, it would be necessary to traverse through the

       documents vide which respondent No.1 was given the aforesaid

       benefits.
18.    Record shows that the Government of Assam created an ex-
cadre post of Executive Engineer (PWD), which fact was

       informed to the Accountant General (A&D), Assam, vide

       communication dated April 02, 2005. This letter mentions that the

       Governor of Assam has sanctioned the creation of one post of ex-

       cadre Executive Engineer from the date of the issue of the letter,

       i.e. April 02, 2005, for a period up to February 28, 2006. It was

       also stated that beyond February 28, 2006, PWD would move for

       further retention of this post, if necessary, with name of the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015         Page 12 of 20
incumbent. It was subject to the following conditions which were

       contained in the said letter itself:
“1. The ex-cadre post of OSD to Chief Minister in the rank
               of Executive Engineer, PWD will be personal to Sri Debajit
               Das.
2. The ex-cadre post of OSD to Chief Minister in the rank
               of Executive Engineer, PWD shall Stand abolished as soon
               as Sri Debajit Das get regular promotion as Executive
               Engineer, PWD in the parent cadre.
3. Beyond 28-02-2006, Public Works Department will
               move for further retention of this post, if necessary, with
               name of the incumbent.
Meanwhile, Public Works Department is advised to initiate
               the process of regular promotion from Asstt. Executive
               Engineer to Executive Engineer.
Sd/-
Under Secretary
                                                        Finance (EC-II) Department”
19.    It becomes clear from the aforesaid that this ex-cadre post was

       created specially for respondent No.1, which was to remain till the

       regular promotion of respondent No.1 as Executive Engineer in

       the parent cadre.           It was nothing but an act of favouritism.

       Pertinently, respondent No.1 was attached with the Chief Minister

       as an Officer on Special Duty at that time. It is also relevant to

       note that though appellant Nos. 1 and 2 had already stood

       promoted as Executive Engineers (who were promoted in the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                        Page 13 of 20
year 2002), appellant No.3 was yet to be promoted. They were,

       thus, much senior to respondent No.1.
20.    Within three months of the aforesaid promotion of respondent

       No.1 in ex-cadre post, respondent No.1 was given regular

       promotion in the cadre. The manner in which it was done again

       shows that undue favour was accorded to him. The Selection

       Board meeting for encadrement of ex-cadre post held by

       respondent No.1 was held on July 27, 2005. Minutes of these

       meeting are placed on record.                     It is recorded that probable

       vacancies in the year 2004 as assessed by the Department are

       thirteen, which are inclusive of existing vacancy due to the

       retirement of one officer and twelve vacancies that occurred due

       to the promotion of twelve Executive Engineers to the rank of

       Superintending         Engineers        (Civil)     during   the   year   ending

       December 31, 2004. The Minutes also record that the Board was

       intimated by the Appointing Authority that the Department had

       given promotion to respondent No.1 as Executive Engineer (ex-

       cadre) with the concurrence of the Finance Department.                      Inter

       alia, on the aforesaid basis, the Selection Board recommended

       his encadrement.           It was noted that since there were thirteen
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                       Page 14 of 20
vacancies and respondent No.1 was at the thirteenth position in

       the Select List, his encadrement was recommended.
21.    Two things flow from the aforesaid Minutes, which are as follows:
(a)     The Board was wrongly informed that there were thirteen

       vacancies.
(b)     Respondent No.1 was promoted as Assistant Executive

       Engineer in the year 2002 and stood promoted as Executive

       Engineer in the year 2005, i.e. within three years of his promotion

       as Assistant Executive Engineer. The extant Rules provide that a

       person, to be eligible for promotion to the post of Executive

       Engineer, should work for a minimum period of five years as

       Assistant Executive Engineer. He was, thus, not even eligible for

       consideration to the post of Executive Engineer. It appears that

       the Selection Board glossed over this fundamental aspect and

       proceeded on the basis as if respondent No.1 was eligible to be

       considered for promotion.
In spite of aforesaid two glaring defects, which go to the root

       of the matter, the recommendation of the Selection Board was

       accepted and the Government of Assam issued orders dated

       August 03, 2005 promoting various persons, including respondent

       No.1, to the rank of Executive Engineer (Civil), PWD.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015              Page 15 of 20
22.    We, thus, find that the findings of the learned Single Judge to the

       effect that encadrement of respondent No.1 to the post of

       Executive Engineer was illegal not only on the ground that he was

       ineligible for consideration, as he had put in only three years of

       service, but also for the reason that there were only ten vacancies

       and not thirteen and, therefore, respondent No.1 could not be

       promoted at all, are without blemish. We are also in agreement

       with the findings of the learned Single Judge that respondent

       No.1 was guilty of committing fraudulent acts in getting his

       promotion to the post of Executive Engineer out of turn and

       contrary to the service Rules. Even the Division Bench, in the

       impugned judgment, accepted the aforesaid position in paragraph

       20 of its judgment, which reads as under:
“20) It is no doubt that the promotion of the appellant to the
               post of EE (encadre) and consequent encadrement is
               contrary to the service rules, since he had not put in the
               required service of five years to be eligible to the promotion
               to the post of EE. The condition in the promotion order that
               the officer “over the post so encadred” should be in the
               lowest position till the senior category comes to the position
               appears to be an untenable condition that could be
               attached to the promotion under the service rules. There
               appears to be compounded illegalities. The promotion may
               be illegal. So much so the conditions stipulated is also
               illegal. Promotions have to be granted according to the
               service rules.”
23.    Interestingly, the Division Bench has also accepted that

       calculation of thirteen vacancies by the Government may also be
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                 Page 16 of 20
incorrect. However, this aspect is side tracked by stating that it

       was a bona fide mistake and not a deliberate one. Fact remains

       that the Division Bench has accepted that thirteen vacancies

       were not in existence.
24.    Notwithstanding the same, the Division Bench has non-suited the

       appellants only on the ground that writ petition filed by the

       appellants suffered from delays and laches as it was filed nine

       years after the promotion of respondent No.1 and has stated that

       even when respondent No.1 had taken undue favour in getting

       the promotion, it was not proper to upset the decision because of

       delay and laches, as also the fact that in the meantime

       respondent No.1 has got promotion to the post of Superintending

       Engineer as well.
25.    It, therefore, needs to be considered as to whether the order of

       the learned Single Judge warranted interference thereby denying

       the relief to the appellants on the ground that their writ petition

       suffered from delays and laches.
26.    Having regard to the circumstances in which respondent No.1

       was given promotion to the post of Executive Engineer by

       creating an ex-cadre post and thereafter the manner in which he
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015          Page 17 of 20
was encadred to the said post by stretching the number of

       vacancies against the record, speaks volumes about the manner

       in which undue favour was shown to respondent No.1. One has

       to keep in mind that at that time he was working as Officer on

       Special Duty to the Chief Minister.              These facts reflect clear

       manipulation of the system at various stages to give out of turn

       promotion to respondent No.1 by bestowing undue favour. With

       such ‘flyover promotions’, respondent No.1 parachuted from

       Assistant Executive Engineer to Superintending Engineer by

       bypassing many senior colleagues in the cadre of Assistant

       Executive Engineer who are still stagnating in the same cadre.
When this factual position emerged on record and was duly

       approved by the Division Bench as well, we are of the opinion

       that the writ petition could not be dismissed on the ground of

       delay and laches.            In fact, the Division Bench has erred in

       invoking this principle by dubbing the entire exercise as a bona

       fide error. What happened cannot be termed as ‘bona fide’. It

       was a clear case of favouritism shown to respondent No.1 and

       the actions were contrary to Rules.
27.    That apart, there is one more reason for coming to the conclusion

       that the Division Bench of the High Court was in error in saving
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                  Page 18 of 20
respondent No.1 on the premise that the writ petitions suffered

       from delay and laches. In fact, the Association had submitted a

       representation to the then Chief Minister. Going by the nature of

       allegations, the Chief Minister rightly acted thereupon and

       referred the matter to a Committee which, after examining the

       matter, had also given its report stating that the promotion of

       respondent No.1 was against the Rules.               This provides

       reasonable explanation for delay, if any.
28.    We are of the opinion that it was virtually a case of fraud, at least

       on three counts. First, by creating ex-cadre post of Executive

       Engineer only for respondent No.1 and giving him that post when

       he was much junior to many others. Second, encadrement of

       respondent No.1 as Executive Engineer by showing that there

       were thirteen posts when, in fact, there were only ten posts of

       Executive Engineer on that date. This was done obviously with

       the purpose of accommodating him. Third, the promotion was

       given when respondent No.1 was not even eligible as per Rules

       as he had not put in minimum service of five years. Fraud vitiates

       every action and cannot be kept under the carpet on the ground

       that the action challenged was belated, more so when there is a

       reasonable explanation for such delay.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015            Page 19 of 20
29.    We, accordingly allow these appeals, set aside the impugned

       judgment dated August 07, 2015 of the Division Bench of the

       High Court and restore the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
No order as to costs.
.............................................J.
                                                                                    (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                        .............................................J.
                                                                      (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 23, 2018.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 25770 of 2015                                 Page 20 of 20