[Cites
21
, Cited by
35
]
Supreme Court of India
Sushil Kumar Agarwal vs Meenakshi Sadhu . on 9 October, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 718, 2019 (2) SCC 241, AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 1538, (2019) 1 CAL HN 6, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 142 (SC), (2018) 131 ALL LR 756, (2018) 13 SCALE 778, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 142, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 764, (2018) 4 CIVILCOURTC 841, (2018) 4 CURCC 352, (2018) 4 JLJR 271, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 259, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 775, (2018) 8 MAD LJ 446, (2019) 127 CUT LT 444, (2019) 142 REVDEC 724, (2019) 1 ALL RENTCAS 193, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 855, (2019) 1 ICC 156, (2019) 1 JCR 105 (SC), (2019) 1 MAD LW 449, (2019) 3 CALLT 3
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
,
A M Khanwilkar
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1129 OF 2012



         SUSHIL KUMAR AGARWAL                                                .....Appellant


                                                           Versus

         MEENAKSHI SADHU & ORS.                                             .....Respondents




                                                    JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
1.              The present appeal1 is from the judgment of a Division Bench of the High

         Court of Calcutta2. The appellant, who is a builder, instituted a suit for specific

         performance of a development agreement, against the respondents, who are

         owners of the premises. The suit was dismissed by the City Civil Court. The

         High Court dismissed the first appeal.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.10.09
15:15:15 IST
Reason:
1   Leave was granted on 12 January 2012.
2   The High Court delivered judgment on 18 February 2009.
1
2.          The subject matter of the suit for specific performance is a development

agreement dated 14 April 1992, entered into by the appellant with the

predecessor-in-interest of the respondents (Late Kalidas Sadhu)3 in respect of

premises situated at 243N, Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road, P.S. Burtolla,

Kolkata – 700 006. The agreement recites that the owners had approached the

appellant for construction of a building on the land and that the following terms,

inter alia, were agreed upon by and between the parties:
a)       The appellant agreed to apply at his own costs and expenses for sanction

         of the plan of a proposed building complex on 14 cottahs 5 chittacks and

         40 square feet, to the Calcutta Municipal Corporation (Clause-1 of the

         agreement);
b)       The plan of the building complex would be prepared and submitted by the

         appellant to the Calcutta Municipal Corporation, after the approval of the

         respondent (Clause -2 of the agreement);
c)       The appellant shall deposit with the respondent an amount of ₹ 4,00,000/-
without interest which shall be refundable upon the completion of the

         building (Clause-3 of the agreement);
d)       If for any reason after the plan is sanctioned or for any act or omission on

         the part of the appellant, the construction cannot take place, the appellant

         shall refund the deposit in addition to all costs, charges and expenses

         incurred by the respondent (Clause-22 of the agreement);



3   Late Kalidas Sadhu was the original respondent. Upon his death, by an order dated 12 May 2018, the legal
    heirs of the original respondent were substituted as existing respondents.
2
e)   The respondent shall retain 42% of the total constructed area as ‘sole

     owned’ and the balance 58% of the total constructed area shall remain

     secured for due payment of the construction costs. The total construction

     cost shall not exceed the value of 58% of the constructed area. The

     respondent agreed to pay the appellant the costs and expenses along with

     agreed remuneration upon completion of the construction and if the

     respondent failed to pay, the appellant was entitled to realise its money by

     selling 58% of the total constructed area (Clauses – 6, 10 and 11 of the

     agreement); and
f)   The respondent was entitled to demand any loss and/or damage suffered

     by him for any illegal activities of the appellant and the appellant was also

     entitled to recover damages from the respondent for lapse and negligence,

     in addition to the right of the parties to claim specific performance (Clause
-24 of the agreement).
3.    The appellant alleged that upon the execution of the agreement, he found

that the premises were encumbered and that there were arrears of municipal

tax and electricity dues, besides which there were labour and industrial disputes

and ‘factory closure problems’. The respondent is alleged to have requested

the appellant to make payments and assured that he will reimburse him before

the sanction of the building plan was obtained. Accordingly, the appellant claims

to have made a payment of ₹ 7,03,000/-.
3
4.         On 18 March 2002, the respondent addressed a letter to the appellant

and denied the execution of the agreement. The appellant, by a letter dated 4

April 2002 protested the denial and requested the respondent to give him the

authority to obtain sanction of the building plans. Parties thereafter met and

agreed to modify the terms of the agreement with revised terms under which (i)

allocation of the owner would be 47% instead of 42%; and (ii) allocation of the

developer would be 53% instead of 58%.
5.         On 26 May 2003, the appellant issued to the respondent a notice for

payment of his share of the sanctioned fees. On 3 June 2003 the owner wrote

a letter to the appellant through his advocate, denying the contents of the notice

on the ground that he had by a notice dated 19 May 2003 cancelled the

agreement and requested the appellant to return all documents and collect the

deposit.
6.        On 6 August 2003, the appellant instituted a suit4 in the City Civil Court

seeking a declaration that the cancellation of the agreement by the respondent

was invalid and a permanent injunction restraining the respondent from entering

into any agreement with a third party for sale of the premises. On 28 September

2005 the City Civil Court allowed an amendment of the plaint, by which a prayer

for specific performance was included.
4   TS No.1150/03
4
7.         On 28 February 2007, the City Civil Court dismissed the Suit with the

following observation:
“No tangible evidence is forthcoming in the instant suit by
                   which it can be said that the plaintiff (developer) obtained
                   possession of the suit property i.e. the possession of the suit
                   property is/has handed over to him after the execution of the
                   agreement in question.”



The City Civil Court relied on a judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court

of Calcutta in
Vipin Bhimani v Smt Sunanda Das5
, that a suit for specific

performance of a development agreement at the instance of a developer is

barred by the provisions of
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Specific Relief Act 1963 (“the

Act”). Upon examining various clauses of the agreement, the City Civil Court

concluded that the appellant had agreed to apply at his own cost and expense

to the Calcutta Municipal Corporation for getting the plans of the proposed

building approved. The City Civil Court noted that it was an admitted fact that

sanction was not obtained by the appellant and therefore, it could not be said

that he had obtained possession. As a result, the suit at the instance of the

appellant was held to be barred by
Section14(3)(c)
.
8.         Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the City Civil Court, the appellant

preferred an appeal6 before the High Court of Calcutta. On 18 February 2009

the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal, on the ground that

the suit was not maintainable under
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act.




5   (2006) 2 CHN 396
6   F.A. No. 175 of 2007
5
The High Court rejected the appellant’s argument that even if
Section 14(3)(c)
stood in the way of getting a decree for specific performance, the
Specific Relief

Act
not being exhaustive, there was no bar in granting a decree. The High Court

held:
“….if in the Act there is a clear prohibition in granting a decree
             for specific performance in a given situation, such provision is
             exhaustive and cannot be made nugatory by contending that
             the Act is not exhaustive and thus, the Court can ignore such
             provision.”
9.      The High Court also rejected the argument of the appellant that the

agreement in question was not a contract for construction of building on the

land in a real sense, as the respondent was not getting any consideration for

building. The High Court held that the agreement was in substance a contract

of construction within the meaning of sub-section (3)(c) of
Section 14
and the

consideration was payable only upon the completion of the work.
10.     The issue which has been raised before this Court is whether
Section

14(3)(c)
of the Act is a bar to a suit by a developer for specific performance of

a development agreement between himself and the owner of the property. In

dealing with this issue, the court needs to assess whether the word “defendant”

in
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
has the effect of confining the scope of the suit for specific

performance only to a particular class (consisting of owners) or whether a

purposive interpretation to the legislation would be required, so as to provide a

broader set of remedies to both owners and developers. In deciding this issue

the court will need to scrutinise the nature of a development agreement.
6
11.
Section 14
provides thus:
“14. Contracts not specifically enforceable-
(1) The following contracts cannot be specifically enforced,
            namely -
(a) a contract for the non-performance of which compensation
            in money is an adequate relief;
(b) a contract which runs into such minute or numerous details
            or which is so dependent on the personal qualifications or
            volition of the parties, or otherwise from its nature is such, that
            the court cannot enforce specific performance of its material
            terms;
(c) a contract which is in its nature determinable;
(d) a contract the performance of which involves the
            performance of a continuous duty which the court cannot
            supervise.
(2) Save as provided by the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(10 of 1940),
            no contract to refer present or future differences to arbitration
            shall be specifically enforced; but if any person who has made
            such a contract (other than an arbitration agreement to which
            the provisions of the said Act apply) and has refused to perform
            it, sues in respect of any subject which he has contracted to
            refer, the existence of such contract shall bar the suit.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) or clause
(c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1), the court may enforce
            specific performance in the following cases--
(a) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract,-
(i) to execute a mortgage or furnish any other security for
            securing the repayment of any loan which the borrower is not
            willing to repay at once:
Provided that where only a part of the loan has been advanced
            the lender is willing to advance the remaining part of the loan
            in terms of the contract; or
(ii) to take up and pay for any debentures of a company;
(b) where the suit is for-
(i) the execution of a formal deed of partnership, the parties
            having commenced to carry on the business of the partnership;
or
(ii) the purchase of a share of a partner in a firm;
7
(c) where the suit is for the enforcement of contract for the
                    construction of any building or the execution of any other work
                    on land:
Provided that the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: -
(i) the building or other work is described in the contract in
                    terms sufficiently precise to enable the court to determine the
                    exact nature of the building or work;
(ii) the plaintiff has a substantial interest in the performance of
                    the contract and the interest is of such a nature that
                    compensation in money for non-performance of the contract is
                    not an adequate relief; and
(iii) the defendant has, in pursuance of the contract, obtained
                    possession of the whole or any part of the land on which the
                    building is to be constructed or other work is to be executed.”
Section 14(1)
provides categories of contracts which are not specifically

enforceable. Sub-section (3) of
Section 14
is an exception to clauses (a), (c)

and (d) of sub-section (1). Though the species of contract stipulated in clauses
(a), (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) cannot be specifically enforced, a suit for

specific performance of contracts of that description will be maintainable if the

conditions set out in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (c) of
Section 14(3)
are satisfied.
12.        The consistent position of the common law is that courts do not normally

order specific performance of a contract to build or repair. But this rule is subject

to important exceptions, and a decree for specific performance of a contract to

build will be made only upon meeting the requisite requirements under law.

According to Halsbury’s Laws of England7, the discretion to grant specific



7   Halsbury’s Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Volume 44(1), para 801
8
performance is not arbitrary or capricious; it is governed by principles developed

in precedents. The judge must exercise the discretion in a judicious manner.

Circumstances bearing on the conduct of the plaintiff, such as delay,

acquiescence and breach or some other circumstances outside the contract,

may render it inequitable to enforce it. The position as elucidated in Halsbury’s

Laws of England8 is thus:
“… the court does not normally order specific performance of
                    a contract to build or repair. However, this rule is subject to
                    important exceptions, and a decree for specific performance of
                    a contract to build will be made if the following conditions are
                    fulfilled: (1) that the building work is defined by the contract
                    between the parties; (2) that the plaintiff has a substantial
                    interest in the performance of the contract of such a nature that
                    he cannot be adequately be compensated in damages; (3) that
                    the defendant is in possession of the land on which the work is
                    contracted to be done.”
13.        This principle was followed by the Court of Appeal in Wolverhampton

Corporation v Emmons9, where the plaintiff, the urban sanitary authority, in

pursuance of a scheme of street improvement, sold and conveyed to the

defendant a plot of land abutting a street, the defendant covenanting with them

that he would erect buildings within a certain time. Upon the defendant failing

to perform the agreement, the plaintiffs brought a suit against him claiming

specific performance. Romer L.J, held that a plaintiff can bring himself within

the exception, if three things are shown to exist: (i) the building work, the

performance of which the plaintiff seeks to enforce, is defined by the contract

allowing the court to know the exact nature and extent of work; (ii) the plaintiff
8   Halsbury’s Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Volume 44(1), para 806
9   [1901] 1 K. B. 515
9
must have a substantial interest in having the contract performed and the

interest must be of such a nature that damages will not be an adequate

compensation for the non-performance of the contract; and (iii) the defendant

has obtained from the plaintiff by means of the contract the possession of the

land on which the work is to be done. The case was held to come within the

class of cases which had been recognised as forming an exception to the

general rule that specific performance of a building contract will not be ordered.
14.        In a decision of the Chancery Division in Carpenters Estate v Davies10,

an owner of land sold a certain portion of it to the purchaser for development,

retaining land adjoining it, and agreed to lay roads and provide mains, sewers

and drains on the land retained. The purchaser brought a suit for specific

performance against the owner for not performing his obligations under the

agreement. Farwell J., observed that the plaintiff is required to establish that the

defendant is in possession of the land on which the work is contracted to be

done. The facts of the case, indicated that the defendant was already in

possession of the land, and there was no difficulty for her to carry out her

obligations. Finding that the plaintiff proved all three conditions as laid out in

Wolverhampton Corporation (supra), the court granted specific performance

to the plaintiff.
10   (1940) Ch. D 160
10
15.          The requirements to be satisfied by the plaintiff bringing forth a suit for

specific performance have been analysed in Hudson’s Building and

Engineering Contracts11 and in Price v Strange12, where the rule has been

settled that the court will order specific performance of an agreement to build if:
(i)      the building work is sufficiently defined by the contract, for example by

         reference to detailed plans;
(ii) the plaintiff has a substantial interest in the performance of the contract of

         such a nature that damages would not compensate him for the defendant’s

         failure to build; and
(iii) the defendant is in possession of the land so that the plaintiff cannot

         employ another person to build without committing a trespass.
16.          The expression “development agreement” has not been defined

statutorily. In a sense, it is a catch-all nomenclature which is used to be

describe a wide range of agreements which an owner of a property may enter

into for development of immovable property. As real estate transactions have

grown in complexity, the nature of these agreements has become increasingly

intricate. Broadly speaking, (without intending to be exhaustive), development

agreements may be of various kinds:
(i)      An agreement may envisage that the owner of the immovable property

                engages someone to carry out the work of construction on the




11   Hudson’s Building and Engineering Contracts, Eleventh Edition, Volume 1, page 677
12   [1978] 1 Ch. 337 at page 359
11
property for monetary consideration. This is a pure construction

        contract;
(ii)    An agreement by which the owner or a person holding other rights in

        an immovable property grants rights to a third party to carry on

        development for a monetary consideration payable by the developer

        to the other. In such a situation, the owner or right holder may in effect

        create an interest in the property in favour of the developer for a

        monetary consideration;
(iii)   An agreement where the owner or a person holding any other rights

        in an immovable property grants rights to another person to carry out

        development. In consideration, the developer has to hand over a part

        of the constructed area to the owner. The developer is entitled to deal

        with the balance of the constructed area. In some situations, a society

        or similar other association is formed and the land is conveyed or

        leased to the society or association;
(iv)    A development agreement may be entered into in a situation where

        the immovable property is occupied by tenants or other right holders.

        In some cases, the property may be encroached upon. The developer

        may take on the entire responsibility to settle with the occupants and

        to thereafter carry out construction; and
(v)     An owner may negotiate with a developer to develop a plot of land

        which is occupied by slum dwellers and which has been declared as

        a slum. Alternately, there may be old and dilapidated buildings which
12
are occupied by a number of occupants or tenants. The developer

               may undertake to rehabilitate the occupants or, as the case may be,

               the slum dwellers and thereafter share the saleable constructed area

               with the owner.
When a pure construction contact is entered into, the contractor has no interest

in either the land or the construction which is carried out. But in various other

categories of development agreements, the developer may have acquired a

valuable right either in the property or in the constructed area. The terms of the

agreement are crucial in determining whether any interest has been created in

the land or in respect of rights in the land in favour of the developer and if so,

the nature and extent of the rights.
17.        In a construction contract, the contractor has no interest in either the land

or the construction carried out on the land. But, in other species of development

agreements, the developer may have acquired a valuable right either in the

property or the constructed area. There are various incidents of ownership of in

respect of an immovable property. Primarily, ownership imports the right of

exclusive possession and the enjoyment of the thing owned. The owner in

possession of the thing has the right to exclude all others from its possession

and enjoyment. The right to ownership of a property carries with it the right to

its enjoyment, right to its access and to other beneficial enjoyments incidental

to it. (
B Gangadhar v BG Rajalingam13
). Ownership denotes the relationship

13   (1995) 5 SCC 239 at para 6
13
between a person and an object forming the subject matter of the ownership. It

consists of a complex of rights, all of which are rights in rem, being good against

the world and not merely against specific persons. There are various rights or

incidents of ownership all of which need not necessarily be present in every

case.
They may include a right to possess, use and enjoy the thing owned; and

a right to consume, destroy or alienate it. (
Swadesh Ranjan Sinha v Haradeb

Banerjee14
). An essential incident of ownership of land is the right to exploit the

development, potential to construct and to deal with the constructed area. In

some situations, under a development agreement, an owner may part with such

rights to a developer. This in is essence is a parting of some of the incidents of

ownership of the immovable property. There could be situations where pursuant

to the grant of such rights, the developer has incurred a substantial investment,

altered the state of the property and even created third party rights in the

property or the construction carried out to be carried out. There could be

situations where it is the developer who by his efforts has rendered a property

developable by taking steps in law. In development agreements of this nature,

where an interest is created in the land or in the development in favour of the

developer, it may be difficult to hold that the agreement is not capable of being

specifically performed. For example, the developer may have evicted or settled

with occupants, got land which was agricultural converted into non-agricultural

use, carried out a partial development of the property and pursuant to the rights

conferred under the agreement, created third party rights in favour of flat



14   (1991) 4 SCC 572
14
purchasers in the proposed building. In such a situation, if for no fault of the

developer, the owner seeks to resile from the agreement and terminates the

development agreement, it may be difficult to hold that the developer is not

entitled to enforce his rights. This of course is dependent on the terms of the

agreement in each case.
There cannot be a uniform formula for determining

whether an agreement granting development rights can be specifically enforced

and it would depend on the nature of the agreement in each case and the rights

created under it.
18         In
Chheda Housing Development Corporation v Bibijan Shaikh

Farid15
, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court while dealing with the

question of whether specific performance should be granted of a development

agreement held as follows:
“In our opinion from a conspectus of these judgments, what is
                   relevant would be the facts of each case and the agreement
                   under consideration. Agreements considering what is
                   discussed, amongst others, could be:
(a) An Agreement only entrusting construction work to a party
                   for consideration.
(b) An Agreement for entrusting the work of development to a
                   party with added rights to sell the constructed portion to flat
                   purchasers, who would be forming a Co-operative Housing
                   Society to which society, the owner of the land, is obliged to
                   convey the constructed portion as also the land beneath
                   construction on account of statutory requirements.
(c) A normal agreement for sale of an immovable property.
An Agreement of the first type normally is not enforceable as
                   compensation in money is an adequate remedy. An Agreement
                   of the third type would normally be specifically enforceable

15   (2007) 3 Mah LJ 402
15
unless the contrary is proved. A mere agreement for
                  development, which creates no interest in the land would not
                  be specifically enforced.”
19.       The judgement of the Bombay High Court in
Della Developers Private

Limited v Noble Organics Private Limited16
, deals with a case where a

development agreement was executed between the petitioners and the

respondents. A dispute arose between the parties and arbitration proceedings

were initiated. An order was passed by the Arbitrator under
Section 17
of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 against which an appeal was filed under
Section 37
. Before the High Court, the findings of the sole arbitrator under
Section 17
were challenged. Upon examining the agreement, the High Court

held that the agreement created a right or interest in immovable property. On

the issue of the maintainability of a proceeding initiated by the developer against

the owner under
Section 14(3)(c)
, the court reiterated the requirement of

fulfilling the three conditions under
Section 14(3)(c)
. Hon’ble Mr. Justice A M

Khanwilkar (as my learned Brother then was) held as follows:
“Insofar as present case is concerned, out of the three
                  conditions specified in
Section 14(3)(c)
, prima facie, from the
                  terms of the Agreement as executed between the parties, there
                  is nothing to indicate that the Petitioner in pursuance of the
                  contract, was put in possession of the whole or any part of the
                  land on which the building is to be constructed or other work is
                  to be executed.”
20.
In
Ashok Kumar Jaiswal v Ashim Kumar Kar17
, a Full Bench of the

Calcutta High Court held that a development agreement with a clause for



16   (2010) 2 Bom CR 13
17   AIR 2014 Cal 92
16
conditional sale of the premises in question will also be an agreement for sale

subject to certain conditions. While deciding whether a suit at the instance of a

developer is maintainable in view of
Section 14(3)(c)
, the Court, inter alia, held

that in the absence of a definition of "developer" or "development agreement"
the nature of the agreement which is the subject-matter of a suit must be

considered in order to determine whether it is an agreement to merely provide

construction of a building or whether the developer has obtained a share of, and

interest in, the developed property which is the outcome of the agreement,

creating a contract for transfer of immovable property. The Full Bench observed

thus:
“An owner without any funds or the independent resources to
             construct a new building on such owner’s land may engage for
             such purpose with the consideration for the construction being
             paid by allocation of a part of the constructed area. There could
             be several variants of the same basic structure of a
             development agreement…..Such agreements are not merely
             for the construction of any building or for the mere execution of
             any other work on the land. The developer is not merely a
             contractor engaged to undertake the construction; the
             developer is, under the agreement with the owner, promised a
             part of the constructed premises as owner thereof together with
             the proportionate area of the land.”




The Full Bench held that a right to seek specific performance of a development

agreement is not barred either expressly or by necessary implication by the

1963 Act and a broad interpretation should be given to allow an adequate

remedy:
“….it would be preposterous to say that only the owner can
             maintain a suit against the developer for enforcing his rights
             and not vice-versa. If the developer has a right under the
17
contract he must be having a remedy in the form of
             approaching a forum for appropriate redressal. A question of
             maintainability of a suit is completely different from the
             question of whether the suit will succeed or not on the facts of
             the case and in the light of the applicable law.
Section 14 (3)(c)
of the Act can in no manner be interpreted as debarring a
             developer from approaching the legal forum for redressal of his
             grievance.”
21.   In the present case, the respondent agreed to pay the appellant the

costs and expenses along with the agreed remuneration upon completion of

the construction. If the respondent failed to pay, the appellant was entitled to

realise its money by selling 58% of the total constructed area. Clauses 6, 10

and 11 of the agreement indicate that the respondent would retain 42% of the

total constructed area and the balance 58% would remain secured for due

payment of the construction costs. It was further agreed, that the total

construction costs shall not exceed 58% of the constructed area. The intention

of the parties is clear from the agreement. This was an agreement to carry out

the construction of the building for which payment of the construction costs and

agreed remuneration had to be made. The agreement did not create an interest

in the land for the developer. If the payment due to the developer was made,

there would arise no security interest. Moreover, the security interest in respect

of 42% of the constructed area would arise only if the construction came up and

the payment due to the builder was not made. In present case, admittedly there

is no construction at all.
18
22.    Various High Courts have interpreted the requirements under
Section

14(3)(c)
of the Act and opined on the maintainability of a suit by the developer

for specific performance against the owner of the property for a breach in the

conditions of the development agreement. A common thread that runs through

the analysis in decided cases is the following:
(i)   The courts do not normally order specific performance of a contract to build

      or repair. But this rule is subject to important exceptions, and a decree for

      specific performance of a contract to build will be made only upon meeting

      the requirements under law;
(ii) The discretion to grant specific performance is not arbitrary or capricious

      but judicious; it is to be exercised on settled principles; the conduct of the

      plaintiff, such as delay, acquiescence, breach or some other circumstances

      outside the contract, may render it inequitable to enforce it;
(iii) In order to determine the exact nature of the agreement signed between

      the parties, the intent of the parties has to be construed by reading the

      agreement as a whole in order to determine whether it is an agreement

      simpliciter for construction or an agreement that also creates an interest

      for the builder in the property. Where under a development agreement, the

      developer has an interest in land, it would be difficult to hold that such an

      agreement is not capable of being specifically enforced; and
(iv) A decree for specific performance of a contract to build will be made if the

      following conditions are fulfilled:
19
a) the work of construction should be described in the contract in a

         sufficiently precise manner in order for the court to determine the exact

         nature of the building or work;
b) the plaintiff must have a substantial interest in the performance of the

         contract and the interest should be of such a nature that compensation

         in money for non-performance of the contract is not an adequate relief;
and
c) the defendant should have, by virtue of the agreement, obtained

         possession of the whole or any part of the land on which the building is

         to be constructed or other work is to be executed.
23.    The issue before this Court is whether
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
is a bar to a

suit by a developer for specific performance of a development agreement

between himself and the owner of the property. The condition under
Section

14(3)(c)(iii)
is that the defendant has, by virtue of the agreement, obtained

possession of the whole or any part of the land on which the building is to be

constructed or other work is to be executed. If the rule of literal interpretation is

adopted to interpret
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
, it would lead to a situation where a suit

for specific performance can only be instituted at the behest of the owner

against a developer, denying the benefit of the provision to the developer

despite an interest in the property having been created. This anomaly is created

by the use of the words “the defendant has, by virtue of the agreement, obtained

possession of the whole or any part of the land” in
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
. Under a
20
development agreement, an interest in the property may have been created in

favour of the developer. If the developer is the plaintiff and the suit is against

the owner, strictly applied, clause (iii) would require that the defendant should

have obtained possession under the agreement. In such a case if the developer

files a suit for specific performance against the owner, and the owner is in

possession of the land by virtue of a lawful title, the defendant (i.e. the owner)

cannot be said to have obtained possession of the land by way of the

agreement. This would lead to an anomalous situation where the condition in
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
would not be fulfilled in the case of a suit by a developer.

Application of the literal rule of interpretation to
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
, would lead

to an absurdity and would be inconsistent with the intent of the Act.
24.        The conditions that should be present to justify a departure from the plain

words of any statute, have been elucidated in Justice GP Singh’s treatise on

Principles of Statutory Interpretation18 (while discussing the decision of the

House of Lords in Stock v Frank Jones (Tipton) Ltd.19):
“...a court would only be justified in departing from the plain
                     words of the statute when it is satisfied that (1) there is clear
                     and gross balance of anomaly; (2) Parliament, the legislative
                     promoters and the draftsman could not have envisaged such
                     anomaly and could not have been prepared to accept it in the
                     interest of a supervening legislative objective; (3) the anomaly
                     can be obviated without detriment to such a legislative
                     objective; and (4) the language of the statute is susceptible of
                     the modification required to obviate the anomaly.”




18   Principles of Statutory Interpretation, 12th Edition - 2010, Lexis Nexis - page 144
19   (1978) 1 WLR 231
21
The principle has been also adverted to in Maxwell on Interpretation of

Statutes20 :
“Where the language of a statute, in its ordinary meaning and
                     grammatical construction, leads to a manifest contradiction of
                     the apparent purpose of the enactment, or to some
                     inconvenience or absurdity, hardship or injustice, presumably
                     not intended, a construction may be put upon it which modifies
                     the meaning of the words, and even the structure of the
                     sentence.”



By giving a purposive interpretation to
Section 14(3)(c)(iii)
, the anomaly and

absurdity created by the third condition will have no applicability in a situation

where the developer who has an interest in the property, brings a suit for

specific performance against the owner. The developer will have to satisfy the

two conditions laid out in sub clause (i) and (ii) of
Section 14(3)(c)
, for the suit

for specific performance to be maintainable against the owner. This will ensure

that both owners and developers can avail of the remedy of specific

performance under the Act. A suit for specific performance filed by the

developer would then be maintainable. Whether specific performance should in

the facts of a case be granted is a separate matter, bearing on the discretion of

the court.
25.        Having dealt with the first aspect of the matter, it is now necessary to

determine whether, in the facts of the present case, the agreement between the

appellant and the respondent is capable of specific performance. For this




20   Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edition, page 221
22
purpose, it would be necessary to consider the terms and conditions of the

agreement between the parties.
26.   The condition under
Section 14(3)(c)(i)
is that the building or other work

described in the contract is sufficiently precise to enable the court to determine

the exact nature of the building or work. To examine the question as to whether

the scope of the building or work described in the agreement is sufficiently

defined, the Court needs to determine the exact nature of the work by referring

to the relevant clauses of the agreement. Clause 8 of the agreement provides

that the building shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans and

built with “first class materials” with wooden doors, mosaic floor, basin and

lavatories, tap water arrangement, masonry work, electric points, finished

distemper and bath room fittings of glazed tiles up to 6” height and lift, “etc.”

Further, at clause 13 of the agreement, the parties have agreed that the

contractor would construct a building at the premises consisting of “residential

apartments of various sizes and denomination” in the said building complex in

accordance with plans sanctioned by the Calcutta Municipal Corporation and

the owner shall convey the proportionate share in the land to the respective

buyers. Clause 22 of the agreement states that if for any reason after the plan

is sanctioned or “for any act or omission on the part of the owner” the building

cannot be constructed; the owner shall refund to the contractor ₹4,00,000/- in

addition to all costs, charges and expenses incurred by the contractor. At clause

20 of the agreement, the parties have agreed that the apartments of the owner
23
shall be constructed and be made in “similar condition” as that of the contractor

with water connection, sewerage, electric wiring except “special fittings”. Use

of such vague terms in the agreement such as “first class materials”, “residential

apartment of various sizes and denomination”, “etc.”, “similar condition”, and

“special fittings”, while discussing the scope of work clearly shows that the exact

extent of work to be carried out by the developer and the obligations of the

parties, have not been clearly brought out. Parties have not clearly defined, inter

alia, the nature of material to be used, the requirements of quality, structure of

the building, sizes of the flats and obligations of the owner after the plan is

sanctioned. Further, clause 9 of the agreement states that the owner shall pay

the contractor costs, expenses along with agreed remuneration only after

completion of the building on receiving the possession. However, the exact

amount of remuneration payable by the owner to the contractor is not to be

found in the agreement. The agreement between the parties is vague. The court

cannot determine the exact nature of the building or work. The first condition in
Section 14(3)(c)(i)
is not fulfilled.
27.    Another condition under
Section 14(3)(c)(ii)
is that the plaintiff has a

substantial interest in the performance of the contract and the interest is of such

a nature that compensation in money for non-performance of the contract is not

an adequate relief. The intent of the section is to make a distinction between

cases where a breach of an agreement can be remedied by means of

compensation in terms of money and those cases where no other remedy other
24
than specific performance will afford adequate relief. Therefore, before granting

the remedy of specific performance, we need to analyse the extent of the

alleged harm or injury suffered by the developer and whether compensation in

money will suffice in order to make good the losses incurred due to the alleged

breach of the agreement by the owner. From the facts of the case, it is clear

that the case of the developer is that he incurred an expenditure of ₹ 18,41,000/-

towards clearing outstanding dues, security deposit and development,

incidental and miscellaneous expenses. The alleged losses/damages incurred

by the Plaintiff can be quantified. The plaintiff can be provided recompense for

the losses allegedly incurred by payment of adequate compensation in the form

of money. The developer has failed to satisfy the conditions under sub-clause
(i) and (ii) of
Section 14(3)(c)
of the Act. In such a case, specific performance

cannot be granted.
28.
By the Specific Relief (Amendment) Act
201821,
Section 14
has been

amended to read as follows:
“14. The following contracts cannot be specifically enforced,
                     namely:—
(a) where a party to the contract has obtained substituted
                     performance of contract in accordance with the provisions of
section 20
;
(b) a contract, the performance of which involves the
                     performance of a continuous duty which the court cannot
                     supervise;
(c) a contract which is so dependent on the personal
                     qualifications of the parties that the court cannot enforce
                     specific performance of its material terms; and
(d) a contract which is in its nature determinable.”




21Act   18 of 2018
25
However, the amended section has been notified on 19 September 2018 and

the central government has appointed 1 October 2018 as the date on which the

provision of Act 18 of 2018 will come into force22. However, in the present case,

we are not called upon to examine the effect of this amended provision. In any

case, we have indicated the reasons why
Section 14(3)(c)
was not attracted.
29.        The appellants have relied on the decision of this Court in
Her Highness

Maharani Shantidevi P Gaikwad v Savjibai Haribai Patel23
,                where an

agreement was entered into between the landowner and the developer for the

purpose of construction of houses for the weaker sections on excess vacant

land under a scheme sanctioned under
Section 21
of the Urban Land (Ceiling

and Regulation) Act 1976. This Court reversed the decision of the High Court

that granted the decree of specific performance to the developer on the grounds

that it was inequitable to enforce specific performance in view of a change in

the Master Plan. The court noted that a contract which involved continuous

supervision of the court, was not specifically enforceable. Further, in the opinion

of the court, at best the plaintiff - builder could claim damages and the

expenditure incurred by him for the implementation of the terms of the

agreement. The above case has no applicability to the facts of the present case

and is of no relevance as the issue in relation to the maintainability of a suit for

specific performance by the builder against the owner has not been discussed.




22   S.O.4888(E) dated 19.09.2018
23   AIR 2001 SC 1462
26
30.       The appellant has also placed reliance on the decision in
Faqir Chand

Gulati v Uppal Agencies Private Limited24
, where the issue before this Court

was whether a landowner, who enters into an agreement with the builder, for

construction of an apartment building is a “consumer” entitled to maintain a

complaint against the builder as a service provider under the
Consumer

Protection Act, 1986
. The Court held:
“We may notice here that if there is a breach by the landowner
                  of his obligations, the builder will have to approach a civil court
                  as the landowner is not providing any service to the builder but
                  merely undertakes certain obligations towards the builder,
                  breach of which would furnish a cause of action for specific
                  performance and/or damages. On the other hand, where the
                  builder commits breach of his obligations, the owner has two
                  options. He has the right to enforce specific performance
                  and/or claim damages by approaching the civil court. Or he can
                  approach the Forum under
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
for
                  relief as consumer, against the builder as a service- provider.”



The issue involved before this Court was in relation to the interpretation of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
and not on the maintainability of a suit filed by

the developer against the owner for specific performance in view of
Section

14(3)(c)
of the Act. Therefore, the decision cannot be relied upon in relation to

the issue before us.
31.       Ordinarily, if there was an alternative plea for damages or monetary relief,

we would have remanded the case to the High Court for consideration of the

prayer. However, in the impugned judgment, the Division Bench has observed

thus:
24   (2008) 10 SCC 345
27
“Although we find no merit in this appeal, we wanted to give
            liberty to the plaintiff for amendment of the plaint for the
            purpose of getting alternative relief by way of return of security
            of money and damages, if at all suffered, in terms of
Section
            22
of the Specific Relief Act; but Mr. Das, the learned Advocate
            appearing on behalf of the appellant after taking instruction
            from his client submitted before us that his client did not want
            to avail of such remedy and wanted to challenge our decision
            by preferring an appeal if we decided to refuse the prayer for
            specific performance of the contract. ”



The same statement has been made before this Court, as was made before the

High Court. In the absence of any plea for damages or monetary relief by the

respondents, there is no reason to remit the appeal back to the High Court.
32.   For the above reasons we find no merit in this appeal. The appeal stands

dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
.……..….....................................................J
                                          [A M KHANWILKAR]




                                         .…………....................................................J
                                          [Dr DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]

New Delhi;
October 09, 2018.
28