[Cites
9
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Sailen Krishna Majumdar vs Malik Labhu Masih (Deceased) ... on 21 February, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1596, 1989 SCR (1) 817, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1596, 1989 SCFBRC 191, 1989 PUNJ LJ 545, (1990) 1 RRR 165, (1989) 1 JT 361 (SC), 1989 SCC (SUPP) 1 302
Author:
K.N.  Saikia
Bench:
K.N.  Saikia
,
G.L.  Oza
PETITIONER:
SAILEN KRISHNA MAJUMDAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MALIK LABHU MASIH (DECEASED) REPRESENTEDBY SMT. JASSI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/02/1989

BENCH:
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)
BENCH:
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1596		  1989 SCR  (1) 817
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (1) 302 JT 1989 (1)	361
 1989 SCALE  (1)461


ACT:
Displaced  Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation)	Act,
1954
:  Exemption in respect of gallantry award	land-Whether
available in respect of land allotted under this Act.
Punjab  Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953
:
Sections  9
,
14A,
18
and 19DD--Grant of land for gallantry before January
26,  1950--Whether to be taken in account in computing	sur-
plus area.
    Practice and Procedure: Whether equities are  equal--Law
should prevail.
    Word and Phrases: 'In aequali jure, melior est  conditio
possidentis'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 father of the appellant was conferred	a  gallantry
award  posthumously by the Government wherewith a  piece  of
land  situated in Lyallpur district was granted to him,	 and
was  allotted to the appellant who took possession  on	July
24,  1947.  Consequent to the partition of the	country	 the
family migrated to India where the Government allotted about
69 standard acres of land in Jullundur district as compensa-
tion for the land left behind in Pakistan. Out of this	land
19 standard acres came under the possession of the  respond-
ent as a tenant.
    On	February, 1961 the respondent filed  an	 application
under
s. 18
of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953
to  the Assistant Collector stating that he was a tenant  in
respect of the aforesaid land and should be granted  permis-
sion  to purchase the same. The Assistant Collector  granted
the   requisite	 permission  subject  to  the	payment	  of
Rs.21,007.88P  in  ten equal half  yearly  instalments.	 The
appellant  appealed to the Collector who upheld the  permis-
sion  to  purchase, but enhanced the amount payable  to	 the
appellant as landlord.
    During  the pendency of these proceedings the  appellant
moved an application under s. 9 read with
s. 14A
of the	 Act
for ejectment of the
 818
respondent and obtained an order an 27th September, 1961.
    The	 respondent  moved a revision  petition	 before	 the
Commissioner in the proceedings initiated under
s. 18
of the
Act,  and  the	Commissioner made a  recommendation  to	 the
Financial  Commissioner for setting aside the orders of	 the
Assistant Collector and the Collector allowing the  purchase
of land by the respondent on the ground that the application
of  the	 appellant for the ejectment of the  respondent	 had
since  been allowed. The Financial Commissioner,  set  aside
the order of purchase. The respondents' writ petition  chal-
lenging	 this order was allowed and the High  Court  quashed
that order on 30th August, 1966.
    On	July 3, 1970 the appellant filed a suit against	 the
respondent  for possession of the land contending  that	 the
respondent  had	 entered  on a part of land  as	 tenant	 and
subsequently  applied for the purchase of the land under  s.
18, but by virtue of
s. 19
DD of the Act inserted on  August
3,  1968  with retrospective effect, the  suit	property  of
gallantry award was exempted from the provisions of the Act.
The  Trial court dismissed the suit. The order was  affirmed
in  appeal by the Additional District Judge, and the  second
appeal to the High Court was also dismissed holding that  s.
19
DD	of the Act
was applicable to the suit land  and	 the
tenant could purchase it under
s. 18
.
    In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on  behalf
of the appellant that the High Court was in error in holding
that the land in question having been granted to the  appel-
lant,  the landlord in the year 1946 the same could  not  be
said  to  be covered by the provisions of
s. 19
DD  of	 the
Punjab	Security  of  Land Tenures Act, 1953.  It  was	also
contended  that equity is in favour of the appellant as	 the
land  was as compensation for the gallantry award land	left
by the awardee family at Layallpur as a result of  partition
of  the country, and that the privilege of exemption  should
be acquired by the compensation land, and that the appellant
has acquired the right to purchase as a tenant in occupation
after a long time.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
    HELD:  1.1. From the language of
s. 19
DD of the  Punjab
Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 which was inserted by the
Punjab Act No. 12 of 1968 and from the fact that the date of
the award of the grant of the land for gallantry having been
before	the 26th day of January, 1950 so long as  such	land
or,  any portion thereof, had not passed from  the  original
grantee into more than three successive
819
hands  by inheritance or bequest, and was held by the  gran-
tee, or any of such hands, such land or portion, as the case
may  be, should not be taken into account in  computing	 the
surplus	 area  under the Act, nor shall any tenant  of	such
land  or portion have the right to purchase it under
s.	 18
.
[822C-D]
    1.2. There is no basis for holding that the exemption in
respect	 of  the gallantry award land will be  available  in
respect	 of  the  land given  under  the
Displaced  Persons
(Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954
as	compensation
for  the  loss thereof. There is no infirmity  in  the	High
Court judgment on this Court. [823A-B]
    1.3. Equity is being claimed by both the parties.  Under
the  circumstances there is no other alternative but to	 let
the  loss lie where it fails. As the maxim is,	'in  aequali
jure,  melior est conditio possidentis' Where  the  equities
are equal, the law should prevail the respondent's right  to
purchase must, therefore, prevail. [823B-C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2 193  of
1982.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  29.5.1980  of	 the
Punjab	and Haryana High Court in Regular Second Appeal	 No.
706 of 1973.
Dr. Y.S. Chitale and Ashok Grover for the Appellant.
R.K. Garg and D.K. Garg for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.N. SAIKIA, J. This appeal by special leave is from the
judgment  of  the High Court of Punjab and  Haryana  in	 the
appellant's regular second appeal No. 706 of 1973 dismissing
the appeal and allowing the respondent's civil writ petition
against the order passed by the Assistant Collector.
    Late  Wg. Cdr. K.K. Majumdar, of the Indian	 Air  Force,
father of the appellant laid down his life during the second
world war. He was conferred a gallantary award	posthumously
by the Government wherewith 442 Kanals and 10 Marlas of land
bearing	 Chak Nos. 535-G-V situated in Tehsil  and  District
Layallpur was granted to him and was allotted to the  appel-
lant  Shri  S.K. Majumdar who took possession  on  July	 24,
1947. Consequent to the partition of the country the  family
of
820
late  Wg. Cdr. K.K. Majumdar had to migrate to	India  where
the  Government	 allotted 69 standard acres and 2  units  of
land to the appellant in Village Dhogri, Tehsil and District
Jullundhur  as	compensation  for the land  left  behind  at
Layallpur, Pakistan. Out of this land 19 standard acres came
under  possession of the respondent Malik Labhu	 Masih	(now
deceased) as a tenant.
On February 26, 1961 Malik Labhu Masih filed an applica-
tion under
section 18
of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures
Act,  1953,  hereinafter referred to as 'the  Act',  to	 the
Assistant Collector stating that he was a tenant in  respect
of the land in question and should be granted permission  to
purchase  it. As per order of the Assistant Collector  Grade
I, Jullundhur dated 15th January, 1962 the said Labhu  Masih
was granted the requisite permission subject to the  payment
of  Rs.21,007.88 P. in 10 equal half yearly  instalments  of
Rs.2100.80 P. each. The appellant appealed therefrom to	 the
Collector  Jullundhur who upheld the permission to  purchase
but enhanced the amount payable to the appellant as landlord
to Rs.23,133.53 P. During the pendency of the said  proceed-
ings the appellant moved an application under section 9 read
with
section 14A
of the Act for ejectment of the  respondent
and obtained an order on 27th September, 1961. The  respond-
ent moved a revision petition before the Commissioner in the
proceedings  initiated under
section 18
of the Act  and	 the
Commissioner  made recommendation to the  Financial  Commis-
sioner for setting aside the orders of the Assistant Collec-
tor  and the ColleCtor allowing the purchase of land by	 the
respondent on the ground that the application of the  appel-
lant for ejectment of the respondent had since been allowed.
The  Financial Commissioner accordingly set aside the  order
of purchase. The respondent impugned that order in the	High
Court  of  Punjab and Haryana in writ petition No.  1158  of
1963  and the High Court quashed that order on 30th  August,
1966. On July 3, 1970 the appellant filed a suit against the
respondent  for possession of the lands contending that	 the
respondent  had entered on a part of the land as tenant	 and
subsequently applied for purchase of the land under
section
18
of	the Act but by virtue of
section 19
DD of  the	Act,
which  was  inserted on August 3,  1968	 with  retrospective
effect,	 the suit property of gallantry award  was  exempted
from  the provisions of the' Act and as such the  respondent
could not purchase the land under
section 18
of the Act	 and
the orders passed by the Assistant Collector as also of High
Court  were  nullity  and the  respondent  was	consequently
liable	to be ejected. The trial court dismissed  the  suit.
The  appellant's appeal therefrom was also having been	dis-
missed	by  the Additional District  Judge  Jullundhur,	 the
appellant preferred second appeal to the High
821
Court of Punjab and Haryana which also dismissed the  appeal
holding that
section 19
DD of the Act was not applicable  to
the suit land and the tenant could purchase it under section
18.
    Dr.	 Y.S. Chitale the learned counsel for the  appellant
submits that the High Court was in error in holding that the
land  in question having been granted to the appellant	S.K.
Majumdar, the landlord, in the year 1946 the same could	 not
be said to be covered by the provisions of
section 19
DD  of
the Act. We are inclined to agree. Though the Memorandum No.
2354-C Lahore, dated the 30th March, 1946 from D.S.D. to the
Commissioner, Lahore, Rawalpindi and Multan Divisions on the
subject Award of land in the Punjab for acts of gallantry in
the  field' with reference to Punjab  Government  Memorandum
No. 3583-C dated 30th November, 1944- contained the instruc-
tions to allot two squares rectangles of land to the heir of
the  grantee  noted  in the margin in  accordance  with	 the
orders contained in the aforesaid Memorandum, and showed the
appellant  Shri S.K. Majumdar, it could not been  said	that
the  grant itself was to the appellant. The said  Memorandum
No. 3583-C dated 30th November, 1944 clearly showed that the
Government had decided that in the case of posthumous grants
allotments  would  be  made to the heirs  in  the  following
order:
"(a)  the male lineal descendants of  the	 de-
ceased in the male line of descent."
I, having not been in dispute that the appellant S.K. Majum-
dar was the male lineal descendant of the deceased Wg.	Cdr.
K.K. Majumdar, the allotment was to be made in his name	 and
hence it was done so.
Section  19
DD  of the Act which was  inserted  by	 the
Punjab	Act  No. 12 of 1968 and was to be deemed  always  to
have been inserted said:
"Notwithstanding	anything contained  in	this
	      Act,  where any land is granted for  gallantry
	      at  any time before the 26th day	of  January,
	      1950 to any member of the armed forces, wheth-
	      er maintained by the Central Government or  by
	      any  Indian State, then, so long as such	land
	      or,  any portion thereof, as the case may	 be,
	      has not passed from the original grantee	into
	      more  than three successive hands	 by  inheri-
	      tance or bequest, and is held by the  grantee,
	      or any of such hands, such land or portion, as
	      the case may be, shall
822
not  be  taken into account on  computing	 the
	      surplus  area  under this Act, nor  shall
	      any  tenant of such land or portion  have	 the
	      right to purchase it under
section 18
.
		       Provided	 that  where  such  land  or
	      portion  has passed into more than three	such
	      hands  and  the person holding  such  land  or
	      portion,	immediately before the	3rd  August,
	      1967,  is	 a person to whom it has  passed  by
	      inheritance  or bequest, the  exemption  under
	      this  section  shall apply, to  such  land  or
	      portion  thereof, as the case may	 be,  during
	      the life time of such person."
From the language of this section and from the fact that
the date of the award of the grant of the land for gallantry
having been before the 26th day of January, 1950 so long  as
such  land or, any portion thereof, as the case may be,	 had
not  passed from the original grantee into more	 than  three
successive  hands by inheritance or bequest and was held  by
the grantee, or any of such hands, such land or portion,  as
the case may be, should not be taken into account on comput-
ing the surplus area under the Act. nor shall any tenant  of
such  land  or portion have the right to purchase  it  under
section 18
.
Mr.	 R.K. Garg the learned counsel for the	respondents,
while  not refuting the proposition of law, points out	that
the land in respect of which the respondent has obtained the
order  of purchase as tenant is not the land granted to	 Wg.
Cdr.  K.K.  Majumdar for gallantry award. That land  was  in
Layallpur and the suit land in respect of which the respond-
ent acquired socially beneficial right of purchase is  situ-
ate at village Dhogri Tehsil and District Jullundhur in	 the
State  of  Punjab and as such it cannot	 be  exempted  under
section 19
DD. Dr. Chitale answers that this land was  given
as compensation for the gallantry award land left behind  by
the awardee family at Layallpur as a result of partition  of
the  country  and as such equity demands that  privilege  of
exemption  should  be  acquired by  the	 compensation  land.
Besides,  Dr. Chitale submits, that equity is in  favour  of
the  appellant	who has acquired the right  to	purchase  as
tenant in occupation after a long time.
We	are  referred  to the provisions  of  the
Displaced
Persons	 (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954
. It  is
an Act to provide for the payment of compensation and  reha-
bilitation  grants  to	displaced persons  and	for  matters
connected therewith. We have not been shown in it any provi-
sion to the effect that any land given as compensation to
823
a  displaced  person for loss of gallantry  award  land	 may
imbibe	the convent of exemption available under
section  19
DD of the Act. We are consequently of the view that there is
no  basis for holding that the exemption in respect  of	 the
gallantry  award  land will be available in respect  of	 the
land  given  under the
Displaced Persons  (Compensation	 and
Rehabilitation)	 Act,  1954
as compensation  for  the	loss
thereof. We find no infirmity in the High Court judgment  on
this count.
Equity  is being claimed by both the parties. Under	 the
circumstances  we have no other alternative but to  let	 the
loss lie where it falls. As the maxim is, 'in aequali  jure,
melior	est  conditio possidentis'. Where the  equities	 are
equal,	the  law should prevail. The respondent's  right  to
purchase must, therefore, prevail.
In	the result, this appeal fails and  hence  dismissed,
but  without  any order as to costs. The stay  order  stands
vacated.
N.V.K.				    Appeal dismissed.
824