[Cites
7
, Cited by
25
]
Supreme Court of India
Sankar Mukherjee And Ors vs Union Of India And Ors on 16 November, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 532, 1989 SCR SUPL. (2) 182, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 532, (1990) 2 LABLJ 443, (1989) 4 JT 330 (SC), (1989) 2 LAB LN 953, (1990) 1 UPLBEC 533, (1990) 1 SERVLR 154, (1990) 1 SERVLJ 151, (1990) 76 FJR 64, (1990) 1 CURLR 31, 1990 SCC (SUPP) 668, (1990) 1 SCJ 559, (1990) 60 FACLR 20, 1991 SCC (L&S) 456
Author:
Kuldip Singh
Bench:
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
SANKAR MUKHERJEE AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/11/1989

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  532		  1989 SCR  Supl. (2) 182
 1990 SCC  Supl.  668	  JT 1989 (4)	330
 1989 SCALE  (2)1119


ACT:
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970
: s.
10-Notification dated February 9, 1980 prohibiting  contract
labour	in  establishments of M/s Indian Iron  &  Steel	 Co.
Ltd.--Exclusion	 of  loaders in	 brick	department--Validity
of--Whether violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.



HEADNOTE:
Section  10(1)
of the Contract Labour  (Regulation	 and
Abolition) Act, 1970 empowered the appropriate Government to
prohibit  employment  of  contract labour  in  any  process,
operation or other work in any establishment.
    The	 Government of West Bengal issued a notification  on
February  9, 1980 under
s. 10(1)
of the Act prohibiting	 the
employment of contract labour in certain departments in	 the
establishments	of  M/s Indian Iron and Steel  Company	Ltd.
Paragraph 9 of the Schedule thereto listing the departments,
included cleaning and stacking and other allied jobs in	 the
brick  department,  except loading and unloading  of  bricks
from wagons and trucks.
    In the writ petition, the affected workmen assailed this
action	of the State Government in excluding them  from	 the
beneficial  purview of the notification as  arbitrary,	dis-
criminatory and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
It  was contended for them that the job of loading  and	 un-
loading was not peculiar to the brick department alone, that
the  work of stacking was directly dependent on the  loading
and unloading of bricks, and that the two jobs being  allied
and  incidental the workmen holding these jobs could not  be
treated	 differently. For the respondents, it was  contended
that the job of loading and unloading of bricks in the brick
department was not of perennial nature, the supply of bricks
being  intermittent depending upon the	requirement,  avail-
ability of bricks as also the availability of the wagons and
trucks.
Allowing the writ petition,
HELD: 1.1
The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act
is
183
an important piece of social legislation for the welfare  of
the labourers and has to be liberally construed. [186D]
    Standard-Vacuum Refining Co. of India Ltd. v. Its  Work-
men,  [1960]  3 SCR 466 and Catering  Cleaners	of  Southern
Railway v. Union of India & Anr., [1987] 1 SCC 700, referred
to.
    1.2	 In  the instant case, it was not  denied  that	 the
bricks handled by the brick department were used in furnaces
of  the company as refractory. Therefore, the work  done  by
the  brick  department including loading  and  unloading  of
bricks	was  incidental to the industry carried	 on  by	 the
company. It was also not denied that the petitioners were  ,
employed  as  contract labour by the company  for  the	last
15/20  years.	There was, therefore,  no  justification  to
treat the petitioners differently and deny them the right of
regular appointment. [186E-F]
    1.3 The purchase of bricks, transportation to the facto-
ry, unloading, stacking and use in the furnace were the jobs
in  one continuing process. It could not thus be  said	that
all these jobs were not incidental or allied to each  other.
That being so, all the workmen performing these jobs were to
be treated alike. On the same reasoning it could not be said
that  the loader's job was not, and other jobs in the  brick
department were, of perennial nature. There was,  therefore,
no  justification for excluding the job of loading  and	 un-
loading of bricks from wagons and trucks from the purview of
the notification dated February 9, 1980. [187G-188A]
    2.	The  words "except loading and unloading  of  bricks
from  wagons and trucks" in paragraph 9 of the	Schedule  to
the notification are struck down being discriminatory and as
such  violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of  India.
[188A-B]
    [The  petitioners  and co-workers to be treated  at	 par
with  effect  from the date of notification with  those	 who
were  doing  the job of cleaning and stacking in  the  brick
department, and such of them who have been retrenched during
the pendency of the writ petition to be put back into  serv-
ice with all back wages and consequential benefits.]  [188B-
C]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2 123 of
1982.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
184
R.K. Garg and H.K. Puri for the Petitioners.
    D.P. Mukherjee, G.S. Chatterjee, Ms. C.K. Sucharita, Ms.
A. Subhashini and S.R. Grover for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KULDIP  SINGH,  J. The Parliament enacted  the
Contract
Labour	(Regulation  and Abolition) Act,  1970
(hereinafter
called	the  Act) with the object of abolition	of  contract
labour	in respect of such categories as may be notified  by
the  Appropriate  Government in the light of  criteria	laid
down  in the Act and also regulating the service  conditions
of contract labour where abolition is not possible.
Section
10
of the Act which is relevant is as under:
"Prohibition   of	  employment   of   contract
	      labour--
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
	      Act,  the	 appropriate Government	 may,  after
	      consultation with the Central Board or, as the
	      case may be, a State Board prohibit, by  noti-
fication	in the Official Gazette,  employment
	      of  contract labour in any process;  operation
	      or other work in any establishment.
(2)  Before  issuing  any	 notification  under
	      sub-section  (1) in relation to an  establish-
	      ment,  the appropriate Government	 shall	have
	      regard to the conditions of work and  benefits
	      provided	for  the  contract  labour  in	that
	      establishment and other relevant factors	such
	      as--
(a)  Whether the process, operation  or  other
	      work  is incidental to, or necessary  for	 the
	      industry,	 trade,	 business,  manufacture	  or
	      occupation  that is carried on in	 the  estab-
	      lishment;
(b) Whether it is of perennial nature, that is
	      to  say, it is of sufficient  duration  having
	      regard  to the nature of	industry,  business,
	      manufacture  or occupation carried on in	that
	      establishment;
(c)  Whether  it is  done	 ordinarily  through
	      regular  workmen in that establishment  or  an
	      establishment similar thereto;
185
(d) Whether it is sufficient to employ consid-
	      erable number of whole time workmen.
Explanation--If a question arises whether	 any
	      process  or  operation  or other	work  is  of
	      perennial	 nature, the decision of the  appro-
	      priate Government thereon shall be final."
    In	exercise  of the powers under
Section 10(1)
of	 the
Act,  the  Government of West Bengal issued  a	notification
dated  February 9, 1980 prohibiting the employment  of	con-
tract  labour  in  16 departments covering 65  jobs  in	 the
establishments	of  M/s.  Indian Iron  and  Steel  Co.	Ltd.
(hereinafter called the company) situated at Burnpur in	 the
State  of West Bengal. The list of the departments  and	 the
jobs  is given in the schedule attached to the	notification
and  paragraph 9 therein, relating to the Brick	 Department,
is as under:
"Cleaning and stacking and other allied jobs except  loading
and unloading of bricks from wagons and trucks."
It is thus obvious that the job of loading and unloading
of bricks from wagons and trucks in the Brick Department has
been  specifically excluded from the beneficial	 purview  of
the  notification. The said action of the  State  Government
has  been challenged in this writ petition under
Article  32
of the Constitution of India by the affected workmen on	 the
ground	that the petitioners have been subjected to  hostile
discrimination	so much so that the workmen doing  the	same
job in other departments and allied jobs in the same depart-
ment  have been rescued from the archaic system of  contract
labour	whereas	 the petitioners have been  singled-out	 and
left  to  be  grinded under the pernicious  effect  of	this
primitive system. The action according to the petitioners is
arbitrary, discriminatory and is violative of
Article 14
of
the Constitution of India.
Mr.	 R.K. Garg, learned counsel appearing for the  peti-
tioners has contended that the job of loading and  unloading
is not peculiar to the Brick Department rather such jobs are
being  operated	 in  the stores (iron  and  steel),  Traffic
(steel) and Coke ovens Departments. The benefit of notifica-
tion dated February 9, 1980 has been extended to the loaders
in all these departments. He further argued that the work of
stacking is directly dependent on the loading and  unloading
of  bricks.  The two jobs according to him  are	 allied	 and
incidental and as such the workmen holding these jobs cannot
be treated differently.
186
The  learned counsel for the respondents on  the  other
hand  has  argued that the job of loading and  unloading  of
bricks	in the Brick Department is not of perennial  nature,
the  supply  of	 bricks is intermitent	depending  upon	 the
requirement, availability of bricks as also the availability
of  the wagons and trucks. It is further submitted that	 the
decision  of the appropriate Government to the	effect	that
the job is not of perennial nature is final under the Act.
It	 is surprising that more than forty years after	 the
independence  the practice of employing labour through	con-
tractors by big companies including public sector  companies
is  still being accepted as a normal feature  of  labour-em-
ployment. There is no security of service to the workmen and
their  wages are far below than that of the regular  workmen
of  the company. This Court in
Standard-Vaccum Refining	 Co.
of India Ltd. v. Its Workmen
, [1960] 3
SCR 466 and  Catering
Cleaners  of  Southern	Railway v. Union of  India  &  Anr.
,
[1987]	1  SCC 700 has disapproved the	system	of  contract
labour	 holding  it  to be 'archaic',	'primitive'  and  of
'baneful  nature'. The system, which is nothing but  an	 im-
proved	version of bonded-labour, is sought to be  abolished
by the Act.
The Act
is an important piece of social legisla-
tion  for the welfare of labourers and has to  be  liberally
construed.
It  is not denied that the bricks handled by the  Brick	 De-
partment are used in furnaces of the company as	 refractory.
Therefore  the work done by the Brick  Department  including
loading and unloading of bricks is incidental to the  indus-
try  carried on by the company. It is also not	denied	that
the  petitioners  are  employed as contract  labour  by	 the
company for the last 15/20 years. Then where is the justifi-
cation	to treat the petitioners differently and  deny	them
the right of regular appointment?
We may examine the case from another aspect. The  peti-
tioners	 have specifically averred in paras 7 and 11 of	 the
writ  petition	that  the job of loading  and  unloading  of
bricks	is allied and incidental to the job of	stacking  of
bricks. Para 7 is as under:
"It  is submitted that loading and unloading of bricks	from
wagons	and trucks is an essential feature of; and/or a	 job
allied	and/or incidental to the job of stacking of  bricks.
It is further submitted that the job of loading and  unload-
ing  of	 bricks from wagons and trucks cannot  be  separated
from  the job of stacking and other allied jobs in the	case
of the petitioners."
187
Further para 11 is as under:
"It may be stated here that"stacking" as	such
	      was never the job of contract labour. The	 job
	      of stacking and the job of loading and unload-
	      ing  of  bricks are job  ancillary,  including
	      and/or  supplemented to each other. It may  be
	      made  clear  that the job of  stacking  and/or
	      loading and unloading of bricks has to be done
	      by  competent and technical hands. The  bricks
	      used  in	the furnace are a  very	 costly	 and
	      technical	 material requiring  perfect  dimen-
	      sions  and  precision These  bricks  are	also
	      imported	from outside India. Such bricks	 are
	      manufactured  indigenously too, but  depending
	      upon  the consumption and demand,	 the
	      bricks  arc purchased locally and/or  imported
	      from outside India. Such a costly material has
	      to  be handled by skilled workmen. The job  of
	      loading  and  unloading of such  bricks  their
	      stacking	is done by skilled workmen and	this
	      work cannot be done by casual labour which may
	      be  engaged  disengaged  as  contract   labour
	      depending	 upon the sweet will of the  manage-
	      ment. It is submitted that loading and unload-
	      ing and stacking of bricks are jobs which	 are
	      supplementary to each other carried out by the
	      same  set of workmen and is essential for	 the
	      day-to-day production. The petitioners  submit
	      that  it is not possible to engage one set  of
	      workmen for stacking and another set of  work-
	      men for loading and unloading of bricks."
In the counter affidavit on behalf of the company  filed
by  its	 Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, there is	no  specific
denial	to  the above averments. Though it has	been  stated
that  the petitioners are not doing the job of stacking	 the
bricks,	 there is no denial nor any averment or material  on
the record to show that the job of loading and unloading  of
bricks	is not incidental or allied to the stacking  of	 the
bricks. Even otherwise we fail to understand how the  stack-
ing  of bricks is a job which is not incidental	 to  loading
and unloading. The purchase of bricks, transportation to the
factory, unloading, stacking and use in the furnace are	 the
jobs in one continuing process and it is difficult to accept
that these jobs are not incidental or allied to each  other.
That  being so all the workmen performing these jobs are  to
be  treated alike. On the same reasoning it cannot  be	said
that  the loader's job is not, and other jobs in  the  Brick
Department are, of perennial nature. In any case there is no
material  or basis to show that the job of loading  and	 un-
loading of bricks is not of perennial nature.
188
We,	 therefore, see no justification for  excluding	 the
job  of	 loading  and unloading of bricks  from	 wagons	 and
trucks	from the purview of the notification dated  February
9,  1980.  We allow the writ petition and  strike  down	 the
words  "except loading and unloading of bricks	from  wagons
and  trucks" in paragraph 9 of the said notification  issued
by  Government	of West Bengal being discriminatory  and  as
such  violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of  India.
We  direct that the petitioners and other workers doing	 the
job  of	 loading  and unloading of bricks  from	 wagons	 and
trucks	in the Brick Deptt. be treated at par,	with  effect
from  the date of nonfication, with those who are doing	 the
job  of cleaning and stacking m the said department.  It  is
further	 directed that the workmen doing the job of  loading
and  unloading who have been retrenched during the  pendency
of the writ petition be put back into service with all	back
wages and consequential benefits. There shall be no order as
to costs.
P.S.S.				      Petition allowed.
189