[Cites
3
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Vibhuti Glass Works vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, Lucknow on 28 April, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1443, 1989 SCR (2) 797, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1443, 1989 TAX. L. R. 569, (1989) 44 TAXMAN 182, 1990 SCC(TAX) 70, (1989) 2 JT 257 (SC), (1989) 77 CURTAXREP 77, 1989 SCC (SUPP) 2 431, (1989) 177 ITR 439, (1989) 2 COMLJ 167
Author:
R.S.  Pathak
Bench:
R.S.  Pathak
,
Misra Rangnath
PETITIONER:
VIBHUTI GLASS WORKS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, LUCKNOW

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/04/1989

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1443		  1989 SCR  (2) 797
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (2) 431 JT 1989 (2)	257
 1989 SCALE  (1)1141


ACT:
Income  Tax Act,  1961
:
Section 28-
-Income--Accrual	 of-
Factory	 owned	by  assessee--State  Government	 allowed  to
manage for 20 years as condition for grant of  loan--Profits
earned--Applied	 by  managing State  Government	 for  paying
assessee's debts--Whether assessee assessable.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 assessee Company had a glass factory besides  other
business. Since the glass factory business had been  suffer-
ing losses for several years, resulting in increasing  debt,
the assessee took loans from the State Government and  mort-
gaged the land, buildings and machinery. Later, under a deed
executed by it the assessee allowed the State Government  to
take  over running of the glass factory for a period  of  20
years  and permitted it to have a share of the business,  if
and when they exceeded a prescribed limit, as conditions for
guaranteeing  repayment of a loan of Rs.20 lakhs granted  by
the Industrial Finance Corporation.
    During  assessment proceedings for the  assessment	year
1962-63,  the assessee contended that the profits earned  by
the  glass  factory  business during that  period  were	 not
assessable  in	its  hands, but in the hands  of  the  State
Government, which had taken over the factory and was running
the  business,	and  that, in any event, only  half  of	 the
profit	could  be included in its assessment  as  the  State
Government was entitled to 50 per cent of profits under	 the
deed. Rejecting the contentions, the Income-tax officer held
that  the assessee was liable to be assessed in	 respect  of
the entire profits earned by the glass factory.
    The assessee's appeals were dismissed by both the Appel-
late Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal. On a
reference  made at assessee's instance, the High  Court	 af-
firmed the Tribunal's finding that the entire profits of the
factory,  and not half of them accrued to the  assessee.  It
also  rejected	assessee's contention that  the	 income	 was
diverted  through an overriding title before it reached	 the
assessee.
Dismissing the appeal of the assessee, this Court,
798
    HELD:  The present case is one where the income  accrued
to the assessee directly and was merely, upon such  accrual,
applied to discharge an obligation of the assessee. [.801B]
    Although the Deed executed by the assessee is  described
as  a  lease-deed  and provides that the  glass	 factory  is
demised to the State Government, in substance possession  of
the factory was transferred to the State Government only for
the  purpose of enabling it to manage and run the  business.
[800F]
    The entire income earned during the year under consider-
ation  was the income of the assesee and was merely  applied
by  the	 managing State Government for the  payment  of	 the
assessee's  debt,  and there was no over-riding	 title.	 The
profits earned during the year under consideration were	 not
sufficient for the State Government to enjoy a share in	 the
profits in accordance with the terms of the Deed, and there-
fore, no part of the profits could be regarded as assessable
in  the hands of the State Government. In point of fact,  no
part of the profits was actually taken by the State  Govern-
ment. [801C-D]
    Commissioner  of Income-tax, Bombay City H	v.  Sitaldas
Tirathdas, [1961] 41 ITR 367, relied on.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1442 (NT)
of 1975.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  14.3.1974  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in I.T.R. No. 437 of 1971.
E.C. Agarwala for the Appellant.
S.C.  Manchanda, Ms. A Subhashini and M.B. Rao  for	 the
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    PATHAK,  CJ. This appeal by certificate granted  by	 the
Allahabad  High Court is directed against a judgment of	 the
High  Court answering the following questions in  favour  of
the Revenue and against the assessee in an income tax refer-
ence:
"(1)  Whether  on the facts and  in	 the
	      circumstances  of the case, and on  a  correct
	      interpretation of the leasedeed
799
dated  22.8.1960,	 the Tribunal was  fight  in
	      holding  the  profits  of	 the  Glass  factory
	      during the relevant accounting year accrued to
	      the assessee-company?
(2) If the answer to the question no.  1
	      is  in the affirmative, whether  the  Tribunal
	      was  right in holding that the entire  profits
	      and  not one half of the profits of the  glass
	      factory  during the relevant  accounting	year
	      accrued to the assessee-company?"
The	 assessee, Messrs. Vibhuti Glass Works is  a  public
limited company. It has a glass factory and also carries  on
other business. The accounts of the glass factory are closed
on  31	March each year, while the assessee closes  its	 ac-
counts on 30 September each year. We are concerned with	 the
assessment year 1962 -63.
For	 several years the glass factory business  had	been
suffering losses resulting in increasing debt. It took heavy
loans  from  the  Banaras State Bank,  Varanasi,  for  which
purpose its stocks and stores were hypothecated to the Bank.
It also took loans from the Uttar Pradesh Government and the
land,  buildings and machinery were  mortgaged	accordingly.
The assessee found it difficult to emerge out of its  finan-
cial  embarrassment. It discovered also that it needed	cer-
tain equipment in order to produce better quality goods	 and
also required funds for its working capital and for repaying
loans  to  other  creditors. It	 approached  the  industrial
Finance Corporation, New Delhi, and the State Finance Corpo-
ration	for financial assistance and the Industrial  Finance
Corporation agreed to grant a loan of Rs.20 lakhs on  condi-
tion (a) that the State Government guaranteed repayment	 and
(b)  that the State Government postponed their charge  under
the mortgage deeds and the Industrial Financial	 Corporation
was  allowed to have the first charge. The State  Government
agreed to those conditions provided the assessee allowed the
State  Government  to  take over the running  of  the  glass
factory for a period of 20 years. The State Government	also
stipulated  that  if and when the profits  of  the  business
exceeded a prescribed limit, a share of those profits  would
go  to	the State Government. The assessee  agreed  to	this
arrangement  and executed a document dated 22  August,	1960
incorporating the requisite conditions.
For	 the  relevant accounting period the  glass  factory
business disclosed a profit of Rs.92,960 while the  assessee
suffered  a  loss of Rs.3,47,656 according to  its  separate
profit and loss account. During
800
assessment  proceedings for the assessment year	 1962-63  it
was contended by the assessee before the Income Tax  Officer
that  the  profit of Rs.92,960 earned by the  glass  factory
business was not assessable in the hands of the assessee but
in the hands of the Uttar Pradesh Government which had taken
over  the factory and was running the business. It was	con-
tended	that in any event only half of the profits could  be
included  in the assessment of the assessee,  the  remaining
profit being assessable in the hands of the State Government
which  was entitled to 50 per cent of the profits under	 the
Deed  dated 22 August, 1960. Both contentions were  rejected
by  the Income Tax Officer, who held that the  assessee	 was
liable	to  be	assessed in respect of	the  entire  profits
earned	by the glass factory. He set off the profit  against
the loss declared by the assessee and computed a net loss of
Rs.2,54,785.
The assessee appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner	of Income Tax, but without success. A second  appeal
by the assessee filed before the Income Tax Appellate Tribu-
nal was also dismissed. At the instance of the assessee	 the
Appellate  Tribunal  referred the two questions of  law	 set
forth earlier to the High Court of Allahabad. The High Court
considered  the	 various  provisions of the  Deed  dated  22
August,	 1960 and answered both the questions in  favour  of
the Revenue and against the assessee.
It is apparent that this appeal must be disposed of on a
consideration  of  the terms of the Deed  dated	 22  August,
1960. A perusal of the conditions set forth in that document
discloses  that the State Government was given the power  to
manage	the glass factory business for a period of 20  years
from  the date it assumed possession. Although the  Deed  is
described  as  a lease-deed and it provides that  the  glass
factory	 is  demised to the State Government,  in  substance
possession of the glass factory was transferred to the State
Government only for the purpose of enabling it to manage and
run  the business. The High Court has given good reason	 for
reaching that conclusion.
Clause (c) of paragraph 7 of the Deed provides "that  if
upon  the expiration or sooner determination of this  demise
it is found that the working of the factory has shown  prof-
its after meeting the entire liabilities of the company	 the
balance	 profits, after accounting for all charges  and	 ex-
penses	incurred by the State Government, shall	 be  divided
between the company and the Governor in equal proportion."
It was contended by the assessee before the High Court	that
the
801
income	was diverted through an overriding title  before  it
reached	 the assessee. The High Court. in our  opinion,	 has
rightly	 rejected the contention, holding that there was  no
overriding title and in fact it was a case of mere  applica-
tion of the income. The proper test to be applied in such  a
case  has  been laid down by this Court in
Commissioner  of
Income-tax, Bombay City H  v. Sitaldas Tirathdas
, [1961]  41
ITR  367 and we are satisfied that the present case  is	 one
where  the income accrued to the assessee directly  and	 was
merely applied upon such accrual to discharge an  obligation
of  the assessee. The entire income earned during  the	year
under  consideration was the income of the assessee and	 was
merely	applied	 by the managing State	Government  for	 the
payment of the assessee's debts.
We	are also in agreement with the High Court  that	 the
profits earned during the year under consideration were	 not
sufficient for the State Government to enjoy a share in	 the
profits	 in  accordance with the terms of the Deed,  and  no
question, therefore, arises of any part of the profits being
regarded as assessable in the hands of the State Government.
In point of fact, it appears that no part of the profits was
actually taken by the State Government.
In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed but  in
the circumstances there is no order as to costs.
N.P.V.				      Appeal dismissed.
802