[Cites
22
, Cited by
419
]
Supreme Court of India
Mithilesh Kumari & Anr vs Prem Behari Khare on 14 February, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1247, 1989 SCR (1) 621, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1247, 1989 2 SCC 95, 1989 92 (2) TAXATION 23, (1989) 1 JT 275 (SC), 1989 (1) JT 275, (1989) 92 TAXATION 23, (1989) 76 CURTAXREP 27, 1989 2 LANDLR 97, 1989 (2) CURCC 33, 1989 TLNJ 1, 1989 40 ELT 267, 1989 MPLJ 156, 1989 (103) MADLW 430, (1989) 1 MAD LW 430, (1989) 1 KER LT 46, (1989) 1 APLJ 31, (1989) 2 MAD LJ 1, (1989) 40 ELT 257, (1989) 1 LS 14, 1989 BBCJ 54, (1989) 177 ITR 97, (1989) 1 KER LJ 424, (1989) MAH LJ 210, (1989) 1 CIVLJ 635
Author:
K.N.  Saikia
Bench:
K.N.  Saikia
,
G.L.  Oza
PETITIONER:
MITHILESH KUMARI & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PREM BEHARI KHARE

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/02/1989

BENCH:
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)
BENCH:
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1247		  1989 SCR  (1) 621
 1989 SCC  (2)	95	  JT 1989 (1)	275
 1989 SCALE  (1)358
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC1654	 (40,44)
 R	    1992 SC 885	 (6,7,8)


ACT:
    Benami  Transaction-
(Prohibition)  Act,  1988
:
Sections
2(a)
,  (c),  3(2)  and 4--Prohibition of  right	 to  recover
property held benami-Whether applicable to an appeal pending
on  the	 date of commencement of Act--Delay in	disposal  of
appeal--Whether	 an action of court-Maxim actus curiae	gra-
vabit nemenium--Applicability of.
    Constitution   of	India,	 1950:
Art.	136--
Supreme
Court--When can interfere with concurrent findings of fact.
    Statutory  Construction:  Retrospective  operation--Pre-
sumption    against--When   arises--Act	   declaratory	  in
nature--Whether	   operates   from   time   antecedent	  to
enactment--Qualifying	or  disqualifying   statute--Whether
retroactive--Remedy  barred  by	 Act--Whether  corresponding
right	   rendered	unenforceable--Law	Commission's
Report--Whether can be referred as external aid to construc-
tion of provisions of statute.
    Practice	 &     Procedure:   Decree     passed	  by
courts--Appeal	pending--Appellate Court--Whether  competent
to  take into account legislative changes subsequent to	 the
decree in moulding the relief to be granted.
Words and Phrases: Ubi jus ibi remedium--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    The respondent filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge,
praying	 that he be declared the sole and real owner of	 the
suit house and that the appellant be permanently  restrained
from  transferring the suit house. The trial  court  decreed
the  suit accordingly. The appellant filed an appeal  before
the  Additional	 District  Judge, who  dismissed  the  same,
agreeing  with	the  findings of the trial  court  that	 the
respondent had paid the price and purchased the house benami
in  the name of the appellant and therefore,  the  appellant
had no right to create an equitable mortgage or to  transfer
the  suit  house.  The appellant's second  appeal  was	also
dismissed  by the High Court. Hence, the appeal	 by  special
leave, by the appellant. During the pendency of the  appeal,
the
622
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
came into force.
    It	was  contended on behalf of the appellant  that	 the
respondent and the appellant had been living as man and wife
and  out of affection for the appellant, the respondent	 had
purchased  the	suit  house  in	 the  appellant's  name	 for
Rs.8,000,  for which the appellant had contributed  Rs.2,000
and,  therefore, the courts below had erred in holding	that
the  suit  house  was not gifted by the	 respondent  to	 the
appellant but was held benami in her name, and that even  if
it  was so held benami, the subsequent legislation,  namely,
the
Benami  Transactions (Prohibition Act, 1988
had  put  a
complete bar to the respondent's suit against the appellants
in respect of the suit house.
    On	behalf of the respondent, it was submitted that	 the
issues on gift and benami have been concluded by  concurrent
findings  of fact of the courts below and that the  respond-
ent's  right to the benami suit house having already  become
final it would not be affected by the subsequent Act.
    On the questions: (a) whether the concurrent findings of
fact  of the courts below should be interfered with or	not,
(b) whether despite the decree in favour of the	 respondent,
the  suit  or  action would be affected	 by  the  subsequent
legislation,  namely, the
Benami Transactions  (Prohibition)
Act,  1988
and its predecessor Ordinance, (c) whether, on  a
proper	construction,  the legislature may be said  to	have
expressed  its intention of retrospective  applicability  of
the  legislation, and (d) whether there was a  suit  present
between the respondent and the appellant on the date of	 the
law coming into force,
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1 A retrospective operation is not to be  given
to a statute, so as the impair existing right or  obligation
otherwise  than as regards matter of procedure	unless	that
effect	cannot	be  avoided without doing  violence  to	 the
language  of the enactment. The presumption  against  retro-
spective operation is strong in cases in which the  statute,
if  operated  retrospectively,	would  prejudicially  affect
vested rights or the illegality of the past transactions, or
impair contracts or impose new duty or attach new disability
in  respect  of past transactions or  consideration  already
passed.	 However, a statute is not properly called a  retro-
spective  statute because a part of the requisites  for	 its
action	is  drawn  from a time antecedent  to  its  passing.
[633H; 634A-C]
623
    1.2	 Every law that takes away or impairs rights  vested
agreeably to existing laws is retrospective, and is general-
ly  unjust and may be oppressive. But laws made	 justly	 and
for the benefit of individuals and the community as a  whole
may  relate  to time antecedent to their  commencement.	 The
presumption  against  retrospectivity may in such  cases  be
rebutted by necessary implication from the language employed
in  the statute. It cannot be said to be an invariable	rule
that  a	 statute could not be retrospective  unless  so	 ex-
pressed	 in  the very terms of the section which has  to  be
construed. The question is whether on a proper construction,
the legislature may be said to have so expressed its  inten-
tion. [634C-E]
    1.3 Before applying a statute retrospectively, the court
has  to be satisfied that the statute is in fact  retrospec-
tive.  The  Courts must also look at the general  scope	 and
purview	 of the statute and at the remedy sought to  be	 ap-
plied and consider what was the former state of law and what
the legislation contemplated. [634A-B]
Craise on Statute Law, 7th ed. referred to.
    1.4	 Where	a particular enactment or amendment  is	 the
result of the recommendation of the Law Commission of India,
it may be permissible to refer to the relevant report.	What
importance  can be given to it will depend on the facts	 and
circumstances of the case. However, the court has to  inter-
pret  the language used in the Act and when the language  is
clear  and  unambiguous,  it must be given  effect  to.	 Law
Commission's  Report may be referred to as external  aid  to
construction of the provisions. [631C; 633D]
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab, [1977] 1 S.C.R.	 229referred
to.
    In the instant case, the Law Commission was of the	view
that  the  legislation replacing  the  Benanti	Transactions
(Prohibition  of Right to Recover Property Ordinance,  1988)
should	be retroactive in operation and that no locus  peni-
tentia	need be given to the persons who had entered in	 the
benami transactions in the past. [633B]
    2.1	 When an Act is declaratory in nature, the  presump-
tion against retrospectivity is not applicable. Acts of this
kind only declare. A statute in effect declaring the  benami
transactions  to  be  unenforceable belongs  to	 this  type.
[636A-B]
2.2  The Parliament has jurisdiction to pass  a	 declaratory
legisla-
624
tion.  As a result of the provisions of the Benami  Transac-
tions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988
, all properties held benami at
the  moment  of the Act coming into force  may	be  affected
irrespective  of their beginning, duration and origin.	This
will be so even if the legislation is not retrospective, but
only retroactive. [633E-F]
    2.3 The expression "any property held benami" in
s. 4
of
the  Act  is  not limited to any particular  time,  date  or
duration.  Once	 the  property iS found to  have  been	held
benami,	 no  suit, claim or action to enforce any  right  in
respect	 thereof shall lie, and the real owner is bereft  of
any defence against the person in whose name the property is
held or any other person. In its sweep, s. 4 envisages	past
benami	transactions also within its retroactivity. In	this
sense, the Act is both a penal and a disqualifying  statute.
In Case of a qualifying or disqualifying statute, it may  be
necessarily retroactive. [635E-H]
    2.4	 The  presumption against taking away  vested  right
will not apply in this case inasmuch as under law it is	 the
benamidar  in whose name the property stands, and  law	only
enabled	 the  real owner to recover the	 property  from	 him
which  right  has now been ceased by the Act. In  one  sense
there  was  a right to recover or resist in the	 real  owner
against the benamidar. Ubi jus ibi remedium. When there is a
right,	there is a remedy. Where the remedy is	barred,	 the
right  is  rendered  unenforceable. In this sense  it  is  a
disabling statute. All the real owners are equally  affected
by  the	 disability provision irrespective of  the  time  of
creation of the right. A right is a legally protected inter-
est.  The real owner's right was hitherto protected and	 the
Act has resulted in removal of that protection. [636B-C]
    2.5 When the law nullifies the defences available to the
real owner in recovering the benami property from the benam-
idar,  the  law must apply irrespective of the time  of	 the
benami	transactions. The expression "shall lie" in
s.	4(1)
and "shall be allowed" in
s. 4(2)
are prospective and  shall
apply to present (future stages) and future suits, claims or
actions only. [636D]
    3.	The  hearing of appeal under the procedural  law  of
India  is  in the nature of re-hearing	and,  therefore,  in
moulding  the relief to be granted in a case on appeal,	 the
appellate court is entitled to take into account even  facts
and  events which have come into existence after the  decree
appealed  against.  Consequently,  the	appellate  court  is
competent to take into account legislative changes since the
decision  under	 appeal	 was given and its  powers  are	 not
confined only to see whether the
625
lower  court's decision was correct according to the law  as
it stood at the time when its decision was given. [636F-G]
    Once  the  decree of the High Court	 has  been  appealed
against, the matter became sub judice again and,  therefore,
the  Supreme Court had seisin of the whole case, though	 for
certain purposes, e.g. execution, the decree was regarded as
final  and  the courts below retained jurisdiction  in	that
regard. [636G-H]
    Lachmeshwar v. Keshwar Lal A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 5;  Shyabud-
dinsab	v.  The Gadag Betgeri Municipal	 Borough,  [1955]  1
S.C.R. 1268; The King v. The General Commissioner of  income
Tax,  [1916]  2	 K.B. 249; Mukharjee  Official	Receiver  v.
Ramratan Kaur. [1935] L.R. 63 I.A. 47; Dayawati v. Inderjit,
[1966]	3 S.C.R. 275; Mohanlal Jain v.His Highness  Maharaja
Shri  Man  Singh, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 702 and  Amerjit  Kaur  v.
Pritam Singh, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 605 relied upon.
    Nand  Kishore Marwah v. Samundri Devi, [1987]  4  S.C.C.
382 distinguished.
    4.	Ordinarily, this Court in an appeal will not  inter-
fere  with a finding of fact which is not shown to  be	per-
verse or based on no evidence. But where there are  material
irregularities affecting the said finding or where the court
feels  that justice had failed and the finding is likely  to
result	in  unduly  excessive hardship,	 this  Court  cannot
decline	 to interfere merely on the ground that the  finding
in question is finding of fact. [627E, H; 628A]
    Babu  v. Dy. Director, A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 756;  Prasad  v.
Govindaswamy,  A.I.R. 1982 S.C. 84; Dhanlibhai v.  State  of
Gujarat, A.I.R. 1985 S.C. 603; Ganga Bishan v. Jay  Narayan,
AIR 1986 SC. 441; Udaychand Disst v. Saihal Sen, A.I.R. 1988
S.C.  367  and Ram Singh v. Ajay Chawla AIR  1988  S.C.	 514
relied upon.
    In	the  instant case, the concurrent  findings  of	 the
courts	below are based on reasonable appreciation  of	evi-
dence on record and, therefore, can in no way be said to  be
perverse  or unreasonable. The High Court has  analysed	 the
facts  and correctly applied the tests to determine  whether
the  transaction was benami or not. Therefore, there  is  no
justification in tile appeal under
Art. 136
of the Constitu-
tion for interference with the concurrent findings of  fact.
[629A-C]
    However,  in view of the pendency of the  appeal  before
the  Supreme Court, and consequently, the suit filed by	 the
respondent, on
626
the date of coming into force of
s. 4
of the Benami Transac-
tions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988
, which nullified the  defences
available to the real owner in recovering the benami proper-
ty  from  the benamidar, and since the	law  was  applicable
irrespective  of  the time of the benami  transactions,	 the
respondent's  suit or action for recovering the	 suit  house
held benami by the appellant cannot be decreed. [636D-E]
    No doubt, nobody should suffer for an act of the  Court,
but  delay  in	disposal of an appeal cannot  be  termed  an
action	of the court. Hence the maxim actus  curiae  nemenim
gravabit is not applicable in this case. [637F-G]
    The	 decree	 passed by the lower courts  is,  therefore,
annihilated  and  the suit filed by the respondent  is	dis-
missed. [637G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2311  of
1978.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  27.3.1978  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Second Appeal No. 130 of 1975.
Awadh Behari and N.N. Sharma for the Appellants.
Yogeshwar Prasad and Mrs. Rani Chhabra for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.N. SAIKIA, J. This appeal by special leave is from the
judgment  and  order dated 27.3.1978 of the  High  Court  of
judicature  at Allahabad (Lucknow Bench), in  second  appeal
No.  130  of 1975, dismissing the appeal and  upholding	 the
decree of the plaintiff-respondent's suit.
    The	 plaintiff-respondent Prem Behari  Khare  instituted
suit  No. 42 of 197 1 in the court of Civil Judge,  Mohanlal
Gun j, Lucknow praying for the reliefs, inter alia, that  he
be declared to be the sole and real owner of the suit house,
and  that the defendant-appellant be permanently  restrained
from  transferring the suit house. The learned Civil  Judge,
Lucknow,  by  his judgment dated 133.1974 decreed  the	suit
declaring the plaintiff to be the sole and real owner of the
suit  house and permanently restraining the  defendant	from
transferring  the suit house to any other person.  On  first
appeal	by  the defendant appellant the	 learned  Additional
District Judge; Lucknow by his judg-
627
ment dated 23.12.1974 dismissed the appeal agreeing with the
findings  of the trial court that it was  the  plaintiff-re-
spondent  who paid the consideration and purchased the	suit
house  benami in the name of tile  defendant-appellant	who,
therefore, had no right to create any equitable mortgage  or
to transfer the suit house. The defendant-appellant's second
appeal	thereafter was also dismissed by the High  Court  of
Judicature  at	Allahabad  by the  impugned  judgment  dated
27.3.1978. Hence this appeal by special leave.
    Mr.	 A.B.  Rohtagi	learned counsel	 for  the  appellant
submitS, inter alia, that the learned courts below erred  in
holding that the suit house was not gifted by the  plaintiff
to  the defendant but was held benami in her name; and	that
even  if it was so held benami, the subsequent	legislation,
namely, the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act
1988,	 has
put  a	complete  bar to the plaintiff's  suit	against	 the
defendant in respect of the suit house.
Mr. Yogeshwar Prasad learned counsel for the  respondent
refutes	 submitting that the issues on gift and benami	have
been concluded by concurrent findings of fact of the learned
courts	below; and that the plaintiff's right to the  benami
suit  house  having  already become final, it  will  not  be
affected by the subsequent Act.
The	 first	question, therefore, is whether	 or  not  to
interfere  with	 the  concurrent findings  of  fact  of	 the
learned courts below. It has been said in a series of  deci-
sions  that  ordinarily	 this court in an  appeal  will	 not
interfere  with a finding of fact which is not shown  to  be
perverse  or  based on no evidence, (Babu v.  Dy.  Director,
A.I.R.	1982 S.C. 756), but will interfere if material	cir-
cumstances  are ignored by the High Court. Prasad v.  Govin-
daswaray,  A.I.R.  1982 S.C. 84. In Dhanjibhai v.  State  of
Gujarat,  A.I.R. 1985 S.C. 603 it was observed that where  a
finding of fact has been rendered by a learned Single  Judge
of the High Court as a court of first instance and  thereaf-
ter  affirmed in appeal by an Appellate Bench of  that	High
Court, this Court should be reluctant to interfere with	 the
finding	 unless there is very strong reason to do so.  There
is  no reason why this should not apply to cases  where	 the
first  appellate court was the district court. It was  noted
in  Ganga Bishan v. Jay Narayan, A.I.R. 1986 S.C.  441	that
ordinarily  this Court, under
Article 136
of  the  Constitu-
tion, would be averse to interfere with concurrent  findings
of fact recorded by the High Court and the Trial Court.	 But
where  there are material irregularities affecting the	said
findings  or where the court feels that justice	 has  failed
and  the findings are likely to result in  unduly  excessive
hardship this court could not
628
decline	 to interfere merely on the ground that findings  in
question are findings on fact.
So also in
Uday Chand Dutt v.
Saibal	Sen,  A.I.R.
1988 S.C. 367 it was said	that  in  an
appeal	by special leave under
Article 136
of the  Constitu-
tion  of  India where there are concurrent findings  of	 the
courts below this court is not called upon to reconsider the
entire evidence in detail to ascertain whether the  findings
are justified.
In Ram Singh v. Ajay Chawla, A.I.R. 1988 S.C.
514  where  the concurrent finding was that  the  appellants
were  in  unauthorised occupation of premises of  which	 the
respondents  were  the owners this court did  not  interfere
with the concurrent findings of fact.
Mr. Rohtagi lays emphasis on the facts, namely, that the
plaintiff  Prem	 Behari	 Khare's wife having  died  in	1955
leaving behind two sons aged about 2 and 3 years respective-
ly,  he faced great difficulties in managing the  household,
looking after his sons and carrying on his duties as employ-
ee of the Allahabad Bank; that under these circumstances  he
agreed	to  take  in the defendant  Mithilesh  Kumari  whose
relation  with	her husband Ram Swarup was  then  estranged;
that  the relation between the plaintiff and  the  defendant
come  to  be such that she bore two children  to  him;	that
there were efforts to legalise their de facto living as	 man
and wife by obtaining defendant's divorce from her  husband,
and  in fact there was a decree for judicial  separation  in
1958; that the plaintiff had full confidence in, and  affec-
tion  towards the defendant; and that in the court he  could
give no reason why he purchased the house in the name of the
defendant.  Under those circumstances, counsel submits,	 the
purchase of the suit house in the name of the defendant	 was
made  for Rs.8,000 out of which Rs.2,000 contributed by	 the
defendant, and the learned courts below ought, therefore, to
have held the transaction of purchase in the name of defend-
ant  to have been a genuine gift out of love  and  affection
and not a benami purchase in her name.
Perusing  the judgment of the Trial Court we  find	that
whether	 the  transaction was a benami or it was  a  genuine
gift  by the plaintiff to the defendant were main issues  on
which parties led evidence. The averment that the  defendant
contributed Rs.2,000 towards purchase price was	 disbelieved
by  both the courts below. The plaintiff  respondent  proved
from the statement of his Savings Bank account of  Allahabad
Bank,  Exts.  6,  7  and 8, that  he  withdrew	Rs.8,250  on
8.11.1962  and stated in witness box that he  purchased	 the
suit house in the name of the defendant by sale deed execut-
ed  on	8.11.1962  which was registered	 on  9.11.1962.	 The
plaintiff-respondent  has  since been staying  in  the	suit
house. As the two were living as man and wife the
629
custody of the sale deed was not very material. We thus find
that the concurrent findings are based on reasonable  appre-
ciation of evidence on record and, therefore, can in no	 way
be  said to be perverse or unreasonable. Counsel  criticises
the observation of the High Court that the relation  between
the  two  was of a rather objectionable nature.	 We  do	 not
think that this observation was unwarranted or it had in any
way  prejudiced	 the defendant's case. The  High  Court	 has
analysed the facts and correctly applied the tests to deter-
mine  whether the transaction was benami or  not  discussing
the case law. We do not find any justification in the appeal
under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India to  interfere
with the concurrent findings of fact.
The	 next  question	 is whether despite  the  decree  in
favour	of the plaintiff-respondent his suit or action	will
be  affected  by  the subsequent  legislation,	namely,	 the
Benami	Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
and its  prede-
cessor	Ordinance. In other words, whether the	effectuation
of  the decree has been barred. For this it is	relevant  to
note  that  the	 impugned  High	 Court	judgment  was  dated
27.3.1978.  The first appellate court's judgment  was  dated
23.12.1974, the trial court judgment dated 13.3.1974 and the
suit  was  filed in 1971. The special leave  to	 appeal	 was
granted by this Court on 15.11.1978. The Benami Transactions
(Prohibition  of the Right to Recover  Property)  Ordinance,
1988,  hereinafter referred to as 'the Ordinance', was	pro-
mulgated  on  May 19, 1988 to come into force at  once.
The
Benami	Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
(Act No. 45  of
1988),	hereinafter referred to as 'the Act',  received	 the
asset  of the President of India on September 5,  1988.	 The
provisions of
Sections 3
,
5
and
8
of the Act came into force
at once on that date and the remaining provisions were to be
deemed	to have come into force on 19th day of May 1988.  It
is  an Act to prohibit benami transactions and the right  to
recover property held benami and matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
Mr.	 Rohtagi  submits that provisions of the  Act  cover
past  benami transactions also and that to hold so it  would
be permissible for this Court to refer to the 57th Report of
the  Law Commission of India wherein it was  suggested	that
the  legislation should not be applied to past	transactions
but the Parliament did not accept that suggestion, and	made
the law applicable to past transactions also.
    Learned  counsel  for the respondent  Submits  that	 the
provisions of the Act are prospective and not retrospective,
and  as such would not affect the  respondent's	 established
right  to the benami property. He has not controverted	that
this Court can refer to Law Commission's Report.
630
To decide the controversy the relevant provisions of the
Act  may be referred to. As defined in
section 2(a)
of	 the
Act  "Benami  Transaction" means any  transaction  in  which
property  is transferred to one person for  a  consideration
paid  or provided by another person. As defined	 in
section
2(c)
of  the  Act "property" means property  of  any  kind,
whether	 movable  or immovable, tangible or  intangible	 and
includes any right or interest in such property. There	can,
therefore,  be	no doubt that the transaction by  which	 the
suit  house was transferred to the  defendant-appellant	 for
Rs.8,000 paid or provided by the plaintiff-respondent  would
be  a  benami transaction if this law is applicable  to	 it.
There is also no doubt that the suit house being a  tangible
immovable  would  be  included	within	this  definition  of
'property'.
Section	 3
of the Act prohibits benami transactions by	pro-
viding:
"(1)	 No  person  shall  enter  into	 any
	      benami transaction.
(2)  Nothing in sub-section  (1)  shall
	      apply  to	 the  purchase of  property  by	 any
	      person  in the name of his wife  or  unmarried
	      daughter and it shall be presumed, unless	 the
	      contrary is proved that the said property	 had
	      been purchased for the benefit of the wife  or
	      the unmarried daughter.
(3)  Whoever  enters  into	 any  benami
	      transaction shall be punishable with imprison-
ment  for	 a term which may  extend  to  three
	      years or with fine or with both.
(4) Notwithstanding anything  contained
	      in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2  of
	      1974), an offence under this section shall  be
	      non-cognisable and bailable."
The appellant having not been wife or unmarried daughter
of the respondent the exception in (2) will not be  applica-
ble.
Section  4
prohibits the right to recover property	held
benami by providing:
"(1) No suit, claim or action to enforce
	      any  right  in resspect of any  property	held
	      benami  against the person  in	       whose
	      name the property is held or against any other
	      person  shall lie by or on behalf of a  person
	      claiming to	   be the real owner of such
	      property.
631
(2)	 No  defence based on any  right  in
	      respect  of any property held benami,  whether
	      against  the person m whose name the  property
	      is held or against any other person, shall  be
	      allowed in any suit, claim or action by or  on
	      behalf  of  a person claiming to be  the	real
	      owner of such property."
Having  upheld the finding that the suit house has	been
held benami by the respondent in the name of the  appellant,
the question is whether to this transaction the Act shall be
applicable.
The Act
has not been made retrospective by	 any
specific  provision. Is it permissible to refer to  the	 Law
Commission's  Report  to ascertain  the	 legislative  intent
behind	the provision? We are of the view that where a	par-
ticular enactment or amendment is the result of	 recommenda-
tion  of the Law Commission of India, it may be	 permissible
to refer to the relevant report as in this case. What impor-
tance  can be given to it will depend on the facts and	cir-
cumstances of each case.
In
Santa Singh v. State of Punjab
, [1977] 1 S.C.R.	 229
Fazal  Ali, J. in order to answer the question	whether	 the
non-compliance with the provisions of
section 235(2)
of	 the
Criminal  Procedure Code, 1973 vitiated the sentence  passed
by the court considered it necessary to trace the historical
background and social setting under which section 235(2) was
inserted for the first time in the 1973 Code and referred to
the  research done by the Law Commission which made  several
recommendations in its 48th Report for revolutionary changes
in the provision. The Statement of Objects and Reasons	were
also  referred to in that context. In the instance  case  we
find  that way back in 1972 the Government of India  consid-
ered it necessary to request the Law Commission of India  to
examine	 the problem of benami held property with a view  to
determining whether benami transactions should be  prohibit-
ed. The Law Commission accordingly submitted its 57th Report
on  benami  transactions on 7.8.1973 after  studying  benami
system	as operating in India and in England. It also  exam-
ined implications of the provisions of the
Indian Trust Act,
1882
and other statutory modifications of the Benami Law  as
contained  in
the Code of Civil Procedure
, the	Transfer  of
Property Act, the Indian Penal Code and the Income-tax	Act.
It  also  suggested  in its Report the	following  draft  of
proposed legislation:
6.33  Recommendation: In the light of the above	 discussion,
we recommend the enactment of a separate law containing	 the
following legislative provisions:
632
"(1)	 No  suit to enforce  any  right  in
	      respect  of any property held  benami  against
	      the person in whose name the, property is held
	      or against any other person shall be institut-
ed  in any court by or on behalf of  a  person
	      claiming to be the real owner of such  proper-
	      ty.
(2) In any suit, no defence based on any
	      right in respect of any property held  benami,
	      whether  against the person in whose name	 the
	      property is held or against any other  person,
	      shall be allowed in any court by or on  behalf
	      of  a person claiming to be the real owner  of
	      such property.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply:
(a) whether the person in whose name the
	      property	is  held is a manager of, or  a	 co-
parcener in, a Hindu undivided family, and the
	      property	is  held for)he benefit of  the	 co-
parceners in the family, or
(b)	 where the person in whose name	 the
	      property is held is a trustee or other  person
	      standing	in  a fiduciary	 capacity,  and	 the
	      property	is held for the benefit	 of  another
	      person  for  whom he is a trustee	 or  towards
	      whom he stands in such capacity."
On 19th May 1988, the President of India promulgated the
Benami	Transactions  (Prohibition of the Right	 to  Recover
Property)  Ordinance, 1988 (No. 2 of 1988) "to prohibit	 the
right  to recover property held benami and for matters	con-
nected	therewith and incidental thereto" based on the	sug-
gestion	 of the Law Commission of India made as far back  as
in  1973.  With this Ordinance the  judicial  acceptance  of
benami	transactions was being removed with a view  to	help
people	to  keep property they were holding for	 others.  It
remedied the age old doctrine of benami and made a benamidar
the real owner in law, of course with few exceptions.
    The Ordinance was referred by the Government on July 22,
1988 to the Law Commission of India requesting the latter to
take  up  the  question of benami  transactions	 for  detail
examination  and  to give its considered views as  early  as
possible  so that a Bill to replace the Ordinance  could  be
drafted	 on the basis of its recommendations and got  passed
before the close of the Monsoon Session of the Parliament.
633
The 130th Report of the Law Commission was submitted to	 the
Government  on	August	14, 1988.  The	Benami	Transactions
(Prohibition) Bill, 1988, drafted after getting the  report,
was  introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 31st August, 1988	 and
the  Bill  was passed. The Law	Commission  devoted  several
pages to justify retrospective legislation and its view	 was
that  the  legislation	replacing the  Ordinance  should  be
retroactive  in operation and that no locus penitentia	need
be given to the person who had entered in the benami  trans-
actions in the past. It reported at para 3.18 as follows:
"3.18.  Therefore, viewed from  either  angle,
	      the Law Commission is of the firm opinion that
	      the legislation replacing the ordinance should
	      be retroactive in operation and that no  locus
	      penitentia  need be given to the	persons	 who
	      had  entered into benami transactions  in	 the
	      past.  They had notice of one and a half	dec-
	      ades  to	set their house in  order.  No	more
	      indulgence is called for."
However, the court has to interpret the language used in
the  Act, and when the language is clear and unambiguous  it
must.  be given effect to. Law Commission's Reports  may  be
referred  to as external aid to construction of	 the  provi-
sions. It may be noted that the Act is a piece of prohibito-
ry legislation and it prohibits benami transactions  subject
to stated exceptions and makes such transactions  punishable
and also prohibits the right to defences against recovery of
benami	transactions as defined in
section 2(a)
of the	Act.
The Parliament has jurisdiction to pass a declaratory legis-
lation. As a result of the provisions of the Act all proper-
ties held benami at the moment of the Act coming into  force
may  be affected irrespective of their	beginning,  duration
and  origin. This will be so even if the legislation is	 not
retrospective but only retroactive.
The	 learned counsel for the respondent rightly  submits
that  the  Act	contains no specific  provision	 making	 its
operation retrospective. The Law Commission itself  observed
that democratic culture abhors ex post facto legislation and
that  it was necessary .to curb unlawful nefarious  uses  of
property.
We	 read  in Maxwell that it is a fundamental  rule  of
English	 Law  that  no statute shall be	 construed  to	have
retrOspective  operation Unless such a construction  appears
very clearly at the time of the Act, or arises by  necessary
and  distinct  implication. A  retrospective  operation	 is,
therefore,  not	 to be given to a statute so  as  to  impair
existing right
634
or   obligation,  otherwise  than  as  regards	 matter	  of
procedure  .unless  that effect cannot	be  avoided  without
doing  violence	 to the language of  the  enactment.  Before
applying  a  statute  retrospectively the Court	 has  to  be
satisfied  that	 the statute is in fact	 retrospective.	 The
presumption   against  retrospective  operation	 is   strong
in .cases in which the statute, if operated retrospectively,
would  prejudicially affect vested rights or the  illegality
of the past transactions, or impair contracts, or impose new
duty  or attach new disability in respect of  past  transac-
tions or consideration already passed. However, a statute is
not  properly called a retrospective statute because a	part
of  the requisites for its action is drawn from a  time	 an-
tecedent  to its passing. We must look at the general  scope
and  purview of the statute and at the remedy sought  to  be
applied,  and consider what was the former State of Law	 and
what the legislation contemplated. Every law that takes away
or  impairs  rights  vested agreeably to  existing  laws  is
retrospective,	and is generally unjust and may	 be  oppres-
sive- But laws made justly and for the benefit of  individu-
als  and  the  community as a whole, as in  this  case,	 may
relate	to  a  time antecedent to  their  commencement.	 The
presumption  against  retrospectivity may in such  cases  be
rebutted  by  necessary implications from the  language	 em-
ployed in the statute. It cannot be said to be an invariable
rule  that  a statute could not be retrospective  unless  so
expressed  in the very terms of the section which had to  be
construed. The question is whether on a proper	construction
the legislature may be said to have so expressed its  inten-
tion. Craise on Statute Law, 7th Ed. writes that the general
rule  of law that statutes are not operated  retrospectively
may  be	 departed from (a) by express enactment and  (b)  by
necessary  implication from the language employed,  and	 the
author goes on to say:
"If  it  is a necessary implication  from	 the
	      language employed that the legislature intend-
	      ed  a particular section to have a  retrospec-
	      tive  operation, the courts will give it	such
	      an operation. "Baron Parke," said Lord Hather-
	      ley  in Pardo v. Bingham, did not consider  it
	      an invariable rule that a statute could not be
	      retrospective unless so expressed in the	very
	      terms  of	 the section which had	to  be	con-
	      strued,  and  said that the question  in	each
	      case  was whether the legislature	 had  suffi-
	      ciently expressed that intention. In fact,  we
	      must look to the general scope and purview  of
	      the  statute, and at the remedy sought  to  be
	      applied,	and  consider what  was	 the  former
	      state of the law, what it was that the  legis-
	      lature contemplated." But a statute is not  to
	      be    read    retrospectively    except	  of
	      necessity	 ....  In Main v.
635
Stark,  Lord Selborne said: "Their  lordships,
	      of  course do not say that there might not  be
	      something in the context of an Act of  Parlia-
	      ment,  or to be collected from  its  language,
	      which might give towards prima facie  prospec-
	      tive a larger operation, but they ought not to
	      receive  a  larger operation unless  you	find
	      some reason for giving it	 ....  In all  cases
	      it is desirable to ascertain the intention  of
	      the legislature."
He went on: "Words not requiring a  retrospec-
	      tive  operation, so as to affect	an  existing
	      statute  preudicially,  ought  not  to  be  so
	      construed",  but in Renold v. Att.  Genl.	 for
	      Novo Scotia it was held that this rule did not
	      extend to protect from the effect of a  repeal
	      a privilege which did not amount to an accrued
	      right." (pp. 392-393)
    As	defined in
Section 2(a)
of the Act "benami  transac-
tion" means any transaction in which property is transferred
to  one person for a consideration paid or provided  by	 any
other  person."	 A transaction must,  therefore,  be  benami
irrespective of its date or duration.
Section 3
, subject  to
the  exceptions, states that no person shall enter into	 any
benami	transaction.  This  section  obviously	cannot	have
retrospective operation. However,
section 4
clearly provides
that  no suit, claim or action to enforce any right  in	 re-
spect  of  any property held benami against  the  person  in
whose name the property is held or against any other  person
shall  lie, by or on behalf of a person claiming to be	real
owner  of  such	 property. This naturally  relates  to	past
transactions  as  well. The expression	"any  property	held
benami"	 is  not  limited to any particular  time,  date  or
duration.  Once	 the  property is found to  have  been	held
benami,	 no  suit, claim or action to enforce any  right  in
respect	 thereof  Shall lie. Similarly, sub-section  (2)  of
section	 4
nullifies  the defences based on  any  right  in
respect	 of  any property held benami  whether	against	 the
person	in  whose name the property is held or	against	 any
other person in any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of
a person claiming to be the real owner of such property.  It
means that once a property is found to have been held  bena-
mi,  the  real owner is bereft of any  defence	against	 the
person	in  whose  name the property is held  or  any  other
person. In other words in its sweep
section 4
envisages past
benami	transactions also within its retroactivity. In	this
sense  the Act is both a penal and a disqualifying  statute.
In  case of a qualifying or disqualifying statute it may  be
necessarily retroactive. For example when a Law of Represen-
tation declares that all who have attained 18 years shall be
eligible  to vote, those who attained 18 yearS in  the	past
would be as much eligible as those who
636
attained  that	age  at the moment of the  law	coming	into
force. When an Act is declaratory in nature .the presumption
against retrospectivity is not applicable. Acts of this kind
only  declare.	A  statute in effect  declaring	 the  benami
transactions  to be unenforceable belongs to this type.	 The
presumption against taking away vested right will not  apply
in  this case inasmuch as under law it is the  benamidar  in
whose  name  the property stands, and law only	enabled	 the
real owner to recover the property from him which right	 has
now  been ceased by the Act. In one sense there was a  right
to  recover or resist in the real owner against the  benami-
dar. Ubi jus ibi remedium. Where there is a right, there  is
a remedy. Where the remedy is barred, the right is  rendered
unenforceable. In this sense it is a disabling statute.	 All
the  real  owners  are equally affected	 by  the  disability
provision irrespective of the time of creation of the fight.
A  right is a legally protected interest. The  real  owner's
fight  was  hitherto protected and the Act has	resulted  in
removal of that protection.
When  the  law nullifies the defences available  to	 the
real owner in recovering the benami property from the benam-
idar  the  law must apply irrespective of the  time  of	 the
benami	transactions. The expression "shall lie" in
section
4(1)
and "shall be allowed" in
section 4(2)
are	 prospective
and shall apply to present (future stages) and future suits,
claims or actions only. This leads us to the question wheth-
er there was a present suit between the plaintiff-respondent
and  the defendant-appellant on the date of the	 law  coming
into  force. We have noted the dates of filing the suit	 and
judgments of the courts below. On the date of the
section  4
of  the Act coming into force, that is, 19th May  1988	this
appeal was pending and, of course, is still pending. Can the
suit itself be said to be pending?
Lachmeshwar  v. Keshwar Lal, A.I.R. 1941 F.C. 5  is  an
authority  for holding that the hearing of appeal under	 the
procedural  law of India is.in the nature of re-hearing	 and
therefore in moulding the relief to be granted in a case  on
appeal, the appellate court is entitled to take into account
even  facts and events which have come into existence  after
the  decree  appealed against. Consequently,  the  appellate
court is competent to take into account legislative  changes
since the decision under appeal was given and its powers are
not confined only to see whether the lower court's  decision
was  correct  according to the law as it stood at  the	time
when  its  decision was given. Once the decree of  the	High
Court  has  been  appealed against, the	 matter	 became	 sub
judice	again  and thereafter this court had seisin  of	 the
whole case, though for certain purposes e.g., execution, the
decree	was regarded as final and the courts below  retained
jurisdiction in that regard.
This was followed
637
in
Shyabuddinsab  v. The Gadag-Betgeri	 Municipal  Borough
,
[1955]	1 S.C.R. 1268 where after the judgment of  the	High
Court  and  after grant of special leave by this  court	 the
legislation  was passed, and it was applied by	this  Court.
Their  lordships, referring to The King v. The General	Com-
missioner  of  Income Tax, [1916] 2 K.B. 249  and  Mukharjee
Official  Receiver v. Ramratan Kaur, [1935] L.R. 63 I.A.  47
rejected the contention that unless there are express  words
in  the	 amending statute to the effect that  the  amendment
shall  apply  to pending proceedings, it cannot	 affect	 the
proceedings.
In
Dayawati v. Inderjit
, [1966] 3 S.C.R. 275 it
has  been held that the word 'suit' includes an appeal	from
the judgment in the suit. The only difference between a suit
and  an appeal is that an appeal only reviews  and  corrects
and proceedings in a cause already constituted but does	 not
create the cause.
1n
Mohanlal Jain v. His Highness  Maharaja
Shri Man Singh
, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 702 it was observed that  "A
person	is "sued" not only when the plaint is filed  against
him,  but  is  "sued" also when the  suit  remained  pending
against	 him. The word "sued" covers the entire	 proceeding,
in  an	action."
In
Amerjit Kaur v. Pritam Singh
,  [1975]  1
S.C.R.	605 it has been held that an appeal is	a  reheating
and  in moulding relief to be granted in a case	 on  appeal,
the  appellate court is entitled to take into  account	even
facts  and events which have come into existence  after	 the
passing of the decree appealed against.
For	 the  respondent it is submitted that right  of	 the
parties to a suit would be determined on the basis of rights
available  to them on the date of filing of the suit.  Reli-
ance  is  placed on
Nand Kishore Marwah	 v.  Samundri  Devi
,
[1987]	4  S.C.C. 382. That however was a case	of  eviction
where  the  rights of the parties on the date of  suit	were
material  unlike in this case where  subsequent	 legislation
has nullified the defences of benami holders. That case	 is,
therefore, distinguishable.
Counsel  for the respondent lastly submits	that  nobody
should	be allowed to suffer for fault of the court. As	 the
maxim  goes,  actus curiae neminem gravabit.  Nobody  should
suffer	for an act of the court. However, the delay in	dis-
posal of an appeal cannot be termed an action of the  court.
The  consequence is that the plaintiff-respondent's suit  or
action cannot be decreed under the law; and hence the decree
passed	by  the lower courts is annihiliated  and  the	suit
dismissed.
In	.the  result, this appeal is allowed in	 the  manner
indicated above. Under the peculiar facts and  circumstances
of the case, we make no order as to costs.
N.P.V.						      Appeal
allowed.
638