[Cites
13
, Cited by
67
]
Supreme Court of India
Modern Hotel, Gudur Represented Bym.N. ... vs K. Radhakrishnaiah & Ors on 26 April, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1510, 1989 SCR (2) 725, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1510, 1989 (2) SCC 686, (1989) 1 RENCJ 594, (1990) 1 MAD LW 560, (1991) 1 RENTLR 34, (1989) 1 APLJ 67
Author:
Misra Rangnath
Bench:
Misra Rangnath
PETITIONER:
MODERN HOTEL, GUDUR REPRESENTED BYM.N. NARAYANAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
K. RADHAKRISHNAIAH & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/04/1989

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1510		  1989 SCR  (2) 725
 1989 SCC  (2) 686	  JT 1989  Supl.    143
 1989 SCALE  (1)1125


ACT:
Andhra  Pradesh  Buildings (Lease,	Rent  and  Eviction)
Control	 Act,  1960
: s. 7--Advance rent	 refundable  at	 the
expiry	of  lease--Stipulation-Validity	 of--Amount  whether
adjustable--Tenant whether a defaulter.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 proviso to
s. 7(2)(a)
of the Andhra Pradesh  Build-
ings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960  prohibits
payment	 of  any sum exceeding one month's rent	 by  way  of
advance, clause (b) thereto makes any such sum refundable or
at the option of the tenant otherwise adjustable, and sub-s.
(3) declares the stipulation for payment of rent in  advance
beyond that of one month as null and void.
    The	 appellant-tenant  took the demised  premises  on  a
thirty year lease beginning from September 9, 1969 and	paid
a large amount as advance, only a part of which was  adjust-
able  towards the stipulated rent in the  subsequent  months
and  the balance was to be paid back under a  valid  receipt
after the expiry of the lease period. The lease deed did not
have a forfeiture clause. The respondent land lord initiated
action	for  eviction in October 1973 on the plea  that	 the
tenant	had  failed  to pay rent for  a	 certain  subsequent
period.	 The tenant advanced the plea of payment. The  land-
lord  placed the account books of the appellant and  claimed
the  benefit  of
s. 34
of the Evidence Act. All	 the  courts
below found that the payment as claimed had not been  estab-
lished.
    In	this appeal by special leave, it was contended	that
the  balance  of advance which lay in the hands of  the	 re-
spondent-landlord  was	either refundable to the  tenant  or
adjustable against rent under
s. 7
of the Act, and if out of
that  sum  the	arrears were available to  be  adjusted	 the
tenant	was  not at all in default; that the lease  of	1969
being for a term of thirty years certain, eviction could not
be claimed against a contractual tenant during the  subsist-
ence of the lease, and that the lease did not have a forfei-
ture  clause so as to bring the matter within the  ambit  of
section 111(g)
of the Transfer of Property Act.
726
Allowing the appeal by special leave,
    HELD:  1.  The stipulation in the  lease-deed  that	 the
amount	of  advance would be refundable at the	end  of	 the
tenancy was null and void under
s. 7(3)
of the Act. The said
amount became payable to the tenant immediately. It was thus
held by the landlord on account of the tenant on the date of
filing	of the petition for eviction. The tenant could	not,
therefore, be considered a defaulter for a smaller amount by
not paying the rent for some months. [730D, 729BC, 730E]
    Mohd.  Salimuddin v. Misri Lal & Anr., [1986] 1 SCR	 622
and M/s. Sarwan Kumar Onkar Nath v. Subhas Kumar  Agarwalla,
[1987] 4 SCC 546 referred to.
    2.	The  lease being for a term of thirty years  was  to
expire	in  September, 1999. The deed did  not	stipulate  a
forfeiture  clause.  In	 the absence of such  a	 clause	 the
contractual  tenancy was subsisting under the provisions  of
the
Transfer of Property Act
. There could not, therefore, be
any eviction from such a tenancy. [730F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4108  of
1982.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated 23.12. 1981  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in C.R.P. No. 3547 of 1981.
    P.P.  Rao,	R. Venkataramani, V.G.	Pragasam  and  Satya
Mitra Garg for the Appellant.
P. Krishna Rao, B. Krishna Prasad and K.K. Gupta for the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    RANGANATH MISRA, J. This is a tenant's appeal by special
leave against the order of eviction from a commercial  prem-
ises at Gudur in Andhra Pradesh. The Controller, the  Appel-
late  Authority and the High Court have	 concurrently  found
that  the  appellant  was a wilful defaulter  liable  to  be
evicted.
Under  document  No. 1327 of 1969, a  thirty-year  lease
with an annual stipulated rent was granted in favour of	 one
Narayanan,  a partner of the hotel, for a term of  30  years
beginning from 9th of
727
September, 1961. For the first 15 years rent was  stipulated
at the rate of Rs. 150 per month and for the second span  of
15  years rent was to be escalated to Rs.200 per month,	 and
the  tenant  undertook to pay the rent by the 9th  of  every
succeeding month.
The lease-deed further stipulated:
"Out  of the advance of Rs.6,500,	 the  second
	      party shall deduct every month Rs.75 from	 the
	      stipulated rent upto Rs. 1,500 and the balance
	      of  Rs.5,000 shall be paid back to the  second
	      party  by the first party under valid  receipt
	      after the expiry of the lease period."
Thus, by March 1971 the amount of Rs. 1,500 had been adjust-
ed and the landlord held Rs.5,000 refundable to the tenant.
    Action  for eviction was initiated on the plea that	 the
tenant	had failed to pay the rent for a certain  subsequent
period.	  Courts   below  debated  the	 main--perhaps	 the
only--contention as to whether the plea of payment which the
tenant	advanced  had  been established. On  behalf  of	 the
landlord the account books of the Hotel were placed and	 the
benefit	 of  s. 34 of the
Evidence Act
was claimed.  Lot  of
attention  was bestowed in the Courts below on the  question
as  to whether the oral evidence along with the	 presumption
arising under
s. 34
of the Evidence Act had not	 established
the  position that no payment as claimed had been  made.  On
the finding that payment had not been established,  eviction
was ordered.
Two	 contentions  have  been advanced by  Mr.  P.P.	 Rao
appearing  for the appellant to maintain that the  order  of
eviction was contrary to law and cannot be sustained.  Reli-
ance  is  placed  on
s. 7
of the  Andhra  Pradesh  Buildings
(Lease,	 Rent  &  Eviction) Control  Act,  1960,  (hereafter
'Act')	in  support of the stand that the  sum	of  Rs.5,000
which lay as advance in the hands of the respondent-landlord
was  either refundable to the tenant or	 adjustable  against
rent  and  if out of the sum of Rs.5,000  the  arrears	were
available  to  be adjusted, the tenant was not	at  all	 in'
default.  It has next been contended that the lease of	1969
was  for  a term of 30 years certain and eviction  has	been
claimed against a contractual tenant during the	 subsistence
of the lease. Admittedly, the lease does not have a  forfei-
ture clause so as to bring the matter within the ambit of
s.
111(g)
of the Transfer of Property Act. The application	 for
eviction, a copy of which is available on the record (at  p.
10  of the second paper-book), refers to a notice  in  para-
graph 7 in the following terms:
728
"The  petitioners caused a  registered  notice
	      through their counsel dated 28.10.1973 to	 the
	      respondent demanding the rent due and also for
	      the  eviction  from  the	schedule   mentioned
	      premises	since  the respondent has  become  a
	      wilful defaulter. The respondent received	 the
	      notice and has not chosen to give any reply."
It,  therefore, follows,	appellant's  counsel
	      has contended, that the lease remained  unter-
	      minated and the right created under the  lease
	      cannot be taken away by filing an	 application
	      for eviction on the plea of wilful default  in
	      the matter of payment of rent.
Section  7
of  the Act as  far  as  relevant,
	      provides:
"7  (2) Where the fair rent of a building	 has
	      not been so fixed--
(a)  the landlord shall	 not,  after
	      the commencement of this Act claim, receive or
	      stipulate	 for the payment of any	 premium  or
	      other like sum in addition to the agreed rent:
Provided   that	 the  landlord	 may
	      receive,	or stipulate for the payment of,  an
	      amount  not exceeding one month's rent by	 way
	      of advance;
(b) save as provided in clause	(a),
	      any  sum	paid in excess of  the	agreed	rent
	      whether  before or after the  commencement  of
	      this  Act,  in  consideration  of	 the  grant,
	      continuance  or renewal of the tenancy of	 the
	      building	after  such commencement,  shall  be
	      refunded by the landlord to the person by whom
	      it was paid or, at the option of such  person,
	      shall be otherwise adjusted by the landlord.
			(3) Any stipulation in contravention
	      of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
	      null and void."
The	 lease-deed  described	the amount  of	Rs.6,500  as
advance at four places and stipulates adjustment of a sum of
Rs. 1,500 out of it and the balance amount of Rs.5,000 to be
paid back to the tenant after the expiry of the lease  peri-
od.  The provio to
s. 7(2)(a)
prohibits payment of  any	 sum
exceeding one month's rent by way of advance and sub-s.	 (3)
declares  the  stipulation for payment of  rent	 in  advance
beyond that of one month as null and void.
729
The receipt of Rs.6,500 by the landlord was,  therefore,
contrary  to law and opposed to public policy. A sum of	 Rs.
1,500  has already been adjusted in the manner indicated  in
the  petition  for  eviction  and the fact  that  a  sum  of
Rs.5,000 was still held by the landlord was admitted  there-
in.  On the facts appearing on the record it is	 thus  clear
that the landlord held a higher amount than the rent due  on
the  date  when the petition for eviction was filed  on	 the
plea  of wilful default of payment of rent. The	 stipulation
of holding the excess amount of RS.5,000 free of interest to
be  refunded under a valid receipt after the expiry  of	 the
lease period is the null and void stipulation and the amount
of Rs.5,000 in the hands of the landlord was an amount	held
by  the	 landlord on account of the tenant on  the  date  of
filing of the petition for eviction.
This  Court	 in
Mohd. Salimuddin v. Misri  Lal  &  Anr.
,
[1986]	1 SCR 622 had occasion to deal with a more  or	less
similar situation arising under the
Bihar Buildings  (Lease,
Rent & Eviction) Control Act, 1947
. There, a sum of Rs.2,000
had been advanced by the tenant to the landlord	 stipulating
adjustment of the loan amount_against the rent which accrued
subsequently. The landlord asked for eviction on the  ground
of  arrears  of rent by filing a suit. The trial  court	 had
decreed the suit but the lower appellate court reversed	 the
decree by holding that the tenant was not in arrears of rent
since  the amount advanced by the tenant was  sufficient  to
cover  the  landlord's	claim of arrears.  The	High  Court,
however, vacated the appellate judgment and restored that of
the  trial court holding that the loan amount by the  tenant
was in violation of the prohibition contained in s. 3 of the
Bihar  Act and the tenant was in arrears of rent and  liable
to be evicted. This Court set aside the judgment of the High
Court by saying:
"The  view taken by the High Court  is  unsus-
	      tainable	inasmuch as the High Court has	lost
	      sight  of	 the fact that the  parties  to	 the
	      contract	were unequal. The tenant was  acting
	      under  compulsion	 of  circumstances  and	 was
	      obliged  to succumb to the will of  the  land-
	      lord, who was in a dominating position. If the
	      tenant  had not agreed to advance the loan  he
	      would not have been able to secure the  tenan-
	      cy."
The Court referred to the doctrine of pari-delicto and	held
that the same was not applicable against the tenant.In	M/s.
Sarwan Kumar Onkar Nath v. Subhas Kumar Agarwalla
,
730
[1987] 4
SCC 546, Salimuddin
's case came for  consideration.
This  was  also	 a dispute under the  Bihar  Act  where	 two
months'	 rent had been paid in advance by the tenant to	 the
landlord on the stipulation that the advance amount would be
liable	to  be adjusted towards arrears	 of  rent,  whenever
necessary or required. The Court held that the tenant  could
not  be evicted on the ground of default in the	 payment  of
rent  for  two months even if the tenant failed to  ask	 the
landlord  to  make adjustment of the advance amount  in	 the
absence of any agreement requiring the tenant to inform	 the
landlord  as  to when such adjustment is to  be	 made.	This
Court said that when the
Rent Act
prohibited the landlord to
claim such advance payment, the tenant could not be  consid-
ered to be a defaulter and the doctrine of pari-delicto	 was
not attracted to such a fact-situation.
Mr.	 Rao building upon the ratio of these two  decisions
rightly	 contended  before  us that when  the  landlord	 had
Rs.5,000  on tenant's account with him which he was  holding
for  years  without paying interest and	 against  the  clear
statutory bar, there could be no justification for  granting
a decree of eviction on the plea of arrears of rent. In view
of  the fact that the stipulation that the amount  would  be
refundable at the end of the tenancy is null and void  under
s. 7(3)
of the Act, the amount became payable to the  tenant
immediately  and  the landlord with Rs.5,000 of	 the  tenant
with  him could not contend that the tenant was	 in  default
for a smaller amount by not paying the rent for some months.
    The	 second	 contention advanced before  us	 is  equally
weighty. The lease being for a term of 30 years is to expire
in  September, 1999. As we have already said, the lease	 did
not  stipulate a forfeiture clause and in the absence  of  a
forfeiture  clause  in the lease leading to  termination  by
forfeiture, the contractual tenancy was subsisting under the
provisions  of the
Transfer of Property Act
and there  could
not be any eviction from such a tenancy.
We are somewhat surprised to find that these  irresisti-
ble  defences were not advanced in the Courts below and	 the
course of the litigation was confined to a consideration  of
s. 34
of the Evidence Act.
The	 appeal is allowed, the concurrent decision  of	 all
the  three Courts below directing the tenant to	 be  evicted
are set aside and the application for eviction is  dismissed
with costs throughout. Hearing fee in this Court is assessed
at Rs.3,000.
P.S.S.					  Appeal allowed.
731