[Cites
9
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Kasturi (Dead) By L.Rs vs Gaon Sabha on 27 July, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 SCR (3) 591, 1989 SCC (4) 55, AIRONLINE 1989 SC 121, 1989 (4) SCC 55, (1989) 39 DLT 58, (1989) 3 JT 228 (SC), (1990) 1 LANDLR 33, (1990) 2 LANDLR 33, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 11
Author:
Misra Rangnath
Bench:
Misra Rangnath
,
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
SMT. KASTURI (DEAD) BY L.RS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GAON SABHA

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/07/1989

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:
 1989 SCR  (3) 591	  1989 SCC  (4)	 55
 JT 1989 (3)   228	  1989 SCALE  (2)77


ACT:
Delhi  Land Reforms Act, 1954
.'
Section 3(13)
,
11
,
154
.
185 'Land'--When  vest in gaon sabha -civil suit-Dicleartion
of bhumidhari right--Whether maintainable.
       Statutory Interpretation.' External aid--Word defined
in  another statute containing different meaning--Not to  be
relied upon.
Words & Phrases: 'Land'--'Garden'--'Grove'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant-plaintiff sued for declaration that inclu-
sion  of  the disputed property in the land records  of	 the
respondent-Gaon Sabha on the basis that it had vested  under
the  provisions of the
Delhi Land and Reforms Act, 1954
was
wrong,	void  and without jurisdiction, and  for  a  further
declaration  that she was entitled to bhumidhari  rights  in
the property under
section 11
of the Act. In paragraph	4(d)
of  the	 plaint, it was pleaded that the suit land  was	 not
'land'	and was not banjar (waste) and did not	come  within
section 154(1)(i)
to (vii) of the Act and, therefore,  there
was  no	 vesting in law. The proprietor,  according  to	 the
plaintiff,  grew fuel wood and partly used the	property  as
ghatwars and used the stones for building purposes.
    The	 suit was decreed in the trial court, and  the	said
decree	was affirmed in appeal, but at the instance  of	 the
respondent-defendant  No.  --Gaon Sabha, the High  Court  in
second	appeal reversed the decrees of the courts below	 and
dismissed the suit.
    The	 High Court found that the property came within	 the
definition  of 'land' and, therefore, was subjected  to	 the
legal  incidence of the statutory provisions. In  regard  to
the  relief  of bhumidhari rights, it held that	 the  plain-
tiffs' suit was not maintainable.
Dismissing the appeal this Court,
    HELD:  The definition of 'land' in
section 3(13)
of	 the
Delhi  Land Reforms Act, 1954 is wide. A land on which	fuel
wood is grown would
592
constitute groveland. In view of the inclusive definition of
'land',	 the  finding  of the High Court  that	the  dispute
property  constituted  land  cannot be	said  to  be  wrong.
[594C-D]
      Nemi  Chand v. Financial Commissioner, Punjab &  Anr.,
AIR  1964  (51) Punjab 373; Rajinder Prashad & Anr.  v.	 The
Punjab State &	Ors., AIR 1966 (53) Punjab 185; Munshi Ram &
Ors. v. Financial Commissioner, Haryana & Ors., [1979] 1 SCC
471; Haiti v. Sunder Singh, [1971] 2 SCR 163 referred to.
      It is impermissible to rely-on definitions  containing
meanings different from the definition under the
Delhi	Land
Reforms	 Act, 1954
for a proper resolution of  the  dispute.
[595A]
      The  High Court therefore came to the correct  conclu-
sion  when  it held that the disputed  property	 Constituted
'land' under the Act, and became liable to vest in the	Gaon
Sabha under the Act. [595B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 351  of
1974.
From  the	 Judgment and Order dated 23.2.1973  of	 the
Delhi High Court in R.S.A. No. 69 of 1968.
Rajinder Sachar, Sr. Ad v. and K.C. Dua for the Appellants.
N.S. Das Bahal and D.N. Puri for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
      RANGANATH	 MISRA, J. This appeal is by  special  leave
and the sole legal representative of the original  plaintiff
is in appeal.
The  plaintiff sued for declaration that inclusion  of
the disputed property in the land records of the  respondent
Gaon Sabha on the basis that it had vested under the  provi-
sions  of  the
Delhi Land Reforms  Act,	 1954
,	(hereinafter
referred to as 'the Act') was wrong, void and without juris-
diction and for a further declaration that she was  entitled
to bhumidhari rights in the property under
section 11
of the
Act.  Her suit was decreed in the trial court and  the	said
decree was affirmed in appeal but at the instance of defend-
ant  no.  1,  Gaon Sabha, the High Court  in  second  appeal
reversed  the decrees of the courts below and dismissed	 the
suit.
593
The	 suit was instituted on 16.8.1966. The	decision  of
this  Court in the case of
Hatti v. Sunder Singh
,  [1971]  2
SCR  163 settled the legal position that a claim under	sec-
tion  11 of the Act for declaration of bhumidhari right	 was
not  maintainable in the Civil Court in view of
section	 185
of  the Act read with Schedule I and exclusive	jurisdiction
for  adjudication of such claims vested in  the	 appropriate
Revenue	 Court. This position of law is not disputed  before
us.  In regard to the relief of bhumidhari rights  the	High
Court had, therefore, rightly held that the plaintiff's suit
was not maintainable.
The	 only  other submission advanced on  behalf  of	 the
plaintiff for our consideration is that the disputed proper-
ty did not constitute 'land' as defined in
section 3(13)
of
the Act and, therefore, the right, title and interest of the
appellant  as proprietor of the property was in no  way	 af-
fected by the provisions of the Act and the inclusion of the
property in L.R. 2 was void, and liable to vacation.
    In paragraph 4(d) of the plaint, plaintiff pleaded	that
the suit land was not 'land' and was not banjar (waste)	 and
did  not come within
section 154(1)(i)
to (vii) of  the	 Act
and, therefore, there was no vesting in law. The proprietor,
according  to the plaintiff, grew fuel wood and partly	used
the  property as ghatwars and used the stones  for  building
purposes.
The	 High Court has found that the property came  within
the  definition of 'land' and, therefore, was  subjected  to
the  legal  incidence of the statutory	provisions.
Section
3(13)
defines land to mean:
"land held or occupied for purposes  connected
	      with   agriculture,  horticulture	 or   animal
	      husbandry	 including pisciculture and  poultry
	      farming and includes--
(a) buildings appurtenant therto,
(b) village, abadis,
(c) grovelands,
(d) lands for village pasture or land  covered
	      by  water and used for growing  singharas	 and
	      other  produce or land in the bed of  a  river
	      and used for casual or occasional cultivation
......"
The  definition of land in the Act is wide and in  paragraph
4(d) '
594
the  admitted position is fuel wood was being grown  on	 the
property.  'Horticulture', 'garden' and 'groveland'  in	 the
absence	 of  statutory definitions, would  have	 the  common
parlance  meaning.  'Horticulture', as	the  Shorter  Oxford
English Dictionary indicates means:
"the cultivation of a garden."
'Garden', according to the Dictionary, means--
"an area of land, usually planted with  grass,
	      trees, flower beds, etc.; an area of land used
	      for  the	cultivation  of	 ornamental  plants,
	      herbs, fruit, vegetables, trees, etc.
A  grove, as the Dictionary puts it means; "A  small  wood.;
small  woodland	 area or plantation". A land on	 which	fuel
wood is grown would constitute groveland.
    In	view  of  the inclusive definition  of	'land',	 the
finding of the High Court that the disputed property consti-
tuted  land cannot be said to be wrong. Reliance was  placed
on  the decision of the Punjab High Court in Nemi  Chand  v.
Financial Commissioner, Punjab & Anr., AIR 1964 (51)  Punjab
373  where  the meaning of land in
Punjab Security  of	Land
Tenures	 Act
was under examination and the Court was  called
upon  to decide whether banjar Jadid and banjar quadim	came
within the definition. For that purpose the meaning of	land
occurring  in the Tenures Act and the Punjab Tenancy Act  of
1887 was examined. The Court also referred to the definition
of  land  in
Punjab Alienation of Land Act,  1900
.  In	 the
presence of a definition in the Act under consideration,  we
find  no justification to refer to definitions in  different
statutes  for finding out whether the disputed property	 was
land.
Appellant's counsel also placed reliance on the decision
of  a Full Bench of the same High Court in the case  of	 Ra-
jinder	Prasad & Anr. v. The Punjab State & Ors.,  AIR	1966
(53)  Punjab 185. Here again the question for  consideration
was  whether  gair mumkin land was land	 within	 the
Punjab
Security  of  Land  Tenures Act
. For  the  reason  indicated
above, we do not think that the appellant is entitled to any
support	 from the Full Bench Judgment. Lastly, reliance	 was
placed on :he decision of this Court in Munshi Ram & Ors. v.
Financial  Commissioner, Haryana & Ors., [1979] 1  SCC	471.
The  Court was considering the true meaning of	'permissible
area' under the
Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act
and	 for
that purpose the meaning of land was being examined; whether
banjar Jadid should be excluded with reference to
595
the meaning of land under the East Punjab Displaced  Persons
(Land  Settlement) Act and the Punjab Tenancy Act was  being
debated	 before	 the Court. We do not think in view  of	 the
statutory  definition  any  digration is  necessary.  It  is
impermissible  to  rely on definitions	containing  meanings
different  from	 the definition under the Act for  a  proper
resolution  of the dispute. The High Court, in our  opinion,
came to the correct conclusion when it held that the disput-
ed property constituted land under the Act and became liable
to vest in the Gaon Sabha under the Act. The judgment of the
High  Court,  therefore, is upheld and the  appeal  is	dis-
missed. In the peculiar facts of this case, the parties	 are
directed to bear their respective costs in this Court.
N  .V.K.					Appeal	dis-
missed.
596