[Cites
3
, Cited by
127
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Jagannath Achyut Karandikar on 8 March, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1133, 1989 SCR (1) 947, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1133, 1989 LAB. I. C. 1237, (1989) 1 JT 520 (SC), 1989 SCC (SUPP) 1 393, (1990) 1 SERVLJ 146, 1989 SCC (L&S) 417, (1989) 1 CURLR 678, (1989) 1 LAB LN 557, (1989) 58 FACLR 635, (1989) 1 LABLJ 441
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
K.N.  Singh
PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAGANNATH ACHYUT KARANDIKAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/03/1989

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
SINGH, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1133		  1989 SCR  (1) 947
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (1) 393 JT 1989 (1)	520
 1989 SCALE  (1)566


ACT:
    Maharashtra State Subordinate Secretariat Service  Rules
1951, 1955 and 1962--Rules I to 5--Departmental Examination,
passing	 of--Condition precedent for promotion to  cadre  of
Superintendents	  "late	 passing"  of	examination--Whether
affects position in Seniority List-Whether Government has to
make specific order relaxing condition for passing  examina-
tion--Circular	    dated     Jan.     15,	1962--Effect
of--Vis-a-Vis--Statutory Rules.



HEADNOTE:
    Respondents	 1  to 8 are  Assistant	 Secretaries/Section
Officers/  Superintendents  who	 are  working  in  different
departments  of	 the State of Maharashtra. Under  the  Rules
governing their Service conditions the Govt. had  prescribed
Departmental  Examination  for	promotion to  the  cadre  of
Superintendents; the passing of the examination was a condi-
tion  precedent	 for  the officials for	 being	promoted  as
superintendents. The Examination in question was required to
be  conducted every year and the officials were required  to
pass  the same within the stipulated period; and  the  offi-
cials who were not able to pass the said examination  within
the prescribed period were to lose their Seniority, but they
were  permitted	 to take the examination in  any  number  of
chances	 after the expiry of the stipulated period and	they
were  to be promoted only when they qualify themselves.	 The
Govt. as required under the Rules, could not hold the exami-
nation	every  year particularly in the years 1968,  1969  &
1970. The Govt. neither extended the period within which the
officials were required to pass the examination nor promoted
the seniors in the cadre of Superintendents subject to their
passing	 the examination and instead thereof the juniors  in
the cadre who had qualified in the examination were promoted
to  the cadre of Superintendents. The seniors in  the  cadre
were promoted only when they qualified the examination	i.e.
later in point of time.
    The	 Govt. issued a revised Seniority List	relating  to
the cadre of Superintendents. In the said List the  Respond-
ents herein were shown juniors to those persons who had	 not
only qualified the Dept. Examination later in point of	time
but also promoted after them. Being aggrieved, the  Respond-
ents herein challenged the validity of the revi-
948
sion of the Seniority List as also the validity of the Rules
being  violative  of
Art. 14
& 16
of  the  Constitution  by
filing a Writ Petition in the Bombay High Court.
    The	 High  Court allowed the Writ Petn. and	 issued	 the
following two directives to the State Govt.
   (1)	To  recast the Revised/Final  Seniority	 List  dated
20.12.1982  vis-a-vis the persons shown in the	Category  of
"Late Passing" after considering the objections of the	Writ
Petitioners  and Ors. and assign them seniority strictly  in
accordance  with  Rule	2 and the  other  Government  Orders
referred to in paragraph 96 of the Judgment, and
   (2) The Seniority in the Superintendent's Cadre so  fixed
should	also be considered as seniority for  further  promo-
tions.
    Being  dissatisfied	 with  the said order  of  the	High
Court, the State of Maharashtra filed appeals in this  Court
after obtaining Special Leave.
Allowing the appeals this Court,
    HELD:  Under the 1951 Rules, the candidate could  appear
for the examination after two years of his entering into the
cadre.	He  had three chances and he must  pass	 within	 six
years of his joining Service. Under the 1962 Rules a  candi-
date was allowed to take the examination only after complet-
ing  five years service in the cadre. He had  three  chances
for  taking  the  examination and that must  be	 availed  of
within	four years. That means he must pass the	 examination
within 9 years' service. Under both the Rules, the Govt	 was
required to hold the examination every year, but no examina-
tion was held in 1968, 1969 and 1970. [953F-G]
Those recruited in 1961 are deprived of two chances in 1968
JUDGMENT:
three  chances	in 1968, 1969 & 1970 and those of  the	year
1963 have lost two chances in 1969 & 1970. The last batch to
lose one chance in 1970 is of the year 1964. [953H; 954A]
    Under the 1955 Rules, the Government preserved power  to
dispense with or relax the requirements of any rule regulat-
ing "the conditions of service of Government servants; or of
any class thereof". [954B]
949
There is no restriction as to the exercise of the  power
or discretion.[954C]
    The	 Circular  dated January 15, 1962  is  an  executive
instruction  whereas  the  1955 Rules  are  statutory  since
framed	under the proviso to
Art. 309
of  the  Constitution.
The  Government could not have restricted the  operation  of
the  Statutory Rules by issuing the  executive	instruction.
The executive instruction may supplement but cannot supplant
the statutory rules. [954D-E]
    Rule  2 of the 1962 Rules no doubt states that a  candi-
date who does not pass the examination at the end of 9 years
service	 will  lose his seniority. But this rule  cannot  be
read in isolation. [955D]
    If	examination is not held every year. The rule  cannot
operate	 to the prejudice of a person who has not  exhausted
all his chances. The person who has not exhausted the avail-
able  chances to appear in the examination cannot he  denied
of  his	 seniority.  It would be  unjust,  unreasonable	 and
arbitrary  to penalise a person for the default of the	Gov-
ernment	 to hold the examination every year. That  does	 not
also  appear to be the intent or purpose of the 1962  Rules.
[955E-F]
    The	 Govt.	instead of promoting such persons  in  their
turn  made  them to wait till they passed  the	examination.
They  are  the persons failing into the	 category  of  "Late
Passing".  To remove the hardship caused to them  the  Govt.
wisely restored their legitimate seniority in the promotion-
al  cadre.  There  is nothing improper or  illegal  in	this
action and indeed, it is in harmony with the object of	1962
Rules. [955G-H]
    The	 Court	need not have to reflect upon the  Rules  of
interpretation	since  they are well settled. They  are	 now
like the habits of driving which have become ingrained. They
come for assistance by instinct. The different rules have to
be  used  meticulously to give effect to the scheme  as	 the
clutch,	 brake and accelerator are used for smooth  driving.
These rules are to be harmoniously construed. One should not
concentrate  too much on one rule and pay too little  atten-
tion on the other, for that would lead astray and result  in
hardship, such construction should be avoided. [955C-D]



&
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.  30373038
of 1984
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.12. 1983 of the Bombay
950
High Court in W.P. No. 1189 of 1980.
S.K.  Dholakia, A.S. Bhasme and A.M. Khanwilkar for	 the
Appellant.
N.B. Shetya, S.B. Bhasme, S. Ramachandran, R.  Ramachan-
dran, Maknand Adkar and Mrs. M. Karanjawala for the Respond-
ents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.	JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. These two appeals	 by  special
leave  are  by the State of Maharashtra. They  are  directed
against the judgment of the High Court of Bombay dated	12th
January,  1983 by which the High Court issued the  following
two directives to the State Government:
"(1)  To recast the Revised/Final	Sen-
iority  List dated 20.12. 1982  vis-a-vis	 the
	      persons  shown in the category of 'Late  Pass-
	      ing'  and	 assign them seniority	strictly  in
	      accordance  with Rule 2 and the other  Govern-
	      ment orders referred to in Paragraph 96 of the
	      judgment; and
		     (2)  The seniority in the	Superintend-
ent's cadre so fixed should also be considered
	      as seniority for further promotions."
The  background  to these	 directives  is,  in
	      outline, this:
Respondents	 1  to 8 are  Assistant	 Secretaries/Section
Officers/  Superintendents in different departments  of	 the
Government  of Maharashtra. The State Government  prescribed
departmental  examinations  as	a  condition  precedent	 for
promotion  to the cadre of Superintendents. The	 examination
was  required to be conducted every year, and the  officials
have  to pass within the stipulated period. Those who  could
not  pass within the time frame would lose  their  seniority
but  they  will be promoted as and when they  qualify  them-
selves.	 The Government for some reason or the	other  could
not hold the examinations every year. Particularly in  1968,
1969  & 1970, the Government did not hold the  examinations.
The  Government, however, did not pass any  order  extending
the  period  prescribed for passing  the  examinations,	 nor
promoted  the seniors subject to their passing the  examina-
tion.  The  juniors who qualified themselves  were  promoted
overlooking  the case of seniors and seniors were only	pro-
moted  upon their passing the examination. In the  cadre  of
Superinten-
951
dents, however, the Government revised the seniority list so
as  to reflect the rankings in the lower cadre	irrespective
of  the date of promotion. The validity of the	revision  of
seniority  was	challenged before the High Court.  The	High
Court  conceded	 the power to the Government  to  relax	 the
rules  relating	 to passing of the examination	in  case  of
hardship, but refused to recognise the power of the  Govern-
ment  to  give	seniority to those who could  not  pass	 the
examination within the time schedule. The High Court was  of
opinion	 that  without	specific orders	 of  the  Government
relaxing the conditions of the rules, the persons could	 not
be given seniority for 'Late Passing'. There are also  other
reasons	 given	by the High Court which	 we  will  presently
consider.  But before that, it is important that  we  should
have  a chronology of the relevant rules and resolutions  of
the Government. It is as follows:
On	22nd August, 1951, the Government made a  resolution
prescribing departmental examination for the members of	 the
Upper  Division of the Subordinate Secretariat Service,	 and
further	 directing  that  only those persons  who  pass	 the
examination  should  be	 promoted  as  Superintendents.	 The
accompanying rules (The 1951 Rules) thereunder provided	 the
procedure for passing the examination as well as the  conse-
quences of failure to pass the examination. On 24th  August,
1955, the Government framed rules (The 1955 Rules) under the
proviso	 to
Article 309
of  the  Constitution	specifically
providing power to dispense with, or relax, the requirements
of  the operation of any rule regulating the  conditions  of
service	 of Government servants; or of any class thereof  if
it  causes undue hardships in any particular case.  On	15th
January,  1962, the Government issued a circular  purporting
to restrict the scope of the rule permitting relaxation only
in respect of travelling allowance rules, leave rules,	etc.
The circular also clarified that the 1955 Rules could not be
invoked for conferring benefit on an individual by relaxing
the conditions relating to recruitment, promotion, grant
of extension of service or re-employment. On 28th December,
1961, the Government made the revised rules in supersession
of the 1951 Rules. They were brought into force with effect
from  1st  January, 1962 (the 1962 Rules).  They  were	made
appl-
icable to all persons recruited to the Upper Division of
the Subordinate Secretariate Service on or after that date
and also to those who have been in service prior to 1st Jan-
uary, 1962  unless  they had already passed the examination
under the 1951 Rules. The rules 1 to 5 are as follows:
"1.  Every member of the Upper  Divi-
sion  of the Subordinate	Secretariat  Service
	      will be required to pass within
952
nine  years from the date of his entry in	 the
	      Upper Division, a departmental examination for
	      promotion	 to  the  posts	 of  Superintendents
	      according	 to  the  prescribed  syllabus.	 For
	      being eligible to appear for the examination a
	      candidate	 must have passed the  Post-Recruit-
	      ment Training Examination for Junior Assistant
	      and  must	 have also completed not  less	than
	      five  years' continuous service in  the  Upper
	      Division.
(2) Subject to Rule 1, a  candidate
	      will be allowed to appear for the	 examination
	      in  three	 chances which must  be	 availed  of
	      within a period of four years. This period  of
	      4	 years will not be extended for any  reasons
	      irrespective  of the fact whether a  candidate
	      has availed himself of 3 chances or not during
	      the  period.  Similarly no candidate  will  be
	      allowed to take during this period more than 3
	      chances.	A  candidate who does not  pass	 the
	      examination  at the end of 9 years service  in
	      the Upper Division, will lose his seniority to
	      all those candidates who pass the	 examination
	      before he passes it.
(3)  No persons shall be  appointed
	      to  the post of Superintendent unless  he	 has
	      passed   the   Superintendents'	Examination.
	      Provided	that  this rule shall not  apply  to
	      short term vacancies not exceeding two months.
			 (4)  Subject  to the  condition  of
	      loss  of	seniority  laid down in	 rule  2,  a
	      candidate will be allowed to take the examina-
	      tion  in any number of chances after the	com-
	      pletion of 9 years' service.
(5) The examination will be held once a year.
XXX		  XXX			 XXX
	      XXX "
On  December  28,  1970, proviso to above rule	3  has	been
added. The said proviso reads:
"Provided  that  if  the  Superintendent's
	      Examination is not held in any year, a  person
	      who has completed 9 years service and who	 has
	      not  exhausted all the  permissible   chances,
	      may be promoted to the post of Superintendent,
	      provided further that he is otherwise suitable
	      for  promo	     tion,  subject  to	 the
	      clear condition that he will have to pass
953
the  examination at the  earliest	 opportunity
	      whenever it is held."
"It is further clarified that  promo-
tions to the posts of Superintendents  should,
	      in view of the above amendments, be given only
	      after  ensuring that there are no persons	 who
	      have  passed the	Superintendents	 Examination
	      earlier  for  being promoted to the  posts  of
	      Superintendents."
We	may incidentally refer to the subsequent rules	made
by  the	 Government, although it is not	 applicable  to	 the
present	 case.	On June 6, 1977, the Government	 framed	 the
rules called "The Maharashtra Government Subordinate Service
Rules, 1977". Rule 7 of the rules provides that if, for	 any
reason, the examination is not held in any particular  year,
that  year shall be excluded in computing the period  speci-
fied  under the rules. This is, indeed, the true  reflection
of the underlying concept of purpose of the earlier rules.
    Against  this backdrop, we may now consider whether	 the
Government  was justified in re-arranging the  seniority  by
giving benefit to persons in the category of "Late Passing".
    We	are  not  concerned herein about  the  seniority  of
persons	 in whose favour the Government has made  individual
orders extending the period for passing the examination.  We
will consider such cases a little later. For the present, we
may  examine  the rights of those "Late Passing"  where	 the
Government  has	 not made any specific	order  relaxing	 the
conditions  for	 passing the examination. Under	 the  195  1
Rules, the candidate could appear for the examination  after
two  years  of	his entering into the cadre.  He  has  three
chances	 and  he  must pass within 6 years  of	his  joining
service.  Under	 the  1962 Rules  the  scheme  provided	 was
slightly different. Under that scheme, candidate was allowed
to  take  the examination only after completing	 five  years
service	 in the cadre. He had three chances for	 taking	 the
examination  and that must be availed of within four  years.
That means he must pass the examination within the 9  years'
service.  Under both the Rules, the Government was  required
to  hold the examination every year, but no examination	 was
held  in  1968, 1969 & 1970. This is not in dispute.  For  a
proper	appreciation of the question raised, we	 must  first
try  to understand the hardship resulted by not holding	 the
examination  in	 1968, 1969 & 1970. It is  as  follows:	 The
candidates  recruited in 1960 have lost one chance in  1968.
Those recruited in 1961 are deprived of two chances in	1968
and 1969. The candidates recruited in 1962 are
954
denied	of three chances in 1968, 1969 & 1970 and  those  of
the  year 1963 have lost two chances in 1969-and  1970.	 The
last batch to lose one chance in 1970 is of the year 1964.
    The	 aforesaid  Rules expressly provided  power  to	 the
Government to grant more chances for passing the examination
in any individual case or in class of cases. Under the	1955
Rules,	the Government preserved power to dispense with,  or
relax  the requirements of any rule regulating	"the  condi-
tions  of  service of government servants; or of  any  class
thereof".  In  the exercise of this  power,  the  Government
could  dispense	 or relax the operation of any rule,  if  it
causes	undue hardships in any particular case. It is  need-
less  to state that this power includes the power  to  relax
the conditions prescribed for promotion since promotion is a
condition  of  service. There is no restriction	 as  to	 the
exercise of the power or discretion. The High Court,  howev-
er,  has  observed  that the scope of this  power  has	been
constrained  by the circular dated 15th January,  1962.	 The
circular  states that the 1955 Rules  permitting  relaxation
cannot be utilised to relax the rules which regulate  condi-
tions  of service. It further states that the scope  of	 the
Rules should be limited only to matters relating to  travel-
ling allowance, leave, etc. But this appears to be an  exer-
cise  in  vain.	 The circular is  an  executive	 instruction
whereas the 1955 Rules are statutory since framed under	 the
proviso	 to
Article 309
of the Constitution. The  Government
could  not  have restricted the operation of  the  statutory
rules  by issuing the executive instruction.  The  executive
instruction  may supplement but not supplant  the  statutory
rules.	The  High Court was in error in ignoring  this	well
accepted principle.
When we turn to the 1962 Rules with the amendments	made
in  1970, it becomes more clear about the power of the	Gov-
ernment to relax the conditions for passing the examination.
The proviso dated 28th December, 1970 to rule 3 specifically
provides that if the examination is not held in any year,  a
person	Could be promoted to the cadre of Superintendent  if
he has completed nine years' service. The only condition  is
that  he  should  not have  exhausted  all  the	 permissible
chances. The promotion, made should be subject to the condi-
tion that he will have to pass the examination at the earli-
est  opportunity  whenever it is held. The benefit  of	this
proviso	 was  evidently not extended to any of	the  persons
falling into the category of "Late Passing".
    Counsel  for the contesting respondents  however,  urged
that  the proviso does not entitle the candidate to get	 his
legitimate seniority if
955
he  does not pass the examination at the end of nine  years'
service.  He  depended upon rule 2 of the 1962	Rules  which
states that the candidate who does not pass the	 examination
within 9 years' service will lose his seniority to all those
candidates who pass the examination earlier. He also  argued
that the proviso is only to rule 3 and not to rule 2 and the
Government has no power to restore the seniority of a person
who has lost it by the operation of rule 2.
This  is a question of construction of the	rules  which
form  part of the scheme prescribing a condition for  promo-
tion. We do not have to reflect upon the rules of  interpre-
tation	since they are well settled. They are now  like	 the
habits of driving which have become ingrained. They come  to
our  assistance	 by instinct. We are to	 use  the  different
rules  meticulously to give effect to the scheme as  we	 use
the clutch, brake and accelerator for smooth driving.  These
rules  are to be harmoniously construed. We should not	con-
centrate  too much on one rule and pay too little  attention
on the other. That would lead us astray and result in  hard-
ship.  We must avoid such construction. Rule 2 of  the	1962
Rules no doubt states that a candidate who does not pass the
examination at the end of nine years' service will lose	 his
seniority. But this rule cannot be read in isolation as	 the
High Court did. It has to be read along with the other rules
since  it  is a part of the scheme provided  for  promotion.
Rule 5 requires the Government to hold the examination every
year.  This rule is the basis of the entire scheme  and	 the
effect of other rules depends upon holding the	examination.
If  examination is not held in any year, the rule  2  cannot
operate	 to the prejudice of a person who has not  exhausted
all his chances. The person who has not exhausted the avail-
able  chances to appear in the examination cannot be  denied
of  his	 seniority.  It would be  unjust,  unreasonable	 and
arbitrary  to penalise a person for the default of the	Gov-
ernment	 to hold the examination every year. That  does	 not
also appear to be the intent or purpose of the 1962 Rules.
    If	the examination is not held in any year, the  person
who  has  not exhausted all the permissible  chances  has  a
right  to have his case considered for promotion even if  he
has  completed 9 years' service. The Government	 instead  of
promoting such persons in their turn made them to wait	till
they  passed the examination. They are the  persons  falling
into the category of "Late Passing". To remove the  hardship
caused to them the Government wisely restored their  legiti-
mate  seniority in the promotional cadre. There is,  in	 our
opinion,  nothing  improper or illegal in  this	 action	 and
indeed, it is in harmony with the object of the 1962 Rules.
956
This takes us to the question whether the Government was
justified in individual cases to relax the period for  pass-
ing  the examination. It is said that the number of  persons
failing	 into this category are not more than five.  In	 the
rejoinder  filed on behalf of the Government, it  is  stated
that  the Government made some orders extending	 the  period
for  individuals to pass the examination  on  administrative
grounds or on some genuine hardships. It is also stated that
such orders were made upon recommendations by the respective
departments and those persons passed the examination  within
the  period extended. There is no reason to doubt  the	cor-
rectness  of  these statements made in	the  rejoinder.	 The
power  to relax the conditions of the rules to	avoid  undue
hardship  in any case or class of cases cannot now be  gain-
said. It would be, therefore, futile for the respondents  to
make any grievance.
In the result and for the reasons stated, we allow these
appeals	 and in reversal of the judgment of the High  Court,
we  dismiss the writ petitions filed by the  contesting	 re-
spondents.  In	the circumstances of the case,	however,  we
make no order as to costs.
Y.L.						     Appeals
allowed.
957