[Cites
4
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
P.L. Shah vs Union Of India & Anr on 18 January, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 985, 1989 SCR (1) 224, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 985, 1989 (1) SCC 546, 1989 LAB. I. C. 1253, 1989 (1) SERVLR 573, (1989) 1 JT 98 (SC), 1989 (1) JT 98, 1989 30 GUJLR 513, (1989) 1 GUJ LR 513, 1989 RAJLR 69, 1989 SCC (L&S) 223, (1989) 58 FACLR 334, (1989) 1 LABLJ 302, (1989) 1 LAB LN 546, (1989) 2 SERVLJ 49, (1989) 74 FJR 163
Author:
E.S.  Venkataramiah
Bench:
E.S.  Venkataramiah
,
N.D.  Ojha
PETITIONER:
P.L. SHAH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/01/1989

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  985		  1989 SCR  (1) 224
 1989 SCC  (1) 546	  JT 1989 (1)	 98
 1989 SCALE  (1)81


ACT:
Central  Administrative  Tribunals	Act,  1985
:
Section
21(2)
-Subsistence    allowance--Reduction    of--Application
seeking restoration moved after five  years--Maintainability
of--Period  of	limitation-Computation	of--Held,  cause  of
action	arises	every  month in	 which	reduced	 subsistence
allowance is paid.
    Civil  Services:  Suspension order--Nature	and  purpose
of-Subsistence	allowance--Sufficiency	of--Need  to  review
from time to time.



HEADNOTE:
    Sub-section (2) of
s. 21
of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 empowers the Tribunal not to entertain an applica-
tion  the  grievance in respect of which had  arisen  beyond
three  years  immediately preceding the date  on  which	 the
jurisdiction,  powers and authority of the  Tribunal  became
exercisable under the Act.
    The	 appellant, an Upper Division Clerk,  was  suspended
from service, in July 1975 pending on account of the  insti-
tution	of  criminal proceedings against him.  By  an  order
dated August 4, 1975 he was sanctioned subsistence allowance
at  the rate of 50 per cent of his salary last drawn.  By  a
further	 order dated May 6, 1982 the  subsistence  allowance
was  reduced to 25 per cent of the salary he was drawing  on
the  date  of  suspension. He moved a  petition	 before	 the
Tribunal in the year 1988 for a direction to the  Government
to restore the original order of August 4, 1975. That  peti-
tion was dismissed by the Tribunal solely on the ground that
the  order reducing the allowance having been passed on	 May
6,  1982, it could not entertain the application  made	more
than  five  years thereafter, apparently on  the  ground  of
limitation set out in
s. 21(2)
of the Act.
    In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the
appellant that the Government had failed to review the order
of  May 6, 1982 even though a long period of five years	 had
elapsed	 after the reduction of the  subsistence  allowance,
that the delay in conclusion of the criminal proceedings, as
a consequence of which he had been kept under suspension,
225
was not due to him and in the circumstances it was not	just
and appropriate that he should be paid a subsistence  allow-
ance at a reduced rate for an unreasonably long period.
Allowing the appeal,
    HELD:  1.  The Tribunal was not right in  rejecting	 the
application. [229F]
    2.	The cause of action in respect of a  prayer  seeking
enhancement  of subsistence allowance arises every month  in
which the said allowance at the reduced rate is paid. There-
fore,  in the instant case, though no relief could be  given
to  the appellant in respect of the period which was  beyond
three years from the date on which the Tribunal commenced to
exercise its powers under the Act, it was quite open to	 the
Tribunal  to consider whether it was proper for the  Govern-
ment  to continue to give effect to the order dated  May  6,
1982  from any subsequent date, and if the Tribunal came  to
the  conclusion that the said order was required to  be	 re-
vised it could pass an appropriate order notwithstanding the
fact  that a period of five years had elapsed from the	date
on  which the order reducing the subsistence  allowance	 was
passed. While doing so it was open to the Tribunal to fix  a
date  within the period of the said three years	 from  which
the  appellant should be paid subsistence allowance  at	 the
revised	 rate having due regard to the date of the  applica-
tion. [229C-E]
    3.1.  The  very nomenclature of the allowance  makes  it
clear  that  the amount paid to a Government  servant  under
suspension should be sufficient for bare subsistence in this
world  in  which the prices of the necessaries of  life	 are
increasing every day on account of the conditions of  infla-
tion  obtaining in the country. More so, when  a  Government
servant	 cannot engage himself in any other activity  during
the  period of suspension. The amount of subsistence  allow-
ance  payable  to the Government servant  concerned  should,
therefore, be reviewed from time to time where the  proceed-
ings  drag on for a long time, even though there may  be  no
express rule insisting on such review. [228F-G]
    3.2.  In doing so, the authority concerned no doubt	 has
to  take into account whether the Government servant  is  in
any  way responsible for the undue delay in the disposal  of
the  proceedings  initiated against him. If  the  Government
servant	 is not responsible for such delay or even if he  is
responsible  for such delay to some extent but is  not	pri-
marily	responsible  for  it, it is for	 the  Government  to
consider whether the
226
order  of  suspension  should be continued  or	whether	 the
subsistence  allowance should be varied to his advantage  or
not. [228G-H; 229A]
    4.	The case is remanded to the Tribunal to	 dispose  of
the application made by the appellant on merits. [229G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 38 of
1989.
From  the  Judgment and order dated 15.3.  1988  of	 the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Ahmedabad in M.A. No. 49 of
1988.
P.H. Parekh and Shishir Sharma for the Appellant.
    B. Dutta, Additional Solicitor General, Ms. Indu  Malho-
tra and C.V. Subba Rao for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    VENKATARAMIAH, J. The appellant was working as an  Upper
Division Clerk in the year 1975. He was placed under suspen-
sion by an order dated 25.7.1975 as a result of the institu-
tion of a criminal prosecution against him and he  continues
to  remain  under suspension till today. By an	order  dated
4.9.  1975  he was sanctioned subsistence allowance  at	 the
rate  of 50 per cent of his salary last drawn. By a  further
order made on 6.6.1982 the subsistence allowance was reduced
to  25 per cent of the salary he was drawing on the date  of
suspension. The increments he would have earned from time to
time  and  the periodical revisions of pay-scales  were	 not
taken  into  consideration in  determining  the	 subsistence
allowance.
The charge-sheet was filed in the criminal case  against
the  appellant	in 1976 and the case was  committed  to	 the
sessions, but the committal proceedings were quashed by	 the
High Court in 1978. Then the proceedings again began  before
the Metropolitan Magistrate in 1979. The case, however,	 has
not yet come to an end.
Aggrieved by the denial of the salary and allowances due
to him for a long time on account of the order of suspension
and in particular the order fixing the subsistence allowance
at  25	per cent of the salary which he was drawing  at	 the
time of suspension by the Order dated 6.5. 1982, the  appel-
lant approached in the year 1988 the Central  Administrative
Tribunal (Ahmedabad Bench) for a direction to be
227
issued to the Government to restore the original Order dated
4.8. 1975 by which the subsistence allowance was fixed at 50
per  cent of his salary. That petition was dismissed by	 the
Tribunal by its order dated 15.3.1988 on the ground that the
appellant  had approached the Tribunal more than five  years
after  the date on which the Order dated 6.5. 1982 had	been
passed	apparently  on the ground of limitation set  out  in
sub-section  (2) of
section 21
of the Administrative  Tribu-
nals  Act,  1985  (hereinafter referred to  as	'the  Act').
Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the appellant  filed
this appeal.
The question for consideration in this appeal by special
leave is whether in a case of this nature, the Tribunal	 was
right in holding that the application before it, was  barred
by time. Sub-section (1) of
section 21
of the Act, no doubt,
says  that  a Tribunal shall not admit an application  in  a
case where a final order such as is mentioned in clause	 (a)
of sub-section (2) of
section 20
has been made in connection
with  the grievance unless the application is  made,  within
one  year from the date on which such final order  has	been
made,  and in a case where an appeal or representation	such
as  is mentioned in clause (b) of subsection (2) of
section
20
has	 been made and a period of six	months	had  expired
thereafter without such final order having been made, within
one  year from the date of expiry of the said period of	 six
months.	 Sub-section  (2) of
section 21
,  however,  provides
that  notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section	 (1)
of
section  21
where the grievance in respect of  which  an
application  is made had arisen by reason of any order	made
at  any	 time during the period of three  years	 immediately
preceding  the	date on which the jurisdiction,	 powers	 and
authority  of the Tribunal become exercisable under the	 Act
in respect of the matter to which such order related, and no
proceedings  for  the redressal of such grievance  had	been
commenced  before the said date before any High	 Court,	 the
application  shall be entertained by the Tribunal if  it  is
made within the period referred to in clause (a), or, as the
case  may  be,	clause (b) of sub-section (1)  or  within  a
period	of six months from the said date,  whichever  period
expires later. Sub-section (3) of
section 21
further confers
power  on the Tribunal to condone the delay in certain	cir-
cumstances  if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that  he
had  sufficient cause for not making the application  within
such period.
In the present case the main grievance of the  appellant
was not that the Order dated 6.5.1982 by which the  subsist-
ence allowance payable to him was reduced to 25 per cent was
bad at the commencement although there were some allegations
to that effect but it was one relating to the failure of the
authority  or  the  Government to  review  the	Order  dated
6.5.1982 even though a long period of 5 years had elapsed
228
after  the reduction of the subsistence allowance. His	con-
tention was that the delay in the conclusion of the criminal
proceedings as a consequence of which he had been kept under
suspension  was not due to him and in the  circumstances  it
was not just and proper that he should be paid a subsistence
allowance at a reduced rate for an unreasonably long period.
In support of his case the appellant relied upon a  decision
dated  23.6.1987 of the very bench of the Tribunal  in	Shri
Bhupendra  Mahashuklal Mehtap v. The Union of India &  Ors.,
in  T.A. No. 223 of 1986 (S.C.A. No. 3509 of 1922) in  which
Fundamental  Rule  53  which authorised	 the  Government  to
review	an order regarding subsistence allowance  arose	 for
consideration.	In the said case the Ahmedabad Bench of	 the
Tribunal quashed the Order dated 6.5.1982 passed against the
applicant  in that case by which the  subsistence  allowance
payable to the said applicant had been reduced.
    An order of suspension is not an order imposing  punish-
ment  on  a person found to be guilty. It is an	 order	made
against	 him  before  he is found guilty  to  ensure  smooth
disposal  of  the proceedings initiated	 against  him.	Such
proceedings should be completed expeditiously in the  public
interest and also in the interest of the Government  servant
concerned. The subsistence allowance is paid by the  Govern-
ment so that the Government servant against whom an order of
suspension  is	passed	on account of the  pendency  of	 any
disciplinary  proceeding  or  a	 criminal  case	  instituted
against him could maintain himself and his dependants  until
the departmental proceeding or the criminal case as the case
may  be	 comes to an end and appropriate orders	 are  passed
against	 the Government servant by the Government  regarding
his  right  to continue in service etc. depending  upon	 the
final outcome of the proceedings instituted against him. The
very  nomenclature of the allowance makes it clear that	 the
amount	paid to such a Government servant should  be  suffi-
cient for bare subsistence in this world in which the prices
of  the	 necessaries  of life are increasing  every  day  on
account	 of  the conditions of inflation  obtaining  in	 the
country. It is luther to be noted that a Government  servant
cannot	engage	himself	 in any other  activity	 during	 the
period	of suspension. The amount of  subsistence  allowance
payable	 to the Government servant concerned should,  there-
fore,  be reviewed from time to time where  the	 proceedings
drag on for a long time, even though there may be no express
rule  insisting	 On such review. In doing so  the  authority
concerned  no  doubt has to take into  account	whether	 the
Government  servant is in any way responsible for the  undue
delay  in the disposal of the proceedings initiated  against
him.  If the Government servant is not responsible for	such
delay  or even if he is responsible for such delay  to	some
extent	but is not primarily responsible for it, it  is	 for
the Government to recon-
229
sider whether the order of suspension should be continued or
whether	 the subsistence allowance should be varied  to	 his
advantage or not. The decision on the said question no doubt
depends	 upon several factors relevant to the case.  In	 the
instant	 case the appellant was suspended in the year  1975.
Now  nearly 13 years have elapsed from the date	 of  suspen-
sion.  He was paid subsistence allowance at the rate  of  50
per cent of the salary last drawn by him from 1975 and	1982
and  from  1982 he is being paid 25 per cent of	 the  salary
last  drawn by him. It is not clear from the  record  before
us,  since  the application made by the applicant  was	dis-
missed by the Tribunal at the preliminary stage, whether the
appellant  was responsible for the inordinate delay  in	 the
disposal of the case instituted against him. In the  circum-
stances	 of the case we are of the view that even though  no
relief	could  be given to the appellant in respect  of	 the
period	which was beyond three years from the date on  which
the Tribunal commenced to exercise its powers under the Act,
it was quite open to the Tribunal to consider whether it was
proper for the Government to continue to give effect to	 the
Order  dated  6.5.1982 from any subsequent date and  if	 the
Tribunal  came	to  the	 conclusion  that  the	Order  dated
6.5.1982 was required to be revised it could pass an  appro-
priate order notwithstanding the fact that a period of	five
years had elapsed from the date on which the order  reducing
the subsistence allowance was passed. While doing so it	 was
open to the Tribunal to fix a date within the period of	 the
said three years from which the appellant should be paid the
subsistence allowance at the revised rate of course,  having
due  regard  to	 the date of the application  also.  In	 the
alternative,  the  Tribunal could have asked  the  authority
concerned to review the order.
In	the  circumstances, the Tribunal was  not  right  in
rejecting  the	application solely on the  ground  that	 the
order reducing the subsistence allowance having been  passed
on 6.5. 1982 the Tribunal could not entertain an application
for directing the Government to revise the Order dated	6.5.
1982  even in respect of any period within three years	from
the  date  on which the Tribunal commenced to  exercise	 its
powers having due regard to the date of the application also
since  we feel that the cause of action in respect  of	such
prayer arises every month in which the subsistence allowance
at  the	 reduced rate is paid. We therefore  set  aside	 the
order  of the Tribunal and remand the case to it to  dispose
of the application made by the appellant on merits. We	make
an order accordingly.
There is no order as to costs.
P.S.S.				      Appeal allowed.
230