[Cites
6
, Cited by
54
]
Supreme Court of India
Firm Ganpat Ram Rajkumar vs Kalu Ram & Ors on 22 September, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 2285, 1989 SCR SUPL. (1) 223, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 2285, (1990) 1 RENCJ 101, (1990) 1 RENTLR 451, (1990) 1 RRR 480, 1990 HRR 177, 1989 SCC (SUPP) 2 418, (1990) 1 RENCR 589
Author:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
Bench:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
,
B.C.  Ray
PETITIONER:
FIRM GANPAT RAM RAJKUMAR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KALU RAM & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/09/1989

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (J)
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 2285		  1989 SCR  Supl. (1) 223
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (2) 418 JT 1989  Supl.    258
 1989 SCALE  (2)692
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1992 SC1537	 (6)


ACT:
Contempt of Court Act
1971--
Section 2(b)
, Order of	this
Court--Not  complied with by the petitioner--Whether  provi-
sions  of
sections 2(b)
&
20
of the Contempt of	 Courts	 Act
1971--Attracted.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 Respondent filed proceedings for  eviction  against
the  Petitioner	 firm in respect of a property	situated  at
Narnaul	 under the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent and  Evic-
tion) Act, 1973 and obtained a decree of eviction. Petition-
er's appeal against that decree failed in the High Court and
the  Special  Leave Petition filed by it in this  Court	 was
also  dismissed	 on 24.8.87. While  dismissing	the  Special
Leave Petition this Court inter alia directed that the order
of eviction shall not be executed for a period of six months
on  the Petitioner's filing usual undertaking in this  Court
within	four  weeks.  Usual under-taking  implied  that	 the
Petitioner  was	 in possession of the property and  that  it
would deliver vacant possession of the property by the	time
granted to it by the Court. The Petitioner did not file	 any
undertaking in this Court. Instead three of Sanjay Kumar and
Lala  Ram sons of Rajkumar and Ved Prakash who are  sons  of
Ganpat Ram (a partner in the petitioner's firm) filed a suit
in  the	 Court of senior Sub Judge,  Narnaul  for  permanent
injunction  restraining	 the decree  holders  from  ejecting
Sanjay	Kumar & Lala Ram. In the said suit the	said  plain-
tiffs obtained an order of temporary injunction dated  3.11.
1988.  The  said suit was filed against Kalu Ram  and  Puran
Chand son of Roshan Lal and also against Ganpat Rai.
    The learned Senior Subordinate Judge in his order  dated
12.2.88 granting injunction to the plaintiffs took the	view
that  the plaintiffs had claimed a right of tenancy  to	 the
premises in question independently and as such the decree of
eviction passed by this Court in Special Leave Petition	 No.
5597 of 1987 would not bind the plaintiffs. On this  reason-
ing he issued the injunction.
    Being  unable  to obtain possession of the	property  in
question, Kalu Ram and Ant. who were respondents in  Special
Leave  Petition	 (decree holders) have filed  this  Petition
praying	 for  initiation of Contempt  of  Court	 proceedings
against the Petitioner-firm.
224
Disposing of the Petition with some directions this Court,
HELD:  On  the date of the order of this  Court	 dated	21st
August	1987, in the Special Leave Petition, the  Petitioner
therein	 had  obtained	time on the  implied  assurance	 and
representation that they were in possession of the  premises
in  question and were capable of delivering the vacant	pos-
session	 to the applicants. The effect of the said order  of
this Court, is that the applicants would have vacant posses-
sion from the firm, Ganpat Ram Rajkumar. [227C-D]
    Having  regard to the relationship between	the  parties
and having regard to the undertaking promised to be filed in
this Court, upon which time was obtained from this Court, it
appears,  there	 is  a clear non-compliance  of	 the  order.
[227E]
    The said order must be implemented and cannot be allowed
to  be defeated by the dubious methods adopted by the  part-
ners  of  the said firm of Ganpat Ram Raj Kumar.  The  whole
conduct betrays a calculated attempt to defeat the order  of
this  Court and to mislead the Court. Sons and grandsons  of
the  partners  or erstwhile partners of the firm  cannot  be
allowed to frustrate the order of this Court. [227G-H; 228A]
    The Respondents, all of them, were guilty of acts  which
had to the situation and thereby frustrate the order of this
Court.	Though	perhaps the respondents could not  be  found
guilty	of violating any undertaking as there was  none,  in
the  facts and circumstances of the case, this Court  should
ensure compliance with its order dated 24th August 1987	 and
see  that  vacant and peaceful possession is  given  to	 the
applicant in the interest of Justice. [229D-E]
    Failure to give possession, if it amounts to contempt in
a situation of this nature is a continuing wrong. There	 was
no scope for application of
section 20
of the Act. [230B]
    The	 Court accordingly directed the learned Senior	Sub-
Judge.	Narnaul	 (Haryana) to cause, deliver up	 the  vacant
possession  of	the  shop situated at  Sabji  Mandi  Narnaul
Distt. Mohindergarh (Haryana), if necessary with the help of
police	forthwith. The learned Senior Sub Judge is also	 di-
rected to report compliance immediately. Save as  aforesaid,
the  Court passed no order on this application.	 Respondents
viz.,  firm  Ganpat  Ram, Rajkumar,  Ganpat  Ram,  Rajkumar,
Sanjay	Kumar, Lalu Ram and Ved Prakash are directed to	 pay
to the applicants the costs of this Application,  quantified
at Rs.2,500. This order will
225
not prevent or prejudice the applicants from taking any step
for  recovery of arrears of rent and mesne profits  as	they
are entitled to in accordance with law. [230C-E]
    Babu Ram Gupta v. Sudhir Bhasin & Anr., [1979] 3 SCR 685
and Thackar Hariram Motiram v. Balkrishan Chatrathu  Thacker
JUDGMENT:
&
    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Miscellaneous  Peti-
tion No. 1103 of 1989.
IN
Special Leave Petition No. 5597 of 1987.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 2.4.87 of the Punjab &
Haryana High Court in C.R. No. 1095 of 1987.
A.K. Sanghi for the Petitioner.
C.M. Ashri and S.M. Ashri for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J. This application is by Kalu	 Ram
and  another,  who  were the respondents  in  special  leave
petition  No. 5597/87. The petitioner in the  special  leave
petition  was  the  firm, namely, Ganpat  Ram  Rajkumar.  It
appears that the applicants had filed proceedings for  evic-
tion against the firm in respect of the property in  Narnaul
in  the	 State of Haryana under
s. 13(3)(c)
of	the  Haryana
Urban  (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act, 1973. An  order  of
eviction  was passed against the said firm.  Ultimately	 the
High Court upheld the said order of eviction. The said	firm
came  in  special leave petition to this Court.	 This  Court
found that there was nothing to interfere with the order  of
eviction and on August 24, 1987 passed the following order:
In  view of the finding that the landlord	 has
	      made  out	 a case for eviction  under
Section
	      13(3)(c)
of the Haryana Urban (Control of Rent
	      & Eviction) Act, 1973 the Special Leave  Peti-
	      tion is dismissed. The order of eviction shall
	      not be executed for a period of six months  on
	      the  petitioners filing usual  undertaking  in
	      this Court within four weeks from
226
today.  The  dismissal of	 the  Special  Leave
	      Petition should also not prevent the petition-
	      er to the benefit of putting back into posses-
	      sion  in the equivalent accommodation  in	 the
	      reconstructed building provided the Court lays
	      down  such  condition while  interpreting	 the
	      provisions  of the Act. We are  informed	that
	      the  question is pending consideration  before
	      this  Court in some other cases i.e.W.P.	Nos.
13385, 9921-24 of 1983 etc."
From  the aforesaid, it is apparent that the  said	firm
wanted	time to vacate the premises within six	months	from
the date of the order and representation must have been made
on behalf of the said firm that the 'usual undertaking' will
be  filed  in this Court. Upon that, this  Court  restrained
eviction  for  a period of six months from the date  of	 the
said  order. This Court, further preserved the right of	 the
said petitioner to the benefit of being put back in  posses-
sion  in the equivalent accommodation in the  re-constructed
building  provided the Court laid down such condition  while
interpreting the provisions of the Act.
This  Court	 recorded that the  aforesaid  question	 was
pending	 consideration	in this Court. However,	 it  appears
that  the said firm did not file any undertaking,  usual  or
otherwise. The usual undertaking to this Court means,  inter
alia,  a statement that the party giving the undertaking  is
in  possession	of  the premises and that  it  will  further
deliver	 vacant and peaceful possession to the	landlord  or
the  respondent. As mentioned hereinbefore,  the  petitioner
did  not  file the undertaking though it had  obtained	time
from  this Court on that plea. Furthermore,  the  petitioner
did  not  vacate the premises in question. It  appears	that
Sanjay	Kumar and Lala Ram sons of Rajkumar and Ved  Prakash
who  as	 sons  of Ganpat Ram filed a suit in  the  court  of
Senior	Sub-Judge,  Narnaul for	 permanent  injunction,	 re-
straining the present applicants from ejecting Sanjay  Kumar
and Lala Ram. It may be mentioned that Ganpat Ram and Rajku-
mar  are the partners of the petitioner-firm M/s Ganpat	 Ram
Rajkumar. The said firm and the partners thereof were  bound
in law to comply with the Order dated 24th August, 1987.  In
the said suit Sanjay Kumar and Lala Ram obtained an order of
temporary  injunction dated 3rd November, 1988. The  learned
Sr. Sub-Judge, Narnaul, by an order in an application  under
Order  39 Rules 1 & 2 read with
s. 151
of the Code of  Civil
Procedure in civil suit No. 121/88 filed in the Court of Sr.
Sub-Judge, Narnaul, by Sanjay Kumar, Lala Ram--minor sons of
Rajkumar  and Ved Prakash, son of Ganpat Ram as partners  in
the said firm, made the order of injunction.
227
The said suit was instituted against Kalu Ram and  Puran
Chand sons of Roshan Lal and also against Ganpat Ram. In the
order  passed on the 12th February, 1988 in the	 said  suit,
the  learned Senior Sub Judge, Narnaul had stated  that	 the
present	 plaintiffs  had  claimed right of  tenancy  to	 the
premises in question independently and as such the decree of
eviction passed by this Court in Special Leave Petition	 No.
5597  would not bind the plaintiffs therein. He,  therefore,
issued	an injunction restraining the parties who were	Kalu
Ram,   Puran   Chand  and  Ganpat  Ram,	 partners   of	 the
petitioner-firm.  As  mentioned	 hereinbefore,	both  Sanjay
Kumar  and  Lala Ram are sons of Rajkumar  and	Ved  prakash
respectively,  who  is	a partner of the  firm,	 Ganpat	 Ram
Rajkumar.  Rajkumar was a partner, Ganpat Ram was a  partner
and  their sons and grandsons were claiming in the  suit  in
Narnaul.  On the date of the order of this Court dated	21st
August,	 1987 in the said Special Leave Petition, the  peti-
tioner	therein had obtained time on the  implied  assurance
and  representation  that  they were in	 possession  of	 the
premises  in  question and were capable	 of  delivering	 the
vacant possession to the applicants herein The effect of the
said  order of this Court, as we have set out  hereinbefore,
is that the applicants would have vacant possession from the
firm, Ganpat Ram Rajkumar. It is not clear from the order of
the learned Sr. Sub-Judge, Narnaul dated 3rd November, 1988,
how since the order of this Court 'dated 24th August,  1987,
the  plaintiffs in the suit in Narnaul Court could  have  in
possession of the premises in question. Having regard to the
relationship  between the parties and having regard  to	 the
undertaking  promised to be filed in this Court	 upon  which
time  was  obtained from this Court, it appears to  us	that
there  is  a clear non-compliance of the  order.  The  order
stated that vacant possession was to be given.
    In	the aforesaid view of the matter, the question	that
requires  consideration is how will this order	of  eviction
passed	by  the High Court and confirmed by  this  Court  by
dismissing the Special Leave Petition on the terms mentioned
hereinbefore  on  24th	August, 1987 is to  be	enforced  or
implemented?  In our opinion, the said order must be  imple-
mented	and cannot be allowed to be defeated by the  dubious
methods	 adopted by the partners of the said firm of  Ganpat
Ram Rajkumar. The whole conduct betrays a calculated attempt
to defeat the order of this Court and to mislead this Court.
If  that is the position, in our opinion, parties cannot  be
allowed to do so and get away by misleading this Court. This
application  was  made for contempt. It may or	may  not  be
appropriate to pass any order punishing the wrongdoers.	 But
there  is no doubt that the order of this Court	 dated	24th
August, 1987 is being sought to be defeated and	 frustrated.
Sons and grandsons
228
of the partners or erstwhile partners of the firm cannot  be
allowed to frustrate the order of this Court.
    Mr Ashri, learned counsel for the respondents  submitted
that the respondents could not be held guilty of contempt of
court.	It was further submitted by him that no	 undertaking
had,  in fact, been given, as such there is no	question  of
breach	of any undertaking by anybody. Mr. Ashri was  right.
In fact, no undertaking was given.
It is also true that	 the
parties	 who  instituted suit in Narnaul  and  obtained	 the
order  of injunction dated 3rd November, 1988 were not	par-
ties  before this Court when this Court passed the order  on
the  24th August, 1987 nor are those parties  successors-in-
interest,  according to law, of those who were bound by	 the
order  dated 24th August, 1987, as such. As we look  at	 it,
the order of this Court is an order of the High Court with a
sanction  of this Court and the applicants were entitled  to
have it executed. It has been interfered, by the firm  along
with  the plaintiffs in the said suit at Narnaul. Mr.  Ashri
referred  to certain observations of this Court in
Babu	 Ram
Gupta  v.  Sudhir Bhasin & Anr.
, [1979] 3 SCR  685,  wherein
pending	 decision of a dispute between the parties  referred
to  an arbitrator, the High Court passed with the  agreement
of  the parties a consent order appointing a  receiver.	 The
Court  directed that the receiver should take charge of	 the
property  forthwith  from the appellant therein	 and  submit
periodical reports to the Court regarding the running of the
business. Without making an express direction to the  appel-
lant, that the properties in its possession should be handed
over to the receiver, the High Court directed the  appellant
not  to	 interfere with the receiver in the running  of	 the
business and that the appellant should give the receiver all
cooperation that the receiver might require. In the petition
filed  before  the High Court
in that case
,  the  respondent
alleged	 that  by  failing to hand over	 possession  of	 the
property to the receiver, in terms of the consent order	 the
appellant  had committed breach of the undertaking given  to
the  court and hereby committed an offence punishable  under
s.  2(b)
of the Contempt of Courts Act,  1971	(hereinafter
referred to as 'the Act'). The High Court held the appellant
to  be	guilty	of contempt of court and  sentenced  him  to
undergo civil imprisonment. This Court held that the act  of
the appellant in not complying with the terms of the consent
order did not amount to an offence under
s. 2(b)
of the Act,
however	 improper or reprehensible his conduct might be.  It
was further held that when a person appearing before a court
files  an application or affidavit giving an undertaking  to
the  court  or when he clearly and expressly gives  an	oral
undertaking which is incorporated by the court in its  order
and fails to honour that undertaking then a wilful breach of
229
the undertaking would amount to an offence punishable  under
the  Act. An undertaking given by one of the parties  should
be  carefully construed by the Court to find out the  nature
and extent of the undertaking given by the person concerned.
It is not open to the court to assume an implied undertaking
when  there  was  none of the record, this  Court  said.  As
mentioned  hereinbefore,  the  facts of	 that  decision	 are
significantly  different  from the facts in this  case.	 The
parties	 by  no conduct, overt or otherwise,  herein  misled
this Court. Indubitably, in the instant case, the decree  of
eviction  was passed by the learned St.	 Sub-Judge,  Narnaul
and upheld by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana. This Court
dismissed the Special Leave Petition and granted time of six
months	on the plea that the petitioner firm would  file  an
undertaking. All this could not have happened if the present
plaintiffs in the Narnaul suit had not consented or  allowed
it  to be passed or stood by. It is difficult to accept	 the
position that they did not know. In the facts of this  case,
we are of the opinion that they deliberately did not  object
to this Court passing the order and thereby allowed the firm
to  mislead  this Court. They are, therefore, bound  to	 see
that  the  order  of this Court is  complied  with.  Though,
contempt  is  a serious matter and it  interferes  with	 the
right  of those who are found guilty of contempt,  no  court
should	allow  any party to mislead the	 court	and  thereby
frustrate its order. In the aforesaid view of the matter, we
are  of the opinion that though perhaps the petitioner	firm
could  not be found guilty of violating any  undertaking  as
there was none, in the facts and circumstances of the  case,
this  Court  should ensure compliance with its	order  dated
24th  August, 1987 and see that vacant and peaceful  posses-
sion  is given to the applicant in the interest of  justice.
Mr.  Sanghi,  learned  counsel for the	applicant  drew	 our
attention  to  an order of this Court  in  Thackar  Harirarn
Motirarn v. Balkrishan Chatrathu Thacker & Ors., [1988] 3 JT
SC 18. That decision was, however, on the question of enter-
taining	 a Special Leave Petition or not. Special leave	 was
not entertained in that case because the petitioner  therein
had  obtained time from the High Court in respect of  decree
of  eviction. In this case, also the Special Leave  Petition
was dismissed but out of consideration for the	difficulties
of the petitioner-firm in the said petition, this Court	 was
induced	 to  grant some time on certain	 considerations.  It
appears that this Court was mislead. It further appears that
the respondents, all of them, were guilty of acts which	 led
to  the	 situation and thereby frustrate the order  of	this
Court.
Another point was taken about limitation of this  appli-
cation	under
section 20
of the Act.
S. 20
states  that  no
court shall initiate any proceedings for contempt, either on
its own motion or otherwise, after
230
the  expiry of a period of one year from the date  on  which
the  contempt  is alleged to have been	committed.  In	this
case,  the  present application was filed on  or  about	 3rd
November,  1988 as appears from the affidavit in support  of
the application. The contempt considered, inter alia, of the
act  of not giving the possession by force of the  order  of
the  learned  Sr. Sub-Judge, Narnaul  dated  12th  February,
1988. Therefore, the application was well within the  period
of one year. Failure to give possession, if it amounts to  a
contempt  in  a	 situation of this nature  is  a  continuing
wrong.	There was no scope for application of s: 20  of	 the
Act.
In	the  aforesaid	view of the matter,  we	 direct	 the
learned St. Sub-Judge, Narnaul (Haryana) to cause deliver up
the  vacant possession of the shop situated at Sabji  Mandi,
Narnanl.  Distt. Mohindergarb (Haryana), if  necessary	with
the  help  of police forthwith. The learned  Sr,  Sub-Judge,
Narnaul	 is also directed to report compliance	immediately.
Save  as aforesaid, there will be no order on this  applica-
tion,  but  we	direct that the	 respondents,  namely,	firm
Ganpat Ram Rajkumar, Ganpat Ram Rajkumar, Sanjay Kumar, lala
Ram  and Ved Prakash should pay and bear the costs  of	this
application  to the applicant, which is quantified  and	 as-
sessed at Rs.2,500 (Rupees two	thousand five hundred only).
Save  as aforesaid, there will be no further orders on	this
application.  This order will not prevent or  prejudice	 the
applicants  from taking any step for recovery of arrears  of
rent and mesne profit as they are entitled to in  accordance
with law.
Y.  Lal					      Petition	dis-
posed of.
231