[Cites
13
, Cited by
50
]
Supreme Court of India
Anand Prakash vs State Of U.P. And Ors on 14 December, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 516, 1989 SCR SUPL. (2) 479, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 516, (1990) MAD LJ(CRI) 86, (1989) 4 JT 557 (SC), (1990) 1 ALLCRILR 403, 1990 CRILR(SC&MP) 94, (1990) 1 CRIMES 265, (1990) ALLCRIR 69, 1990 SCC (CRI) 96, (1990) 11 RECCRIR 241, (1990) 2 CHANDCRIC 90, 1990 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 290, 1990 (1) SCC 291
Author:
B.C.  Ray
Bench:
B.C.  Ray
PETITIONER:
ANAND PRAKASH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF U.P. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/12/1989

BENCH:
RAMASWAMI, V. (J) II
BENCH:
RAMASWAMI, V. (J) II
RAY, B.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  516		  1989 SCR  Supl. (2) 479
 1990 SCC  (1) 291	  JT 1989 (4)	557
 1989 SCALE  (2)1326
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC1640	 (12)


ACT:
National  Security Act, 1980
:
S. 8-
-Detenu likely to  be
released on bail in criminal proceedings--Preventive  deten-
tion  of---Whether permissible-Detaining authority's  satis-
faction	 must be based on  credible  information--Inordinate
delay  in  making  detention.  order--Whether  vitiates	 the
order.



HEADNOTE:
    The detenu was arrested on May 2, 1989. On the same date
a  bail application was moved on his behalf. On May 3,	1989
he  was	 detained under
s. 8
of the National  Security	Act,
1980. The detention order stated that the detenu was  likely
to  be bailed out and there was every likelihood that  after
coming out of jail he would again indulge in criminal activ-
ities injurious to the maintenance of essential services and
supplies required for public life. The facts referred to  in
the  grounds of detention were that on the basis of  a	com-
plaint of theft of electric wire lodged on February 15, 1989
an  FIR was registered under
s. 379
IPC against	 three	per-
sons,  'J',  'S' and 'M'. Some of the  stolen  material	 was
recovered from the house of 'J' on March 3, 1989 and on	 the
information  provided  by  him about the  purchase  of	such
material  the factory of the detenu was raided on  the	same
day. There 'M', stated to be the servant of the detenu,	 was
found in possession of about 20 kg. of melted electric	wire
and  that was seized under a recovery memo. In	the  confes-
sional	statement made by 'M' and recorded in  the  recovery
memo  itself, he had stated that he had purchased the  elec-
tric  wire from 'J' and 'S' and that he had melted and	sold
the  same to the detenu. These facts led the  detaining	 au-
thority to conclude that there was inherent criminal propen-
sity in the detenu. Detenu's representation was rejected  by
the  Advisory Board. The Order was confirmed by the  Govern-
ment under
s. 12(1)
of the Act.
    In	the  writ  petition seeking to quash  the  order  of
detention,  it was contended that there was no	evidence  of
detenu's  complicity  with the crime linking  him  with	 the
recovery of melted wire, that the criminal case filed  under
s. 411
IPC was the first crime alleged against him, that  he
had no past criminal record from which it could be  inferred
that  he was likely to indulge in such activity	 in  future,
and that there was an
480
unexplained delay from the date of the alleged crime and the
date of detention vitiating the satisfaction and the  deten-
tion order itself.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court,
    HELD:  1. The detaining authority though can  take	into
account the possibility of the detenu being released on bail
in  the criminal proceedings, have to be  satisfied,  having
regard	to his past activities or by reason of the  credible
information  or	 cogent reasons, that if he is	enlarged  on
bail, he would indulge in such criminal activities. [487B]
    In the instant case, except the bald statement that	 the
detenu would repeat his criminal activities after coming out
of the jail, there were no credible information or  material
or  cogent  reasons  apparent on the record  to	 warrant  an
inference that the detenu if enlarged on bail would  indulge
in  such criminal activities which were prejudicial  to	 the
maintenance  of essential services. There must be  something
more  than what was found in the record to come to the	con-
clusion that this was not a case of solitary incident but  a
case of the detenu indulging in business of receiving stolen
electric  wires. Furthermore, the detention order  seems  to
have been made in order to supplant the criminal prosecution
which was not permitted. [487B-D]
    Ramesh Yadav v. District Magistrate, Etah, [1985] 4	 SCC
232; Rameshwar Shaw v. District Magistrate, Burdwan &  Anr.,
[1964]	4 SCR 921; Kartic Chandra Guha v. The State of	West
Bengal	&  Ors., [1975] 3 SCC 490; Alian  Mian	v.  District
Magistrate, Dhanbad & Ors., [1983] 4 SCC 301; Smt. ShashiAg-
garwal	v.  State of U. P. & Ors., [1988] 1 SCC 436  and  N.
Meera Rani v. Government of Tamil Nadu & Anr., [1989] 4	 SCC
418, referred to.
    2.	In  spite of the fact that  the	 recovery  statement
itself	was made as early as on March 3, 1989 no action	 was
taken against the detenu till May 3, 1989. Nothing more	 was
stated	in the detention order. The delay had also not	been
satisfactorily	explained  in the counter statement  of	 the
respondents. The ground therefore, could not be a  proximate
cause for a sudden decision to take action under the Nation-
al
Security Act
and this also vitiates the order. [487F-G]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 353 of
1989.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
481
P.K. Chatterjee and R.P. Gupta for the Petitioner.
    Prithvi Raj, Dalveer Bhandari and Prashant Choudhary for
the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    V. RAMASWAMI, J. This writ petition has been filed under
Article	 32
of the Constitution praying for the issue  of  a
writ  of  certiorari to quash the order of  detention  dated
3.5.1989  passed  by the District  Magistrate,	Farrukhabad,
U.P.  as confirmed by the Government of U.P. in their  order
dated  20.6.1989 detaining one Lakhmi Chand Gupta under	 the
National  Security Act
and to issue a writ of habeas  corpus
releasing the said detenu from such detention. The order  of
detention was made under
section 8
of the National  Security
Act, 1980 by the District Magistrate on the ground that with
a  view	 to prevent the detenu from  indulging	in  unlawful
activities  which  are	prejudicial to	the  maintenance  of
essential services and supplies required for public life  it
was necessary to keep 'him under detention. The detenu	made
his representation to the Advisory Board. On receipt of	 the
report	of  the	 Advisory Board to the effect  that  in	 its
opinion	 there	are sufficient grounds	for  detention,	 the
Government after a consideration of the report confirmed the
order  of detention under
section 12(1)
of the Act  and	 di-
rected	that the said Lakhmi Chand Gupta be detained  for  a
period	of  12 months from 3.5.1989 the	 date  of  detention
order.	This writ petition for habeas corpus has been  filed
by the brother-in-law of the detenu.
The	 learned counsel for the petitioner  contended	that
there  are absolutely no grounds or basis on which  the	 de-
taining	 authority  could have satisfied  himself  that	 the
detenu	had  been engaged in criminal activities  which	 are
injurious  to  the  maintenance of  essential  services	 and
supplies  required  for public life or that  the  detenu  is
likely to indulge in any such activity in future.  Secondly,
there  is an unexplained delay from the date of the  alleged
incident  or crime and the date of detention  vitiating	 the
satisfaction  and  the detention order itself.	The  circum-
stances referred to in the order of detention does not	lead
to  nor there was anything on which the District  Magistrate
can  come  to a conclusion that there is  inherent  criminal
propensity  in	the  detenu which could	 lead  the  District
Magistrate  to infer that there is every likelihood  of	 the
detenu repeating the alleged unlawful activity.
The  facts relating to the incident which is referred to  in
the order
482
of detention as the ground for detention are as follows:  On
the  15th  of February, 1989 the Junior	 Engineer,  Tubewell
Electrification Sub Division, Sarvodaya Nagar, Kanpur lodged
a  complaint with the Station House Officer, Police  Station
Chhibranau,  Distt.  Farrukhabad that electric	wires  to  a
length of about 2900 mtrs. in 11 K.V. Visya Bank Feeder	 had
been  cut and stolen away on 14.2.1989 by some unknown	per-
sons and that the value of the loss to the Electricity Board
amounted  to Rs.21,500. This F.I.R. was registered as  Crime
Case No. 51 of 1989 under
section 379
IPC in the said Police
Station and it was shown therein that three persons, namely,
Jagdish, Santosh and Munshi Sharma were the accused. Santosh
is  the	 brother of Jagdish. On the 3rd of March,  1989	 the
house of Jagdish was raided and two bags filled with  stolen
aluminium electric wire recovered. Jagdish gave an  informa-
tion that a person at Vishnugarh Road claiming himself to be
a  resident of Delhi used to purchase stolen  electric	wire
from  the  person cutting the electric wire  stealthily.  On
this  information  of Jagdish the factory of the  detenu  at
Vishnugarh Road was raided. One Munshi Sharma who is  stated
to  be the servant of the detenu was found in possession  of
about  20 k.g. of melted electric wire and that	 was  seized
from  him  under  a recovery memo. The	order  of  detention
stated	that  Munshi Sharma had confessed  that	 the  stolen
electric  wire	had been purchased by him from	Jagdish	 and
Santosh. The detenu was arrested on the 2nd of May, 1989. On
the  same date the bail application was moved on  behalf  of
the accused. After setting out this incident the grounds  of
detention stated:
"This  act  on  your part	 has  disrupted	 the
	      electric system resulting in non-operation  of
	      tubewells,  dearth  of water for	crops,	non-
	      supply  of drinking water for  general  public
	      and  cattle.  This unlawful act of  yours	 and
	      that of your accomplices is against the  main-
	      tenance  of  essential services  and  supplies
	      required	for public order and life. This	 act
	      of  yours have caused injury to  the  national
	      economy  and  created terror  in	the  general
	      public  and  poses  a serious  threat  to	 the
	      public life."
The order of detention further stated:
"At  present you are detained in the  District
	      Jail of Fatehgarh in connection with case	 No.
	      51/89  under
section 379
/
411
of I.P.C. and  in
	      the  P.S. Chhibranau in connection  with	case
	      No. 56/89 under
section 379
of I.P.C and	your
	      well  wishers and sympathisers are  trying  to
	      get you bailed
483
out in the aforesaid cases and a bail applica-
	      tion in this behalf has already been moved  in
	      the court and you are likely to be bailed out.
	      There  is every likelihood that  after
	      coming  out of jail you will again indulge  in
	      your criminal activities."
It is on the basis of this the order stated that the detain-
ing authority was satisfied that the detenu had been engaged
in  criminal  activities  injurious to	the  maintenance  of
essential services and supplies required for public life and
that  with  a  view to prevent him from	 indulging  in	such
unlawful  activities  it has become necessary  to  keep	 him
under detention.
The	 learned  counsel contended that the detenu  had  no
past criminal record. The present criminal case filed  under
section	 411
of I.P.C. is the first crime  which  had	been
alleged	 against him. The learned counsel further  contended
that there is absolutely no evidence of detenu's  complicity
with the crime and making link of the detenu with the recov-
ery  of 20 k.g. of melted wire recovered from Munshi  Sharma
at  the behest of Jagdish. In this connection he  also	con-
tended	that the statement said to have been made bY  Munshi
Sharma	had  not been supplied to him and  that	 would	also
vitiate	 the  order of detention. In the  counter  affidavit
filed in this Court the respondent stated that there was  no
separate confessional statement recorded from Munshi  Sharma
and the confessional statement referred to in the  detention
order  is the one that is found in the recovery memo a	copy
of  which  had	already been supplied  to  the	detenu.	 The
learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the
recovery memo and contended that if the statement of  Munshi
Sharma	in the recovery memo is the only material  available
that  cannot  be  a basis of satisfaction for  an  order  of
detention under the
National Security Act
. The statement  of
Munshi Sharma relied on by the detaining authority and found
in the recovery memo reads as follows:
"When the gauge of that melted wire was  meas-
	      ured it was found that of the Government wire,
	      therefore,  the said melted wire	weighing  20
	      k.g. was taken in the possession of police and
	      thoroughly sealed in a sack. But before  seal-
	      ing  the	same a separate specimen  of  melted
	      wire  and the specimen of wire were taken	 and
	      the specimens were sealed. The accused  Munshi
	      Sharma  on his being arrested stated  that  he
	      had purchased that property from both  Santosh
	      i.e  the	brother of Jagdish and	Jagdish,  he
	      further stated that
484
he melted and sold the same to Lakhmi i.e. the
	      owner  of the said factory. The said  property
	      after being melted cannot be identified and it
	      is used for making utensils thereafter." '
In this statement it may be seen that Munshi Sharma did	 not
say  that he purchased the stolen wire for the detenu or  on
the instructions of the detenu. In fact he did not even	 say
that he is the servant or agent of the detenu. He had merely
stated	that 20 k.g. of melted wire recovered from  him	 was
purchased  by him from Santosh and his brother	Jagdish	 and
that he had melted and sold the same to the detenu. After it
is  melted in the melted form it could not be  distinguished
from  any other melted wire of legal origin.  The  statement
also  does  not impute knowledge on the part of	 the  detenu
that the same was from stolen wires. In any case it was	 not
possible  to  say on the basis of this	statement  that	 the
detenu	was in league with other persons in the activity  of
stealing  wire or purchasing of the same. In fact it is	 not
known how from the melted wire weighing 20 k.g. the  detain-
ing  authority	or the investigating officers  came  to	 the
conclusion that the gauge of the melted wire was found to be
that of Government wire. Again only 20 k.g. was found in the
factory	 and  that too in the possession  of  Munshi  Sharma
though	inside the factory. The statement of  Munshi  Sharma
in, the recovery memo and melted wire recovered from  Sharma
were  the only material available before the  detaining	 au-
thority. In the light of the absence of past criminal histo-
ry  on	the  part of the detenu we have no  doubt  that	 the
statement found in the recovery memo could not form basis of
satisfaction for the detention.
The learned counsel took strong exception to the view of
the  detaining	authority that the detenu is likely  to	 get
bail and there is every likelihood that after coming out  of
jail  the detenu will again indulge in	criminal  activities
and that, therefore, it is necessary to detain him.
In	this
connection he relied on the decision of this Court in
Ramesh
Yadav  v. District Magistrate, Etah
, [1985] 4 SCC 232  where
it  was	 held that merely on such apprehension	a  detention
order under
National Security Act, 1980
should not ordinari-
ly be passed. This Court observed:
"On a reading of the grounds particularly	 the
	      paragraph which we have extracted above, it is
	      clear  that the order of detention was  passed
	      as  the detaining authority  was	apprehensive
	      that  in case the detenu was released on	bail
	      he  would again carry on his criminal  activi-
	      ties in the area. If
485
the  apprehension of the	detaining  authority
	      was  true,  the  bail application	 had  to  be
	      opposed and in case bail was granted challenge
	      against that order in the higher forum had  to
	      be  raised. Merely on the ground that  an	 ac-
	      cused  in detention as an undertrial  prisoner
	      was  likely to get bail an order of  detention
	      under  the
National Security Act
should	 not
	      ordinarily be passed. We are inclined to agree
	      with counsel for the petitioner that the order
	      of  detention  in	 the  circumstances  is	 not
	      sustainable  and is contrary to the well	set-
	      tled  principles	indicated by this  Court  in
	      series of cases relating to preventive  deten-
	      tion. The impugned order, therefore, has to be
	      quashed."
This  Court	 had  considered in a number  of  cases	 the
validity  of  orders of detention made when a person  is  in
jail  custody  but the detaining  authority  considered	 the
likelihood  of	the detenu getting a bail and in  that	view
proceeding to consider the necessity for detaining him under
the  preventive detention proceedings.
In
Rameshwar Shaw  v.
District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr.
, [1964] 4 SCR 921  their
Lordships observed:
"On the other hand, if a person who is  under-
	      going  imprisonment, for a very short  period,
	      say for a month or two or so, and it is  known
	      that  he would soon be released from jail,  it
	      may be possible for the authority to  consider
	      the antecedent history of the said person	 and
	      decide  whether  the  detention  of  the	said
	      person would be necessary after he is released
	      from  jail, and if the authority is bona	fide
	      satisfied that such detention is necessary, he
	      can make a valid order of detention a few days
	      before  the person is likely to  be  released.
	      The  antecedent history and the past  conduct'
	      on which the order of detention would be based
	      would,  in such a case, be proximate in  point
	      of  time and would have a rational  connection
	      with  the	 conclusion drawn by  the  authority
	      that  the	 detention of the person  after	 his
	      release is necessary."
In
Kartic Chandra Guha v. The State of West Bengal	 and
Ors.
,  [1975] 3 SCC 490 the order of detention	stated	that
having regard to the activities of the detenu, as  discussed
in the grounds of detention, and having regard to the possi-
bility of his being enlarged on bail the detaining authority
was  satisfied that the detenu should be detained under	 the
Act. This order was upheld on the ground "the District
486
Magistrate  on information received by him thought that	 the
petitioner  was likely to be released on bail in which	case
having	regard	to his past activities it was  open  to	 the
District  Magistrate  to come to the  reasonable  conclusion
that having regard to the desperate nature of the aCtivities
of the petitioner his enlargement on bail would be no deter-
rent to his desperate activities."
In
Alijan	Mian  v. District  Magistrate,	Dhanbad	 and
Others
, [1983] 4 SCC 301 it was again held that a  detention
order would not become invalid merely because the  detention
order was passed on the detaining authority being  apprehen-
sive of the likelihood of the detenu's release on bail.
In
Smt. Shashi Aggarwal v. State of U.P. & Ors.
,  [1988]
1 SCC 436 this Court observed:
"Every  citizen in this country has the  right
	      to  have recourse to law. He has the right  to
	      move  the court for bail when he	is  arrested
	      under  the  ordinary law of the land.  If	 the
	      State thinks that he does not deserve bail the
	      State  could  oppose  the grant  of  bail.  He
	      cannot,  however, be interdicted	from  moving
	      the  court  for bail by clamping an  order  of
	      detention. The possibility of the court grant-
	      ing  bail	 may not be sufficient. Nor  a	bald
	      statement	 that  the person would	 repeat	 his
	      criminal	activities  would be  enough.  There
	      must  also be credible information  or  cogent
	      reasons apparent on the record that the  dete-
	      nu,  if enlarged on bail, would  act  prejudi-
	      cially  to the interest of public order.	That
	      has been made clear in
Binod Singh v. District
	      Magistrate,  Dhanbad
, where it  was  observed:
[1986] SCC (Crl.) 490 @ 495 (para7)
	  A  bald statement is merely an ipse dixit  of	 the
officer.  If there were cogent materials for  thinking	that
the  detenu  might be released then these should  have	been
made apparent. Eternal vigilance on the part of the authori-
ty  charged with both law and order and public order is	 the
price which the democracy in this country extracts from	 the
public	officials in order to protect the fundamental  free-
doms of our citizens."
All these cases were again considered in a latest  judg-
ment  of this Court in
N. Meera Rani v. Government of  Tamil
Nadu and Another
, [1989] 4 SCC 418, and it was held that all
those decisions of the Court on this aspect have to be	read
in the light of the Constitution Bench
487
decision  in
Rameshwar	 Shaw
's case (supra)  and  that	 the
conclusion about the validity of the detention order in each
case  was  reached having regard to the	 facts	and  circum-
stances in the particular case.
Thus  the detaining authority though can take  into	 ac-
count  the possibility of the detenu being released on	bail
in  the criminal proceedings,. have to be satisfied,  having
regard	to his past activities or by reason of the  credible
information  or	 cogent reasons, that if he is	enlarged  on
bail,  he would indulge in such criminal activities. In	 the
present case except the bald statement that the detenu would
repeat his criminal activities after coming out of the jail,
there  are  no credible information or	material  or  cogent
reasons apparent on the record to warrant an inference	that
the detenu if enlarged on bail would indulge in such  crimi-
nal  activities which are prejudicial to the maintenance  of
essential  services. There must be something more than	what
is  found in the record here to come to the conclusion	that
this  is not a case of solitary incident but a case  of	 the
detenu	indulging in business of receiving  stolen  electric
wires. On the other hand it appears to us that the detention
order has been made in order to supplant the criminal prose-
cution which is not permitted.
The	 learned  counsel also contended that  there  is  an
unexplained  delay which makes the ground of  detention	 not
proximate vitiating the order of detention itself. The theft
of  the wire was on 14.2.1989 and the F.I.R. was  registered
on  15.2.1989.	On that day itself as seep from	 the  record
Jagdish, Santosh and Munshi Sharma were shown as accused  on
the  basis  of some information. The house  of	Jagdish	 was
raided	on 3.3.1989 and on the same day the factory  of	 the
detenu	was raided and 20 k.g. of melted wire was  recovered
from  Munshi  Sharma but no action was taken  till  2.5.1989
against the detenu. On being arrested on 2.5.1989 the detenu
moved a bail application and the detention order itself	 was
made  on 3.5.1989. Though bail was granted, in view  of	 the
detention order he could not be released from jail. In spite
of  the fact that the recovery statement itself was made  as
early  as  on 3.3.1989 no action was  taken  till  3.5.1989.
Nothing more is stated in the detention order. The delay has
also not been satisfactorily explained in the counter state-
ment  of  the respondents. The ground  instance,  therefore,
could not be a proximate cause for a sudden decision to take
action	under the
National Security Act
and this also  viti-
ates the order.
In the result we allow this writ petition, set aside the
order  of detention and direct that the detenu	be  released
forthwith.
P.S.S.						    Petition
allowed.
488