[Cites
4
, Cited by
28
]
Supreme Court of India
Mrs. Arundhati Balkrishna vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 15 March, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1092, 1989 SCR (1) 865
Author:
R.S.  Pathak
Bench:
R.S.  Pathak
,
Misra Rangnath
PETITIONER:
MRS. ARUNDHATI BALKRISHNA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/03/1989

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1092		  1989 SCR  (1) 865
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (1) 278 JT 1989 (1)	429
 1989 SCALE  (1)529


ACT:
Income Tax Act, 1961
--
S. 161(1)
read with
s. 166-
-Compu-
tation	of  assessee's	income derived	from  a	 Trust--Real
income of Trust to be included in the total income of asses-
see  after  taking  into consideration	different  items  of
permissible deductions in relation to that income.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant was an assessee who derived income from  a
Trust.	For assessment years 1964-65 and 1966-67 the  Income
Tax  Officer disallowed deduction of two mounts	 claimed  as
interest  paid	by the Trust for amounts withdrawn  from  an
Estate	Account for investment on the ground that a  portion
of  the amounts withdrawn from the Estate Account  had	been
utilized  for  personal	 expenditure by	 the  assessee.	 The
appellants appeals to the Assistant Commissioner having been
rejected,  she	preferred second appeals  to  the  Appellate
Tribunal  raising an additional question in respect  of	 the
assessment  year 1964-65 that she was liable to tax  on	 the
net  income only received by her from the Trust and  not  on
income	determined in accordance with the provisions of	 the
Income	Tax Act
in the case of the Trust. The Tribunal	dis-
missed	the  appeals but at the instance  of  the  appellant
referred  the  two questions of law arising therein  to	 the
High Court which answered both of them against the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals,
    HELD: It is not the income shown in the books of account
of  the Trust actually paid to the assessee after  deduction
of  the outgoings from the income received in the  hands  of
the  Trust, but the real income of the Trust has to  be	 in-
cluded in the total income of the assessee after taking into
consideration the different items of permissible  deductions
in relation to that income. [869E-F]
    It	is  apparent from
s. 161(1)
of the Income  Tax	Act,
1961 that a representative assessee, that is to say a  trus-
tee,  as  regards  the income In respect of which  he  is  a
representative	assessee,  is subject to  the  same  duties,
responsibilities  and  liabilities  as if  the	income	were
income received by or accruing to or in favour of him  bene-
ficially, and he is
866
liable	to  assessment in his own name in  respect  of	that
income;	 but any such assessment is deemed to be  made	upon
him  in	 his representative capacity only, and	the  tax  is
levied upon and recovered from him in like manner and to the
same  extent  as it would be leviable upon  and	 recoverable
from  the person represented by him. And
s. 166
of  the	 Act
clarifies that the provisions relating to the liability of a
representative	assessee will not prevent either the  direct
assessment of the person on whose behalf or for whose  bene-
fit  income is receivable, or the recovery from such  person
of the tax payable in respect of such income. The Income Tax
Officer has the option to proceed either against the trustee
or against the beneficiary, but in either case the income to
be  assessed  must be in the same figure. What	the  trustee
receives  as  the income pertaining to	the  beneficiary  is
received  by him under an obligation to pass on that  income
to  the beneficiary. However, in most  cases  administration
charges	 and  expenses	have to be met out  of	the  Trust's
income	and  it	 is only the net income	 which	reaches	 the
beneficiary.  If  the income had, to pass  directly  to	 the
beneficiary  and  not  under trust through  a  trustee,	 the
beneficiary  would  have equally to  meet  those  outgoings,
leaving a net income in his hands which for the purposes  of
the
Income Tax Act
would have been computed after  reducing
the gross income by the deductions admissible under the Act.
[868H; 869A-E]
    (ii)  The High Court was right in deciding the  question
relating to the disallowance of part of the interest claimed
as a deduction against the assessee. [868F]
    Padmavati  Jaikrishna v. Addl. Commissioner	 of  Income-
Tax, Gujarat, [1987] 166 I.T.R. 176, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 80 &  81
of 1975.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 26/27.8.1974  of	 the
Gujarat High Court in I.T. Reference Nos. 7 and 29 of 1973.
S.C. Patel for the Appellant.
Dr.	 V.  Gauri  Shanker and Ms. A.	Subhashini  for	 the
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
PATHAK, CJ. The appellant is an assessee who derives income
867
from  various  sources, including income from  the  Shrimati
Arundhati  Balkrishna Trust, Ahmedabad. In  assessment	pro-
ceedings  for  the assessment year 1964-65  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer	 found that a sum of Rs. 10,880 had been debited  to
the interest account maintained in the books of the  Ahmeda-
bad  Trust as interest paid to the  Harivallabhadas  Kalidas
Estate	Account. Upon further scrutiny, he  discovered	that
substantial debits totalling Rs.2,19,804 included  withdraw-
als  from the Estate Account by the Ahmedabad Trust  on	 ac-
count of the personal expenses of the assessee. After taking
into  consideration  earlier  withdrawals  from	 the  Estate
Account by the Ahmedabad Trust for the purpose of investment
and  making  adjustments for deposits during the  year,	 the
Income	Tax Officer concluded that the net withdrawals	from
the   Estate   Account	 for   personal	  expenditure	were
Rs.3,10,806-  He  held that the	 proportionate	interest  of
Rs.6,199 out of the total interest of Rs. 10,880 paid by the
Ahmedabad Trust to the Estate Account was referable to	such
withdrawals,  and.  therefore  constituted  an	inadmissible
deduction.  Similarly, for the assessment year	1966-67	 the
Income	Tax Officer found that a sum of Rs.25,496  had	been
shown in the books of account of the Ahmedabad Trust for the
relevant  previous year as interest paid to the	 Estate	 Ac-
count. He held that of this sum, an amount of Rs.12,833	 was
referable to withdrawals for purposes other than investment,
and accordingly he disallowed the claim of interest to	that
extent.
The  assessee appealed to the Appellate Assistant	Com-
missioner  of Income-Tax, and failing there he proceeded  in
second appeal to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, claiming
that the entire amount of interest should have been  allowed
as a deduction for each year. An additional question  raised
in  respect  of the assessment year 1964-65 related  to	 the
point  whether	the assessee was liable to tax	on  the	 net
income	only  received by her from the Trust or	 the  income
determined  in accordance with the provisions of the
Income
Tax  Act
in the case of the Trust. The	 Appellate  Tribunal
dismissed the appeals of the assessee.
At the instance of the assessee the Appellate  Tribunal
referred the following questions of law to the High Court of
Gujarat in respect of the assessment year 1964-65:
"(1)  Whether, on the facts and in the  circumstances
of the case, the Tribunal was fight in not holding that	 out
of  the interest payment of Rs.10,880, Rs.6,199 was  not  an
admissible deduction against the income from other sources?
868
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances  of
the  case, the income includible in the total income of	 the
assessee  is  income determinable as per provisions  of	 the
Income	Tax,  1961 in the case of the Trust  or	 the  income
receivable by the assessee from the said trust?"
The	 question referred to the High Court for  assessment
year 1966-67 was:
"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the  case,
the  Tribunal was right in holding that out of the  interest
payment	 of  Rs.25,496,	 Rs. 12,833 was	 not  an  admissible
deduction against the income from other sources?"
The	 High Court held that the question relating  to	 the
disallowance of part of the interest for the two  assessment
years was rightly decided against the assessee and in favour
of the Revenue. On the second question in the reference	 for
the  assessment year 1964-65, the High Court held  that	 the
income	includible in the total income of the  assessee	 was
income determinable in accordance with the provisions of the
Income	Tax Act
in the case of the Trust and not the  income
actually  received  or receivable by the assessee  from	 the
Trust  or according to the entries in the books of  accounts
of the Trust. In the result that question was also  answered
against the assessee and in favour of the Revenue.
In regard to the question arising in each of the assess-
ment years 1964-65 and 1966-67 relating to the	disallowance
of part of the interest claimed as a deduction by the asses-
see,  the High Court relied on the view taken by it  earlier
in
Shrimati Padmavati Jaykrishna v. Commissioner of  Income
Tax.
, [1975] 101 I.T.R. 153. The judgment of the High  Court
was  considered in appeal by this Court in Padmavati  Jaikr-
ishna  v. Addl. Commissioner of Income-Tax, Gujarat,  [1987]
166 I.T.R. 176 and this Court affirmed the view taken by the
High  Court.  For the reasons which found favour  with	this
Court
in that case
, we must answer the question in the	 two
appeals before us against the assessee and in favour of	 the
Revenue.
Turning to the additional question referred to the	High
Court fo-
r  the	assessment year 1964-65, it seems to us	 clear	that
what is assessable in the hands of the assessee must be	 the
income	of the Trust received by it on behalf of the  asses-
see. It is apparent from
s. 161(1)
of the
869
Income Tax Act, 1961
that a representative assessee, that is
to say a trustee, as regards the income in respect of  which
he  is representative assessee, is subject to the  same	 du-
ties, responsibilities and liabilities as if the income were
income received by or accruing to or in favour of him  bene-
ficially, and he is liable to assessment in his own name  in
respect of that income; but any such assessment is deemed to
be  made upon him in his representative capacity  only,	 and
the tax is levied upon and recovered from him in like manner
and  to	 the same extent as it would be	 leviable  upon	 and
recoverable  from the person represented by him. And
s.	 166
of  the. Act clarifies that the provisions relating  to	 the
liability  of  a representative assessee  will	not  prevent
either	the direct assessment of the person on whose  behalf
or  for whose benefit income is receivable, or the  recovery
from  such  person  of the tax payable in  respect  of	such
income.	 The  Income Tax Officer has the option	 to  proceed
either	against the trustee or against the beneficiary,	 but
in either case the income to be assessed must be in the same
figure.	 What the trustee receives as the income  pertaining
to the beneficiary is received by him under an obligation to
pass  on  that income to the beneficiary. However,  in	most
cases administration charges and expenses have to be met out
of  the Trust's income and it is only the net  income  which
reaches' the beneficiary. If the income had to pass directly
to the beneficiary and not under trust through a trustee the
beneficiary  would  have equally to  meet  those  outgoings,
leaving a net income in his hands which for the purposes  of
the
Income Tax Act
would have been computed after  reducing
the gross income by the deductions admissible under the Act.
It seems to us clear that it is not the income shown in	 the
books of account of the Ahmedabad Trust actually paid to the
assessee  after deduction of the outgoings from	 the  income
received  in the hands of the Ahmedabad Trust, but the	real
income	of  the Ahmedabad Trust has to be  included  in	 the
total income of the assessee after taking into consideration
the different items of permissible deductions in relation to
that income. We are of opinion that the High Court is  right
in the view which it has taken.
In the result, the appeals fail and are dismissed	with
costs.
H.L.C.				     Appeals dismissed.
870