[Cites
7
, Cited by
25
]
Supreme Court of India
Shah Phoolchand Lalchand vs Parvathi Bai on 2 February, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 865, 1989 SCR (1) 417, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 865, 1989 (1) SCC 556, (1989) 1 JT 224 (SC), 1989 SCFBRC 181, 1989 MPRCJ 119, (1989) 2 MAD LJ 28, 1989 (1) JT 224, (1989) 1 RENCR 483
Author:
M.H. Kania
Bench:
M.H. Kania
,
L.M.  Sharma
PETITIONER:
SHAH PHOOLCHAND LALCHAND

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PARVATHI BAI

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/02/1989

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
SHARMA, L.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR  865		  1989 SCR  (1) 417
 1989 SCC  (1) 556	  JT 1989 (1)	224
 1989 SCALE  (1)243


ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950:
Article  136--
Contention
that  partners	of a firm not made parties  by	landlord  in
eviction  proceeding-Such  a  contention--Whether  could  be
raised at special leave stage.
Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960
:
Section 10(2)(ii)(a)
--Unlawful sub-letting--Eviction on that
ground-Whether	partners of the firm are to be made  parties
to such eviction petition.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellants are tenants of the premises belonging  to
the  Respondent,  and have been carrying on  business  as  a
partnership firm in the said premises. The respondent  filed
an eviction petition against the appellant firm and  another
firm,  on the ground that the appellant had  unlawfully	 and
without	 the consent of the Respondent sub-let the  premises
to  the	 other	firm. The Trial Court passed  a	 decree	 for
eviction,  against which the appellants preferred an  appeal
to  the	 Appellate Authority. The Appellate  Authority	dis-
missed	the appeal and upheld the finding of  unlawful	sub-
letting by the appellants. The appellants preferred a  Civil
Revision  petition  before the High Court,  which  was	also
dismissed.  The present appeal by special leave	 is  against
the High Court's decision.
    On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that since
the  eviction  petition had been filed without	joining	 the
partners  of  the other firm (the sub-tenant)  the  eviction
petition was not maintainable at all.
Dismissing the appeal,
    HELD:  1. The objection that the eviction  petition	 was
filed  against the appellants-firm and the other  firm,	 was
not maintainable as it had been filed without joining any of
the partners of the said other firm as respondents or  serv-
ing  them as partners, had not been raised at all  till	 the
stage of special leave and it is not open to the  appellants
to raise such an objection at a very late stage and  thereby
delay matters for a number of years. [419F; 420C]
418
     Chhotelal Pyarelal, the partnership firm and others  v.
Shikharchand, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 268, distinguished.
    2.	There  is evidence to show that the other  firm	 was
carrying on business at the said premises and that the	said
firm carried on business in the said premises even for	some
time during which the appellants-firm had ceased to carry on
the business there. Moreover, although a notice was given by
the  respondent	 to  the appellants and the  other  firm  to
produce their income-tax returns, assessment orders as	well
as account books and ledgers for the relevant period,  these
were  not  produced. It was open to the	 Trial	Court,	from
these circumstances, to come to the conclusion that had	 the
account	 books	and ledgers been produced, they	 would	have
shown  that  rent was received by the  appellants  from	 the
other  firm which would justify the finding  of	 subletting.
[420D-F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1347  of
1981
From  the  judgment and Order dated 24.1.  1981  of	 the
Madras High Court in C.R.P. No. 44 of 1981.
B.N.  Nayar, T.V.S.N. Chaff, K. Srinivasan,	 C.H.  Badri
Nath,  R.K.  Gupta and Ms. Sudha Srivastava for	 the  Appel-
lants.
U.R. Lalit and Ambrish Kumar for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KANIA, J. This is an appeal filed by Special Leave under
Article	 136
of the Constitution by the appellants  who	 are
the tenants against the respondent-landlady.
    The	 appellants are a partnership firm and are the	ten-
ants  of premises situate at No. 6 Kasi Chetty Street,	G.T.
Madras.	 They carry on business there. The respondent  filed
an  eviction  petition being H.R.C. No. 641 of 1975  in	 the
Court of Small Causes, Madras against the appellants and one
other partnership firm, carrying on business in the name and
style  of  M/s. Adeshwar Glass Mart on the ground  that	 the
appellants  had	 unlawfully and without the consent  of	 the
respondent  sublet  the said shop let out to the  said	M/s.
Adeshwar Glass Mart and were liable to be evicted for unlaw-
ful  subletting under the provision of
Section	10(2)(ii)(a)
of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and
419
Rent  Control)	Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to  as	"the
said
Rent Act
"). M/s. Adeshwar Glass Mart were also  joined
by  the	 respondent herein as respondents  in  the  eviction
petition on the ground that they were unlawful	sub-tenants.
The  Trial Court held this ground established and  passed  a
decree for eviction as sought by the respondent. The  appel-
lants  preferred  an  appeal against this  decision  to	 the
Appellate  Authority under
Section 23
of the said
Rent	Act
,
being  the Court of Small Causes at Madras. The said  appeal
was numbered as H.R.A. 156 of 1979. The Appellate  Authority
dismissed the said appeal upholding the finding of  unlawful
subletting by the appellants. The appellants then  preferred
a Civil Revision Petition being C.R.P. No. 44 of 1981 in the
High  Court  of Judicature at Madras against  the  aforesaid
decision.
This Revision Petition was dismissed by the	then
learned	 Chief	Justice	 of the Madras	High  Court.  It  is
against the decision the present appeal is directed.
    Mr. Nayar, learned counsel for the appellants has  urged
before	us that the impugned judgment must be set  aside  as
the eviction petition was filed against the appellants	firm
and  one  other partnership firm, M/s. Adeshwar	 Glass	Mart
without	 joining  any of the partners of the said  firms  as
respondents  or	 serving  them as partners  and	 hence,	 the
eviction  petition  was not maintainable at all.  He  placed
strong reliances on the decision of this Court in  Chhotelal
Pyarelal,  the partnership firm and
others v.  Shikharchand
,
[1985]	1 S.C.R. 268. In that case an eviction petition	 was
filed  by  the respondent-landlord against the	appellant  a
partnership  firm-under	 clause 13(3)(iv) and (vii)  of	 the
Central	 Provinces  and	 Berar Letting of  Houses  and	Rent
Control	 Order,	 1949. The appellant  raised  a	 preliminary
objection that the application against the partnership	firm
was  not  maintainable without joining its partners  as	 re-
spondents.  It	was held by this Court that it	is  only  by
virtue	of the provisions of order 30
of the Code  of  Civil
Procedure
, 1908, that a firm can sue and be sued in its	 own
name  without the partners being impleaded. It	was  pointed
out  by Mr. Nayar that
the Code of Civil Procedure
was	 not
applicable to the proceedings under the said
Rent Act
either
and hence, the
ratio
laid down in
the aforesaid decision was
directly  applicable to the case before us. In our view,  it
is  not open to Mr. Nayar to raise this contention  at	this
stage  at all. This contention is not one which	 would	have
been  fatal  to the eviction petition. Had  this  contention
been  raised in the Trial Court or even in the first  Appel-
late  Court,  it would have been open to the  respondent  to
amend  the  eviction petition and join the partners  as	 re-
spondents. In the aforesaid decision in Chhotelal Pyarelal's
case,  relied upon by Mr. Nayar the objection to  the  main-
tainability of the
420
petition  was raised at the earliest stage and	was  wrongly
negatived  by the Trial Court. In fact, this Court  observed
as follows:
"But  we agree with the Division Bench of	 the
	      High  Court that this cannot by itself  result
	      in the dismissal of the application. It  would
	      be  merely  a case of  misdescription  of	 the
	      respondents to the application and this misde-
	      scription can be corrected at any stage of the
	      proceedings.  There can be no doubt  that	 the
	      partners	of  the firm are  before  the  Court
	      though in a wrong name."
In the case before us, no such objection has been raised
at all till the stage of Special Leave and it is surely	 not
open to the appellants to raise such an objection at a	very
late stage and thereby delay matters for a number of  years.
This contention must, therefore, be negatived.
    It	was  next submitted by Mr. Nayar that there  was  no
evidence  in  the case to come to the  conclusion  that	 the
appellants had sublet the shop to M/s. Adeshwar Glass  Mart.
In our view, there is no substance in this contention. There
is evidence to show that M/s. Adeshwar Glass Mart was carry-
ing  on	 business  at the said premises and  that  firm	 was
carried on business in the said premises even for some	time
during which the appellants-firm had ceased to carry on	 the
business there. Moreover, although a notice was given by the
respondent to the appellants and M/s. Adeshwar Glass Mart to
produce their income-tax returns, assessment orders as	well
as account books and ledgers for the relevant period,  these
were  not  produced. It was surely open to the	Trial  Court
from these circumstances to come to the conclusion that	 had
the account books and ledgers been produced, they would have
shown  that  rent was received by the appellants  from	M/s.
Adeshwar  Glass	 Mart  which would justify  the	 finding  of
subletting.  In these circumstances, this contention of	 Mr.
Nayar must fail.
Although  Mr.  Nayar  wanted us  to	 undertake  detailed
scrutiny  of the evidence and to reappreciate the  same,  we
fail  to  see how we are called upon to do so in  an  appeal
under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
G.N.						Appeal	dis-
missed.
421