[Cites
5
, Cited by
87
]
Supreme Court of India
Gajanan Jaikishan Joshi vs Prabhakar Mohanlal Kalwar on 13 December, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 SCR, SUPL. (2) 474 1990 SCC (1) 166, AIRONLINE 1989 SC 42, 1990 (1) SCC 166, (1990) MAH LJ 212, 1990 ALL CJ 177, (1990) ILR (KANT) 3273, (1990) 1 CUR CC 262, (1990) 2 LAND LR 205, (1990) 1 SCJ 468, (1990) 1 GUJ LH 17, (1990) 2 CIV LJ 23, (1990) 1 REN CR 229, (1990) 1 BLJ 650, (1989) 4 JT 524, (1991) 1 LJR 674, (1990) 1 LJR 674, (1990) 1 RRR 222, (1989) 4 JT 524 (SC)
Author:
E.S.  Venkataramiah
Bench:
E.S.  Venkataramiah
,
M.H. Kania
PETITIONER:
GAJANAN JAIKISHAN JOSHI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRABHAKAR MOHANLAL KALWAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/12/1989

BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (CJ)
BENCH:
VENKATARAMIAH, E.S. (CJ)
KANIA, M.H.

CITATION:
 1989 SCR  Supl. (2) 474  1990 SCC  (1) 166
 JT 1989 (4)   524	  1989 SCALE  (2)1323


ACT:
    Civil    Procedure	 Code,	  1908:	  Order	  VI	Rule
17--Plaint-Amendment of--When to be permitted.
Specific  Relief  Act,  1963
:
Section  16(c)
--Suit	 for
specific  performance-Amendment of  plaint----Permissibility
of.



HEADNOTE:
    For	 selling an immovable property,	 respondent  entered
into an agreement with the appellant. Appellant paid part of
the  consideration  and	 he was put  in	 possession  of	 the
property. Since the respondent failed to execute the  regis-
tered  sale-deed, the appellant filed a suit. There  was  no
specific averment in the suit that the appellant was and had
always	been  ready and willing to perform his part  of	 the
agreement.
    Respondent	contended inter-alia that the suit  was	 not
maintainable  for  non-compliance  with	 the  provisions  of
Section	 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963. This  issue
was  directed  to be tried as a preliminary issue.  At	that
stage,	the appellant applied for leave to amend the  plaint
by incorporating an averment that he was always and had been
ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement.	 The
trial court rejected the application.
    The	 revision petition filed in the High Court was	dis-
missed.	 The High Court took the view that  the	 application
for amendment was filed beyond the period of limitation	 and
cannot	be granted, as a vested interest of  the  respondent
would be disturbed.
This appeal is against the judgment of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1 Amendments should be refused only  where	 the
other party cannot be placed in the same position as if	 the
pleading  had  been originally correct,	 but  the  amendment
would cause him an injury which could not be compensated  in
costs.	It is merely a particular case of this general	rule
that. where a plaintiff seeks to amend by setting up a fresh
475
claim  in  respect  of a cause of action  which,  since	 the
institution  of the suit, had become barred  by	 limitation,
the amendment must be refused; to allow it would be to cause
the  defendant an injury which could not be  compensated  in
costs  by  depriving  him of a good defence  to	 the  claim.
Courts	would as a rule, decline to allow amendments,  if  a
fresh  suit on the amended claim would be barred by  limita-
tion on the date of the application. But that is a factor to
be  taken into account in exercise of the discretion  as  to
whether application for amendment should be granted and does
not  affect the power of the Court to order it, if  that  is
required in the interest of justice. [477A-D]
    1.2	 In the present case, no fresh cause of	 action	 was
sought	to be introduced by the amendment applied  for.	 All
that the appellant sought to do was to complete the cause of
action	for specific performance and add an  averment  which
required  to be added in view of the provisions of  sub-sec-
tion (c) of
Section 16
of the Specific Relief Act. There was
no  fresh  cause of action sought to be	 introduced  by	 the
amendment and hence, no question of causing any injustice to
the respondent on that account arose. [477E-F]
    Pirgonda Hongonda Patil v. Kalgonda Shidgonda Patil	 and
Ors.,  AIR  1957  SC 363 and L.J. Leach & Co.  and  Anr.  v.
Messrs Jardine Skinner & Co., AIR 1957 SC 357, relied on.
    Ouseph Varghese v. Joseph Aley & Ors., [1963] 2 SCC 539,
distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1638  of
1987.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated	 28.11.1986  of	 the
Karnataka High Court in C.R.P. No. 365 of 1984.
S.B. Bhasme and A.S. Bhasme for the Appellant.
R.S. Hegde and S.N. Bhat for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KANIA, J. This is an appeal from a judgment and order of
a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court.
    Only a few facts are necessary to appreciate the contro-
versy raised before us.
476
The appellant herein was the plaintiff in Original	Suit
No. 103 of 1981 in the Court of 2nd Additional Civil  Judge,
Belgaum. It was the case of the appellant in the plaint that
on  July  16, 1976 the respondentdefendant entered  into  an
agreement  in his favour for sale of the suit property	com-
prising a shop and a bhatti room situated at Kirloskar Road,
Belgaum	 City for a sum of Rs.20,000. The appellant paid  to
the  respondent as part consideration a sum of Rs.5,000	 and
pursuant to the agreement for sale the appellant was put  in
possession of the suit property. The sale agreement provided
that  the  registered sale deed was to be  executed  by	 the
respondent  after  securing a No  Objection  certificate  or
permission from the competent officer as required under	 the
Karnataka Urban Land Ceiling Act and within one month of the
grant  of  such permission. The respondent received  the  No
Objection  or permission as aforesaid on March 31, 1981	 but
failed	to execute the registered deed of sale	as  provided
under  the  said agreement. Hence, on 30th June,  1981,	 the
appellant  filed the present suit. It may be  observed	here
that in the plaint, there was no specific averment that	 the
appellant  was	and  had always been ready  and	 willing  to
perform his part of the said agreement. The respondent filed
a  written statement raising several contentions  and  inter
alia  raised the contention that the suit was not  maintain-
able for non-compliance with the provisions of
section 16(c)
of  the Specific Relief Act, 1963. The issue as	 to  whether
the  suit was not maintainable on the aforesaid	 ground	 was
directed to be tried as a preliminary issue. At this  stage,
the  appellant	applied	 for leave to amend  the  plaint  by
incorporating  an averment in the plaint that the  appellant
was  and  had always been ready and willing to	perform	 his
part  of  the said agreement. The learned  Additional  Civil
Judge  before whom the said application was  made,  rejected
the same. A revision petition was preferred by the appellant
against	 the judgment of the learned Additional Civil  Judge
to  the High Court of Karnataka but the said revision  peti-
tion  was  dismissed by a learned Single Judge of  the	said
High  Court  as aforesaid. The learned judge took  the	view
that  the  application for amendment was  filed	 beyond	 the
period of limitation and the application could not be grant-
ed as a vested right of the respondent would be disturbed by
allowing  the said amendment. It is the correctness of	this
decision which is challenged before us.
In	the leading case of Pirgonda Hongonda Patii v.	Kal-
gonda  Shidgonda Patil and Others, AIR 1957 SC 363  a  Bench
comprising three learned Judges of this Court laid down	 the
principles  which should govern the question of granting  or
disallowing  amendments. It was held by this Court that	 all
amendments ought to be allowed which
477
satisfy the two conditions: (a) not working injustice to the
other  side, and (b) of being necessary for the	 purpose  of
determining  the real questions in controversy	between	 the
parties.  Amendments should be refused only where the  other
party cannot be placed in the same position as if the plead-
ing  had  been originally correct, but the  amendment  would
cause him an injury which could not be compensated in costs.
It  is	merely a particular case of this general  rule	that
where a plaintiff seeks to amend by setting up a fresh claim
in respect of a cause of action which since the	 institution
of  the suit had become barred by limitation, the  amendment
must be refused; to allow it would be to cause the defendant
an injury which could not be compensated in costs by depriv-
ing him of a good defence to the claim.
In
L.J. Leach & Co. & Anr. v. Messrs Jardine Skinner  &
Co.
, AIR 1957 SC 357 another Bench comprising three  learned
Judges	of  this Court held that it is no  doubt  true	that
courts	would, as a rule, decline to allow amendments, if  a
fresh  suit on the amended claim would be barred by  limita-
tion on the date of the application. But that is a factor to
be  taken into account in exercise of the discretion  as  to
whether amendment should be ordered, and does not affect the
power  of the Court to order it, if that is required in	 the
interests of justice.
If these principles are to be followed, there is  little
doubt  that the learned judge was in error in rejecting	 the
application  for  amendment made by the	 appellant.  In	 the
present	 case  no  fresh cause of action was  sought  to  be
introduced by the amendment applied for. All that the appel-
lant  sought to do was to complete the cause of	 action	 for
specific performance for which relief he had already prayed.
It was only that one averment required in law to be made  in
a  plaint in a suit for specific performance in view of	 the
provisions of sub-section (c) of
section 16
of the  Specific
Relief	Act was not made, probably on account of some  over-
sight  or mistake of the lawyer who drafted the	 plaint	 and
that  error  was  sought to be rectified  by  the  amendment
applied for. There was no fresh cause of action sought to be
introduced by the amendment and hence, no question of  caus-
ing any injustice to the respondent on that account arose.
    Learned  counsel for the respondent placed strong  reli-
ance  on  the decision of this Court in
Ouseph	Varghese  v.
Joseph	Aley and Others
, [1963] 2 SCC 539. In that  case,  a
suit for specific performance was filed by the plaintiff  on
the basis of an alleged agreement with the first  defendant.
The defendant denied the agreement and went on to state that
just before his death her husband had agreed to sell to	 the
plaintiff
478
Item No. 1 of the suit property less one acre of paddy field
for  a sum of Rs. 11,000 but due to the illness of her	hus-
band, the sale in question could not be effected. After	 the
written	 statement to this effect was filed, no	 application
for  amendment to the plaint was made. The Trial  Court	 de-
creed the suit. In the appeal, the High Court did not accept
the agreement pleaded by the plaintiff, but granted a decree
on the basis of the agreement set out in the written  state-
ment.  It was held by a Bench comprising two learned  Judges
of  this Court that the agreement pleaded by  the  defendant
was wholly different from that pleaded by the plaintiff. The
plaintiff  did	not  plead either in the plaint	 or  at	 any
subsequent  stage that he was ready and willing	 to  perform
the agreement pleaded in the written statement and hence, no
decree	on  the	 basis of that agreement  should  have	been
passed	in his favour as done by the High Court.  The  Court
held  that it was well settled that in a suit  for  specific
performance,  the plaintiff should allege that he  is  ready
and  willing to perform his part of the contract and in	 the
absence of such an allegation in the plaint, the suit is not
maintainable.  In our opinion, this case does not  lend	 any
support	 to  the  argument of the learned  counsel  for	 the
respondent,  as in the present case there is no question  of
any decree being passed on the basis of any agreement  other
than the one pleaded by the appellant in the plaint.
    In	the  result, the judgment and order  passed  by	 the
learned	 Single Judge are set aside. The appeal is  allowed.
The  amendment applied for by the appellant is allowed.	 The
amendment  to  be carried out by the appellant	at  his	 own
expense within eight weeks of a certified copy of this order
being  received	 by the Trial Court. The Trial	Court  shall
thereafter give time to the respondent to file a  supplemen-
tary  written statement, if so advised, and dispose  of	 the
case  on merits according to law. There will be no order  as
to costs of the appeal.
G.N.						      Appeal
allowed.
479