[Cites
16
, Cited by
30
]
Supreme Court of India
Kali Prasad Agarwalla & Others vs Bharat Coking Coal Limited & Others on 31 March, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1530, 1989 SCR (2) 283, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1530, (1989) 3 JT 170 (SC), (1990) 1 PAT LJR 55, 1989 SCC (SUPP) 1 628
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
G.L.  Oza
PETITIONER:
KALI PRASAD AGARWALLA & OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
BHARAT COKING COAL LIMITED & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/03/1989

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1530		  1989 SCR  (2) 283
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (1) 628 JT 1989 (3)	170
 1989 SCALE  (1)852


ACT:
Coal  Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973
:  ss.  2(h)(iv),
2(h)(vi), 3, 5 & 6--Land used for carrying on mining  opera-
tions  adjacent	 to  a coal  mine--Whether  a  mine--Whether
vested in Central Government-Owners right, title and  inter-
est--Whether extinguished.
    Practice  and  Procedure: Whether  parties	entitled  to
retract from evidence let in.



HEADNOTE:
Section  3
of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950  provided
for  vesting an estate or tenure in the State.
Section	2(h)
of  the	 Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act,  1973  defines  a
'mine,	to mean any excavation where any operation  for	 the
purpose	 of searching for or obtaining minerals has been  or
is being carried on. Sub-clause (iv) thereto includes there-
in  all open cast workings and sub-clause (vi) takes in	 all
lands, buildings etc., in or adjacent to a mine and used for
the purposes of the mine.
Section 3(1)
provides for acquisi-
tion  of  rights of owners in respect of coal mines  by	 the
Central Government.
Section 5(1)
empowers the Central Govern-
ment  to direct vesting of the said rights in  a  Government
company.
Section 6(1)
refers properties vested in the	Cen-
tral Government free from mortgages etc.
    The	 appellants instituted a suit in respect of a  large
expanse	 of  land for declaration of their  homestead  right
thereto.  The possession in the zamindari right was  settled
to  their ancestor in 1949. They, therefore, claimed  owner-
ship of leasehold land.
    The	 respondent Government-company resisted the suit  on
the grounds, firstly, that the disputed land formed part  of
a  colliery which had vested in the Central  Government	 and
thereafter  in the company under the provisions of the
Coal
Mines (Nationalisation) Act
and secondly, that the  interest
claimed by the plaintiffs, automatically stood	extinguished
with the vesting of the estate of the plaintiffs' lessor  by
reason	of  the notification issued under
s. 3
of  the	Land
Reforms Act.
The trial court negatived all the defences anti decreed	 the
suit.
284
Reversing  the	said decree, the High Court  held  that	 the
lease granted to the plaintiffs was an encumbrance which was
annihilated with the issuance of the notification under
s. 3
of the Land Reforms Act, and that the lease having thus come
to  an	end the plaintiffs had no title to be  declared.  It
further	 found that the salt lands were adjacent to  a	coal
mine  and were being used for the purpose of the said  mine.
Therefore, it held that the suit lands were more within	 the
meaning	 of  the Nationalisation Act, and  that	 what  vests
under  that Act is the mine and not .merely the interest  of
the owner of the mine.
Dismissing the appeal,
    HELD: 1.1 The evidence on record both for the  plaintif-
fappellants  and the defendant-respondents makes it  evident
that the land was being used for the purpose of the mine for
carrying on the mining operations in respect of the part  of
the  seam lying immediately below the surface. There  cannot
be  any working mine without the surface being	included  in
that  concept.	If  the surface does not form  part  of	 the
concept of mine, it is not possible to have any	 excavation.
Section	 2(h)(iv)
of the Coal Mines  (Nationalisation)	 Act
includes open cast working within the definition of  'mine.'
[289E-F]
    1.2	 The suit land was also adjacent to a coal mine	 and
was  being used for the purposes of the said  mine,  namely,
stacking  of the coal and effecting local sale	thereof.  It
was  therefore, a mine as defined under
s. 2(h)(vi)
of	 the
Act. [289G]
    2.	Under  s. 3 of the said Act, the  right,  title	 and
interest  of the owners in relation to the coal mines  stood
transferred to and vested absolutely in the Central  Govern-
ment  free from encumbrances. It was immaterial whether	 the
mine belonged to the State or to a private party. The appel-
lant's	title  to the said land, if any, thus  stood  extin-
guished. [289H; 290A]
    State  of  West Bengal v. Union of India, [1964]  1	 SCR
371, referred to.
    3.	The  parties went to trial knowing fully  well	what
they  were required to prove. They have adduced evidence  of
their  choice  in  support of the  respective  claims.	That
evidence  has  been  considered by both	 courts	 below.	 The
appellants  cannot now turn round and say that the  evidence
should	not be looked into. This is a well accepted  princi-
ple. [290C-D]
285
    Kunju  Kesavan v.M.M. Philip & Ors., [1964] 3  SCR	634,
referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2647  of
1980.
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.4.1980 of the Patna
High Court in Original Decree No. 289 of 1979(R).
Shankar Ghosh, S .P. Lal and H.K. Puri for the Appellant.
L.N.  Sinha, R.N. Sachthey and A. Sachthey for the  Respond-
ents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.	JAGANNATHA  SHETTY, J. This  appeal  by	 certificate
under
Art. 133(1)
of the Constitution is from a decision  of
the  Patna High Court which reversed the decree in the	suit
filed by the appellant for declaration of title and  confir-
mation of possession.
In	the court of the Subordinate Judge, the First  Court
at  Dhanbad, the plaintiff/appellants instituted a  suit  in
respect	 of  Schedule B of the plaint for a  declaration  of
their  homestead right thereto and for confirmation of	pos-
session	 or in the alternative recovery of  possession.	 The
suit property consists of 30 bighas, 18 kattar and 11  chha-
taks  being part of plot nos. 59 and 70 in village  Dhansar.
The plaintiff's claim was based on a registered indenture of
lease  dated December 9, 1949 by which it is said  that	 the
possession in the Zamindari right of Kali Prasad was settled
to  Ruplal  Aggarwal, father of plaintiff No. 1	 and  grand-
father of plaintiff Nos. 2 and 3. The plaintiffs' claim that
they  have become the owners of the lease hold land and	 are
in  possession	of the same by exercising  diverse  acts  of
possession, mutating their name and by payments of stipulat-
ed  rents  to the State of Bihar, who  recognised  the	said
lease.
The	 defendant  is a Government company  called  Messrs.
Bharat	Coking Coal Limited (The Company). The	Company	 re-
sisted	the  suit on three main grounds: firstly,  that	 the
disputed land formed part of North Bhuggatdih Colliery which
had  vested in the Central Government and thereafter in	 the
company under the provisions of the Coal Mines (Nationalisa-
tion) Act, 1973, secondly, that the interest claimed by	 the
plaintiffs automatically stood extinguished with the vesting
of  the estate of the plaintiffs' lessor, by reason  of	 the
vesting notification
286
issued	under
sec. 3
of the Bihar Land Reforms	 Act,  1950.
Lastly, that actual lease of the land was taken much earlier
expressly for the purposes of the mines and that the instru-
ment  of 1949 is contaminated with flaw and obtained with  a
view  to certifying the vesting of the estates in the  State
of  Bihar  and even that on a misapprehension that  the	 so-
called homestead land would. not vest.
The  trial court negatived all the defences and decreed	 the
suit.
Upon  appeal  by the company, the Patna High  Court	 re-
versed the decree of the trial court and dismissed the suit.
There  are two main findings recorded by the High  Court  to
allow  the appeal. As to the scope and effect of the  provi-
sions of the
Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950
in respect of	 the
suit property, the High Court held:
"For  the reasons indicated above,  I
	      am  of  the view that a lease granted  to	 the
	      plaintiffs  in the instant case was an  encum-
	      brance  and it was annihilated with the  issu-
	      ance  of the notification under
sec. 3
of	 the
	      Act.  The	 submission urged on behalf  of	 the
	      appellants, therefore, in this behalf must  be
	      accepted.	 The lease of the plaintiffs  having
	      come to an end consequent upon the issuance of
	      notification  under
sec. 3
of  the  Act,	 the
	      plaintiffs  have no title to be  declared	 and
	      the decree of the trial court is liable to  be
	      set aside."
As to the nature of the suit property	 and
	      the  scope and effect of the Coal	 Mines	(Na-
	      tionalisation) Act, 1973, the High Court on an
	      appraisal of the oral and documentary evidence
	      led by both the parties said:
"I  would,  therefore,  prefer  their
	      positive	evidence (referring to	the  defend-
	      ants/respondents	evidence) than to the  nega-
	      tive evidence adduced on behalf of the  plain-
	      tiffs. It will, however, be seen that the suit
	      lands  are  adjacent to a coal  mine,  namely,
	      North Bhuggatdih Colliery and were being	used
	      for  the	purposes of the said  mine,  namely,
	      stacking	of  coal and effecting	local  sales
	      thereof.	The conclusion is, therefore,  ines-
	      capable  that the suit lands are	more  within
	      the  meaning of the Nationalisation Act.	What
	      vests  under  the Nationalisation Act  is	 the
	      mine and not merely the interest of the  owner
	      of the mine."
287
Having regard to these findings, the High Court did	 not
find it necessary to examine whether the instrument of	1949
was a genuine transaction.
In	this appeal, on the submission of counsel  for	both
sides, two questions arise for our consideration: (i) wheth-
er the suit lands had vested, free from encumbrance in	the.
State  consequent  upon the issuance of	 Notification  under
sec.  3
of the Bihar Land Reforms Act; and (ii) whether	 the
suit  land is "mines" within the meaning of the
Coal  Mines
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973
?
In our opinion, it is unnecessary to consider the  first
question  and indeed it is not proper also to  consider	 the
question  in the absence of the State which is	a  necessary
party  for adjudication of that dispute. The State of  Bihar
is  not impleaded as a party to the suit and we,  therefore,
refrain	 from expressing any opinion on the first  question.
On the second question, the relevant provisions of the
Coal
Mines  (Nationalisation)  Act,	1973
(The Act
)	may  now  be
noted.
"Section  2(h)	defines	 "mines"  to
	      mean  any excavation where any  operation	 for
	      the  purpose  of searching  for  or  obtaining
	      minerals has been or is being carried on,	 and
	      includes
	      XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(iv) all open cast workings;
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(vi)  all lands,  buildings,  works,
	      adits,  levels, planes, machinery	 and  equip-
ments, instruments stores, vehicles, railways,
	      tramways	and  sidings in, or adjacent  to,  a
	      mine and used for the purposes of the mine;
		    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(x) all lands, buildings and  equip-
ments belonging to the owners of the mine, and
	      in, adjacent to or situated on the surface of,
	      the  mine where the washing of  coal  obtained
	      from  the mine or manufacture,  therefrom,  of
	      coke is carried on.
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
288
Section 3
, so far it is relevant, reads.
"(1)  On  the  appointed  day,	 the
	      right,  title  and interest of the  owners  in
	      relation	to the coal mines specified  in	 the
	      Schedule shall stand transferred to, and shall
	      vest  absolutely	in, the	 Central  Government
	      free from all incumbrances  ..........  "
Section 5(1)
reads as under:
"(1)  Notwithstanding anything	con-
tained  in secs. 3 and 4, the Central  Govern-
	      ment may, if it is satisfied that a Government
	      company is willing to comply, or has complied,
	      with such terms and conditions as that Govern-
	      ment  may think fit to impose, direct,  by  an
	      order  in writing, that the right,  title	 and
	      interest	of  an owner in relation to  a	coal
	      mine referred to in
sec. 3
, shall, instead  of
	      continuing to vest in the Central	 Government,
	      vest  in the Government Company either on	 the
	      date  of	publication of the direction  or  on
	      such  earlier or later date (not being a	date
	      earlier  than  the appointed day), as  may  be
	      specified in the direction."
Section 6(1)
provides as under:
"(1) All property which vests in	 the
	      Central Government or in a Government  company
	      under  this  Chapter shall, by force  of	such
	      vesting  be  freed  and  discharged  from	 any
	      trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien	 and
	      all  other incumbrances affecting it  and	 any
	      attachment,  injunction or decree or order  of
	      any court restricting the use of such property
	      in  any  manner shall be deemed to  have	been
	      withdrawn."
Sections  8
to
10
in chapter III provide for payment  of
compensation  to  owners  of coal  mines.  Provisions  under
Chapter	 IV  of	 the Act
deal with claims to  be  .made	 for
compensation  and for disbursing the amounts payable to	 the
Owners of coal mines by Commissioner of Payments.
    On behalf of the plaintiffs, 11 witnesses were  examined
including  plaintiff  No. 1 himself. Most of  the  witnesses
have  not  made any relevant statement on  the	question  of
location or user of the suit land.
289
However, Kanhaiya Lal Agarwal, witness No. 6 for the  plain-
tiff stated, "The land is full of collieries on all the four
sides."	 Likewise Ram Briksha Viswakarma, witness No. 8	 for
the  plaintiffs	 has stated that the suit land is  a  fallow
land and no crop is grown on it and there is nothing  except
the  road in between the suit land and the  North  Bhagatdih
Colliery. The 9th witness of the plaintiffs B.K.  Mukherjee,
who surveyed the locality and submitted a report stated:
"At  the time of my inspection,	 the
	      defendants  were	removing  the  over-burdened
	      surface  and then taking out coal and this  is
	      called open cast working	.....  I do not	 see
	      the quarry by Southern side of the leased coal
	      land  but	 do not remember  whose	 quarry	 was
	      there.  There were coal all over the land	 but
	      it   was	after  the  burden  of	 earth	 was
	      removed  .....  The coal was being ,cut at the
	      depth  of 25 from the surface.  Adjoining	 the
	      quarry,  the land was not for  homestead	pur-
	      poses."
The witnesses for the defendant company have specifical-
ly  stated  that the land in dispute constitutes  the  upper
layer  of the coal lying beneath and above the surface.	 The
working	 of the mines is by open cast working  system.	When
the  mining operations are carried on in the other parts  of
the  Seam, the land is being used for the  various  purposes
connected with the mining operations.
In the light of this evidence, the location of the	suit
land  and the uses to which it is put to are  beyond  doubt.
The land is being used for carrying on the mining operations
and it is adjacent to a mine. It is used for the purposes of
the mine for carrying on the mining operations in respect of
the  part of the Seam lying immediately below  the  surface.
Apparently,  there  cannot be any working mine	without	 the
surface being included in that concept. If the surface	does
not form part of the concept of mine, it is not possible  to
have  any  excavation.
Section 2(h)(iv)
includes  open	cast
working within the definition of "mine".
    Secondly, the suit land is also adjacent to a coal mine,
namely,	 North Bhagatdih Colliery and is being used for	 the
purposes of the said mine, namely, stacking of the coal	 and
effecting  local sale thereof. It is, therefore, a  mine  as
defined under
sec. 2(h)(vi)
of the Act.
Under
sec. 3
of the Act, the right, title and  interest
of  the	 owners in relation to the coal mines  stand  trans-
ferred to and shall vest abso-
290
lutely in the Central Government free from encumbrances. For
the  purpose  of acquisition and vesting, it  is  immaterial
whether the mine belongs to the State or to the	 plaintiffs.
In either case, the Act extinguishes the title. A  Constitu-
tion Bench of this Court in
State of West Bengal v. Union of
India
, [1964] 1 SCR 371 has held that under Entry 44 of List
3 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, Parliament is
competent to make a law for acquisition of property owned by
the State.
It was, however, urged for the appellants that there  is
no proper pleading or issue for determination of the  afore-
said  question and the evidence let in should not be  looked
into.  It is too late to raise this contention. The  parties
went to trial knowing fully well what they were required  to
prove. They have adduced evidence of theft choice in support
of the respective claims. That evidence has been  considered
by  both  courts below. They cannot now turn round  and	 say
that the evidence should not be looked into. This is a	well
accepted principle.
In
Kunju Kesavan v. M.M. Philip & Others
, [1964] 3	 SCR
634, this Court has stated (as summarised in the headnote at
p. 637):
"The  parties went to  trial,  fully
	      understanding  the  central fact	whether	 the
	      succession  as
laid down in
the	 Ezhava	 Act
	      applied  to Bhagavathi Valli or not.  The	 ab-
	      sence of an issue, therefore, did not lead  to
	      a material sufficient to vitiate the decision.
	      The plea was hardly needed in view of the fact
	      that  the plaintiff stated in his	 replication
	      that the "suit property was obtained as makka-
	      thayam property, by Bhagavathi Valli under the
	      Ezhava  Act".  The subject of  exemption	from
	      Part IV of the Ezhava Act, was properly raised
	      in the trial court and was rightly  considered
	      by the High Court."
On	the facts and circumstances of the case	 we  cannot,
therefore, accept the contention urged for the appellant  in
this regard.
In	the  result and for the reasons	 stated	 above,	 the
appeal fails and is dismissed. In the circumstances,  howev-
er. we make no order as
to costs.
P.S.S.					       Appeal	dis-
missed.
291