[Cites
5
, Cited by
29
]
Supreme Court of India
Claggett Brachi Co.Ltd., London vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax, A.P on 26 April, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1472, 1989 SCR (2) 731, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 1472, 1989 TAX. L. R. 572, 1990 SCC(TAX) 78, (1989) 44 TAXMAN 186, (1989) 2 JT 273 (SC), (1989) 77 CURTAXREP 72, 1989 SCC (SUPP) 2 182, (1989) 177 ITR 409
Author:
R.S.  Pathak
Bench:
R.S.  Pathak
,
Misra Rangnath
PETITIONER:
CLAGGETT BRACHI CO.LTD., LONDON

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, A.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/04/1989

BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
BENCH:
PATHAK, R.S. (CJ)
MISRA RANGNATH

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1472		  1989 SCR  (2) 731
 1989 SCC  Supl.  (2) 182 JT 1989 (2)	273
 1989 SCALE  (1)1133


ACT:
Indian Income Tax Act, 1922
/
Income Tax Act
1961:
Section
23(3)
/Section 147-149--Reassessment consequent on change  in
method	    of	   computation	    of	    profits--Whether
permissible--Original  assessment made on  agents--Reassess-
ment--Whether could be initiated against assessee.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant-assessee, a non-resident sterling company,
carrying on business of purchase and sale of tobacco, on its
own  and  for  commission, effected  purchases	through	 its
Indian agents. The agents filed returns of income on  behalf
of  the assessee for the assessment years 1959-60 and  1960-
61.  The Income-tax Officer completed the assessment to	 tax
under
s. 23(3)
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922.
    However, in the course of assessment proceedings for the
assessment year 1962-63, the Income-tax Officer noticed that
there  was a mistake in computing the overhead	expenditure.
Therefore, in the opinion that income had escaped assessment
for the two assessment years he issued notices to the statu-
tory  agents, under
s. 148
of the Income-tax Act, 1961,	 but
dropped	 the proceedings, upon the agents' objection to	 the
issue  of the notice of reassessment on the agent of a	non-
resident assessee after the expiry of two years from the end
of the relevant assessment year.
    Thereupon the Income Tax Officer issued notice  directly
to  the	 assessee. The assessee filed returns for  both	 the
years  under  protest. Rejecting the  assessee's  contention
that  it  could	 not he served with the	 notices  since	 its
agents	had already been proceeded against, the	 Income	 Tax
Officer	 made  reassessments  on the assessee  for  the	 two
assessment years.
    The appeals filed by the assessee were dismissed by	 the
Appellate  Assistant  Commissioner. In	second	appeal,	 the
Income-Tax  Appellate Tribunal held that  the  reassessments
were without jurisdiction, as they were proceeded on a	mere
change	of  opinion of the Income Tax Officer and  that	 the
assessee could not he proceeded against directly as the
732
assessments were made originally on the agents.
    On a reference made at the instance of the Revenue,	 the
High  Court held that reassessments were not made due  to  a
mere change of opinion of the Income Tax Officer, but pursu-
ant  to	 information  received subsequent  to  the  original
assessments from the records of the . subsequent  assessment
year that the overhead expenses related to the entire  busi-
ness,  including the business as commission agents, and	 not
merely to the business of purchase and sale of tobacco,	 and
that  there  was nothing to prevent the Income	Tax  Officer
from proceeding directly against the assessee and re-assess-
ing  it	 for the two assessment years, when  he	 found	that
reassessment  proceedings  could not be	 taken	against	 the
agents.
    In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the asses-
see,  it  was contended that the Income Tax Officer  had  no
jurisdiction  to take proceedings under ss. 147 and  148  of
the income-tax Act because the conditions pre-requisite	 for
making the reassessments were not satisfied, and it was	 not
open  to the Income Tax Officer to take assessment  proceed-
ings  against  the  assessee when he  had  taken  assessment
proceedings against the Indian agent.
Dismissing the. appeals,
    HELD:  1.  The Income Tax Officer came to  realise	that
income	had escaped assessment for the two assessment  years
when he was in the process of making assessment for a subse-
quent assessment year. While making that assessment, he came
to  know  from the documents pertaining to  that  assessment
that  the overhead expenses related to the entire  business,
including  as  commission agents, and not  confined  to	 the
business  of purchase and sale. The attention of the  Income
Tax  Officer was not directed by anything before him at	 the
time  of original assessment to the fact that  the  overhead
expenses  related  to the entire business.  In	the  circum-
stances,  there is no doubt that the case fails	 within	 the
terms of cl. (b) of s. 147 of that Act and there was  justi-
fication for initiating the proceedings for reassessment for
the two assessment years in question. [736A-D]
    2. It is open to an Income Tax Officer to assess  either
a  non-resident assessee or the agent of  such	non-resident
assessee.  But if an assessment is made on one there can  be
no assessment on the other. [736E]
733
    Therefore,	in the instant case, if the  assessment	 had
been made on the Indian agent, the assessment could not have
been  made on the assessee. However, the  reassessment	pro-
ceedings  commenced  on	 the agent were barred	by  time  by
reason of
s. 149(3)
of the Act. The issue of notice under
s.
148
of the Act to the agent after the expiry of  two  years
from  the end of the relevant assessment year is  prohibited
by  the statute. Hence, the assessment	proceedings  against
the agent have to be ignored, and cannot operate as a bar to
assessment proceeding directly against the assessee.  [736F-
G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 208	 and
209 (NT) of 1975.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 4th August,  1971  of
the  Andhra Pradesh High Court in Reference Case No.  12  of
1968.
K.B. Rohtagi for the Appellant.
V.  Gauri  Shankar and Ms. A. Subhashini  for	 the
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    PATHAK, CJ. These appeals by special leave are  directed
against	 the  judgment of the High Court of  Andhra  Pradesh
answering  the following two questions of law in  favour  of
the Revenue and against the assessee:
1. Whether the Tribunal was right in  hold-
ing that the re-assessments being only  conse-
	      quent on a change as to the method of computa-
	      tion of the profits the initiation of proceed-
	      ings  under s. 148 for each of the  assessment
	      years 1959-1960 and 1960-61 was justified?
2. Whether the Tribunal was right in law in
	      holding that the original assessment for	each
	      of  the years having been made on the  agents,
	      the  re-assessment  proceedings could  not  be
	      initiated against the assessee direct?
The appellant assessee is a non-resident sterling compa-
ny  whose business consists in the purchase of tobacco	from
India and its sale outside. The tobacco is sold directly  on
the  assessee's own account and for commission on behalf  of
others. The purchases of tobacco were
734
effected through the British India Corporation Ltd., Guntur,
who were appointed agents of the assessee under
s. 43
of the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. For the assessment years  1959-
60 and 1960-61, the agents filed returns of income on behalf
of  the	 assessee.  The Income-tax  Officer,  Guntur,  after
examining  the balance-sheet and profit and loss account  of
the  assessee for the relevant previous years, the  calendar
years  1958  and 1959, completed the  assessments  under  s.
23(3) of the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
. For the year 1.958
the  gross profit on the sale of Indian	 tobacco,  including
commission,  was shown in the balance-sheet and	 profit	 and
loss  account  of the assessee at 11,108.  As  the  assessee
carried	 on business not only in India but in other  places,
the Income Tax Officer worked out the proportionate overhead
expenses of the assesse for its business in India at L16,760
-
taking	the total sales of tobacco at L534031 and the  sales
-
of Indian tobacco at L448590. The Income Tax Officer comput-
-
ed  the	 loss at L5652, and one-half of this  amount  namely
-
L2826  (Rs.37680) was taken as the adjusted loss, being	 the
-
percentage  attributable  to  the  purchasing  operation  in
India.	On the same basis for the assessment  year  1960-61,
after setting off the income against the previous loss,	 the
total loss was found to be Rs.96,482.
Subsequently,  in the course of  assessment	 proceedings
for  the  assessment year 1962-63, the	Income	Tax  Officer
appears to have noticed that a mistake had been committed in
the  computation  of the over-head expenditure.	 The  return
filed on behalf of the assessee for that year had  disclosed
that the over-head expenses were attributable to the  entire
business of the assessee, including the business as  commis-
sion agents, and not merely for the business of purchase and
sale  of  tobacco. The Income Tax Officer believed  that  he
ought  to  have first computed	the  proportionate  overhead
expenses  in  relation to the total profits  by	 taking	 the
proportion  which the profits bore to the total	 of  profits
and commission, and then worked out the proportionate  over-
head  expenses	for the profits arising out  of	 the  Indian
sales. On that basis he determined that the adjusted profits
would  be L160 (Rs.2253), and this would have to be  substi-
-
tuted  in  place  of the loss of Rs.37,680  arrived  in	 the
original  assessment,  Similarly  for  the  assessment	year
1960-61	 the Income Tax Officer realised that  the  original
assessment  would  have	 to be varied  accordingly.  In	 the
opinion	 that  income  had escaped assessment  for  the	 two
assessment  years 1959-60 and 1960-61, he issued notices  on
18 January, 1964 under
s. 148
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 to
the  statutory agents. The agents contested the validity  of
the  notices and contended that in view of
s. 149(3)
of	 the
Act no notice of re-assessment could be served on the  agent
of  a  non-resident assessee after the expiry of  two  years
from the end of the relevant assess-
735
ment  year. The Income-Tax Officer upheld the objection	 and
dropped the proceedings.
Thereupon the Income Tax Officer issued notice under  s.
148 for the two assessment years directly to the assessee to
their  London  address on 29 February,	1964.  The  assessee
filed  returns on 19 August, 1964 for both the	years  under
protest,  contending that it could not be served with  those
notices	 inasmuch  as the Income Tax  Officer  had  already,
proceeded against its agents. The Income Tax Officer reject-
ed  the objections and made re-assessments on  the  assessee
for the two assessment years.
The	 appeals filed by the assessee before the  Appellate
Assistant Commissioner were dismissed, but in second  appeal
the  Income-Tax	 Appellate Tribunal took the view  that	 the
re-assessments proceeded on a mere change of opinion on	 the
part of the Income Tax Officer and, therefore, were  without
jurisdiction,  and further as the assessments had been	made
originally  on the agents it was not open to the Income	 Tax
Officer to proceed directly against the assessee. According-
ly, the Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeals and set aside
the re-assessments made on the assessee.
At	the instance of the Revenue, the Appellate  Tribunal
referred  the two questions of law set forth earlier to	 the
High  Court of Andhra Pradesh for its opinion. On the  first
question  the High Court held that it was not a mere  change
of opinion on the part of the Income Tax Officer pursuant to
which  he made the re-assessments, but that the	 Income	 Tax
Officer had received information subsequent to the  original
assessments  from the records of the  subsequent  assessment
year that the overhead expenses related to the entire  busi-
ness,  including the business as commission agents, and	 not
merely to the business of the purchases and sales of  tobac-
co.  On the second question the High Court held	 that  there
was nothing to prevent the Income-tax Officer, when he found
that  re-assessment proceedings could not be  taken  against
the  agents, from proceeding directly against  the  assessee
and re-assessing it for the two assessment years.
    Two points have been urged before us by learned  counsel
for the assessee. It is contended that the Income Tax  Offi-
cer  has no jurisdiction to take proceedings under  ss.	 147
and  148 of the
Income-tax Act
because the  conditions	pre-
requisite  for making the reassessments were not  satisfied.
The re-assessments were made with reference to cl. (b) of
s.
147
of the Act, and apparently the Income Tax Officer	pro-
ceeded	on the basis that in consequence of  information  in
his possession he had reason to believe that income  charge-
able to tax had
736
escaped	 assessment for the two assessments years. From	 the
material  before us it appears that the Income	Tax  Officer
came  to realise that income had escaped assessment for	 the
two  assessment years when he was in the process  of  making
assessment  for a subsequent assessment year.  While  making
that assessment he came to know from the documents  pertain-
ing to that assessment that the overhead expenses related to
the  entire  business including the business  as  commission
agents and were not confined to the business of purchase and
sale. It is true, as the High Court has observed, that	this
information  could  have  been acquired by  the	 Income	 Tax
Officer if he had exercised due diligence at the time of the
original assessment itself. It does not appear however, that
the  attention	of the Income Tax Officer  was	directed  by
anything  before him to the fact that the overhead  expenses
related	 to the entire business. The information derived  by
the  Income Tax Officer evidently came into  his  possession
when taking assessment proceedings for the subsequent  year.
In  the	 circumstances, it cannot be doubted that  the	case
falls within the terms of cl. (b) of
s. 147
of the Act,	 and
that, therefore, the High Court is right in holding  against
the assessee.
The second point urged before us is that when the Income
tax Officer had taken the assessment proceedings against the
Indian agent of the assessee it was not open to him to	take
assessment  proceedings against the assessee. It is open  to
an Income Tax Officer to assess either a non-resident asses-
see or to assess the agent of such nonresident assessee.  It
cannot	be disputed also that if an. assessment is  made  on
one there can be no assessment on the other, and  therefore,
in  this case if the assessment had been made on the  Indian
agent the assessment could not have been made on the  asses-
see. However, the facts show that the re-assessment proceed-
ings commenced on the agent were found to be barred by	time
by reason of
s. 149(3)
of the Act. The issue of notice under
s. 148
of the Act to the agent after the expiry of two years
from  the end of the relevant assessment year is  prohibited
by the statute. The Income Tax Officer dropped the  proceed-
ings when he was made aware of that prohibition. The assess-
ment  proceedings taken by him against the agent have to  be
ignored and cannot operate as a bar to assessment proceeding
directly  against the assessee. On this point also the	High
Court has taken the correct view when it answered the  ques-
tion in favour of the Revenue.
In the result the appeals fail and are dismissed with costs.
N.P.V.			  Appeals dismissed.
737