[Cites
8
, Cited by
84
]
Supreme Court of India
Food Corporation Of India vs Provident Fund Commissioner And Anr on 26 October, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 SCR, SUPL. (1) 755 1990 SCC (1) 68, (1990) 1 SCJ 218, AIRONLINE 1989 SC 31, (1990) 1 SERV LR 147, 1990 ALL CJ 167, (1989) 2 LAB LN 987, 1990 SCC (L&S) 1, (1990) 1 CUR LR 20, (1990) 60 FAC LR 15, 1990 (1) SCC 68, (1990) 1 SERV LJ 139, (1989) 4 JT 380, (1990) 1 BANK LJ 394, 1990 LAB LR 64, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 257, (1989) 4 JT 380 (SC), 1990 UJ(SC) 257
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
T.K.  Thommen
PETITIONER:
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/10/1989

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 SCR  Supl. (1) 755  1990 SCC  (1)	 68
 JT 1989 (4)   380	  1989 SCALE  (2)1029


ACT:
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous  Provisions
Act,  1952
:
Section 7A
--Determination of amounts payable  by
employer as contribution--Statutory authority--Whether	duty
bound  to  summon evidence when requested by  party,  before
coming to proper conclusion.



HEADNOTE:
    Respondent No. 1--the Provident Fund Commissioner called
upon  the  appellant--Food Corporation of India	 to  deposit
contribution  payable by it under the
Employees'  Provident
Fund  and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
and the  scheme
thereunder,  in respect of workers employed by the  contrac-
tors  appointed	 by the appellant for handling	storing	 and
transporting food grains and other articles in its depots in
Rajasthan.  On appellant's non-compliance, Respondent No.  1
made  an order under
Section 7A
of the Act  determining	 the
amount	payable	 by  the appellant.  Against  the  aforesaid
order,	the  appellant filed writ petition before  the	High
Court,	which dismissed the same. Hence the appeal, by	spe-
cial leave, by the appellant--Corporation.
    It was contended that the appellant was denied a reason-
able  opportunity to produce actual proof of  identification
of  workers  in	 respect of whom  contribution	was  payable
inasmuch as Respondent No. 1 neither gave notice to contrac-
tors, who were in possession of the relevant lists of  work-
ers,  nor made them parties to the proceedings, despite	 its
repeated requests.
Allowing the appeal,
    HELD:  The	Commissioner, while  conducting	 an  inquiry
under
Section 7A
of the Employees, Provident Fund and	Mis-
cellaneous  Provisions Act, 1952 has the same powers as	 are
vested	in  a court under
the Code of  Civil  Procedure
for
trying	a  suit.  Thus, the Commissioner  is  authorised  to
enforce attendance in person and also to examine any  person
on  oath. He has the power requiring the discovery and	pro-
duction	 of documents. This power was given to	the  Commis-
sioner to decide not abstract questions of law, but only  to
determine actual concrete differences in payment of  contri-
bution and other dues by identifying the
756
workmen.The  Commissioner should exercise all his powers  to
collect all evidence and collate all material before  coming
to proper conclusion. That is the legal duty of the  Commis-
sioner.	 It  would be failure to exercise  the	jurisdiction
particularly  when a party to the proceedings  requests	 for
summoning  evidence from a particular person.  [757H;  758A;
F-H]
    In the instant case, the appellant--Corporation had some
problems  in collating the lists of all workers	 engaged  in
depots	scattered  at  different places.  It  requested	 the
respondent--Commissioner  to summon the contractors to	pro-
duce the respective lists of workers engaged by them. Howev-
er, the appellant--Commissioner did not summon the  contrac-
tors,  nor  the	 lists maintained by them.  The	 matter	 is,
therefore, remitted to the Commissioner for fresh  disposal.
[757F; 759A]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4552  of
1989.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated 23.12. 1988  of	 the
Rajasthan High Court in C.W.P. No. 13 of 1987.
G.L. Sanghi and Y.P. Rao for the Appellant.
    C.S.  Vaidyanathan,	 S.R. Setia and K.V. Mohan  for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K. JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. Special leave granted.
    Having  heard counsel on both sides and  having  perused
the  material on record, we are of opinion that	 the  matter
requires reconsideration by the Provident Fund Commissioner.
    The	 Food  Corporation of India has	 depots	 located  at
various places in Rajasthan for handling storing and  trans-
porting	 food  grains and other articles. It  has  appointed
contractors for execution of such works and the	 contractors
in  turn engaged some workers. In respect of  such  workers,
the Provident Fund Commissioner called upon the	 Corporation
to deposit contribution payable under the Employees,  Provi-
dent  Fund Act and the scheme framed thereunder. When  there
was  non-compliance,  the Commissioner made an	order  under
section 7A
of the said Act determining amount payable by the
Corporation.  Being  aggrieved by  that	 determination,	 the
Corporation moved the
757
High  Court for relief under
Art. 226
of  the  Constitution.
The High Court has dismissed the petition. Hence the  Corpo-
ration has appealed to this Court.
The	 grievance complained of by the Corporation is	that
it was denied of reasonable opportunity to produce  material
in proof of identification of the workers in respect of whom
the contribution was payable. It is urged that the  contrac-
tors are in possession of the relevant lists and the Commis-
sioner	has  not even given notice to contractors  nor	made
them  parties  to the proceedings in spite of  repeated	 re-
quests	made  by the Corporation. Counsel for the  Union  of
Workmen, however, contended that under the provisions of the
Contract  Labour  (Regulation and Abolition) Act,  1970
the
Corporation  being  the principal employer has	to  maintain
list  of  workers; that it has failed to produce  such	list
and,  therefore, it cannot throw the burden on the  contrac-
tors to prove the case.
We	have carefully perused the Commissioner's order	 and
also  the order of the High Court. The total amount  ordered
to be payable comes to about Rs.22,48,000 in respect of	 the
employees  of depots namely: Udaipur, Jaipur, Ajmer,  Badmer
and  Sawai Madhopur. The Commissioner has also directed	 the
Divisional  Officer,  Jaipur to deposit the  Provident	Fund
Contribution i.e. Rs. 18,72,194 to the Fund being maintained
by  the trustees of the establishment. It is indeed a  large
amount	for the determination of which the Commissioner	 has
only  depended	upon  the lists furnished  by  the  workers,
Union. It is no doubt true that the employer and contractors
are  both  liable to maintain registers in  respect  of	 the
workers	 employed.  But the Corporation seems to  have	some
problems  in collating the lists of all workers	 engaged  in
depots	scattered at different places. It has requested	 the
Commissioner  to summon the contractors to produce  the	 re-
spective lists of workers engaged by them. The	Commissioner
did  not summon the Contractors nor the lists maintained  by
them.  He  has	stated that the Corporation  has  failed  to
produce the evidence.
The	 question,  in our opinion, is not whether  one	 has
failed	to  produce evidence. The question  is	whether	 the
Commissioner  who is the statutory authority  has  exercised
powers vested in him to collect the relevant evidence before
determining the amount payable under the said Act.
    It	is of importance to remember that  the	Commissioner
while conducting an inquiry under section (7A) has the	same
powers as are
758
vested	in  a Court under
the Code of  Civil  Procedure
for
trying a suit. The section reads as follows:
"
S.  7(A)
Determination of  Moneys  due	from
	      Employer--
(1)  The Central Provident Fund  Commissioner,
	      any  Deputy  Provident  Commissioner  or	 any
	      Regional	Provident Fund Commissioner may,  by
	      order  determine the amount due from  any	 em-
ployer  under any provision of this  Act	(the
	      scheme  or  the Family Pension Scheme  or	 the
	      Insurance	 Scheme as the case may be) and	 for
	      this  purpose may conduct such inquiry  as  he
	      may deem necessary.
(2)  The Officer conducting the inquiry  under
	      sub-section  (1)	shall, for the	purposes  of
	      such  inquiry,  have the same  powers  as	 are
	      vested  in  a Court under
the  Code  of  Civil
	      Procedure
, 1908, for trying a suit in  respect
	      of the following matters, namely:
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person  or
	      examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production  of
	      documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of
	      witnesses.
and  any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial	pro-
ceeding within the meaning of Sections 193 and 228, and	 for
the purpose of
Section 196
of the Indian Penal Code."
    It	will  be  seen from the above  provisions  that	 the
Commissioner is authorised to 'enforce attendance in  person
and  also  to examine any person on oath. He has  the  power
requiring  the discovery and production of  documents.	This
power  was given to the Commissioner to decide not  abstract
questions  of  law, but only to	 determine  actual  concrete
differences  in	 payment of contribution and other  dues  by
identifying  the workmen. The Commissioner  should  exercise
all  his  powers  to collect all evidence  and	collate	 all
material  before  coming to proper conclusion. That  is	 the
legal  duty  of	 the Commissioner. It would  be	 failure  to
exercise  the jurisdiction particularly when a party to	 the
proceedings requests for summoning evidence from a  particu-
lar person.
759
We, therefore, allow the appeal and reverse the order of
the  Commissioner  and that of the High	 Court.	 The  matter
stands remitted to the Commissioner to dispose it of  afresh
and in accordance with law and in the light of the  observa-
tion made.
The	 parties  shall appear before  the  Commissioner  to
receive further orders on December 12, 1989. The Commission-
er, shall dispose of the matter within three months thereaf-
ter.
N  .P.V.					      Appeal
allowed.
760