[Cites
6
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Bhagwanti And Anr vs Union Of India on 29 August, 1989
Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 2088, 1989 SCR (3)1010, AIR 1989 SUPREME COURT 2088, 1989 (4) SCC 397, 1989 LAB. I. C. 2007, (1989) 2 CURLR 514, (1990) 1 MAD LW 517, (1989) 2 LAB LN 496, (1990) 1 PAT LJR 15, 1989 SCC (L&S) 653, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 196, (1990) 1 UPLBEC 48, 1989 RAJLR 412, (1989) 15 ALL LR 814, (1989) 3 JT 545 (SC)
Author:
Misra Rangnath
Bench:
Misra Rangnath
,
G.L.  Oza
PETITIONER:
SMT. BHAGWANTI AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/08/1989

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
OZA, G.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 2088		  1989 SCR  (3)1010
 1989 SCC  (4) 397	  JT 1989 (3)	545
 1989 SCALE  (2)377


ACT:
    Central   Civil  Services  (Pension)  Rules	  1972--Rule
54(14)(b)-'Family'--Definition of--Clauses (i) and (ii) held
ultra  vires
Article 14--
Spouses who get married  after	 re-
tirement  of Government servant-Children born after  retire-
ment--Whether entitled to family pension.
    Constitution of India-Article 14---Rule 54(14)(b)(i) and
(ii)Central  Civil  Services  (Pension)	 Rules--Held   ultra
vires.



HEADNOTE:
    These  two Writ Petitions have been filed by the  widows
of the pensioners viz. Smt. Bhagwati and Smt. Sharda  Swamy,
as they have been refused family pension after the demise of
their husbands.
    Smt.  Bhagwanti  is the widow of an	 Ex-Subedar  of	 the
Indian	Army  who  retired after serving  for  18  years  on
3.8.1947. He was given pension. In 1955 his wife died and in
1965 he married the petitioner. The Subedar died in  Septem-
ber  1985 in an accident. The Petitioner Smt. Bhagwanti	 who
has  two minor children applied for family pension  but	 the
same was not granted to her.
    The	 other Petitioner Smt. Sharda Swamy is the  wife  of
the  retired  railway employee. Her husband  took  voluntary
retirement  at	the age of 44 years in	November  1979.	 The
Petitioner  married her deceased husband in 1981 and  has  a
daughter  born to her in 1984. Petitioner's husband died  in
1986.  The petitioner applied for a family pension but by  a
letter dated 3.8.1988, she was informed that her application
has  been  rejected. It was stated therein that it  has	 not
been found possible to include wife of a Government  Servant
who  had  married after retirement in the definition  of  ''
family" for grant of family pension.
    In the counter affidavits filed on behalf of the  Union,
the  stand taken in the first case is that the	pension	 has
been refused as the marriage was after retirement and in the
other  case the Union relied on the definition	of  "family"
occurring  in Rule 54(14)(b) of the Central  Civil  Services
(Pension)  Rules 1972, which speaks of marriage	 before	 re-
tirement.
1011
    The common stand taken thus by the Union is that  family
pension	 would not be admissible to spouses who get  married
after the retirement of the Government servant nor to  chil-
dren born after retirement.
Allowing the Writ Petitions this Court
    HELD:  Pension  is payable, as pointed  out	 in  several
Judgments of this Court, on the consideration of past  serv-
ice  rendered by the Government servant. Payability  of	 the
family pension is basically on the self-same  consideration.
Since  pension	is linked with past service and	 the  avowed
purpose of the Pension Rules is to provide sustenance in old
age,  distinction between marriage during service  and	mar-
riage  after  retirement  appears to  be  indeed  arbitrary.
[101411-1015B]
    Admittedly,	 the  definition of "family"  as  it  stands
after amendment excludes the spouse of the Government  serv-
ant  who  has got married to such Government  servant  after
his/her	 retirement and the children born  after  retirement
also stand excluded. [1014F]
    In	most  cases, marriage after retirement	is  done  to
provide	 protection,  secure  companionship  and  to  secure
support in old age. [1015C]
    The consideration upon which pension proper is  admissi-
ble  or the benefit of the family pension has been  extended
do  not justify the distinction envisaged in the  definition
of  "family"  by keeping the postretiral spouse out  of	 it.
[1015D]
    The	 two limitations incorporated in the  definition  of
"family" suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and discrimi-
nation and cannot be supported by nexus or reasonable  clas-
sification. [1016D]
    The	 words	"provided  the marriage	 took  place  before
retirement of the Government servant" in clause (i) and "but
shall not include son or daughter born after retirement"  in
clause (ii) are thus ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitu-
tion and cannot be sustained. [1016E]
    D.S. Nakara & Ors. v. Union of India, [1983] 2 SCR	165;
Deoki Nanaan Prasad v. State of Bihar & Ors., [1971]  Suppl.
SCR  634; Smt. Poonamal v. Union of India & Ors.,  [1985]  3
SCR 1042; referred to.



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition Nos. 1128 and	1204
of 1988,
1012
(Under
Article  32
of  the  Constitution  of
	      India).
Mrs. S. Ramachandran for the Petitioners.
		  V.C.	Mahajan, Ms. A. Subhashini  and	 Ms.
	      Kusum Chaudhary
	      for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    RANGANATH  MISRA,  J. Each of these two  writ  petitions
under
Article 32
of the Constitution is by the widow of	 the
respective pensioners. Since family pension under the  Rules
has  not been given to them, they have asked for a  mandamus
to  the respondent-Union of India to grant such	 pension  in
terms  of the pension scheme applicable to the	category  to
which the husbands of the respective petitioners belonged.
    Petitioner Smt. Bhagwanti is the widow of an  ex-Subedar
of  the Indian Army. Her husband after serving for 18  years
retired on 3.8.1947 and was given pension. In 1955, his wife
died  and  in  1965 he was married to  the  petitioner.	 The
Subedar	 died in September, 1985 in an accident.  Petitioner
who  has two minor children applied for family	pension	 and
the same has not been granted.
The	 petitioner  in the connected writ petition  is	 the
wife of a retired Railway employee. Her husband took  volun-
tary  retirement at the age of 44 in November,	1979.  Peti-
tioner got married to her husband in 1981 and has a daughter
born  in 1984 out of the said wedlock. Petitioner's  husband
died in 1986. The petitioner applied for family pension	 but
by  a letter dated 3rd of August, 1988, her application	 was
rejected  by  saying:  'It has not been	 found	possible  to
include	 wife of a Government servant who had married  after
retirement in the definition of 'family' for grant of family
pension'.
Counter-affidavits	have  been filed in  both  the	writ
petitions. In the first case, in the return made by  Captain
N.K. Vishwakarma from the Office of Records AMC, Lucknow  in
paragraph  A, it has been stated that pension has  been	 re-
fused  as petitioner's marriage was after retirement of	 the
Subedar.  In  the  connected matter,  the  Senior  Personnel
Manager of the South-Central Railway has placed reliance  on
the  definition of 'family' occurring in Rule  54(14)(b)  of
the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972. As far  as
relevant, the definition reads thus:
1013
"(b).  'Family'  in relation to  a  Government
	      servant means--
(i)  wife in the case of a male	Gov-
ernment  servant, Or husband in the case of  a
	      female  Government servant, provided the	mar-
	      riage  took  place before	 retirement  of	 the
	      Government servant.
...................................................
........
(ii) son who has not attained the age
	      of twenty-one years and unmarried daughter who
	      has  not	attained the age  of  thirty  years,
	      including such son and daughter adopted legal-
	      ly before retirement but shall not include son
	      or daughter born after retirement."
The common stand of the Union of India in the two cases,
therefore, is that family pension would not be admissible to
spouses who get married after the retirement of the  Govern-
ment servant, nor to children born after such retirement.
    The	 only question for consideration in these  two	writ
petitions  therefore,  has  two	 facets:  (i)  whether	 the
spouse--man or woman, as the case may be--married after	 the
retirement  of the concerned Government servant can be	kept
out of the definition so as to deprive him from the  benefit
of  the	 family pension, and (ii) whether  off-springs	born
after retirement are entitled to benefits of such pension.
In
D.S. Nakara & Ors. v. Union of India
, [1983]  2	 SCR
165,  a	 Constitution Bench of this Court at p. 185  of	 the
Reports observed:
"	 .........  pension is not only compensation
	      for  loyal service rendered in the  past,	 but
	      pension  also has a broader  significance,  in
	      that it is a measure of socio-economic justice
	      which inheres economic security in the fall of
	      life  when  physical  and	 mental	 prowess  is
	      ebbing  corresponding  to aging  process	and,
	      therefore,  one  is required to fall  back  on
	      savings.	One such saving in kind is when	 you
	      gave your best in the hey-day of life to	your
	      employer,	 in  days  of  invalidity,  economic
	      security	by  way	 of  periodical	 payment  is
	      assured. The term has been judicially  defined
	      as  a  stated  allowance or  stipend  made  in
	      consideration  of past service or a  surrender
	      of rights or emoluments to one retired from
1014
service-	Thus  the pension payable  to  be  a
	      Government  employee  is earned  by  rendering
	      long and efficient service and, therefore, can
	      be  said to be a deferred portion of the	com-
	      pensation	 or  for service  rendered.
In	 one
	      sentence	one can say that the most  practical
	      raison detre for pension,, is the inability to
	      provide for oneself due to old age  ......
In
Deoki  Nandan Prasad v. State of Bihar  &  Ors.
,  [1971]
Suppl. SCR 634, it was held by this Court:
"The  payment of pension does not depend	upon
	      the  discretion of the Government but is	gov-
	      erned  by the relevant rules and anyone  enti-
	      tled to the pension under the rules can  claim
	      it as a matter of right."
In
Smt.  Poonamal v. Union of India & Ors.
,  [1985]  3	 SCR
1042, it was pointed out:
"Where  the Government servant rendered  serv-
	      ice,  to	compensate which  a  family  pension
	      scheme is devised, the widow and the dependent
	      minors  would  equally be entitled  to  family
	      pension as a matter of right. In fact we	look
	      upon  pension not merely as a statutory  right
	      but  as  the fulfilment  of  a  constitutional
	      promise in as much as it partakes the  charac-
	      ter of public assistance in cases of unemploy-
	      ment,  old-age, disablement or  similar  other
	      cases  of	 undeserved  want.  Relevant   rules
	      merely   make  effective	the   constitutional
	      mandate.	That is how pension has been  looked
	      upon in D.S. Nakara's judgment."
Admittedly,  the  definition of 'family' as  it  stands
after amendment excludes that scope of the Government  serv-
ant  who  has got married to such Government  servant  after
his/her	 retirement and the children born  after  retirement
also  stand excluded. Petitioners have challenged the  stand
of  the	 Union of India and the definition  in	the  Pension
Rules as arbitrary and discriminatory- It has been contended
that  if family pension is payable to the widow or the	hus-
band  as  the case may be, of the  Government  servant,	 the
category  which the definition keeps out, namely, those	 who
have  married  after retirement and  offsprings	 of  regular
marriage born after retirement, is discriminatory.
Pension	 is payable, as pointed out in several judgments  of
this
1015
Court, on the consideration of past service rendered by	 the
Government  servant.  Payability of the	 family	 pension  is
basically  on the self same consideration. Since pension  is
linked	with  past  service and the avowed  purpose  of	 the
Pension Rules is to provide sustenance in old age,  distinc-
tion  between  marriage during service	and  marriage  after
retirement  appears  to be indeed arbitrary. There  are	 in-
stances	 where	a  Government servant  contracts  his  first
marriage  after	 retirement. In these two cases	 before	 us,
retirement had been at an early age. In the Subedar's  case,
he had retired after putting in 18 years of service and	 the
Railway	 employee had retired prematurely at the age of	 44.
Premature  or early retirement has indeed no  relevance	 for
deciding the point at issue. It is not the case of the Union
of India and, perhaps there would have been no force in such
contention  if raised, that family pension is admissible  on
account	 of  the  fact that the spouse	contributed  to	 the
efficiency  of	the Government servant	during	his  service
career. In most cases, marriage after retirement is done  to
provide	 protection,  secure  companionship  and  to  secure
support	 in  old age. The consideration upon  which  pension
proper	is admissible or the benefit of the  family  pension
has  been extended do not justify the distinction  envisaged
in  the	 definition of 'family' by keeping  the	 postretiral
spouse out of it.
Government	Servants  Conduct  Rules  prohibit  marriage
during the life-time of a spouse.
Section 494
of the  Indian
Penal Code makes second marriage void and makes it a  crimi-
nal  offence.  Thereafter, both before retirement  and	even
after  retirement there is no scope for a person to  have  a
second	wife  or a husband. as the case may be,	 during	 the
life-time of an existing spouse.
Reliance  has been placed on the recommendations of	 the
Third Pay Commission on the basis of which the amendment  in
the  Pension  Rules is said to have been  made.	 Apart	from
referring  to the recommendations, no attempt has been	made
at  the hearing by counsel for the Union of India to  derive
support from the recommendations. We really see no  justifi-
cation as to why post-retirement marriages should have	been
kept out of the purview of the definition.
In	clause (ii) of the definition son or  daughter	born
after  retirement  even out of wedlock prior  to  retirement
have been excluded from the definition. No plausible  expla-
nation has been placed for our consideration for this exclu-
sion.  The purpose for which family pension is provided,  as
indicated in
Smt. Poonamal
's case, is frustrated if children
born after retirement are excluded from the benefit of the
1016
family	pension.  Prospect of children being  born  at	such
advanced  age (keeping the age of normal  superannuation  in
view) is minimal but for the few that may be born after	 the
retirement, family pension would be most necessary as in the
absence	 thereof,. in the event of death of  the  Government
servant	 such minor children would go without  support.	 The
social	purpose which was noticed in some pension  cases  by
this Court would not justify the stand taken by the Union of
India  in the counter-affidavit. It is not the case  of	 the
Union  Government that as a matter of public policy to	con-
tain  the growth of population, the definition has  been  so
modified.  Even	 if such a contention had been	advanced  it
would  not  have stood logical scrutiny on  account  of	 the
position that the Government servant may not have any  child
prior  to  retirement  and in view of  the  accepted  public
policy that a couple could have children upto two, the	only
child born after superannuation should not be denied  family
pension.
Considered	from any angle, we are of the view that	 the
two  limitations incorporated in the definition of  'family'
suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and discrimination and
cannot	be supported by nexus or reasonable  classification.
The  Words 'provided the marriage took place before  retire-
ment of the Government servant' in clause (i) and 'but shall
not include son or daughter born after retirement' in clause
(ii) are thus ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution and
cannot be sustained.
The writ petitions are allowed. The respondent Union  of
India shall have a direction to extend to each of the  peti-
tioners in the two writ petitions family pension as admissi-
ble  under the respective schemes from the date the  husband
of each of petitioners died.
Since these writ petitions were instituted on the  basis
of  letters  received  by the Court and	 treated  as  public
interest litigation and were supported by the Supreme  Court
Legal Aid Committee through their counsel, there shall be no
order as to costs.
Y. Lal			     Petitions allowed.
1017