[Cites
9
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Kerala & Ors vs A.P Mammikutty on 1 July, 2015
Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 SUPREME COURT 3009, 2015 (10) SCC 632, 2015 AIR SCW 4294, AIR 2016 SC (CIVIL) 777, (2015) 3 KER LT 138, (2015) 7 SCALE 231, (2016) 1 MAD LW 655, (2015) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 533
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
Prafulla C. Pant
,
Dipak Misra
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1640 of 2015
                        (@ SLP(C) NO. 12269 OF 2014)



State of Kerala & Ors.                       ...   Appellants

                                Versus

A.P. Mammikutty                         ...  Respondent



                               J U D G M E N T
Dipak Misra, J.
The respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the High  Court  of  Kerala
at Ernakulam under
Article 226
of the Constitution assailing the  demand  of
luxury  tax  imposed  on  a  building  that  consists  of   13   residential
apartments.  The Tahasildar who is the competent statutory  authority  under
the
Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975
(for brevity “the  Act”)   imposed  luxury
tax on the building on the base of
Section 5A
of the Act  vide  order  dated
1.10.2003 in Ref B4-6435/03 whereby he had measured the plinth area  of  all
the residential apartments and computed the  tax  treating  the  same  as  a
singular building.
2.    The learned Single Judge opined that the levy of  luxury  tax  of  the
entire building on the owner was not permissible  under  the  Act,  for  the
scheme is to levy luxury tax for each residential apartment, plinth area  of
which is in excess of the limit provided under
Section 5A
of  the  Act.   It
has been further ruled by the learned Single Judge that if the  plinth  area
of each residential apartment was below 278.7 sq. mts., there was  no  scope
of levying luxury tax.  And if the concerned Tahsildar had  found  that  the
plinth area of the residential  apartments  in  toto  was  above  278.7  sq.
metres, the luxury tax for such  apartments  could  be  demanded,  the  writ
petition was disposed of with the direction that Tahsildar would verify  the
plinth area of each residential apartment and levy luxury tax only for  such
of the residential apartment plinth area of  which  was  in  excess  of  the
limit provided under
Section 5A
of  the  Act.   The  relevant  part  of  the
opinion expressed by the learned Single Judge is reproduced below:-
“Even though petitioner is the owner of the entire building, luxury  tax  is
leviable only if the plinth area of each residential apartment is in  excess
of the limit provided under
Section 5A
of  the  Kerala  Building  Tax  Act.
Tahsildar has demanded luxury tax by clubbing the  plinth  area  of  various
residential apartments.  This is not  permissible  under  the  Act  and  the
scheme is to levy luxury tax for each residential apartment, plinth area  of
which is in excess of the limit provided under
Section 5A
of  the  Act.   If
plinth area of each residential apartment is below  278.7  sq.  meters  then
there is no  scope  for  levying  luxury  tax.   However,  if  Tahsildar  on
inspection finds that the plinth area of any residential apartment is  above
278.7 sq. metres, then he can demand luxury tax for such  of  the  apartment
or apartments.”
3.    Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment  and  order  passed  by  the
learned  Single  Judge  dated  12.06.2008  the  State  of  Kerala  and   its
functionaries preferred writ appeal No. 2150 of 2008.   The  Division  Bench
referred to
Section 5A
of the Act, dictionary clause  contained  in
Section
2
, especially,
Section 2 (k)
and  the  Explanation  II  to  Clause  (e)  of
Section 2
and came to hold that if there is one building  having  more  than
one floor and they are inter-connected with each other and if one  floor  is
of no use without the  existence  of  another  floor,  then  it  has  to  be
considered as one building.  The Division Bench further proceeded  to  state
that as there were 13 independent  flats  or  apartments  and  each  of  the
building could be used on its own without reference to the other  apartment,
the question of taking the measurement of another building to calculate  the
plinth area would not arise.  The conclusion recorded by the Division  Bench
reads as follows:-
“For the purpose of calculating the plinth area, if  the  intention  of  the
legislature was to adopt the entire Explanation (2) to clause (e) even  with
reference to proviso to 2(k) there was no  need  to  mention  the  aggregate
area where a building has more than one floor.  The very reference  to  more
than one floor of a building would explicitly mean, if read along  with  the
proviso that whether the building is a single unit so far as functional  use
is concerned, or separate  units,  so  far  as  functional  utility  of  the
building.  If there is one building having more than one floor and they  are
interconnected with each other, in other words, if one floor is  of  no  use
without the existence of another floor, then it has to be considered as  one
building.  Therefore, if there are 13 independent flats  or  apartments  and
if each of the building could be used on its own without  reference  to  the
other apartment, the question of taking the measurement of another  building
to calculate the plinth area would not arise.”
4.    The singular question  that  emanates  for  consideration  is  whether
under the provisions of the Act, the revenue  authorities  are  entitled  to
levy the demand of luxury tax from the respondent  by  clubbing  the  plinth
area of the apartments which are 13 in number or  the  plinth  area  of  the
individual apartment should be taken into  consideration  for  levy  of  the
said impost.
5.    Relying on
Section 2(e)
of the Act, it is  contended  by  the  learned
counsel for the State that on a plain  reading  of  Explanation  II,  it  is
vivid that a building consisting of different apartments  or  flats  can  be
deemed to be a separate  building,  if  two  conditions,  namely,  that  the
apartments or flats  are  owned  by  different  persons;  and  the  cost  of
construction of the building has been met by all such  owners  jointly,  are
satisfied.  The submission of the learned  counsel  for  the  appellants  is
that the ownership of all  the  13  apartments  rests  with  the  respondent
himself and the cost of construction having been singularly  borne  by  him,
the twin conditions enshrined under the Explanation II  are  not  satisfied,
and, therefore, it is impermissible to treat the  individual  apartments  of
the building as different buildings.  Learned counsel would  emphasise  that
the situation envisaged under Explanation II to
Section 2(e)
would arise  in
a situation where the apartments are pre-booked  by  the  buyers  and  whole
consideration is paid in advance  to  the  builder  thereby  satisfying  the
condition of separate ownership and joint meeting of  costs.   Reliance  has
been placed on
Section 5A
of the Act and other definitions under
Section  2
and on that basis, it is urged that the plinth area  as  prescribed  is  far
excess of the same inasmuch as the residential portion of  the  building  is
590.4 sq.mts.
6.    The submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is  that  the
Explanation II to
Section 2(e)
has no application for  the  levy  of  luxury
tax, for it is only applicable for the purpose of levy of building tax.   It
is argued by him that levy of luxury tax is only for a residential  building
and the reference to building in Explanation II in
Section  2(e)
does  not
apply to a residential building.   Learned  counsel  has  drawn  distinction
between “residential building” and a “building” by drawing our attention  to
Section 2(l)
of the Act.  It is propounded  by  him  that  none  of  the  13
apartments individually have the plinth area of more  than  278.7  sq.  mts.
and hence, the proviso to
Section 5A
of the Act is  not  applicable  to  the
present case.   It  is  contended  that  demand  has  to  be  made  for  the
residential apartments and not for the owner who is holding the whole  unit.
 Elaborating the said stand, it is submitted that there cannot  be  clubbing
of the residential apartments together for  the  purpose  of  imposition  of
luxury tax.
7.    To appreciate the rival submissions, it is necessary  to  extract  the
relevant part of
Section 2(e)
, which defines “building”.  It is as under:-
“ “Building” means a house, out-house, garage or  any  other  structure,  or
part thereof, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, metal or other material  but
does not include any portable shelter or any  shed  constructed  principally
of mud, bamboos, leaves, grass, thatch or a latrine which  is  not  attached
to the main structure.
[...]

Explanation II: Where a building consists of different apartments  or  flats
owned by different persons and the cost of construction of the building  was
met by all such persons jointly,  each  such  apartment  or  flat  shall  be
deemed to be a separate building.”        [Emphasis supplied]
8.
Section 2(k)
of the Act, which defines the “plinth  area”,   reads  as
follows:-
“plinth area” means the area included in the floor of a building  and  where
a building has more than one floor the aggregate area included  in  all  the
floors together:                  [Emphasis supplied]

Provided that in case of a building referred to in the  Explanation  (2)  to
clause (e), the plinth area shall be calculated separately.”
9.
Section 2(l)
of the Act that defines  “residential  building”,  is  as
follows:-
“‘residential building’ means a building or  any  other  structure  or  part
thereof built exclusively for residential purpose  including  out-houses  or
garages appurtenant to the building for the  more  beneficial  enjoyment  of
the main building but does not include hotels, boarding places,  lodges  and
the like.”
10.
Section 5A
stipulates charge  of  luxury  tax.   The  said  provision,
being of significance, to deal with the controversy in hand,  is  reproduced
below:-
“5A. Charge of luxury tax.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in  this
Act, there shall be charged a luxury tax of two thousand rupees annually  on
all residential buildings having a plinth area of  278.7  square  metres  or
more and completed on or after the 1st day of April, 1999.
11.   As is evident, the aforesaid provision commences with  a  non-obstante
clause, and, therefore, has to be given primacy over  the  other  provisions
of the Act.  It clearly provides that luxury tax of  Rs.2,000/-  is  payable
by the owners of all residential buildings constructed on or after  1.4.1999
having plinth area of 278.7 sq.mts. or more.  In the instant case, there  is
no cavil over the fact that the  building  in  question  consists  of  three
storeys and has 13 apartments/ flats.  There is no  dispute  over  the  fact
that the aggregate area is more than 278.7  sq.mts.   The  controversy  that
has emerged is what is meant by the term “residential building” and  whether
each of the 13 apartments constitute a separate building or  is  a  singular
building for the purpose of levy of luxury tax.  There is  no  quarrel  over
the fact and it is also manifest that each  of  the  residential  apartments
has the plinth area of less than 278.7 sq.mts., but when the  entire  plinth
area of 13 apartments is taken by applying the method of  clubbing  or  when
the plinth area is aggregated, it exceeds 278.7 sq.mts.  It is the  admitted
position that the building has been constructed  after  1.4.1999,  that  is,
the date provided in
Section 5A
of the Act.
12.
Section 2(k)
of the Act defines the term  “plinth  area”  and
Section
2(l)
of the Act defines the term “residential building”.   We  have  already
quoted the aforesaid provisions.   As we  notice,  the  term  “plinth  area”
means the area included in the floor of a  building  and  where  a  building
consists of more than one floor,  aggregate  area  of  all  the  floors  and
hence, the plinth area can include the entire  construction,  that  is,  the
floor area of a multi-storied  building.  The  question  would  still  arise
whether different apartments owned by separate persons can  be  clubbed  and
aggregated in a multi-storied building.  The  proviso  thereto  states  that
the plinth area of an entire building can be separated.   It  is  postulated
therein that in case of a building when Explanation II to
Section  2(e)
is
attracted, the plinth area  should  be  calculated  separately.   The  issue
which requires examination and apposite answer is  whether  the  Explanation
II to
Section 2 (e)
as an ameliorative and beneficial  provision,  restricts
and debars calculation and computations of plinth area of  each  independent
apartment by different owners in a multi-storied building.
13.   Having dealt with the concept of plinth area and its applicability  in
the backdrop of the provision, we are required to  scan  the  definition  of
“building”.  As noted earlier, “building” has been defined in
Section  2(e)
of the Act to mean a house, out-house, garage or  any  other  structure,  or
part thereof.  The construction can  be  masonry,  bricks,  wood,  metal  or
other material.  It does not include portable shelter or sheds  including  a
latrine which is not attached to the main structure.  Explanation II is  the
fulcrum  that  would  determine  the  question   that   has   emanated   for
consideration in this case.  The said Explanation lays the stipulation  that
when  a  building  consists  of  different  apartments  or  flats  owned  by
different persons and cost of the  building  has  to  be  met  by  all  such
persons, each apartment or flat is deemed to be a separate building.   On  a
dissection of the said provision, it appears  that  said  Explanation  would
apply when there is a building; that the building must consist of  different
flats or apartments; that each apartment or flat must be owned by  different
persons and cost  of  construction  of  the  building  must  have  been  met
jointly, and in such cases plinth area cannot be clubbed.   Learned  counsel
for  the  appellant-State  has  submitted  that  as  there   has   been   no
contribution of funds at the time of construction.  The  Explanation  II  to
Section 2(e)
would not be applicable and the respondent has  to  be  treated
as the sole owner.  As we perceive, Explanation II  to
Section  2(e)
takes
care of a  situation  where  the  building  is  constructed  and  there  are
different owners who have paid  the  purchase  price  for  their  respective
apartments.  The Explanation should not be read  as  a  negative  provision,
detrimental and fatal to cases  where  there  are  separate  owners  of  the
apartments, for that  is  not  the  basic  object  and  purpose  behind  the
Explanation II  to
Section  2(e)
of  the  Act.  It  is  a  benevolent  and
beneficial provision which has not been enacted to curtail and nullify  what
is logical and apparent to reason.
14.   In this context,  it  is  imperative  to  analyse  what  is  meant  by
“residential building”.  The definition in clause 2(l), means a building  or
any other structure or part thereof used for residential purpose  and  house
or out-house or  garage  appurtenant  to  a  building  for  more  beneficial
enjoyment. It excludes hotels, boarding places, lodges and the like.   Thus,
the  expression  “residential  building”  cannot  be   interpreted   without
reference to the term “building” and Explanation II to
Section 2(e)
of  the
Act.  Therefore, each residential building owned by single  owner  would  be
subjected to luxury tax, if it has  the  plinth  area  which  exceeds  278.7
sq.mts.  It makes no difference whether the  residential  building  consists
of one floor or it is two-storied or three-storied or consists  of  multiple
flats or apartments. The entire plinth  area  in  the  residential  building
owned by a singular owner is required to be aggregated.   It  is  noticeable
that
Section 5A
does not refer to aggregate plinth area of all  the  floors.
The intention of the legislature is apparent that if a person is  the  owner
of the plinth area of 278.7 sq.mts or more  in  one  building,  even  if  it
consists of separate or distinct apartments, he would be liable to  pay  the
luxury tax under
Section 5A
of the Act.  It also becomes further clear  when
the definition of “plinth area” in
Section 2 (k)
is  properly  appreciated.
It clearly postulates that “plinth area” means  the  area  included  in  the
floor of the building and where building has more than one  floor  aggregate
area included in all the floors are taken together. The proviso to the  said
definition lays down  that  in  case  of  a  building  referred  to  in  the
Explanation II  to  clause  (e),  the  “plinth  area”  shall  be  calculated
separately.   Thus,
Section  2(k)
has  an  insegragable  nexus  with   the
definition of “building”.  Explanation II  to
Section  2(e)
which  defines
“residential  building”  only  conveys  about   the   building   meant   for
residential purpose and what  it  includes.
Section  5A
is  the  charging
Section and as has been stated earlier, it  commences  with  a  non-obstante
clause.  It determines the annual luxury tax on  all  residential  buildings
having a plinth area of 278.7 sq. mts. or more.   It  provides  a  date  for
completion that is  1st  April  1999.   Though,  it  does  not  provide  for
aggregate it refers to residential building definition of which refers to  a
building.
Section 2(k)
defines “plinth area” of the building.
Section  5A
also includes “plinth area”.  Though the term “aggregate” is  not  mentioned
but the words therein are buildings having plinth area and in  that  context
one is required to scan and analyse the meaning of the term  “building”  and
the “plinth area” as defined  under
Section  2(e)
and
2(k)
respectively.
“Plinth area” as defined clearly provides that when one  building  has  more
than one floor, the aggregate area includes all  the  floors.   To  give  an
example, a building consisting of four storeys belongs to  a  single  owner,
the aggregate of all the floors are to be included for  calculation  of  the
plinth area and thereby  the  computation  of  the  luxury  tax  has  to  be
determined as provided under
Section  5A
.   Be  it  noted,  the  proviso  to
Section 2(k)
clearly stipulates that if a building as referred  falls  under
Explanation II  to
Section  2(e)
,  the  plinth  area  shall  be  calculated
separately.  The Explanation II refers  to  different  apartments  or  flats
owned  by  different  persons.   It  also  states  that  the  cost  of   the
construction of the building is to be  met  by  all  such  persons  jointly.
This Explanation, as noted before, is required to be appositely  understood.
 The learned counsel for the state would submit that  if  there  is  initial
booking and the persons have contributed  for  the  construction  definitely
there shall be separate computation. The Explanation II has to be read  with
Section 5A
which starts with a non-obstante clause.
Section 5A
as has  been
mentioned before refers to “residential building” having plinth  area  278.7
sq. mts. or more and, therefore, the said provision also takes note of  this
definition.  In view of the above, the contention advanced  by  the  learned
counsel for the State is difficult to accept.  The definitions  have  to  be
given a proper construction.  There can be a case where the owner  erects  a
multi-storied building consisting 10 floors.  He builds it at his  own  cost
and thereafter he sells the apartments or flats to 10 persons  and  in  that
event he ceases to be the owner of the building.  The 10  purchasers  become
the owners of flats and in such a situation it will  lead  to  an  absurdity
because one single person who once owned  the  entire  building  or  several
apartments, though has ceased to be the owner in law yet  is  asked  to  pay
the luxury tax solely on the ground that at the time of  construction  there
was no contribution by the purchasers or to put  it  differently  there  had
been no prior booking.  This is not the intention.  The  Explanation  II  to
Section 2(e)
has to be read harmoniously with proviso to
Section  2(k)
and
Section 5A
of the Act.  The intention of the legislature  as  gatherable  is
that ownership of different flats and the cost of construction  of  building
are met by all such persons.   The meeting of the cost jointly is not to  be
narrowly construed to mean that there has to be  an  investment  before  the
commencement of the construction of the building.  The persons who  purchase
afterwards they really share the value of the construction cost  apart  from
the profit margin due  to  the  builder  or  the  seller.   Unless  such  an
interpretation is placed, the original owner of flats when he ceases  to  be
the owner of the building or the purchaser of a small  apartment  less  then
278.7 square meters would still  be  liable  to  pay  luxury  tax.  Such  an
interpretation would lead to absurdity.
15.   In our considered opinion, the principle of  purposive  interpretation
of the provision has to be adopted and when such a construction  is  placed,
it serves the legislative intent. To elaborate, a person may have  a  three-
storied building and he owns it, then there has to be different  computation
as per the main part of
Section 2(k)
and for that it has  to  be  calculated
as is done by the revenue authority.  Once he ceases to  be  the  owner,  he
will not be liable to pay the luxury tax.  But as long as  he  continues  to
be the owner, as per
Section 5A
, he will be liable to  pay  the  luxury  tax
for all floors/apartments subject to the cap provided under
Section  5A
of
the Act.
In this context we may refer to the decision in
State of  T.N.  v.
Kodaikanal Motor Union (P) Ltd.
[1] wherein this Court,  after  referring  to
K.P. Varghese b. ITO[2] and Luke v. IRC[3], observed thus:-
“The courts must always seek to find out the intention of  the  legislature.
Though the courts must find out  the  intention  of  the  statute  from  the
language used, but language more often than not is an  imperfect  instrument
of expression of human thought. As Lord Denning said it  would  be  idle  to
expect every statutory provision to be drafted with  divine  prescience  and
perfect clarity. As Judge Learned Hand said, we must  not  make  a  fortress
out of dictionary but remember that  statutes  must  have  some  purpose  or
object, whose imaginative discovery is judicial craftsmanship. We  need  not
always cling to literalness and should seek to endeavour to avoid an  unjust
or absurd result. We should not make  a  mockery  of  legislation.  To  make
sense out of an unhappily worded provision, where the  purpose  is  apparent
to the judicial eye ‘some’ violence to language is permissible.”
16.
In
Keshavji Ravji and Co. v. CIT
[4] it has been  held  by  this  court
that when in a taxation statute where  literal  interpretation  leads  to  a
result that does  not  sub-serve  the  object  of  the  legislation  another
construction in consonance with the object can be adopted.
17.   In the case at hand, as is noticeable, the learned  Single  Judge  had
remanded the matter to the revenue authority  and  the  Division  Bench  has
declined to interfere.  The Division Bench has applied the  functional  unit
test.  We do not accept the same.  The learned  Single  Judge,  as  we  have
reproduced a paragraph hereinbefore, has opined that when  the  plinth  area
of any residential apartment is above 278.7 sq.  mts.,  then  the  authority
can demand luxury tax for such apartment or flat.  Be it noted, the  learned
Single Judge has held that even if the person is the  owner  of  the  entire
building the computation would be  apartment-wise.   The  said  analysis  is
also incorrect.  We have given purposive interpretation  to  Explanation  II
as it has to be read with
Section 5A
of the Act.  When the owner parts  with
the building each apartment will be segregable for  the  purpose  of  luxury
tax.   If he remains the owner for the whole or part then he will be  liable
to pay for the plinth area in respect of the flats  or  apartments  that  is
retained by him subject to the cap as envisaged  under
Section  5A
of  the
Act.  If he sells away the entire building then it has to be flat/apartment-
wise calculation/computation, for every apartment owner  is  different  than
the others.  Thus, the plinth area would be different.  To clarify  further,
if a singular person purchases three flats, he will be liable on  the  basis
of aggregate plinth area subject to the cap envisaged under
Section  5A
of
the Act.
18.   In view of the aforesaid, we allow the appeal and set aside the  order
of the revenue authority and that of the High Court  in  writ  petition  and
the writ appeal, and remand the matter to the revenue authority  to  compute
the luxury tax in the manner which we  have  clarified  hereinabove.   There
shall be no order as to costs.
.............................J.
                                                               [Dipak Misra]



                                             ..........................., J.
[Prafulla C. Pant]
New Delhi
July 1, 2015
-----------------------
[1]    (1989) 3 SCC 91
[2]    (1981) 4 SCC 172 : 1981 SCC (Tax) 293
[3]    (1964) 54 ITR 692 : 1963 AC 557 (HL)
[4]    (1990) 2 SCC 231

-----------------------
20