[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dattatraya vs The State Of Maharashtra on 1 February, 2024
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1

                                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2024 INSC 167                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 666/2012

            DATTATRAYA                                                              APPELLANT(S)

                                                            VERSUS

            THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                                RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       O R D E R
This appeal arises out of the final judgment and order dated

            23.11.2010 passed by the Aurangabad Bench of Bombay High Court in

            Criminal               Appeal   No.   06/2009   whereby   the       conviction   of   the

            appellant under
Sections 302
and
316
of the Indian Penal Code

            (for short ‘
IPC
’) was upheld and the appellant was sentenced to

            undergo life imprisonment under
Section 302
and
10
years of R.I.

            under
Section 316
of IPC, and was directed to pay fine amount of

            Rs.5000 and Rs.2000/-, respectively.
2.              The facts of this case are that the appellant (32 years of

            age in the year 2007), was married to one, Meenabai Dattatraya

            Gawali, (who was 30 years of age on the date of the incident).

            The             wife   Meenabai    (deceased)   was   having    a   pregnancy    of   nine

            months at that time. It is the case of the prosecution that the

            appellant came home at about 10.00 P.M. on the fateful night of

            26.01.2007 in an inebriated state. He then picked a fight with
Signature Not Verified
his wife while she was cooking food in the kitchen and poured
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2024.03.04
18:03:34 IST
kerosene on her and as the stove burst, the wife sustained burn
   Reason:
injuries, which in hospital were determined as 98%. She was taken

            to the Civil Hospital, Solapur at about midnight, where the first
2
injury report itself indicates that she sustained burn injuries

of about 98%. A statement is then recorded of the deceased at

01.30 AM on 27.01.2007, which states as under:-
“                   STATEMENT

                                                    Solapur
                                           Dated-27/01/2007
                                              Time-01.30 AM
                           Saturday after completing Friday
Patient is conscious oriental and fit for giving
     valid statement at present.
1.41 AM – 27.01.2007 – Sd/- Deshpande


     Smt.Minabai Datta Gavli, age 30 years, R/o. A. Kata
     Savargaon, Tq.Taljapur, District. Osmanabad gives
     statement that in the night on Friday 26.01.2007 at 10
     PM there was trifle dispute between husband and wife
     and at the time of cooking Mr. Dattatraya Gavli, age
     40 years, service-wireman with the anger of dispute
     poured rockel on me. At that time stove flared up and
     I burned up to 98%. My husband is also burned 40%, Mr.
     Datta Gavli has also burnt. He got burnt while putting
     out the fire. At that time husband had drunk liquor.
He was addicted to liquor. My grandmother admitted in
     Civil Hospital at night 12 am. Now I am under
     treatment and giving statement myself.
Yours faithfully
                                       Thumb Impression
                         Thumb Impression of left hand of
                              Smt. Minabai Dattatraya Gavli

     Before (M.V.Wagh) Executive Magistrate Office,
     Solapur.
Patient was conscious   oriented   and   fit   for   giving
     valid statement.
(Exh.33)
     Sd/- A.P.Deshpande-”
3.   A case is then registered at Tamalwadi Police Station, as

Crime No. 12/2007, filed under
Section 307
of the IPC against the

appellant.
3
4.    As we have already stated above, the deceased at that time

was nine months pregnant. She gave birth to a stillborn child on

the next day i.e., 28.01.2007 and died on 04.02.2007.
5.    The offence which was registered under
Section 307
of the

IPC was converted into an offence under
Section 302
of the IPC

and another charge under Section 3161 was added.
6.    The police after an investigation filed its chargesheet in

the   Court     of    Judicial     Magistrate,        F.C.,   Tuljapur,      which    was

registered      as    RCC    No.96/2007     and       the   case   was   committed      to

Sessions, where it was ultimately placed before Addl. Sessions

Court,     Usmanabad,        Maharashtra.       The   appellant     faced    the    Trial

Court where he was convicted of offences under
Sections 302
and
316
of IPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and 10

years of rigorous imprisonment respectively, along with fine and

default stipulation.
7.    The matter was taken in an appeal before the Bombay High

Court by the appellant which was dismissed.
8.    The Special Leave Petition later was filed by the appellant

before this Court in which leave was granted vide order dated

09.04.2012.
9.    We   have      heard    Mr.Sudhanshu       S.    Choudhari,    learned     counsel

appearing for the appellant and Mr.Bharat Bagla, learned counsel

1
Section 316
. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.--
Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would
be guilty of culpable homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
4
appearing for the respondent, at some length.
10.   The prosecution in this case had examined nine prosecution

witnesses and placed relevant documents such as medical reports,

dying    declaration          etc.,    in    order       to    establish          its    case.    The

appellant gave his statement under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C.,

but did not produce any defence witnesses. In his statement,

under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C., the appellant admits to the

fact that at the relevant point of time, PW-7 who is the maternal

grandmother        of   the    deceased       (the       wife    of        the    appellant)      was

residing with them. He also admits that his wife was nine months

pregnant      at    the    time       of    the       incident       and    gave       birth     to   a

stillborn child on 28.01.2007. He, however, denies all instances

of quarreling with his wife and committing the act as alleged by

the     prosecution.          PW-7     here       is     the     star        witness        of    the

prosecution, who was present in the house and was witness to the

crime. There is also a dying declaration.
11.   After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and then

examining the evidence placed by the prosecution, we find that

there    is   an    overwhelming            evidence      placed       by        the    prosecution

before     the     Trial      Court        regarding       the       incident          itself.    The

prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond reasonable

doubt regarding the incident itself inasmuch as the incident took

place on midnight of 26.01.2007 and 27.01.2007, and the appellant

who was in an inebriated state, picked a quarrel with his wife

and   while      she    was    cooking        his      meal     in    the        kitchen,      poured

kerosene on her as a result of which she sustained burn injuries

and subsequently died.
5
12.   The fact that the appellant had quarreled with the deceased

and had poured kerosene on her is well established. The statement

given by the deceased herself, which the prosecution has placed

as a dying declaration, categorically states that she was being

tortured at the hands of her husband and that her husband was

having an affair with another woman, and that on the fateful day,

he returned late at night in an inebriated state had a fight with

her and then threw kerosene on her, as a result, she sustained

burn injuries. But then, she also states that he also tried to

extinguish the fire and as a result, he too got burn injuries.

The other evidence as we have stated above, is in the form of PW-

7, Chaturabai Tukaram Kale, who is the maternal grand mother of

the deceased, who was residing with the deceased and her husband

(appellant) eight to nine days prior to the incident, and was

taking care of the deceased as she was on the family way. She

also supports the story that the appellant was having an affair

with another woman which was the main reason for the quarrel

between the couple. On the fateful day, the two were quarreling

because of this reason alone and the appellant, thereafter, threw

kerosene on his wife, and set her on fire. Having witnessed the

incident she came out of the house and started shouting that my

grand daughter has been set on fire.
13.   Another prosecution witness which is worth mentioning here

is    PW-8 i.e.   Vimal Suryakant Salunkhe, who is the maternal

aunt, of the deceased and the daughter of PW-7. This witness was

told by the deceased that the appellant had kept a mistress and

this resulted in frequent fights between husband and wife (i.e.,
6
the deceased).   Deceased had also informed her that her husband

i.e., the accused, was addicted to liquor. She was told about the

incident by her mother (PW-7) at about 1 ‘O’ Clock in the night,

and the fact that the burn injuries were caused by the act of the

accused (the appellant). On information received from her mother

(PW-7), she went to the Civil Hospital, Solapur, along with her

husband where she saw Meena (the deceased), in a burnt condition

and it was the deceased who told her that the appellant had kept

a mistress at Kati-Sawargaon and it was for this reason, that he

was picking quarrels with her. At the time of the incident, she

was cooking food on the stove for her husband and it was for this

reason that when he poured kerosene on her, which was lying in

the can, the stove burst and she came out of the room shouting

for help. She was also asked by people who had gathered at the

house by that time as to why her husband has done this to her.

This witness (PW-8), then states that the deceased died in the

hospital after nine days. She had also recognized the accused who

was before the Court. This witness was again put to a lengthy

cross examination without giving any benefit to the defence.
14.   Both PW-7 and PW-8 have clearly established the fact that

the burn injuries were caused by the appellant and that he had

returned to his house in an inebriated state and was under the

influence of liquor while he did the act, after picking a quarrel

with his wife. The presence of PW-7, being a witness, in the

house at the time of the incident was never in doubt.
15.   The statement was given to PW-8 by the deceased stating how

she sustained burn injuries at the hands of her husband, i.e.,
7
the present appellant, and the same was first recorded in the

statement which was given immediately after she had reached the

hospital at about 01.30 AM on 27.01.2007, before PW-1. PW-1 was

working as ‘Avval Karkun’2 in the Tahsil Office, North Solapur, at

the relevant point of time and was requested by the police at

12:30 AM in the night to record the dying declaration of the

deceased at Civil Hospital, Solapur.
16.     The examination-in-chief of PW-1 reads as under:-
“            Exam-in-Chief by APP Shri Jadhav
1. I am working as Aval Karkun in Tahsil office, North
        Solapur. Since 2d Jan. 2007 I am working as Special
        Executive Magistrate. For two days, work of recording of
        dying declaration was allotted to me on Friday and
        Saturday. On 26th Jan. 2007 I was in my house. Police
        had been to my house in the night at about 12.30
        O'clock. I was requested to record the dying declaration
        orally. Thereafter I had been to Civil Hospital,
        Solapur. A letter was given to me for recording dying
        declaration of Meena Gawali and her husband Datta
        Gawali. I am having the copy of letter with me. I had
        given my endorsement on the office copy of the letter of
        the police. The said letter now shown to me is same. It
        is at exh.23. Thereafter I had been to Medical officer
        Shri A.P. Deshpande and requested him to show the
        patient. The patients were shown to me. Both the
        patients sustained burn injuries. Before recording DD I
        requested medical officer to examine the patient and
        certify about the same. Doctor examined Dattatraya
        Bhanudas Gawali. Dr. Deshpande accordingly made the
        endorsement on the statement of Dattatraya Gawali at the
        top of the same. The patient disclosed his name as
        Dattatraya Bhanudas Gawali R/o. Kati Sawargaon. As per
        the statement given by the patient, I recorded the same.
        I read over the statement to Dattarya and he admitted
        the same to be correct. I obtained the left thumb mark
        of the patient. I again requested the Medical officer to
        examine the patient and to tell me as to whether he is
        conscious or not. Doctor examined patient and certified
        the patient to be conscious. The endorsement now shown
        to me is of medical officer. While recording the

2 Special Executive Magistrate
8
statement I myself, Datta Gawali and medical officer
      only were there. I put my signature on the statement.
      The statement now shown to me is the same. It is in my
      hand writing. It is at exh. 24. The patient disclosed me
      that on 26.01.2007, in the night there was quarrel
      between myself and my wife and at the relevant time, I
      poured kerosene on her person in the angry mood when she
      was cooking food. Dur to that according to the patient
      they both sustained burn injury. He told me that he was
      under the influence of liquor.
2.   I also recorded the dying declaration of Meenabai
      Gawali and requested Dr. A.P. Deshpande to examine
      patient before recording her statement. After examining
      the patient Doctor told me that patient was conscious
      and was in position to give statement. Accordingly
      doctor put his endorsement on the dying declaration in
      the beginning of the statement. The patient disclosed
      her name as Meena Datta Gawali, R/o. Kati Sawargaon.
      Meenabai told me that in the nigh on 26.01.2007 when she
      was cooking the food there was quarrel between herself
      and her husband and at the relevant time her husband
      poured kerosene on her person in angry mood due to which
      there was bursting of stove in which she sustained burn
      injury. She also told that her husband was under the
      influence of liquor. Accordingly I recorded the dying
      declaration given by Meenabai. The same was read over to
      the deceased which she admitted to be true and correct.
      I also obtained the left thumb mark of the patient on
      the dying declaration. Again I requested the medical
      officer to examine the patient and tell me as to whether
      she was in position to give statement or not. Doctor
      A.P. Deshpande again examined the patient and certified
      the patient to be conscious. Accordingly he put the
      endorsement alongwith his signature on the dying
      declaration. At the time of recording of dying
      declaration I myself, patient and doctor only were
      there. The dying declaration now shown to me is the
      same. It is in my hand writing. It bears my signature.
      It is at exh. 25. The contents therein are true and
      correct. Thereafter I handed over the statements to the
      police chauky, Civil hospital, Solapur.”
17.   This witness was cross-examined by the defence as there was

some discrepancy in his statement as to whether the deceased was
9
in a proper state of mind to give a statement. His examination-

in-chief was taken again by the Assistant Public Prosecutor and

the    witness   was     declared   hostile   only   to    the    extent    of

discrepancy that the patient was not in a position to talk. But

nothing substantially moves on this aspect, inasmuch as, even if

we do not consider the dying declaration of the deceased which

was given at 01.30 AM          in the night on 27.01.2007, there is

sufficient evidence to prove that it was the appellant who had

poured kerosene on the deceased which led to the burn injuries

and the death of the deceased and the child she was bearing.

There is no doubt that an offence under
Section 316
has clearly

been made out. We only have to examine whether an offence here is

under
Section 302
of IPC or is it of a lesser magnitude.
18.   Having considered the entire evidence at length, we are also

of    the   considered    opinion   that   under   the    given   facts    and

circumstances of the case, it would not be a case of murder but

of culpable homicide not amounting to murder for the reasons

which we want to state as under.
19.   We have, by and large, accepted the case of the prosecution

as to the incident itself. There is sufficient evidence to prove

that the burn injury was caused to the deceased by an act done at

the hands of the appellant and it was the appellant who had come

to his house under the influence of liquor and poured kerosene on

his wife while she was cooking food for him on a stove, which

resulted in bursting of the stove and causing burn injuries on

the deceased. There is also sufficient proof of the fact that the

husband and wife were having frequent fights even earlier. This
10
has come out in the deposition of PW-7 and her cross-examination

has inspired our confidence as well as that of PW-8 though she is

not an eye-witness to the incident. The fact that the deceased

gave birth to a stillborn child on the next day i.e., 28.01.2007

while she was still alive and the death was caused by the act of

the appellant which we have already stated above, also makes a

case under
Section 316
of the Indian Penal Code.
20.   From     every     available      evidence,      which      was    placed     by    the

prosecution, it is a case where a sudden fight took place between

the husband and wife. The deceased at that time was carrying a

pregnancy of nine months and it was the act of pouring kerosene

on the deceased that resulted in the fire and the subsequent burn

injuries       and    the     ultimate      death     of    the    deceased.        In    our

considered opinion, this act at the hands of the appellant will

be covered under the fourth exception given under
Section 300
of

the   IPC,     i.e.,     “Culpable       homicide     is    not    murder      if    it    is

committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of

passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender's having

taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner”.
21.      The act of the appellant is not premeditated, but is a

result    of    sudden      fight     and   quarrel    in    the    heat    of    passion.

Therefore, we convert the findings of
Section 302
to that of 304

Part-II, as we are of the opinion that though the appellant had

knowledge      that    such    an     act   can   result     in    the    death     of    the

deceased,      but    there     was    no   intention       to    kill   the     deceased.

Therefore, this is an offence which would come under Part-II not

under Part-I of
Section 304
of the IPC.
11
On almost similar facts, (as are present in the case at

hand), this Court had converted the findings of
Section 302
to

that of
Section 304
Part II
IPC
. The case of which reference is

being made here is
Kalu Ram v. State of Rajasthan
(2000) 10 SCC
324. The appellant who had been convicted under
Section   302
IPC

for causing death of his wife by pouring kerosene on her and then

setting her on fire was convicted      by the Trial Court under
Section 302
, which was upheld by the High Court. The facts of the

case are as follows :-
In
the above case
, the appellant   who in an inebriated state

was pressurizing his wife to part with some ornaments so that he

could buy some more liquor. On her refusal he poured kerosene on

her and set her on fire by lighting a matchstick. But then he

also tried to pour water on her to save her. This Court was thus

of the opinion that :
“7….Very   probably  he   would   not  have
           anticipated that the act done by him would
           have escalated to such a proportion that
           she might die. If he had ever intended her
           to die he would not have alerted his senses
           to bring water in an effort to rescue her.
           We are inclined to think that all that the
           accused thought of was to inflict burns to
           her and to frighten her but unfortunately
           the situation slipped out of his control
           and it went to the fatal extent. He would
           not have intended to inflict the injuries
           which she sustained on account of his act.
           Therefore we are persuaded to bring down
           the offence from first degree murder to
           culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
8. We therefore alter the conviction from
Section 302
IPC to
Section 304
Part II
IPC
...”
12
The facts of the present case, as we have already discussed

above, by and large reflect the same situation, nature of crime

as well as the act of the accused and the consequences of his

action. We are inclined to accept the arguments raised by the

learned   senior   counsel       for   the    appellant,     Mr.    Sudhanshu   S.

Choudhari that under the present circumstances it would indeed be

a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder as given in
Section   304
Part   II   in    as   much   as,   though    the    accused    had

knowledge of the consequences of the act he was committing, yet

there was no intention to cause death.
The appeal is partly allowed.               We convert the findings of
Section 302
to that of
Section 304
Part II of
IPC
and sentence

the accused to 10 years of R.I.               To this extent the findings

given by the trial court and High Court will stand modified.                    We

have also been informed that the appellant has already undergone

incarceration for more than 10 years. Therefore, he shall be

released forthwith from the jail, unless he is required in some

other offence.
………………………………………………………………,J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                                ………………………………………………………………,J.
[PRASANNA B. VARALE]
NEW DELHI;
01ST FEBRUARY, 2024
13
ITEM NO.101                 COURT NO.16               SECTION II-A

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal    No(s). 666/2012
DATTATRAYA                                           Appellant(s)
                                  VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                             Respondent(s)
Date : 01-02-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDHANSHU DHULIA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE
For Appellant(s)     Mr. Sudhanshu S . Choudhari, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Rucha Pande, Adv.
Mr. M Veera Ragavan, Adv.
Ms. Gautami Yadav, Adv.
Mr. Pranjal Chapalgaonkar, Adv.
Mr. M. A. Chinnasamy, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
                     Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
Mr. Aditya Krishna, Adv.
Ms. Raavi Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Adarsh Dubey, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

     The appeal is partly allowed in terms of the signed reportable

order.
The relevant portion of the order reads as under:-
“The appeal is partly allowed. We convert the findings of
Section 302
to that of
Section 304
Part II of
IPC
and sentence the
accused to 10 years of R.I.    To this extent the findings given by
the trial court and High Court will stand modified.     We have also
been informed that the appellant has already undergone incarceration
for more than 10 years. Therefore, he shall be released forthwith
from the jail, unless he is required in some other offence.”

     Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(VARSHA MENDIRATTA)                           (R.S. NARAYANAN)
 COURT MASTER (SH)                           ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable order is placed on the file)

*earlier ROP dated 01.02.2024 has already been uploaded and sent to
the concerned branch.
14
ITEM NO.101                  COURT NO.16                   SECTION II-A

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F       I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal    No(s).   666/2012

DATTATRAYA                                                 Appellant(s)
                                   VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                   Respondent(s)
Date : 01-02-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDHANSHU DHULIA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE
For Appellant(s)     Mr. Sudhanshu S . Choudhari, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Rucha Pande, Adv.
Mr. M Veera Ragavan, Adv.
Ms. Gautami Yadav, Adv.
Mr. Pranjal Chapalgaonkar, Adv.
Mr. M. A. Chinnasamy, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
                     Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
Mr. Aditya Krishna, Adv.
Ms. Raavi Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Adarsh Dubey, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

    We have already passed the detailed order partly allowing
the present appeal, in which, we have converted the findings of
Section 302
IPC to that of
Section 304
Part-II of the
IPC
and
since, the appellant had already undergone incarceration for more
than 13 years in jail, we have also directed him to be released
from jail forthwith. All the same, we are of the considered view
that it may take some time for the appellant to actually get the
certified copy of the detailed order.
Therefore,      we   direct   that   the   appellant     be   released
forthwith from jail, not awaiting the copy of the final detailed
order, unless the appellant is required in some other offence.
(VARSHA MENDIRATTA)                                (R.S. NARAYANAN)
 COURT MASTER (SH)                                ASSISTANT REGISTRAR