[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sayunkta Sangharsh Samiti vs The State Of Maharashtra on 15 December, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aniruddha Bose
1

                                                              REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1080
                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.1359 OF 2023


      SAYUNKTA SANGARSH SAMITI & ANR.                     …APPELLANTS
                                   Versus
      THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                    …RESPONDENTS


                              JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.   The appellants before this Court have challenged the order

       dated 22.10.2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature,

       Bombay, which has dismissed the Writ Petition of the appellants.

       The petition was for quashing of the order dated 26.10.2020

       passed by respondent No. 2 i.e. Slum Rehabilitation Authority,

       Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as ‘SRA’).
2.   SRA had proposed a Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for the

       slum at CS No. 1(pt) of Lower Parel Division at J.R. Boricha Marg.

       The project was for construction of a total built up area of

       75854.716 sq. m., where 1765 slum dwellers were to be

       rehabilitated. Nine towers i.e. tower nos. A to I, 69 commercial

       tenements, 24 recreational tenements, 6 existing amenities, 19
2
balwadis, 19 welfare centres and 19 society offices, were in the

construction plan. The construction of all the above towers has

been completed as of now, and 473 slum dwellers have already

been given possession of their tenements in Towers A, B and C.

All the same, the allotment for the remaining towers has been

stalled due to the present dispute and the ongoing litigation

between various stake holders of the project. Hopefully it should

end now.
3.   Slums of Mumbai are symbolic of the existing inequalities in

our society.    The growth of industries and urban centres

invariably result in migration of rural population to urban

industrial areas areas, in search of employment. The migrants,

displaced poor and the marginalised are forced by circumstances

to form a living space for themselves, which are called slums.

Slums have also been described as a crowded settlement of

temporary household with inadequate facilities and very poor

hygienic conditions.   Although, many of the slums in Mumbai

such as ‘Dharavi’, ‘Byculla’ and ‘Khar’ were initially villages, but

they too have mushroomed into slums in the lopsided urban

development.
4.   The city of Mumbai has a maximum number of recorded

slums in the country and as per the 2011 census, 42 percent of
3
its population stays in slums. Very little attention was paid to the

slum dwellers in their initial period during the late 19 th century

and early 20th century, during colonial Rule. After the 1896

bubonic   plague   the   Government    recognised   the   need   for

improvement in the housing and sanitary conditions, in the city.

This resulted in the formation of Bombay Improvement Trust (for

short ‘BIT’) in 1898, and later Bombay Development Department

(for short ‘BDD’) in the year 1920. BDD in particular, inter alia,

had a mandate to construct low-cost houses for the workers who

were manning the factories and the mills in the city; and for the

workers in ports and railway station as well. All the same, not

much was done by these bodies as far as improvement of living

conditions of the workers in these areas or for providing them

with a decent housing or sanitary conditions.
5.   With independence, initially the approach of the authorities

towards slums was also largely focused on clearing the slum

areas, rather than improving their conditions.
The Slum Areas

(Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956
was enacted by the

Parliament for declaring the areas as slum area, and clearing it.

The competent authority could declare an area as a slum area

and would thereafter pass demolition or clearance orders. There

was no purposeful welfare, socially sensitive, provision in the Act
4
for redevelopment of the area after its clearance and this was left

to the satisfaction of the competent authority, which may

redevelop an area, subject to his or her satisfaction (see
Section

11
of the Act).
6.   This        approach    of    the    executive   and   the    legislature

subsequently changed with the concept of welfare state taking

hold and the growth of awareness of the inhabitants towards

their rights under the Constitution.
The Maharashtra Slum Areas

(Improvement,          Clearance     and     Redevelopment)       Act,   1971
(hereinafter referred to as ‘1971 Act’) was enacted which had

provisions for redevelopment of area and other benefits for the

inhabitants.           In 1971 Act the purpose of the Act was

“improvement and clearance of slums areas in the State and for

their redevelopment and for the protection or occupiers from

eviction, distress and warrants; and for matters enacted with the

purposes aforesaid; …………………”. The main authorities in the

1971 Act are the competent authority to be appointed under
Section      3
of   the   Act    and    more   importantly     the    Slum

Rehabilitation Authority for implementing slum rehabilitation

scheme. The Slum Rehabilitation Authority or SRA is a creature

of the statute of “1971 Act” and as a body corporate consisting of

following:
5
“3-A…………….
(1)……………..
(2) Every Slum Rehabilitation Authority shall
           consist of a Chairman, a Chief Executive
           Officer and fourteen other members, all of
           whom shall be appointed by the State
           Government.”

Slum areas are defined under
Section 2(ga)
of the 1971 Act as

follows:
“Slum area means any area declared as such
           by the Competent Authority under sub-section
           (1) of
Section 4
[and includes any area
           deemed to be a slum area under Section 4-A”
Section 4
and 4A of the 1971 Act is regarding declaration of slum

areas, which are as follows:
“4. Declaration of slum areas.— [(1) Where the
           Competent Authority is satisfied that—
(a) any area is or may be a source of danger
           to the health, safety or convenience of the
           public of that area or of its neighbourhood, by
           reason of the area having inadequate or no
           basic amenities, or being insanitary, squalid,
           overcrowded or otherwise; or
(b) the building in any area, used or intended
           to be used for human habitation are—
(i) in any respect, unfit for human habitation;
           or
(ii) by reasons of dilapidation, overcrowding,
           faulty arrangement and design of such
           buildings, narrowness or faulty arrangement
           of streets, lack of ventilation, light or
           sanitation facilities or any combination of
           these factors, detrimental to the health, safety
           or convenience of the public of that area,
           the Competent Authority may, by notification
           in the Official Gazette, declare such area to be
           a slum area. Such declaration shall also be
           published in such other manner (as will give
6
due publicity to the declaration in the area) as
may be prescribed.]

(2) In determining whether buildings are unfit
for human habitation for the purposes of this
Act, regard shall be had to the condition
thereof in respect of the following matters, that
is to say, —
(a) repairs;
(b) stability;
(c) freedom from damp;
(d) natural light and air;
(e) provision for water-supply;
(f) provision for drainage and sanitary
conveniences;
(g) facilities for the disposal of waste water;
and the building shall be deemed to be unfit
as aforesaid, if, and only if, it is so far
defective in one or more of the said matters
that it is not reasonably suitable for
occupation in that condition.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a declaration
made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty
days after the date of such declaration in
the Official Gazette, appeal to the Tribunal.
[No such appeal filed after the expiry of thirty
days as aforesaid shall be entertained.]

(4) When an appeal is presented under sub-
section (3), the Tribunal shall, by a public
notice published in a newspaper in the
Marathi language circulating in the local area
in which the slum area is situated and also
displayed at some conspicuous place in the
slum area, call upon the residents of the slum
area to file their objections, if any, to the
appeal within a period of fifteen days from the
date of publication of such public notice in the
newspaper as aforesaid, either by themselves
or through any association of residents in the
slum area of which they are members.
7
(5) On expiry of the period of fifteen days as
aforesaid the Tribunal shall fix a day for
hearing the appeal and inform the appellant
about the same by letter under certificate of
posting and the residents of the slum area by
displaying the notice of hearing at some
conspicuous place in the slum area and upon
hearing the appellant, and the residents or
representative of their association in the slum
area, if present, or on considering the written
objections, if any, made by such residents or
association, if absent, the Tribunal may,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6),
make an order either confirming, modifying or
rescinding the declaration: and the decision of
the Tribunal shall be final.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section
(4) and this sub-section, the, expression “any
association of residents in the slum area”
means a society, if any, of such residents
registered under the
Societies Registration Act,
1860
(21 of 1860) or under the
Maharashtra
Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
(Mah. XXIV of
1961).
(6) While deciding the appeal the Tribunal
shall ignore the works of improvement
executed in such slum area by any agency of
the Government or any local authority after
the declaration thereof as such slum area by
the Competent Authority under sub-section
(1).]

[4-A. Certain slum improvement areas deemed
to be slum areas.—(1) Any declaration made
under Section 26 of the Maharashtra Slum
Improvement Board Act, 1973 (Mah. XXIII of
1973), declaring any area to be slum
improvement area, and in force immediately
before the date of commencement of the
Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement,
Clearance          and          Redevelopment)
(Amendment)Act, 1976 (Mah. XX of 1970),
(herinafter in this section referred to as “the
8
said date”) shall, on and from the said date,
          be deemed to be a declaration made under
Section 4
of this Act declaring the same area
          to be a slum area for the purposes of this Act.

          (2) Any person aggrieved by the provisions of
          sub-section (1) may, within thirty days from
          the said date, appeal to the Tribunal function
          under this Act.
(3) on such appeal, the Tribunal may make an
          order either confirming,       modifying     or
          rescinding the declaration: and the decision of
          Tribunal shall be final].”
7.
The Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(hereinafter referred to as ‘MRTP Act, 1966’) is again an important

piece of legislation with which we are presently concerned. The MRTP

Act, 1966 was enacted in order to have a planned development in the

State of Maharashtra. An amendment was brought in the MRTP Act,

1966, in the year 1995 whereby SRA was given the status of Planning

Authority so far as slums were concerned.       The State Government

under the 1966 Act has got powers to frame what is called

Development   Control   Regulations    (DCR)   for   the    purposes   of

implementation of any scheme, project, etc which would include

development of a slum. The DCR Regulation under which the present

rehabilitation of slum was to be undertaken was
Regulation 33(10)
of

DCR, 1991.
The present slum area with which we are concerned is at Lower

Parel Division in J.R. Boricha Marg and is notified as a “slum”
9
under the 1971 Act and had 1672 residential tenements. As per

the scheme of SRA more than 70 percent of the eligible hutment

dwellers were members of the federation, i.e., present respondent

no.6 which were to choose its developer and take the scheme

forward under the overall supervision of SRA.
8.   In accordance with the procedure given under the DCR, 1991

the majority section of the slum dwellers, in the present case,

who were earlier divided into different independent societies, got

together and formed a society called “Shramik Ekta Co-Operative

Housing Federation” (respondent No. 6, herein), which we here

refer as the “Federation”. The Federation in turn appointed

Lokhandwala Kataria Constructions (respondent No. 5) as its

Developer. SRA consequently issued a Letter of Intent (LoI) on

16.04.2005, in favour of the Developer, approving the proposed

Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, submitted before them.
9.   The work for construction of the nine towers commenced but

was stalled shortly afterwards in 2007. Since then, the project

was moving only in fits and starts. This was due to the

interference caused by a minority section of the slum dwellers.

These slum dwellers are also members of the Federation though

have formed a separate minority society for themselves, called

“Sayunkta Sangharsh Samiti” (hereinafter referred to as ‘SSS’),
10
which is the present appellant no. 1 before us, and to which we

          would refer in a while.
10. Based on the provisions of law regarding redevelopment of a

          slum,    the   procedure   for   the   implementation   of   a   Slum

          Rehabilitation Scheme has been summarised and published by

          SRA in form of “Guidelines for the Implementation of Slum

          Rehabilitation Schemes in Greater Mumbai” which was published

          in September, 1997. The procedure mandates that: “70% or more

          of the eligible hutment-dwellers in a slum or pavement in a viable

          stretch at one place have to show their willingness to join Slum

          Rehabilitation Scheme and come together to form a cooperative

          housing society of all eligible hutment-dwellers through a resolution

          to that effect.”
11. This Court has upheld this procedure in a catena of

          Judgments which include
Ram Chandra Mahadev Jagpat and

          Ors. vs Chief Executive Officer and Others
(2006) 11 SCC

          6611; Pramila Singh Suman vs State of Maharashtra and

          Others (2009) 2 SCC 7292;
Balasaheb Arjun Torbole and

          Others vs Administrator and Divisional Commissioner and

          Others
(2015) 6 SCC 5343



1 Para 28
2 Para 18
3 Paras 14 & 15
11
12. In 2007, the project being stalled by a minority section of the

Federation, the Developer filed a civil suit before the City Civil

Court, Bombay seeking injunction against the defendant nos.1 to

15 who were inhabitants of the slum, and as per the scheme had

an entitlement for a flat each in the residential complex which

was to be constructed by the developer i.e., the plaintiff, but these

defendants were not letting the Developer make construction of

the nine towers which had to be constructed within a stipulated

time. Defendant no.16 was the federation and the recitals of the

plaint clearly states that defendant no.16 is only a proforma party,

it   is   actually   defendant   nos.1   to   15   who   were   creating

obstructions in the construction of the towers, which the plaintiff

was mandated to construct as per the scheme. To our mind, this

Civil Suit was not even maintainable in view of Section 42 of the

1971 Act, which bars the jurisdiction of Civil Courts in matters

relating to slum development. Section 42 of the 1971 Act reads

as under:
"42. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this
           Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in
           respect of any matter which the Administrator,
           Competent Authority or Tribunal is empowered
           by or under this Act, to determine, and no
           injunction shall be granted by any Court or other
           authority in respect of any action taken or to be
           taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or
           under this Act."
12
13. Be that as it may, the SRA which was in any case a necessary

party to the Civil Suit, was not made a defendant. The reasons

are not difficult to locate. In the absence of SRA, there was no one

to question the maintainability of the suit, as it ultimately ended

in a compromise decree.
It so happens that during the pendency of the suit an MoU

was signed between the plaintiff and appellant-society, which had

as its members, most of the contesting defendants, and the so

called contesting parties agreed to resolve their differences as per

the MOU.
14. The Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter referred to

as ‘MoU’) dated 23.06.2009, is an interesting piece of document

signed between the developer and the society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
which is also proposed to be

registered as a charitable trust under the
Bombay Public Trust

Act, 1950
(it was till then not registered as a Trust). The society

claimed that it had 770 hutments dwellers as its members. The

MoU is between the developer and the society, to which most of

the defendants in the Civil Suit were members of the society i.e.,

Sayunkta Sangharsh Samiti (hereinafter referred to as ‘SSS’). A

purely private arrangement was thus arrived at between the

developer and the minority members of the hutment dwellers
13
whereby the society undertook to enforce self-development

rehabilitation with the cooperation of the developer. Some of the

important terms of the MoU are as under:
“A.   …………

        B.     Samiti i.e. M/s. Sayukta Sangharsh Samiti
        is a charitable organization incorporated with the
        sold object for the guidance and welfare of the
        Slum Dwellers occupying the said property.
        Trustees of the said Samiti are also the
        occupants of the said entire property. The said
        Samiti is a non profit making organization.
        However it will work for the benefit of the said
        occupants including corpus and other benefits.
C.     Out of about 2000 Hutments about 770
        Hutments dwellers of the said entire property
        approached Samiti to undertake the Self
        Development. List of the said 770 Hutment
        Dwellers is annexed herewith as Annexure ‘A’
        and they are hereinafter referred to as the “Said
        Occupants”. Hence considering the interest of the
        said occupants Samiti had decided to enforce Self
        Development Rehabilitation Scheme and hence
        suggested the said intention to the Developer.
D.    Developers have alternately suggested to
        the Samiti to carry out the Self Construction of
        the rehab building/s for the said occupants
        which the Samiti has agreed.
E.     The parties have agreed to give
        cooperation to the either party for self
        construction of rehab building/s by the Samiti for
        the said occupants and completion of the said
        Scheme.
F.    The Samiti has also represented that they
        hereby undertake to actively assist the Developer
        in continuation, implementation and completion
14
of the said entire Scheme on the said entire
        property.”


    As we can see it is an entirely private arrangement arrived at

between the Developer on the one hand and some of the hutment

dwellers on the other. SRA has no role to play in it, rather it is an

arrangement at the back of SRA and is in defiance of an already

existing rehabilitation scheme, statutorily sanctioned, which was

surviving.
15. The towers which the Samiti undertook to construct or to

supervise their construction were towers D, E and F, under the

said MoU which were then to be occupied exclusively by the

members of the Society i.e., SSS. Subsequent to this, the Society

was also registered as a public trust on 21.11.2009.              In

September, 2009, the consent terms which were arrived at in the

Court between the developer and defendant nos.1 to 4, 6 to 9 and

16, read as under:
“1.    ……..
2. Plaintiffs confirm that they have arrived at
           Memorandum of Understanding dated 23rd
           June 2009 with one M/s. Sayukta Sangharsh
           Samiti, a Society registered under the
           provisions    of
Maharashtra   Cooperative
           Societies Act
and to be registered as
           Charitable trust under the Bombay Public
           Trust Act (Proposed) for better and smooth
           implementation and completion of Slum
           Redevelopment Scheme under DC Rules
15
33(10).    Hereto annexed and marked as
  Exhibit “A” is a copy of the said Memorandum
  of Understanding.
3. Parties   confirm  that   the   said    Slum
   Redevelopment Scheme has been approved
   vide LOI dated 16th April 2005 bearing Ref.
No. SRA/ENG/027/GS/ML/LOI (which may
   be revised from time to time if required) for
   development of the property bearing CS NO.1
   (Part) and 2 (Part) of Lower Parel Division
   situate at JR Boricha Marg, Bombay – 400
011.
4. Defendant Nos.1 to 4 and 6 to 8 confirm that
   they are lawfully appointed as Trustees of
   M/s. Sayukta Sangharsh Samiti and have
   been duly authorized by the said Samiti to
   sign the Consent Terms and confirm having
   signed Memorandum of Understanding as
   duly authorized by the said Samiti and is
   final, conclusive and binding upon the said
   Samiti.
5. Parties confirm that the Defendant Nos. 7 and
   9 are not members of the Samiti but are only
   will-wishers and supporters of Samiti and
   have therefore willingly agreed to join in this
   Consent Terms.
6. Parties agree that they have agreed to resolve
   all the disputes and differences among
   themselves as recorded in Memorandum of
   Understanding dated 23.06.2009.
7. Parties agree to adopt, confirm and approve
   the Memorandum of Understandings which is
   annexed hereto.
8. Parties confirm that the said Memorandum of
   Understanding is confirmed by themselves in
   their personal capacity and also in their
   capacity as members of the Samiti.
16
9. Parties confirm that decree be passed in terms
           of Consent Terms as against the Defendant
           Nos. 1 to 4 and 6 to 9 and 16 herein.
10.   Parties confirm that the suit may be
          continued as against other Defendant Nos.10
          to 15 as they are not ready and willing to
          cooperate and sign the Consent Terms herein.”


According to the appellants before this Court, the suit was

decreed in terms of the MoU as against defendant nos.1 to 9, as

to what happened for the remaining defendants, it is not clear as

no such order is there on record.
16. Meanwhile,    after   the   aforesaid   MoU/Settlement,    the

Developer wrote to the SRA on 05.10.2009 stating that the

rehabilitation scheme which was earlier facing problems has been

resolved. It says that earlier the slum dwellers were divided into

different groups and got themselves formed into different societies

who were creating obstructions in the construction, but now an

amicable settlement has been arrived between the parties and the

consent terms/MoU was filed in Civil Suit No.1341 of 2007. The

terms of the MoU are binding between the parties and the project

would be now completed.         It further requests that on the

complaint of SRA, the earlier enquiry which was being conducted

against the developer be dropped. It so happens that an enquiry

against the Developer was pending. We are not aware as to the
17
fate of this enquiry.   Be that as it may, more or less similar

information and request was made by the appellants before SRA

vide its letter dated 28.10.2009.
17. Pursuant to the MoU/Settlement between the developer and

the appellants, the appellants approached SRA to do the

allotment as per the terms of settlement. There are some

exchange of letters between the parties on which much reliance

has been placed by the appellant to show that their request for

allotment of Towers D, E and F was being agreed. This, however,

is not correct, but even assuming there was any such indication

and an assurance by SRA or any of its office bearers in this

regard, the same would be in violation of the law, as we shall

explain in a while.
18. Ultimately the SRA decided vide order dated 21.09.2020 to

allot 712 flats on Tower D, E & F, on the basis of lottery, but then

vide order dated 25.09.2020, the SRA stayed this order. This

order dated 25.09.2020 was challenged by the appellant before

the Bombay High Court in a writ petition which was disposed of

vide order dated 09.10.2020 directing SRA to take a call on

allotments of these flats in Tower D, E & F, by way of lottery. The

SRA in compliance with the said order passed an order on
18
26.10.2020 deciding to allot the flats in Tower D, E & F as per the

procedure prescribed vide Circular No. 162 dated 23.10.2015.
19. Aggrieved by this order of SRA, the appellants filed another

Writ Petition (L) No. 8391 of 2020 before the Bombay High Court

with a prayer to set aside the order dated 26.10.2020. The main

ground taken by the appellant was that SRA had to conduct

allotment as per the terms of the MoU dated 23.06.2009 by giving

preferential allotment to the members of the appellant society in

Towers D, E and F. The Bombay High Court dismissed the Writ

Petition on 22.10.2021 which is the order impugned in this Civil

Appeal.
20. The case of the appellant before the High Court was that once

the Developer and the appellant society had come to a settlement

in terms of the MOU dated 23.06.2009 allotment of flats in towers

D, E and F ought to have been made accordingly, with allotments

of these flats only to the members of appellant society. The

appellant, however, failed to show any provision of law on which

this claim was based, particularly when it was a minority society,

which is not even recognised under the law presently applicable,

and was not a part of the SRA scheme. As we have already

referred to the relevant provision of the concerned Regulation

where at least 70% of the settlement dwellers should be on board.
19
The members of the present appellant society are admittedly

much less than 70%. The claim of the appellant was based

entirely on the terms of consent arrived between the Developer

and them, which has no basis in law. This is what the Bombay

High Court observed:
11. It clearly appears that the claim of the
          petitioner is on the sole basis of the
          consent terms which were executed
          between the said parties in the civil suit
          filed by the developer. As noted above, the
          suit between these parties was a matter
          strictly between such private parties
          which would be completely outside the
          scheme of any slum redevelopment being
          undertaken and as approved under the
          rules by the SRA. It clearly appears that
          for such reason, the SRA was not made a
          party to the said civil suit. It also cannot
          be conceived that a developer enters into
          some private arrangement with a parallel
          society that too which is of minority of
          slum dwellers, can have no bearing on the
          execution of a slum scheme under the
          rules and regulations of the SRA. Such
          arrangement can never be made binding
          on the SRA and/or can never restrain the
          SRA from implementing its rules,
          regulations and circulars which are bind
          on any developer and/or a slum society
          undertaking the SRA scheme.
12. Any private arrangement between the
          petitioner, a society not of the majority
          slum dwellers, and the developer in a civil
          suit, if is recognized, it would certainly
          bring about a complete chaos and
          uncertainty in regard to the SRA granting
          permissions to a particular slum society
20
and the developer appointed by it, as per
           the rules, to undertake the SRA scheme.
Any private arrangement which goes
           contrary to the rules and regulations,
           governing the SRA scheme cannot be
           recognized in law.”

The writ petition was hence dismissed and SRA was directed to

make allotment in accordance with Circular no. 162 dated

23.10.2015.
21. Since the procedure for allotment is at the core of the dispute,

it would be necessary for us to examine the relevant legal

provisions governing the procedure of allotment. Under DCR-

1991, Regulation 33(10), Appendix (IV), Clause 1.8, it is

mentioned as follows:
‘1.8 Hutments dwellers in category having
           a differently abled person or female
           headed households shall be given first
           preference in allotment of tenements.
           Thereafter lots shall be drawn for
           allotment of tenements from the remaining
           tenements to the other eligible hutment-
           dwellers before grant of O.C. to rehab
           Building.’

Even    otherwise,   the   SRA     accepted    the   proposal    for

implementation of the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme submitted by

the Developer under Regulation 33(10) and subsequently issued

the Letter of Intent (LoI) dated 16.04.2005. Clause 42 of the said

LoI provides as follows:
21
‘42. That the allotment of rehabilitation
           tenements to the eligible slum dwellers in
           the scheme, shall be made by drawing
           lots in presence of the representative of
           the Asst. Registrar of societies (SRA) and
           statement of rehab tenements allotted to
           the eligible slum families in the
           rehabilitation building with corresponding
           tenements No. in rehab composite building
           and Sr. No. in Annexure-II etc. duly
           certified by the concerned society of slum
           dwellers and Asst. Registrar (SRA) shall
           be submitted before requesting for
           occupation permission to the rehab.
           tenements.’

The allotment by draw of lots is not an arbitrary order of SRA but

this is the settled procedure, long continuing and in terms of the

law.   It is also provided under the Circular No. 162 dated

23.10.2015, that allotment will be done by draw of lots for all the

hutment dwellers.
22. The case of the Appellants, based entirely on the Consent

Terms executed pursuant to the MoU, had little else to say in its

favour. As has rightly been noted by the Bombay High Court, the

consent terms are in the nature of a private agreement. The Civil

Suit was at the behest of the Developer against individual society

members and as we have noted above, SRA was not made a party

to these proceedings.   The seemingly ingenious, yet unfair and

even specious method adopted by the Developer in league with

the Appellants to bypass the statutory procedure must be
22
deprecated. Admittedly, there is no provision in law by which the

settlement terms entered into by two private players can be

accepted and followed in violation of the statutory procedure given

in Circular No.162 dated 23.10.2015. We do not agree with the

submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant who only seeks

to enforce a private arrangement arrived at between the Developer

and the appellant in derogation of the procedure
laid down by
the

SRA.
23. Private agreements cannot be enforced in Slum Rehabilitation

Schemes as against the statutory mandate of the SRA.
In the

case of
Lokhandwala Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. and Another v.

State of Maharashtra and others
reported in 2011 SCC

OnLine Bom 118, the Bombay High Court had held as follows:
9. A Slum Rehabilitation Scheme which
             is implemented under DCR 33(10) read
             with Appendix IV does not lie in the
             realm of a purely private contractual
             agreement. Undoubtedly, the scheme
             postulates a co-operative housing
             society of slum dwellers. Appendix IV of
             DCR 33(10) clarifies that the provisions
             will              apply               to
             redevelopment/construction            of
             accommodation for hutment/pavement
             dwellers                        through
             owners/developers/co-operative
             housing societies of hutment/pavement
             dwellers or by public authorities or by
             nongovernmental organisations within
             the limits of Brihan Mumbai. The
             Scheme regulates the rights of hutment
23
dwellers,     the   grant   of    building
permission for a Slum Rehabilitation
Project, rehabilitation and freesale
components in the total floor space
index, the construction of temporary
transit camps, the relaxation in building
and other requirements, development
plan reservations and payments to be
made      inter   alia   to   the    Slum
Rehabilitation        Authority.       The
Development Control Regulations, it is
well settled, constitute subordinate
legislation enacted with reference to the
provisions of
section 22(m)
of the
Maharashtra Regional Town Planning
Act, 1966. Slum Rehabilitation Schemes
have a public law element.
10. The       execution       of     Slum
Rehabilitation Schemes is impressed
with a public character. The lands on
which the Scheme is sought to be
sanctioned and implemented may be
lands belonging to the Municipal
Corporation or to the State of
Maharashtra or, for that matter, its
instrumentalities     such       as    the
Maharashtra      Housing      and    Area
Development Authority. The title to the
land does not vest in the society or in
its members at the stage when the
Scheme is propounded and subjected
for sanction. Where it owns the land,
the Municipal Corporation of Greater
Mumbai is the authority responsible for
issuing a certification of Annexure II
containing the list of eligible occupants
who can participate in the Scheme. The
interest of the Municipal Corporation as
the owner of the land is recognized by
conferring     upon     the      Municipal
Corporation the role of verifying and
authenticating who are the actual and
genuine occupants of the land as on 1
24
January, 1995. Public land is sought to
be utilized in order to further the object
of providing dignified accommodation to
those living in slums. The co-operative
societies    of   slum     dwellers   and
developers through whom the Slum
Rehabilitation Scheme is sought to be
implemented           facilitate       the
implementation of the Scheme. The
agreements or arrangements that may
be arrived at between them cannot be
treated at par with purely private or
contractual agreements entered into in
respect of land belonging to private
individuals. The State as the owner of
the and upon which a slum is situated
has a vital public interest in ensuring
that the object for which the land is
utilized subserves the purpose of
rehabilitation of the slum dwellers. It is
in that context that diverse provisions
are made by the Development Control
Regulations to regulate every stage of
the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, from
the submission of the proposals, the
evaluation of proposals, scrutiny and
verification, grant of sanctions and the
actual implementation of the Scheme.
Though a dispute between the co-
operative society and its developer has
a private element, it is not as if that a
recourse to private law remedies is the
only available form of redress. The
Slum Rehabilitation Authority as the
authority which is vested with the
power to regulate the implementation of
the Scheme and the owners of the land
such as the Municipal Corporation or,
as the case may be, the State
Government are vital components in the
implementation        of      the    Slum
Rehabilitation Scheme. Their statutory
powers to ensure that the Scheme is not
misused and is utilized to subserve the
25
public purpose underlying the Scheme
             is not trammelled by private contractual
             arrangements.
(emphasis supplied)

[See also:
Susme Builders Private Limited v. Chief Executive

Officer, Slum Rehabilitation Authority
, 2014 SCC OnLine

Bom 4822 at
Para 109 and New Janta SRA CHS Ltd. v. State

of Maharashtra
, 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 3896 at Para 189]
24. Moreover, under the
Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement,

Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971
SRA is the final

authority for implementing a slum rehabilitation scheme. The

Bombay High Court has held in the case of
Smt. Usha

Dhondiram Khairnar and Others v. State of Maharashtra

and Others
reported in 2016 SCC OnLine Bom 11505 that

slum society or private Developer cannot dictate terms to the SRA

and it must act in terms of its own policies and circulars. The

following was held in Paragraphs 24 and 26:
24. We do not think that the developer
             and slumdwellers’ society can dictate
             the SRA in such cases and matters. If
             that is the designated authority, then, it
             must act strictly in terms of its own
             policy, circulars, rules, regulations and
             the
SLUM Act
. These are guiding the
             SRA and in ensuring that all such slum
             dwellers who are languishing in slums
             for decades together and if found
             eligible are rehabilitated, how the
             rehabilitation package evolved for them
26
has to be implemented and worked out,
             is entirely left to SRA.
26. We do not allow the SRA to take a
             decision like this and contrary to the
             principle of natural justice, fairness and
             equity. If they now intend to withdraw
             the allotment letters issued to the
             Petitioners and desire to accommodate
             them in some other scheme nearby,
             then, that decision cannot be reached or
             allowed to be reached in the manner
             stated by the SRA before us. Equally,
             the SRA cannot at the instance of any
             developer/owner or society of slum
             dwellers take a decision contrary to its
             defined and settled policies, circulars,
             rules and regulations. We, therefore,
             direct that no such decision as is
             intended to be taken now in paragraph
             no. 7 shall be taken or reached without
             hearing all affected parties and
             particularly the Petitioners.
(emphasis supplied)
25. Thus, SRA has to act in terms of its own policies and

circulars without allowing private or contractual interests to

prevail over public policy especially a policy which is welfare

based. Apart from this, it is pertinent to point out that the

Circular No. 162 was issued on 23.10.2015. The appellant society

though has filed two Writ Petitions subsequently in connection

with the procedure for allotment undertaken by the SRA, yet it

has not challenged the validity of Circular No. 162, instead it has

sought to impose its private contractual rights over and above the
27
statutory provisions which as we have seen above, is not

permissible.
26. Consequently, we dismiss this Appeal and uphold the order

dated 22.10.2021 passed by the High Court of Bombay. The order

of status quo on allotment of flats given by this Court on

24.01.2022 is also vacated. The Slum Rehabilitation Authority is

directed to carry out the allotment of flats in accordance with law.

All pending interim applications are disposed of in terms of the

directions contained in the present judgement.

    Considering the conduct of the Developer who has evidently

taken a surreptitious route bypassing the statutory procedure,

the SRA would be failing in its duty if it does not seek explanation

from the Developer in this regard and takes suitable action in

accordance with law.
……..............................J.
                                        [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]



                                        .…….............................J.
                                        [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]

New Delhi,
December 15, 2023.