[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manik Hiru Jhangiani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 December, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1078


                                                                                 Reportable

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3864 OF 2023
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 7041 of 2016)


                            Manik Hiru Jhangiani                               … Appellant


                                                          versus


                            State of M.P.                                   … Respondent



                                                        JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.   Various provisions of the
Food Safety and Standards Act,
                            2006
(for short, ‘the FSSA’) were brought into force on different
                            dates.
The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
(for
                            short, ‘the PFA’) was repealed with effect from 5th August 2011,
                            as provided in sub-section (1) of
Section 97
of the FSSA.
3.   The appellant was, at the relevant time, a Director of M/s.
                            Bharti Retail Limited, (for short, ‘Bharti’), a company that is
                            engaged in the business of operating retail stores under the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.12.15
17:09:13 IST
Reason:                  name of ‘Easy Day’ having its outlets all over the country. A
                            Food Inspector appointed under the PFA visited a shop owned
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                Page 1 of 15
by Bharti in Indore and purchased certain biscuit packets from
             the shop. The visit was made on 29th November 2010. On the
             next day, a panchnama was drawn, and the samples were sent
             to the State Food Laboratory, Bhopal, for analysis and testing.
             The report of the Public Analyst was received on 4th January
             2011. On 4th August 2011, a notification was issued under sub-
             section (1) of
Section 97
of the FSSA notifying 5th August 2011
             as the date on which the PFA shall stand repealed. In
Section
             97
, and in particular in sub-section (1), there is a provision that
             notwithstanding the repeal of PFA, any penalty, forfeiture, or
             punishment incurred in respect of any offences committed
             under the PFA shall not be affected by the repeal. Moreover,
             there is a sunset clause in the form of sub-section (4) of
Section
             97
which provides for a sunset period of three years from 5th
             August 2011 for taking cognizance of the offences under the
             PFA. On 11th August 2011, sanction was granted to the Food
             Inspector to prosecute the Directors of Bharti under the
             provisions of the PFA. The Food Inspector filed a charge sheet
             on 12th August 2011, and on the same day, cognizance of the
             offence was taken by the learned Judicial Magistrate, and a
             bailable warrant was issued against the appellant. The
             appellant filed a petition under
Section 482
of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘
CrPC
’) for challenging the
             order of cognizance.                 By the impugned judgment, the High
             Court dismissed the petition under
Section 482
of CrPC. The
             High Court noted that the offence alleged against the appellant
             was of misbranding which had taken place prior to the repeal
             of the PFA. Hence, within a period of three years from the date
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                              Page 2 of 15
of repeal, the learned Magistrate was empowered to take
             cognizance in view of sub-section (4) of
Section 97
of FSSA.
             Being aggrieved by the said decision of the High Court, the
             present appeal has been preferred.
SUBMISSIONS
4.       The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
             made detailed submissions. The learned senior counsel firstly
             pointed out that
Section 3
of the FSSA, which contains the
             definition of ‘misbranded food’ in clause (zf) of sub-section (1)
             thereof, was brought into force on 28th May 2008 and
Section
             52
of the FSSA, which provides for penalty for misbranding was
             brought into force with effect from 29th July 2010. Secondly, he
             pointed out that even
Section 89
of the FSSA, which starts with
             a non-obstante clause providing that the FSSA shall have
             overriding          effect       notwithstanding   anything   inconsistent
             contained in any other law for the time being in force, was
             notified on 29th July 2010.                He submitted that, therefore,
Section 52
of the FSSA, which provides for a penalty for
             misbranding, would prevail over the relevant provisions of the
             PFA, which make the misbranding an offence punishable with
             imprisonment and a fine.                He would, therefore, submit that
             with effect from 29th July 2010, the FSSA will govern
             misbranding and not the PFA.
5.       The learned senior counsel also pointed out that the
             Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 (for short, ‘the PFA
             Rules’) continued to remain in force till the repeal of the PFA.
             He pointed out that corresponding rules under the FSSA,
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                Page 3 of 15
namely, the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
             Labelling) Regulations, 2011 came into force on 5th August
             2011. He would, therefore, submit that Rule 32 of PFA dealing
             with standards for labelling continued to operate till 5th August
             2011. He submitted that only because the Rules corresponding
             to Rule 32 of PFA Rules were not notified on the date of
             commission of the offence, the appellant could not have been
             prosecuted under the PFA for violation of a provision that was
             eclipsed by
Section 89
of FSSA. His submission is that after
             29th July 2010, the regime under the PFA dealing with
             misbranding will not apply.
6.       He submitted that though Rule 32 of the PFA Rules, the
             violation of which has been alleged along with other offences
             under the PFA, was in force on the date on which the alleged
             violation was committed, in view of
Section 89
of FSSA, Rule
             32 will have no application. Learned counsel pointed out that
Section 97
of the FSSA was brought into force with effect from
             29th July 2010.              He submitted that only because the Rules
             corresponding to Rule 32 of the PFA Rules were not notified
             under the FSSA regime, the respondent could not have
             proceeded under the provisions of PFA in the light of
Section
             89
of the FSSA.
7.       He relied upon a chart tendered across the Bar, which
             contains a comparison of the provisions regarding misbranding
             under both enactments. He pointed out that for violation of the
             provisions regarding misbranding, under PFA, the violator
             could be punished by imposing imprisonment of up to three
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                            Page 4 of 15
years. However, under the FSSA, there is a provision for a levy
             of only a penalty up to Rupees 3 lakhs, as provided in Section
52. He submitted that when two statutes are operating in the
             field prescribing a penalty for the same offence and when an
             earlier       statute        contains   a   more   stringent   penalty    or
             punishment, the provision in the earlier statute will stand
             repealed by necessary implication. He relied upon Clause (1)
             of
Article 20
of the Constitution of India.               He relied upon
             decisions of this Court in
T. Barai v. Henry Ah Hoe & Anr.1
and
Nemi Chand v. State of Rajasthan2
.                         Lastly, he
             submitted that the High Court committed an error by relying
             upon the sunset clause under sub-section (4) of
Section 97
since the same was not applicable in the facts of the case.
8.       Learned counsel for the respondent- State firstly urged
             that the acts or omission constituting the alleged offence took
             place when the PFA was not repealed though the FSSA was
             brought into force. Rule 32 of the PFA was also in force on that
             date, the violation of which has been alleged by the respondent.
             Learned counsel relied upon sub-section (4) of
Section 97
of the
             FSSA, which permits cognizance of an offence under the PFA
             before the expiry of three years from the date of the
             commencement of the FSSA. He would submit that considering
             the principles
laid down in
sub-section (4) of
Section 97
, the
             prosecution for violating the provisions of the
PFA Act
and the
             PFA Rules will certainly be maintainable. He submitted that
1
(1983) 1 SCC 177
2
(2018) 17 SCC 448
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                Page 5 of 15
after coming into force of the FSSA, all the provisions of PFA
             and the PFA Rules continued to apply. Inviting our attention
             to Section 52 of the FSSA, he submitted that even the Rules
             under the FSSA were not brought into force on the date the
             offence was committed.                He would, therefore, support the
             reasons recorded by the High Court in the impugned order.
He
             relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of
Hindustan
             Unilever Limited v. State of Madhya Pradesh3
in support of
             his submissions that the criminal proceedings initiated under
             the PFA before its repeal and the punishment to be imposed
             under the PFA after its repeal have been protected by Section
             97 of the FSSA.               He would, therefore, submit that the view
             taken by the High Court calls for no interference.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
9.       We have given careful consideration to the submissions.
             The offence alleged against the appellant is under
Section
             2(ix)(k)
, read with Rule 32 of the PFA, which was made
             punishable under
Section 16(1)(a)
. In short, the allegation was
             that the label on the food product of the appellant was not in
             accordance with the requirements of the PFA and the Rules
             framed thereunder. Therefore, the definition of ‘misbranded’
             under
Section 2 (ix)
will apply. Clause (ix) of
Section 2
of PFA
             reads thus:
“(ix) “misbranded”—an article of food
                           shall be deemed to be misbranded—
(a) if it is an imitation of, or is a
                                 substitute for, or resembles in a
3
(2020) 10 SCC 751
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                             Page 6 of 15
manner likely to deceive, another
                                 article of food under the name of
                                 which it is sold, and is not plainly and
                                 conspicuously labelled so as to
                                 indicate its true character;
(b) if it is falsely stated to be the
                                 product of any place or country;
(c) if it is sold by a name which
                                 belongs to another article of food;
(d) if it is so coloured, flavoured or
                                 coated, powdered or polished that the
                                 fact that the article is damaged is
                                 concealed or if the articles is made to
                                 appear better or of greater value than
                                 it really is;
(e) if false claims are made for it upon
                                 the label or otherwise;
(f) if, when sold in packages which
                                 have been sealed or prepared by or at
                                 the instance of the manufacturer or
                                 producer and which bear his name
                                 and address, the contents of each
                                 package are not conspicuously and
                                 correctly stated on the outside
                                 thereof within the limits of variability
                                 prescribed under this Act;
(g) if the package containing it, or the
                                 label on the package bears any
                                 statement, design or device regarding
                                 the ingredients or the substances
                                 contained therein, which is false or
                                 misleading      in    any     material
                                 particular; or if the package is
                                 otherwise deceptive with respect to
                                 its contents;
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                             Page 7 of 15
(h) if the package containing it or the
                                 label on the package bears the name
                                 of a fictitious individual or company
                                 as the manufacturer or producer of
                                 the article;
(i) if it purports to be, or is
                                 represented as being, for special
                                 dietary uses, unless its label bears
                                 such information as may be
                                 prescribed concerning its vitamin,
                                 mineral, or other dietary properties in
                                 order sufficiently to inform its
                                 purchaser as to its value for such
                                 uses;
(j) if it contains any artificial
                                 flavouring, artificial colouring or
                                 chemical preservative, without a
                                 declaratory label stating that fact, or
                                 in contravention of the requirements
                                 of this Act or rules made thereunder;
(k) if it is not labelled in accordance
                                 with the requirements of this Act or
                                 rules made thereunder;”
10.      The corresponding provision under the FSSA is clause
             (zf) of
Section 3
which reads thus:
“(zf) “misbranded food” means an article of
                           food–

                               (A) if it is purported, or is represented to
                               be, or is being–
(i) offered or promoted for sale with false,
                               misleading or deceptive claims either;
(a) upon the label of the package,
                                     or
(b) through advertisement, or
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                Page 8 of 15
(ii) sold by a name which belongs to
                               another article of food; or
(iii) offered or promoted for sale under
                               the name of a fictitious individual or
                               company as the manufacturer or
                               producer of the article as borne on the
                               package or containing the article or the
                               label on such package; or

                               (B) if the article is sold in packages which
                               have been sealed or prepared by or at the
                               instance of the manufacturer or
                               producer bearing his name and address
                               but–
(i) the article is an imitation of, or is a
                                   substitute for, or resembles in a
                                   manner likely to deceive, another
                                   article of food under the name of which
                                   it is sold, and is not plainly and
                                   conspicuously labelled so as to
                                   indicate its true character; or
(ii) the package containing the article
                                   or the label on the package bears any
                                   statement, design or device regarding
                                   the ingredients or the substances
                                   contained therein, which is false or
                                   misleading in any material particular,
                                   or if the package is otherwise deceptive
                                   with respect to its contents; or (iii) the
                                   article is offered for sale as the product
                                   of any place or country which is false;
or

                      (C) if the article contained in the package–
(i) contains any artificial flavouring,
                                   colouring or chemical preservative and
                                   the package is without a declaratory
                                   label stating that fact or is not labelled
                                   in accordance with the requirements
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                  Page 9 of 15
of this Act or regulations made
                                   thereunder or is in contravention
                                   thereof; or
(ii) is offered for sale for special dietary
                                   uses, unless its label bears such
                                   information as may be specified by
                                   regulation, concerning its vitamins,
                                   minerals or other dietary properties in
                                   order sufficiently to inform its
                                   purchaser as to its value for such use;
or
(iii) is not conspicuously or correctly
                                   stated on the outside thereof within
                                   the limits of variability laid down
                                   under this Act.”

             Sub-clause (A) (i) deals with food being offered or promoted for
             sale with false, misleading or deceptive claims upon the
             package's label.
11.      Under
Section 16
of PFA, penalties have been prescribed.
             Under clause 1(i) of sub-section (1) of
Section 16
, misbranding
             within the meaning of Clause (ix) of
Section 2
is an offence
             punishable with imprisonment for a term which may not be less
             than six months, but it may extend to three years and with a
             fine of the minimum amount of Rupees one thousand.                          The
             procedure for taking cognizance is prescribed by
Section 20
.
12.      As against this, Section 52 of FSSA provides for penalties
             for misbranded food. FSSA does not prescribe any punishment
             of imprisonment for misbranding, but the power under Section
             52 is to impose a penalty, which may extend to Rupees 3 lakhs.
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                   Page 10 of 15
13.      Thus, under the provisions of the PFA, for misbranding,
             a person can be sentenced to imprisonment of a minimum six
             months with a fine of Rupees one thousand and more.
             However, for a similar violation under the FSSA, there is no
             penal provision in the sense that there is no provision for
             sentencing the violator to undergo imprisonment and to pay a
             fine. Under the FSSA, only a penalty of up to Rupees 3 lakhs
             can be imposed.
14.      We must note here that
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
,
7
,
8
,
9
,
10
,87,88,91
             and 101 were brought into force with effect from 15th October
             2007.
Section 3
of the FSSA which defines ‘misbranded food’
             came into force on 28th May 2008. As noted earlier, Section 97
             which provides for repeal of the PFA was brought into force on
             5th August 2011. Thus, the penal provisions of the PFA were in
             force till 5th August 2011. In this case, the alleged offence was
             committed on 29th November 2010. Thus, on that day, Section
             52 of FSSA was in force as also the provisions of the PFA and
             the PFA Rules.
15.      At this stage, we may refer to sub-section (4) of Section 97
             of FSSA, a sunset clause. Sub-section (4) of Section 97 reads
             thus:
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained
                               in any other law for the time being in
                               force, no court shall take cognizance of
                               an offence under the repealed Act or
                               Orders after the expiry of a period of
                               three years from the date of the
                               commencement of this Act.”
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                           Page 11 of 15
16.      Sub-section (4) provides that notwithstanding the repeal
             of the PFA, cognizance of the offence committed under the PFA
             can       be     taken        within   three   years   from   the   date      of
             commencement of the FSSA. The implication of sub-section (4)
             of Section 97 is that if an offence is committed under the PFA
             when the PFA was in force, cognizance of the crime can be taken
             only within three years from the date of commencement of the
             FSSA.
17.      In this case, on the day on which the alleged offence was
             committed, the offender could have been sentenced to
             imprisonment under
Section 16
of the PFA and under the FSSA,
             he could have been directed to pay the penalty up to Rupees 3
             lakhs. The punishment under PFA and the penalty under the
             FSSA cannot be imposed on the violator for the same
             misbranding because it will amount to double jeopardy, which
             is prohibited under
Article 20(2)
of the Constitution of India.
             Thus, when the penal action can be taken under both statutes,
             the question is which will prevail. An answer to the said
             question has been provided by Section 89 of the FSSA, which
             reads thus:
“89. Overriding effect of this Act
                               over all other food related laws. –
                               The provisions of this Act shall have
                               effect     notwithstanding    anything
                               inconsistent therewith contained in
                               any other law for the time being in
                               force or in any instrument having
                               effect by virtue of any law other than
                               this Act.”
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                  Page 12 of 15
18.      The effect of Section 89 is that if there is an inconsistency
             between the provisions of the PFA and the FSSA, the provisions
             of the FSSA will have an overriding effect over the provisions of
             the PFA. When it comes to the consequences of misbranding,
             the same has been provided under both the enactments, and
             there is inconsistency in the enactments as regards the penal
             consequences of misbranding.              As pointed out earlier, one
             provides for imposing only a penalty in terms of payment of
             money, and the other provides imprisonment for not less than
             six months.            In view of the inconsistency, Section 89 of the
             FSSA will operate, and provisions of the FSSA will prevail over
             the provisions of the PFA to the extent to which the same are
             inconsistent. Thus, in a case where after coming into force of
             Section 52 of the FSSA, if an act of misbranding is committed
             by anyone, which is an offence punishable under
Section 16
of
             PFA and which attracts penalty under Section 52 of the FSSA,
             Section 52 of the FSSA will override the provisions of PFA.
             Therefore, in such a situation, in view of the overriding effect
             given to the provisions of the FSSA, the violator who indulges
             in misbranding cannot be punished under the PFA and he will
             be liable to pay penalty under the FSSA in accordance with
             Section 52 thereof.
19.      There are other arguments made by the learned senior
             counsel appearing for the appellant. But we need not deal with
             the same as the appellant must succeed on the abovementioned
             grounds.
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                           Page 13 of 15
20.      Reliance was placed on a decision of the Bench of three
             Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the case of Hindustan Unilever
             Limited3. In this case, an offence punishable under the PFA
             was committed in February 1989. The Trial Court passed the
             order of conviction of the accused on 16th June 2015. Relying
             upon sub-clause (iii) of clause (1) of Section 97 of the FSSA, this
             Court held that the repeal of the PFA will not affect any penalty,
             forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offences
             committed under the PFA before its repeal. Thus, when the
             offence was committed, the provisions of the FSSA were not on
             the statute book. Therefore, the issue of conflict between the
             penal provisions under the PFA and the FSSA did not arise
             before this Court. That is the reason why this Court had not
             adverted to Section 89 of the FSSA, which deals with a situation
             where there is a conflict between the provisions of the PFA and
             the FSSA. As noted earlier, we are dealing with a case where
             the alleged act of misbranding was committed when the
             relevant provisions of the FSSA, and in particular, Section 52
             thereof, were already brought into force.               Therefore, we are
             dealing with a situation where the act of misbranding will
             attract penal provisions both under the PFA and the FSSA.
             Thus, Section 89 of the FSSA comes into the picture which did
             not apply to the fact situation in the case of Hindustan
             Unilever Limited3.
21.      In paragraph 19 of the impugned judgment, the High
             Court has committed an error by holding that there is no
             inconsistency            between     the   penal   provisions   relating    to
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                                Page 14 of 15
misbranding under the PFA and FSSA. Hence, in our view, the
             High Court ought to have quashed the proceedings of the
             prosecution of the appellant under
Section 16
of the PFA.
             Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order dated 13th May
             2016 is hereby set aside. The proceedings of Criminal Case No.
             15830 of 2011 pending before the Special Judicial Magistrate,
             Indore, are hereby quashed. However, this judgment will not
             prevent the authorities under the FSSA from taking recourse to
             the provisions of Section 52 thereof in accordance with the law.
22.      The appeal is allowed on the above terms.
….…………………….J.
                                                        (Abhay S. Oka)




                                                        …..…………………...J.
                                                        (Sanjay Karol)
             New Delhi;
December 14, 2023.
Criminal Appeal @ S.L.P. (Crl.) no.7041 of 2016                     Page 15 of 15