[Cites
44
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Kishor Arora vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 15 December, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
2023 INSC 1082                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3865 OF 2023
                                          (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 12863 of 2023)


          RAM KISHOR ARORA                                                     …APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS


          DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT                                        …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The present appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated

                         22.09.2023 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi, in Writ

                         Petition (Crl.) No. 2408/2023, whereby the High Court has dismissed
Signature Not Verified
the said petition seeking declaration that the arrest of the appellant on
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2023.12.15
27.06.2023 by the respondent Directorate of Enforcement (hereinafter
18:48:00 IST
Reason:
referred to as the ED) was illegal and violative of the fundamental rights
1
guaranteed to the appellant under
Articles 14
, 20
and
21
of the

     Constitution of India, and seeking direction to release the appellant

     forthwith. The appellant had also sought direction to quash the order of

     remand dated 28.06.2023 passed by the ASJ/05, PMLA, Patiala House

     Courts, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “Special Court”), in

     ECIR No. STF/21/2021.
3.   Dehors the facts, a neat question of law that has been raised before this

     Court is, whether the action of the respondent ED in handing over the

     document containing the grounds of the arrest to arrestee and taking it

     back after obtaining the endorsement and his signature thereon, as a

     token of he having read the same, and in not furnishing a copy thereof

     to the arrestee at the time of arrest would render the arrest illegal under
Section 19
of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002

     (hereinafter referred to as PMLA)?
FACTUAL MATRIX: -
4.   The bare minimum facts required to decide the above questions of law

     are as follows: -
(i)   The appellant was the founder of M/s Supertech Limited, a real

           estate company which along with its group companies had
2
undertaken various projects in Delhi NCR and at other places in

        Uttar Pradesh during the period 1988-2015.
(ii)    Due to various reasons, 26 FIRs came to be registered against

        the appellant in various jurisdictions.
(iii)   On 09.09.2021, the respondent ED registered an ECIR bearing

        no. ECIR/21/STF/2021 against M/s Supertech Ltd. and others and

        started investigation under the PMLA. The appellant was also

        summoned under
Section 50
of PMLA on various dates during

        which his statements were also recorded.
(iv)    During March 2022, some insolvency proceedings came to be

        filed against the company M/s Supertech Ltd. before the NCLT,

        which passed some interlocutory orders. The matter was also

        taken up by the appellant before the NCLAT with settlement

        proposal, however during the pendency of the insolvency

        proceedings, the respondent ED passed a provisional attachment

        order on 11.04.2023, provisionally attaching certain personal

        properties of the appellant and filed an original complaint (OC No.

        1974/2023) on 04.05.2023, before the Adjudicating Authority,

        PMLA, seeking confirmation of the provisional attachment order in

        terms of
Section 8
of PMLA.
3
(v)    On 12.05.2023, the Adjudicating Authority, PMLA, issued a notice

       to the appellant under
Section 8(1)
of the PMLA calling upon the

       appellant to show cause as to why the properties provisionally

       attached should not be confirmed as the properties involved in

       money laundering.
(vi)   According to the appellant, before he could reply to the said show

       cause notice, on 27.06.2023 he was arrested by the respondent

       ED without serving to the appellant the ground of arrest.
(vii) On 28.06.2023, the appellant was produced before the Special

       Court, New Delhi, where the ED sought remand. The Special

       Court remanded the appellant to the ED custody till 10.07.2023

       and thereafter the appellant was sent to judicial custody for 14

       days till 24.07.2023.
(viii) The appellant had filed a bail application on 12.07.2023 before the

       Special Court, the same came to be dismissed by the Special

       Court on 22.07.2023. The appellant was sent to the judicial

       custody for further period of 14 days i.e till 07.08.2023, which

       subsequently came to be extended till 21.08.2023.
(ix)   The appellant filed a Writ Petition being no. W.P. (Crl.)

       No.336/2023 before this Court challenging the order dated
4
22.07.2023 passed by the Special Court dismissing his bail

           application. The said writ petition came to be withdrawn by the

           appellant with liberty to approach the High Court.
(x)   Thereafter, the appellant filed the writ petition being W.P. (Crl.) No.

           2408/2023, which came to be dismissed by the High Court vide

           the impugned order dated 22.09.2023.
5.   The respondent ED has filed an affidavit to counter the allegations made

     in the Appeal by the appellant, and asserted that the arrest was in

     accordance with
Section 19
of the PMLA. Paragraph 16 of the counter-

     affidavit being relevant is reproduced herein below: -
“16. The arrest was in accordance with
Section 19
of PMLA in
            so far as the Grounds of Arrest in writing were handed over to
            the arrestee Ram Kishor Arora who after reading the same
            affixed his signature on each page of the Grounds of Arrest.
            Further, after going through the Grounds of Arrest the Arrestee
            Ram Kishor Arora on last page in his own handwriting wrote
            that –
            "I have been informed and have also read the above mention
            grounds of arrest"
Therefore, the ratio of Pankaj Bansal judgement will not be
            applicable in the instant case.
A copy of Grounds of arrest is annexed herewith and marked
            as Annexure R-1.”
5
6.   The appellant without specifically denying the said assertion made by

     the respondent ED in paragraph 16 of the counter-affidavit, filed the

     response by filing an affidavit in rejoinder. The response of the appellant

     in the rejoinder to paragraph 16 of the counter-affidavit reads as under:-
“i. It is respectfully submitted that the very fact that the
            respondent has now annexed the copy of the grounds of arrest
            establishes the fact that the petitioner was not served the copy
            of the grounds of arrest. Rather it is an admission on the part
            of the respondent that the copy of the grounds of arrest were
            not served on the petitioner. This Hon’ble Court in
V. Senthil
            Balaji Vs State and Ors.
2023 SCC OnLine SC 934 in Para 39
            has held that the ground of arrest is to be “served” to the
            arrestee.
The same was also reiterated and clarified by this
            Hon’ble Court in
Pankaj Bansal Vs Union of India and Others
,
            2023 SCC OnLine SC 1244.
ii. It is submitted that the compliance of serving the grounds of
            arrest must be at the time when the Petitioner’s arrest was
            made and not thereafter.
iii. The non-service of grounds of arrest is an illegality and not
            an irregularity that can be regularized later. If the law requires
            that something be done in a particular manner, then it must be
            done in that manner, and if not done in that manner, then the
            same has no existence in the eye of law at all.
iv. Mere perusal of grounds of arrest for getting it signed,
            without serving the same by providing a copy thereof at the
            time of arrest, does not meet the requirements in law and the
            arrest of the petitioner is thus illegal.”
            v. It is submitted that the filing the copy of the grounds of
            arrest at this stage (Annexure R-1 in counter affidavit, page
            no. 36), will not help Respondent to cure this illegality. This
            is an incurable illegality making the very arrest illegal.”
6
LEGAL PROVISION: -
7.   Since the entire controversy centres around the interpretation of
Section

     19
of PMLA which deals with the Power of the ED to arrest, the same is

     reproduced for ready reference.
“19. Power to arrest.- (1) If the Director, Deputy Director,
            Assistant Director or any other officer authorised in this behalf
            by the Central Government by general or special order, has on
            the basis of material in his possession, reason to believe (the
            reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person
            has been guilty of an offence punishable under this Act, he
            may arrest such person and shall, as soon as may be, inform
            him of the grounds for such arrest.
(2) The Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any
            other officer shall, immediately after arrest of such person
            under sub-section (1), forward a copy of the order along with
            the material in his possession, referred to in that sub-section,
            to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed envelope, in the
            manner, as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority
            shall keep such order and material for such period, as may be
            prescribed.
(3) Every person arrested under sub-section (1) shall, within
            twenty-four hours, be taken to a 1[Special Court or] Judicial
            Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be,
            having jurisdiction:
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the
            time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to
            the 1[Special Court or] Magistrate's Court.”
7
SUBMISSIONS BY THE LEARNED COUNSELS: -
8.    The Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi placing heavy

      reliance on the recent decision of this Court in
Pankaj Bansal vs. Union

      of India and Others1
, submitted that mere informing the accused (the

      appellant herein) orally about the grounds of arrest and making him read

      the same and obtaining his signature thereon, and not furnishing in

      writing the grounds of arrest to the accused has been held to be not in

      consonance with the provisions contained in
Section 19(1)
of the PMLA.
He further submitted that taking note of the inconsistent practice being

      followed by the officers of the respondent-ED, it has been directed that

      it would be necessary henceforth that a copy of such written grounds of

      arrest is furnished to the arrested person as a matter of course and

      without exception. According to him, the said direction was the

      reiteration of the principle or doctrine already existing and also stated in
V. Senthil Balaji Vs. State
represented by Deputy Director and

      Others2 and therefore
the said decision
in
Pankaj Bansal
case (supra)

      is required to be applied retrospectively though the word ‘henceforth’

      has been used.
To buttress his submission, Mr. Singhvi has relied upon


1 (2023) SCC Online SC 1244
2   (2023) SCC Online SC 934
8
the judgment in
Assistant Commissioner, Income Tax, Rajkot vs.

     Saurashtra Kutch Stock Exchange Limited3
, in which it was opined

     that a judicial decision acts retrospectively.
9.   Per contra, the learned ASG, Mr. S. V. Raju vehemently submitted that

     the decision in case of
Pankaj Bansal
(supra) was per incuriam, as the

     two-Judge Bench in the said case had deviated from the position of law

     settled by the prior three-Judge Bench judgment in
Vijay Madanlal

     Choudhary and Others vs. Union of India and Others4
with respect

     to the compliance of the provisions of
Section 19
of PMLA.
He also

     submitted that a bench of two judges cannot overlook or ignore a binding

     precedent of larger or even co-equal bench dealing with the issue,

     otherwise the two-judge bench decision would fall in the category of per

     incuriam, in view of the decision in case of
Sundeep Kumar Bafna vs.

     State of Maharashtra and Another5
.
He further submitted that at the

     most the direction contained in paragraph 35 of the
Pankaj Bansal
case

     (supra) to furnish the grounds of arrest in writing, would be applicable

     “henceforth” as mentioned therein, meaning thereby it would have the




3 (2008) 14 SCC 171
4 (2022) SCC Online SC 929
5 (2014) 16 SCC 623
9
prospective and not retrospective effect as sought to be submitted on

    behalf of the appellant.
ANALYSIS: -
10. The validity of the various provisions including
Section 19
of the PMLA

    was examined by the Three-Judge Bench in
Vijay Madanlal

    Choudhary
case (supra) in which the Bench while upholding the validity

    of
Section 19
of the PMLA held that the said provision has reasonable

    nexus with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the

    PMLA. The relevant observations are reproduced herein below: -
“324. ……..In other words, the role of the Authorities appointed
           under Chapter VIII of the 2002 Act is such that they are tasked
           with dual role of conducting inquiry and collect evidence to
           facilitate adjudication proceedings before the Adjudicating
           Authority in exercise of powers conferred upon them under
           Chapters III and V of the 2002 Act and also to use the same
           materials to bolster the allegation against the person
           concerned by way of a formal complaint to be filed for offence
           of money-laundering under the 2002 Act before the Special
           Court, if the fact situation so warrant. It is not as if after every
           inquiry prosecution is launched against all persons found to be
           involved in the commission of offence of money-laundering. It
           is also not unusual to provide for arrest of a person during such
           inquiry before filing of a complaint for indulging in alleged
           criminal activity. The respondent has rightly adverted to
           somewhat similar provisions in other legislations, such as
Section 35
of FERA and
Section 102
of Customs Act including
10
the decisions of this Court upholding such power of arrest at
the inquiry stage bestowed in the Authorities in the respective
legislations. In Romesh Chandra Mehta532, the Constitution
Bench of this Court enunciated that
Section 104
of the
Customs Act confers power to arrest upon the Custom Officer
if he has reason to believe that any person in India or within
the Indian Customs waters has been guilty of an offence
punishable under
Section 135
of that Act. Again, in the case
of Padam Narain Aggarwal533, while dealing with the
provisions of the
Customs Act
, it noted that the term “arrest”
has neither been defined in the 1973 Code nor in the Penal
Code, 1860 nor in any other enactment dealing with offences.
This word has been derived from the French word “arrater”
meaning “to stop or stay”. It signifies a restraint of a person. It
is, thus, obliging the person to be obedient to law. Further,
arrest may be defined as “the execution of the command
of a court of law or of a duly authorised officer”. Even, this
decision recognises the power of the authorised officer to
cause arrest during the inquiry to be conducted under the
concerned legislations. While adverting to the safeguards
provided under that legislation before effecting such arrest, the
Court noted as follows:
“Safeguards against abuse of power
36. From the above discussion, it is amply clear that power to
arrest a person by a Customs Officer is statutory in character
and cannot be interfered with. Such power of arrest can be
exercised only in those cases where the Customs Officer has
“reason to believe” that a person has been guilty of an offence
punishable under
Sections 132
,
133
,
135
,
135-A
or 136 of the
Act. Thus, the power must be exercised on objective facts of
commission of an offence enumerated and the Customs
Officer has reason to believe that a person sought to be
arrested has been guilty of commission of such offence. The
power to arrest thus is circumscribed by objective
considerations and cannot be exercised on whims, caprice or
fancy of the officer.
11
37. The section534 also obliges the Customs Officer to inform
the person arrested of the grounds of arrest as soon as may
be. The law requires such person to be produced before a
Magistrate without unnecessary delay.
38. The law thus, on the one hand, allows a Customs Officer
to exercise power to arrest a person who has committed
certain offences, and on the other hand, takes due care to
ensure individual freedom and liberty by laying down norms
and providing safeguards so that the power of arrest is not
abused or misused by the authorities. ….”
                                         (emphasis supplied)
325. The safeguards provided in the 2002 Act and the
preconditions to be fulfilled by the authorised officer before
effecting arrest, as contained in
Section 19
of the 2002 Act,
are equally stringent and of higher standard. Those
safeguards ensure that the authorised officers do not act
arbitrarily, but make them accountable for their judgment about
the necessity to arrest any person as being involved in the
commission of offence of money-laundering even before filing
of the complaint before the Special Court under
Section
44(1)(b)
of the 2002 Act in that regard. If the action of the
authorised officer is found to be vexatious, he can be
proceeded with and inflicted with punishment specified under
Section 62
of the 2002 Act…….
326. Considering the above, we have no hesitation in
upholding the validity of
Section 19
of the 2002 Act. We
reject the grounds pressed into service to declare
Section
19
of the 2002 Act as unconstitutional. On the other hand,
we hold that such a provision has reasonable nexus with
the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the
2002 Act of prevention of money-laundering and
confiscation of proceeds of crime involved in money-
laundering, including to prosecute persons involved in
the process or activity connected with the proceeds of
crime so as to ensure that the proceeds of crime are not
12
dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating
           any proceedings relating to confiscation thereof.”
11. Further while dealing with the issue as to whether it was necessary to

    furnish a copy of ECIR to the person concerned apprehending the arrest

    or at least after his arrest, the Bench held in
Vijay Madanlal
(supra) as

    under: -
“458. The next issue is: whether it is necessary to furnish copy
           of ECIR to the person concerned apprehending arrest or at
           least after his arrest?
Section 19(1)
of the 2002 Act postulates
           that after arrest, as soon as may be, the person should be
           informed about the grounds for such arrest. This stipulation is
           compliant with the mandate of
Article 22(1)
of the Constitution.
           Being a special legislation and considering the complexity of
           the inquiry/investigation both for the purposes of initiating civil
           action as well as prosecution, non-supply of ECIR in a given
           case cannot be faulted. The ECIR may contain details of the
           material in possession of the Authority and recording
           satisfaction of reason to believe that the person is guilty of
           money-laundering offence, if revealed before the
           inquiry/investigation required to proceed against the property
           being proceeds of crime including to the person involved in the
           process or activity connected therewith, may have deleterious
           impact on the final outcome of the inquiry/investigation. So
           long as the person has been informed about grounds of
           his arrest that is sufficient compliance of mandate of
Article 22(1)
of the Constitution. Moreover, the arrested
           person before being produced before the Special Court
           within twenty-four hours or for that purposes of remand
           on each occasion, the Court is free to look into the
           relevant records made available by the Authority about
           the involvement of the arrested person in the offence of
13
money-laundering. In any case, upon filing of the
complaint before the statutory period provided in 1973
Code, after arrest, the person would get all relevant
materials forming part of the complaint filed by the
Authority under
Section 44(1)(b)
of the 2002 Act before the
Special Court.
459. Viewed thus, supply of ECIR in every case to person
concerned is not mandatory. From the submissions made
across the Bar, it is noticed that in some cases ED has
furnished copy of ECIR to the person before filing of the
complaint. That does not mean that in every case same
procedure must be followed. It is enough, if ED at the time of
arrest, contemporaneously discloses the grounds of such
arrest to such person. Suffice it to observe that ECIR cannot
be equated with an FIR which is mandatorily required to be
recorded and supplied to the accused as per the provisions of
1973 Code. Revealing a copy of an ECIR, if made mandatory,
may defeat the purpose sought to be achieved by the 2002 Act
including frustrating the attachment of property (proceeds of
crime). Non-supply of ECIR, which is essentially an internal
document of ED, cannot be cited as violation of constitutional
right. Concededly, the person arrested, in terms of
Section
19
of the 2002 Act, is contemporaneously made aware
about the grounds of his arrest. This is compliant with the
mandate of
Article 22(1)
of the Constitution. It is not
unknown that at times FIR does not reveal all aspects of the
offence in question. In several cases, even the names of
persons actually involved in the commission of offence are not
mentioned in the FIR and described as unknown accused.
Even, the particulars as unfolded are not fully recorded in the
FIR. Despite that, the accused named in any ordinary offence
is able to apply for anticipatory bail or regular bail, in which
proceeding, the police papers are normally perused by the
concerned Court. On the same analogy, the argument of
prejudice pressed into service by the petitioners for non-supply
of ECIR deserves to be answered against the petitioners. For,
14
the arrested person for offence of money-laundering is
          contemporaneously informed about the grounds of his
          arrest; and when produced before the Special Court, it is
          open to the Special Court to call upon the representative
          of ED to produce relevant record concerning the case of
          the accused before him and look into the same for
          answering the need for his continued detention. Taking
          any view of the matter, therefore, the argument under
          consideration does not take the matter any further.”
12. Since, much reliance has been placed on the decisions in case of
V. Senthil Balaji vs. State
(supra) and in
Pankaj Bansal vs. Union of

    India
(supra), the relevant part thereof also deserve to be reproduced.
In
V. Senthil Balaji
(supra), the two-Judge Bench while dealing with
Section 19
of PMLA observed as under: -
“39. To effect an arrest, an officer authorised has to assess
          and evaluate the materials in his possession. Through such
          materials, he is expected to form a reason to believe that a
          person has been guilty of an offence punishable under
          the PMLA, 2002. Thereafter, he is at liberty to arrest, while
          performing his mandatory duty of recording the reasons. The
          said exercise has to be followed by way of an information
          being served on the arrestee of the grounds of arrest. Any
          non-compliance of the mandate of
Section 19(1)
of the PMLA,
          2002 would vitiate the very arrest itself. Under sub-section (2),
          the Authorised Officer shall immediately, after the arrest,
          forward a copy of the order as mandated under sub-section (1)
          together with the materials in his custody, forming the basis of
          his belief, to the Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed envelope.
          Needless to state, compliance of sub-section (2) is also a
15
solemn function of the arresting authority which brooks no
           exception.”
13.
In
Pankaj Bansal
case (supra), the two-Judge Bench after analyzing

    the provisions contained in
Section 19(1)
of PMLA observed as under:-
“39. On the above analysis, to give true meaning and purpose
           to the constitutional and the statutory mandate of
Section 19(1)
of the Act of 2002 of informing the arrested person of the
           grounds of arrest, we hold that it would be necessary,
           henceforth, that a copy of such written grounds of arrest
           is furnished to the arrested person as a matter of course
           and without exception. The decisions of the Delhi High Court
           in Moin Akhtar Qureshi (supra) and the Bombay High Court
           in Chhagan Chandrakant Bhujbal (supra), which hold to the
           contrary, do not lay down the correct law.…”
14. It hardly needs to be emphasized that as well settled, it is in order to

    guard against the possibility of inconsistent decisions on the points of

    law by different Division Benches that the Rule of precedent has been

    evolved. It is in order to promote the consistency and certainty in the

    development of law and its contemporary status that the statement of

    law by a Division Bench is considered binding on a Division Bench of

    the same or lesser number of Judges.
In this regard, we may refer to
16
the pronouncement of the Constitution Bench judgment in
Union of

    India and Another vs. Raghubir Singh (Dead) by LRs
. Etc.6


            “7. ……..The position is substantially different under a written
            Constitution such as the one which governs us. The
            Constitution of India, which represents the Supreme Law of the
            land, envisages three distinct organs of the State, each with its
            own distinctive functions, each a pillar of the State. Broadly,
            while Parliament and the State Legislature in India enact the
            law and the Executive Government implements it, the
            Judiciary sits in judgment not only on the implementation of the
            law by the Executive but also on the validity of the legislation
            sought to be implemented. One of the functions of the superior
            judiciary in India is to examine the competence and validity of
            legislation, both in point of legislative competence as well as
            its consistency with the Fundamental Rights. In this regard, the
            courts in India possess a power not known to the English
            Courts. Where a statute is declared invalid in India it cannot be
            reinstated unless constitutional sanction is obtained therefore
            by a constitutional amendment or an appropriately modified
            version of the statute is enacted which accords with
            constitutional prescription. The range of judicial review
            recognised in the superior judiciary of India is perhaps the
            widest and the most extensive known to the world of law. The
            power extends to examining the validity of even an
            amendment to the Constitution, for now it has been repeatedly
            held that no constitutional amendment can be sustained which
            violates the basic structure of the Constitution.
(See
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala
[(1973) 4 SCC
            225 : 1973
Supp SCR 1] , Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj
            Narain
[1975 Supp SCC 1 : (
1976) 2 SCR 347] , Minerva Mills
            Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1980) 2 SCC 591] and recently in
S.P.
            Sampath Kumar v. Union of India
[(1987) 1 SCC 124 : (1987)
            1 SCR 435 : (1987) 2 ATC 82] .) With this impressive expanse

6 (1989) 2 SCC 754
17
of judicial power, it is only right that the superior courts in India
should be conscious of the enormous responsibility which rest
on them. This is specially true of the Supreme Court, for as the
highest Court in the entire judicial system the law declared by
it is, by
Article 141
of the Constitution, binding on all courts
within the territory of India.
8. Taking note of the hierarchical character of the judicial
system in India, it is of paramount importance that the law
declared by this Court should be certain, clear and consistent.
It is commonly known that most decisions of the courts are of
significance not merely because they constitute an
adjudication on the rights of the parties and resolve the dispute
between them, but also because in doing so they embody a
declaration of law operating as a binding principle in future
cases. In this latter aspect lies their particular value in
developing the jurisprudence of the law.
9. The doctrine of binding precedent has the merit of
promoting a certainty and consistency in judicial decisions,
and enables an organic development of the law, besides
providing assurance to the individual as to the consequence of
transactions forming part of his daily affairs. And, therefore, the
need for a clear and consistent enunciation of legal principle in
the decisions of a Court.
10. to 26………….
27. What then should be the position in regard to the effect of
the law pronounced by a Division Bench in relation to a case
raising the same point subsequently before a Division Bench
of a smaller number of Judges? There is no constitutional or
statutory prescription in the matter, and the point is governed
entirely by the practice in India of the courts sanctified by
repeated affirmation over a century of time. It cannot be
doubted that in order to promote consistency and certainty in
the law
laid down by
a superior Court, the ideal condition would
be that the entire Court should sit in all cases to decide
18
questions of law, and for that reason the Supreme Court of the
            United States does so. But having regard to the volume of work
            demanding the attention of the Court, it has been found
            necessary in India as a general rule of practice and
            convenience that the Court should sit in Divisions, each
            Division being constituted of Judges whose number may be
            determined by the exigencies of judicial need, by the nature of
            the case including any statutory mandate relative thereto, and
            by such other considerations which the Chief Justice, in whom
            such authority devolves by convention, may find most
            appropriate. It is in order to guard against the possibility of
            inconsistent decisions on points of law by different Division
            Benches that the Rule has been evolved, in order to promote
            consistency and certainty in the development of the law and
            its contemporary status, that the statement of the law by a
            Division Bench is considered binding on a Division Bench of
            the same or lesser number of Judges. This principle has been
            followed in India by several generations of Judges. ……”
15. Another Constitution Bench in
Chandra Prakash and Others vs. State

    of U.P. and Another7
highlighting the utmost importance of the doctrine

    of binding precedent in the administration of judicial system and

    following the decision in Raghubir Singh’s case (supra) observed as

    under: -
“22. A careful perusal of the above judgments shows that this
            Court took note of the hierarchical character of the judicial
            system in India. It also held that it is of paramount importance
            that the law declared by this Court should be certain, clear and
            consistent. As stated in the above judgments, it is of common

7 (2002) 4 SCC 234
19
knowledge that most of the decisions of this Court are of
          significance not merely because they constitute an
          adjudication on the rights of the parties and resolve the
          disputes between them but also because in doing so they
          embody a declaration of law operating as a binding principle in
          future cases. The doctrine of binding precedent is of utmost
          importance in the administration of our judicial system. It
          promotes certainty and consistency in judicial decisions.
Judicial consistency promotes confidence in the system,
          therefore, there is this need for consistency in the enunciation
          of legal principles in the decisions of this Court. It is in the
          above context, this Court in the case of Raghubir
          Singh [(1989) 2 SCC 754] held that a pronouncement of law
          by a Division Bench of this Court is binding on a Division Bench
          of the same or smaller number of Judges. It is in furtherance
          of this enunciation of law, this Court in the latter judgment
          of Parija [(2002) 1 SCC 1] held that : (SCC p. 4, para 6)

             “But if a Bench of two learned Judges concludes that an
          earlier judgment of three learned Judges is so very incorrect
          that in no circumstances can it be followed, the proper course
          for it to adopt is to refer the matter before it to a Bench of three
          learned Judges setting out, as has been done here, the
          reasons why it could not agree with the earlier judgment. If,
          then, the Bench of three learned Judges also comes to the
          conclusion that the earlier judgment of a Bench of three
          learned Judges is incorrect, reference to a Bench of five
          learned Judges is justified.
(emphasis supplied)”
16.
In
Sundeep Kumar Bafna vs. State of Maharashtra
(supra) also the

    above stated jurisprudence has been followed: -
“19. It cannot be overemphasised that the discipline
          demanded by a precedent or the disqualification or diminution
20
of a decision on the application of the per incuriam rule is of
           great importance, since without it, certainty of law, consistency
           of rulings and comity of courts would become a costly casualty.
           A decision or judgment can be per incuriam any provision in a
           statute, rule or regulation, which was not brought to the notice
           of the court. A decision or judgment can also be per incuriam if
           it is not possible to reconcile its ratio with that of a previously
           pronounced judgment of a co-equal or larger Bench; or if the
           decision of a High Court is not in consonance with the views
           of this Court. It must immediately be clarified that the per
           incuriam rule is strictly and correctly applicable to the ratio
           decidendi and not to obiter dicta. It is often encountered in
           High Courts that two or more mutually irreconcilable decisions
           of the Supreme Court are cited at the Bar. We think that the
           inviolable recourse is to apply the earliest view as the
           succeeding ones would fall in the category of per incuriam.”
17.
In view of the afore-stated proposition of law propounded by the

    Constitution Benches, there remains no shadow of doubt that the law
laid down by
the Three-Judge bench in
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
case (supra) that
Section 19(1)
of the PMLA has a reasonable nexus

    with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the
PML Act
and that the said provision is also compliant with the mandate of
Article

    21(1)
of the Constitution of India, any observation made or any finding

    recorded by the Division Bench of lesser number of Judges contrary to

    the said
ratio
laid down in
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
(supra) would be

    not in consonance with the jurisprudential wisdom expounded by the

    Constitution Benches in cases
referred above
.
The Three-Judge Bench
21
in
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
case (supra) having already examined in

    detail the constitutional validity of
Section 19
of PMLA on the touchstone

    of
Article 22(1)
and upheld the same, it holds the field as on the date.
18. It is true that the expression “as soon as may be” has not been

    specifically explained in
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
(supra).
Even the

    said expression has not been interpreted in either V. Senthil Balaji or

    in
Pankaj Bansal
case. In V. Senthil Balaji, it is held inter alia that after

    forming a reason to believe that the person has been guilty of an offence

    punishable under the PMLA, the concerned officer is at liberty to arrest

    him, while performing his mandatory duty of recording the reasons, and

    that the said exercise has to be followed by way of an information being

    served on the arrestee of the grounds of arrest.
In
Pankaj Bansal
case

    also the court after highlighting the inconsistent practice being followed

    by the respondent-ED about the mode of informing the person arrested,

    held that it would be necessary henceforth, that a copy of such written

    grounds of arrest is furnished to the arrested person as a matter of

    course and without exception.
19. In view of the above, the interpretation of the expression “as soon as

    may be” assumes significance.
In our opinion, the interpretation of the

    said expression should not detain us more in view of the Constitution
22
Bench Judgment in case of
Abdul Jabar Butt and Another vs. State

      of Jammu & Kashmir.8 In
the said case, the Constitution Bench while

      interpreting
Section 8
of Jammu & Kashmir Preventive Detention Act

      2011, had an occasion to interpret the expression “as soon as may be”

      and it observed thus:-
“6. Sub-section (1) imposes on the Government two duties,
             namely, (i) the duty of communicating to the detenue the
             grounds on which the order has been made, and (ii) the duty
             of affording him the earliest opportunity of making
             representation against the order to the Government. The first
             duty is to be performed “as soon as may be”. Quite clearly the
             period of time predicated by the phrase “as soon as may be”
             begins to run from the time the detention in pursuance of the
             detention order begins. The question is — what is the span of
             time, which is designated by the words “as soon as may be”?
             The observations of Dysant, J. in King's Old Country,
             Ltd. v. Liquid Carbonic Can. Corpn., Ltd. [(1942) 2 WWR 603,
             606] quoted in Stroud's Judicial Dictionary 3rd Edn., Vol. 1, p.
             200 are apposite. Said the learned Judge, “to do a thing ‘as
             soon as possible’ means to do it within a reasonable time, with
             an understanding to do it within the shortest possible time”.
Likewise to communicate the grounds ‘as soon as may be may
             well be said to mean to do so within a reasonable time with an
             understanding to do it within the shortest possible time. What,
             however, is to be regarded as a reasonable time or the
             shortest possible time? The words “as soon as may be” came
             for consideration before this Court in
Ujagar Singh v. State of
             the Punjab
[1951 SCC 170 : (1952) SCR 756] . At pp. 761-62
             this Court observed that the expression meant with a
             “reasonable despatch” and then went on to say that “what was

8   AIR 1957 SC 281
23
reasonable must depend on the facts of each case and no
             arbitrary time limit could be set down”.
In
Keshav Nilakanth
             Joglekar v. Commissioner of Police, Greater Bombay
[
             Supreme Court Petition No. 102 of 1956, decided on
             September 17, 1956] the word “forthwith” occurring in
Section
             3(3)
of the Indian Preventive Detention Act (4 of 1950) came
             up for consideration. After observing that the word “forthwith”
             occurring in
Section 3(3)
of that Act did not mean the same
             thing as “as soon as may be” used in
Section 7
of the same
             Act and that the former was more peremptory than the latter,
             this Court observed that the time that was allowed to the
             authority to communicate the grounds to the detenue and was
             predicated by the expression “as soon as may be” was what
             was “reasonably convenient” or “reasonably requisite”.
20. Again, a three-judge bench in
Durga Pada Ghosh vs. State of West

      Bengal9
while considering the scheme of
Article 22
of the Constitution

      held as under: -
“8. The scheme underlying
Article 22
of the Constitution
             highlights the importance attached in our constitutional set-up
             to the personal freedom of an individual. Sub-articles (1) and
             (2) refer to the protection against arrest and detention of a
             person under the ordinary law. Persons arrested or detained
             under a law providing for preventive detention are dealt with in
             sub-articles (4) to (7). Sub-article (5) says that when a person
             is detained in pursuance of an order under a law providing for
             preventive detention the grounds on which the order is made
             have to be communicated to the person concerned as soon as
             may be and he has to be afforded earliest opportunity to
             represent against the order. The object of communicating the
             grounds is to enable the detenu to make his representation
             against the order. The words “as soon as may be” in the

9   (1972) 2 SCC 656
24
context must imply anxious care on the part of the authority
           concerned to perform its duty in this respect as early as
           practicable without avoidable delay.”
21. In view of the above, the expression “as soon as may be” contained in
Section 19
of PMLA is required to be construed as- “as early as possible

    without avoidable delay” or “within reasonably convenient” or

    “reasonably requisite” period of time. Since by way of safeguard a duty

    is cast upon the concerned officer to forward a copy of the order along

    with the material in his possession to the Adjudicating Authority

    immediately after the arrest of the person, and to take the person

    arrested to the concerned court within 24 hours of the arrest, in our

    opinion, the reasonably convenient or reasonably requisite time to

    inform the arrestee about the grounds of his arrest would be twenty-four

    hours of the arrest.
22.
In
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
(supra), it has been categorically held

    that so long as the person has been informed about the grounds of his

    arrest, that is sufficient compliance of mandate of
Article 22(1)
of the

    Constitution. It is also observed that the arrested person before being

    produced before the Special Court within twenty-four hours or for that

    purposes of remand on each occasion, the Court is free to look into the

    relevant records made available by the Authority about the involvement
25
of the arrested person in the offence of money-laundering. Therefore, in

    our opinion the person asserted, if he is informed or made aware orally

    about the grounds of arrest at the time of his arrest and is furnished a

    written communication about the grounds of arrest as soon as may be

    i.e as early as possible and within reasonably convenient and requisite

    time of twenty-four hours of his arrest, that would be sufficient

    compliance of not only
Section 19
of PMLA but also of
Article 22(1)
of

    the Constitution of India.
23. As discernible from the judgment in
Pankaj Bansal
Case also noticing

    the inconsistent practice being followed by the officers arresting the

    persons under
Section 19
of PMLA, directed to furnish the grounds of

    arrest in writing as a matter of course, “henceforth”, meaning thereby

    from the date of the pronouncement of the judgment. The very use of

    the word “henceforth” implied that the said requirement of furnishing

    grounds of arrest in writing to the arrested person as soon as after his

    arrest was not the mandatory or obligatory till the date of
the said

    judgment
. The submission of the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Singhvi for

    the Appellant that
the said judgment
was required to be given effect

    retrospectively cannot be accepted when the judgment itself states that

    it would be necessary “henceforth” that a copy of such written grounds
26
of arrest is furnished to the arrested person as a matter of course and

    without exception.
Hence non furnishing of grounds of arrest in writing

    till the date of pronouncement of judgment in
Pankaj Bansal
case could

    neither be held to be illegal nor the action of the concerned officer in not

    furnishing the same in writing could be faulted with.
As such, the action

    of informing the person arrested about the grounds of his arrest is a

    sufficient compliance of
Section 19
of PMLA as also
Article 22(1)
of the

    Constitution of India, as held in
Vijay Madanlal
(supra).
24. In so far as the facts of the present case are concerned, it is not disputed

    that the appellant was handed over the document containing grounds of

    arrest when he was arrested, and he also put his signature below the

    said grounds of arrest, after making an endorsement that “I have been

    informed and have also read the above-mentioned grounds of arrest.”

    The appellant in the rejoinder filed by him has neither disputed the said

    endorsement nor his signature below the said endorsement. The only

    contention raised by the learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Singhvi is that he

    was not furnished a copy of the document containing the grounds of

    arrest at the time of arrest. Since the appellant was indisputably

    informed about the grounds of arrest and he having also put his

    signature and the endorsement on the said document of having been
27
informed, we hold that there was due compliance of the provisions

    contained in
Section 19
of PMLA and his arrest could neither be said to

    be violative of the said provision nor of
Article 22(1)
of the Constitution

    of India.
25. In that view of the matter, the Appeal being devoid of merits is dismissed.
.…..….…………………………..J.
                                           [BELA M. TRIVEDI]




                                           ...……………………………..…..J.
                                           [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA]

 NEW DELHI,
 DECEMBER 15th, 2023
28