[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sekaran vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 12 December, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
Dipankar Datta
,
B.R. Gavai
2023 INSC 1062

                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE



                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2294 OF 2010



             SEKARAN                                                       … APPELLANT



                                                       VS.



             THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU                                      …RESPONDENT




                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
The Challenge
1.             The Principal Sessions Judge, Kanyakumari District at Nagercoil,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.12.12
15:55:40 IST
vide judgment and order dated 22nd March 2002, convicted the appellant
   Reason:
for committing murder and sentenced him to life in prison together with
1
fine of Rs.1000/-, in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 6 (six)

months. Aggrieved thereby, the appellant invoked the jurisdiction of the

Madras High Court, Madurai Bench, under
section 374(2)
of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973. The High Court, vide judgment and order dated

12th November 2009, allowed the appeal in part. The appellant was

convicted for an offence under section 304-Part II, of the
Indian Penal

Code
, 1860 (“
IPC
”, hereafter) and sentenced to five years’ rigorous

imprisonment. Still dissatisfied, the judgment and order of the High Court

has been carried by the appellant in appeal before this Court.


Prosecution Case
2.    The prosecution case is that the victim, Palas, and his wife (PW-3)

after returning from their respective jobs on 12th March, 1996, had been

to a tea stall run by Velukutti (not examined). At the tea stall were

present Ponnaian (not examined) and Wilson (PW-2). In their presence,

Palas had demanded Rs.50/-, being his wages, from the appellant.

Incidentally, Palas was a “coconut cutting coolie” working under the

appellant. Hearing such demand, the appellant abused Palas in filthy

language which was followed by physical abuses by and between them.

Suddenly, the appellant picked up one rubber stick (lying on the back side

of the tea stall) and hit Palas on the front and back sides of his head while

exhorting him to get lost. On receiving such blow from the appellant,

Palas fell down whereupon Ponnaian, Devaraj (PW-1) and PW-3 separated

the two (appellant and Palas). Holding the rubber stick, the appellant
2
threatened those present thereat that they would have to suffer the same

consequences as Palas, if any of them challenged him. Thereafter, the

appellant fled towards the north side. Palas was taken to a private nursing

home,      viz.     Sivanandam      Nursing       Home     at   Panichamuttu     (sic,

Panachamoodu) village, Kanyakumari district, and admitted there on the

same day. On 13th March, 1996, the doctor at the nursing home (PW-7)

advised shifting of Palas to another hospital, whereafter he was taken to a

government          hospital,     viz.      Medical      College      and    Hospital,

Thiruvananthapuram (the nearest government hospital, although in a

State different from the State where the alleged incident occurred). Palas

was admitted there at on 13th March 1996 at 11.00 p.m. but,

unfortunately, breathed his last on 14th March 1996 at about 07.15 p.m. A

death intimation memo (Ex. P3) was issued by the doctor (PW-8). It was

on the following day, i.e. 15th March 1996, that the first information report

(“FIR”, hereafter) was registered on a complaint by Devaraj (PW-1)

against the appellant for the offence punishable under
section 302
, IPC at

Arumanai Police Station at about 09.00 a.m. On 15th March 1996 itself,

post mortem was conducted by an Assistant Professor of Forensic

Medicine          and    Deputy          Police   Surgeon,         Medical   College,

Thiruvananthapuram (PW-9). The post mortem report (Ex. P5) revealed

the opinion that “head injury” sustained by Palas was the cause of death.
3
Proceedings before the Courts
3.   Before the Sessions Court, 11 (eleven) witnesses were examined on

behalf of the prosecution. The trend of cross-examination suggested that

Palas died of a head injury that he sustained due to a fall from a tree.

While the Sessions Court was of the view that the prosecution had been

successful in establishing the charge against the appellant beyond

reasonable doubt, the High Court while exercising appellate jurisdiction

considered the oral testimony of PWs 2 & 3 and held that it had no

hesitation to hold that it was the appellant who caused the head injury

resulting in the death of Palas. However, at the same time, the High Court

was of the view that the attendant circumstances and evidence brought

on record unmistakably showed that the appellant may not have intended

to cause the death of Palas. There was a quarrel between the appellant

and Palas with regard to demand of wages prior to the occurrence, the

appellant did not possess any weapon and that the appellant picked up

the rubber stick from behind the tea stall and attacked Palas – all these

led to the conclusion that there was no premeditation or intention on the

part of the appellant to commit the murder of Palas. Being of the view

that the incident of assault leading to the ultimate death of Palas had

happened at the spur of the moment, the High Court was also of the view

that Exception- II of
section 300
, IPC stood attracted and consequently,

the appellant could not be held liable under
section 302
, IPC; instead, he

would be liable for the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to

murder punishable under section 304-Part II,
IPC
. It was as a result of
4
such a finding and recording of conviction that the High Court proceeded

to   impose   on   the   appellant   the   sentence   of   5   years’   rigorous

imprisonment.
Appellant’s arguments
4.    Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. Basant, learned senior

counsel contended that the High Court grossly erred in misreading the

oral evidence on record as well as drawing conclusions from the

documentary evidence led by the prosecution, without appreciating that

the most vital evidence which could have clinched the issue was withheld

by the prosecution by not examining the independent witnesses, viz.

Ponnaian and Velukutti. Exception was next taken to delayed lodging of

the FIR and it was asserted that the appellant had been falsely implicated.

It was further contended by Mr. Basant that PW-7 had issued a certificate

(Ex. P2) certifying that Palas had been treated at Sivanandan Nursing

Home, Kanyakumari District on 12th March 1996 “for injury on the scalp

as an outpatient”. According to him, if indeed Palas had been assaulted by

the appellant and such incident was witnessed at least by PWs 2 and 3, as

part of normal human reaction, the person(s) taking Palas to the nursing

home/hospital would be expected to disclose the factum of Palas having

suffered head injury as a result of blows inflicted on him by the appellant;

however, neither any disclosure was made of such assault nor the

appellant was named as the assailant. There is also no evidence as to the

nature of treatment extended to Palas on 12th March as well as on 13th
5
March, 1996 prior to he being shifted to the government hospital at

Thiruvananthapuram. No document regarding admission of Palas at such

hospital as well as treatment rendered to him was also produced as

evidence. Referring to Ex. P3, being the death intimation memo issued by

PW-8, Mr. Basant contended that there was sufficient ground to believe

that Palas had suffered injury as a result of a fall from the tree. Moreover,

it was argued that the so-called rubber stick with which the appellant was

alleged to have struck a blow on the head of Palas was not recovered.

Finally, it was brought to our notice that PW-1, a so-called eyewitness and

the first informant, had turned hostile.
5.    Resting on the aforesaid contentions, Mr. Basant urged that the

prosecution had failed to prove that the appellant [who has unnecessarily

suffered 11 (eleven) months incarceration] was instrumental in assaulting

Palas which ultimately led to his death. It was, accordingly, prayed that

the judgment and order under challenge be set aside and the appellant

set free.
Respondent’s arguments
6.    Per contra, it was contended on behalf of the respondent by Dr.

Aristotle, learned counsel that the judgment of the High Court convicting

the appellant for the offence punishable under section 304-Part II,
IPC
is

well reasoned and does not merit interference. PWs 2 and 3 were

eyewitnesses to the assault on Palas by the appellant and nothing

surfaced in course of their cross-examination to discredit them. The death
6
of Palas was attributed to the head injury suffered by him on 12 th March

1996 and injury nos. 1 and 2, indicated in the post mortem report, were

sufficient to cause the death of Palas. It was further contended that any

slip or laxity in investigation ought not to be given any importance,

particularly when there are eye-witnesses of the crime. Dr. Aristotle

further contended that delay in lodging an FIR is not always fatal and the

prosecution case     cannot be disbelieved merely because of minor

contradictions in the testimony of witnesses which were recorded between

4 (four) to 6 (six) years after the incident.
7.    While concluding his address, Dr. Aristotle submitted that the High

Court has exercised appellate power judiciously by returning a finding that

the appellant was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

and that the sentence imposed upon him neither being disproportionate

nor shocking to the conscience of the Court, the same ought not to be

interfered.
The Question
8.    The question we are tasked to decide is whether, based on the

evidence on record, the High Court was justified in returning a finding

that the appellant was guilty of the offence punishable under
section 304-
Part II,
IPC
and liable to be sentenced as a consequence thereof, as has

been imposed on him.
7
Analysis
9.    We have meticulously perused the materials on record as well as

considered the contentions advanced at the Bar with the care and

attention the same deserve.
10.   In cases of the present nature, where material witnesses are

withheld by the prosecution and it is the positive case set up by the

defence that he has been falsely implicated for murder though death of

the victim could be for reasons attributable to an accidental fall from a

tree and such a case in defence finds some amount of corroboration from

the other evidence on record, coupled with the fact that the appellate

court has imposed a lesser sentence upon reversal of the finding of

murder returned by the trial court, this Court as the court of last resort

has a duty to separate the grain from the chaff and after sieving the

untruth or unacceptable portion of the evidence, to also examine whether

the residue is sufficient to prove the guilt of the accused. There seems to

be no legal bar in convicting an accused resting on part of the evidence,

which is primarily found to be credible and acceptable; however, where

the evidence is so inseparable that any attempt to separate them would

destroy the substratum on which the prosecution version is founded, then

this Court would be within its legal limits to discard the evidence in its

entirety. Bearing this settled principle in mind, we proceed to assess the

evidence on record.
8
11.   We start with the FIR, to which exception has been taken by the

appellant urging that there has been no satisfactory explanation for its

belated registration. It is trite that merely because there is some delay in

lodging an FIR, the same by itself and without anything more ought not to

weigh in the mind of the courts in all cases as fatal for the prosecution. A

realistic and pragmatic approach has to be adopted, keeping in mind the

peculiarities of each particular case, to assess whether the unexplained

delay in lodging the FIR is an afterthought to give a coloured version of

the incident, which is sufficient to corrode the credibility of the

prosecution version. In cases where delay occurs, it has to be tested on

the anvil of other attending circumstances. If on an overall consideration

of all relevant circumstances it appears to the court that the delay in

lodging the FIR has been explained, mere delay cannot be sufficient to

disbelieve the prosecution case; however, if the delay is not satisfactorily

explained and it appears to the court that cause for the delay had been

necessitated to frame anyone as an accused, there is no reason as to why

the delay should not be considered as fatal forming part of several factors

to vitiate the conviction.
12.   In the present case, we have noticed that the FIR was admittedly

lodged on 15th March 1996 at about 09.00 a.m. although the incident was

of 12th March 1996 and in between Palas was treated initially in a private

nursing home and then in the government hospital where he passed away

on 14th March 1996 around 07.15 p.m. From the evidence on record, what

we find is that the crime was not reported to the police because, first,
9
none of the doctors who had attended to Palas had advised PWs 2 and 3

to so report; secondly, PW-2 did not report out of fear as the appellant

had threatened PWs 2 and 3; and thirdly, PW-3 wanted to save her

husband. It is the oral evidence of a head constable who was posted at

Arumanai Police Station (PW-10) that PW-1 had visited the police station

on 15th March 1996 and given a statement (Ex. P7) based whereon the

FIR (Ex. P8) was prepared. He admitted that no message was received

prior to the FIR (Ex. P8) and that one police outpost is there within the

campus of the Trivandrum Medical College. He also admitted that

generally an FIR should be registered at the police outpost prior to

admitting the patient for treatment and that such FIR should be

forwarded to the police station. It is also in the evidence of the Inspector

of Police, Arumanai Police Station (PW-11) that the place of occurrence

is at a distance of 15 kms. from his police station.
13.   Upon consideration of the other circumstances, belated reporting of

the crime to the police resulting in undue delay would bear relevance and

we need to arrive at a conclusion as to whether what the PWs 2 and 3

deposed could be regarded as explanations worthy of acceptance for not

reporting the crime to the police between 12th March 1996 (evening) and

15th March 1996 (before 9.00 a.m.).
14.   PW-2 deposed that he had taken Palas to Sivanandan Nursing Home

and had stated to the doctor (PW-7) that the appellant had hit Palas with

a rubber stick. Such version of PW-2 has been contradicted by PW-7.
10
According to PW-7, Palas was brought to the nursing home on 12th March

at about 07.30 p.m. Since he had injury on his head, PW-7 provided first

aid to him. At such nursing home, Palas received treatment for a day

whereafter he was advised by PW-7 to be admitted at a government

hospital. It is in the version of PW-7 that information would have been

given to the police had he been told that Palas was attacked by

somebody. It is, therefore, clear that the version of PW-7 has a different

tale to tell.
15.    Moving on to the oral testimony of the witnesses, what we have to

bear in mind is
section 134
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (“
Evidence

Act
”, hereafter) and the categorization of oral testimony into witnesses

who are (i) wholly reliable; (ii) wholly unreliable; and (iii) neither wholly

reliable nor wholly unreliable. It is not the quantity but the quality of

evidence that would matter.
16.    PWs 2 and 3 were the star witnesses for the prosecution, having

deposed to have not only been present at the place of occurrence but also

having witnessed the quarrel between Palas and the accused over wages

demanded by the former and the subsequent blow inflicted by the latter.

PW-2 in course of cross-examination admitted of the existence of a police

station 10 kms. away and that vehicle facility to reach there was

available. He simply avoided responsibility by deposing that PW-8 did not

advise him to report to the police outpost, which was within the campus

of the hospital. PW-3 in course of her cross-examination (conducted a
11
little less than 4 years from the date of incident) could recollect the

incident and all follow up steps sequentially, and went on to depose that

she chose not to report the crime or have the same reported since she

decided to save Palas. There could be nothing unusual if safety of her

husband was the prime consideration of PW-3. However, what is striking

is that PW-3 could not recall as to whether she had stated at the hospital

that the appellant had attacked Palas with the rubber stick. She shrugged

off the responsibility by deposing that someone else must have disclosed

to the doctor regarding the injury sustained by Palas.
17.   In the light of the above explanation proffered by PWs 2 and 3,

which does not appear to us to be reliable and acceptable, we do feel that

the absence of Ponnaian and Velukutti assumes importance. In fact, their

absence has the effect of seriously damaging the prosecution case and

rendering it quite unreliable.
18.   It is in the deposition of PW-11 that PW-10 had recorded the

statement of, inter alia, Velukutti earlier and that PW-11 himself had

recorded the statements of PWs 1, 2 and 3 as well as Ponnaian. Ponnaian

and Velukutti were admittedly present at the tea stall when the alleged

incident of assault took place (version of PWs 2 & 3). The prosecution has

not explained why Ponnaian and Velikutti were not called upon to depose

despite they being present at the place of occurrence and despite their

statements having been recorded in course of investigation. If indeed

they were unavailable to depose, it was incumbent on the prosecution to
12
adduce relevant evidence in that regard. The prosecution having not

examined Ponnaian and Velikutti, illustration (g) of
section 114
of the

Evidence Act is well and truly attracted in the present case.
19.   Next, there is something noteworthy about the injury inflicted on

Palas if at all the version of the prosecution is to be believed. PW-2 in

course of cross-examination deposed that Palas had suffered a “small

injury”. It is also in the evidence of PW-7 that after Palas was brought to

Sivanandam Nursing Home, he was provided first aid by PW-7. Providing

first aid to Palas coupled with the statement of PW-2 of a small injury

having been suffered by Palas, it is not unreasonable to presume that the

injury was obviously not too serious and Palas himself was in a position to

say how he had suffered the injury. From the evidence of the two doctors,

viz. PWs 7 and 8, it does not appear that Palas was physically disabled to

speak or that any conversation took place in course whereof Palas did

disclose that he was assaulted by the appellant. It was incumbent on the

prosecution to produce documents relating to admission of Palas in the

nursing home and at the government hospital as well as those relating to

his treatment to prove that Palas himself was not in a position to speak.

None of these medical documents having been produced, there is no

corroboration that the head injury which Palas suffered was caused by the

blow of the rubber stick and also that the same could not have been

suffered as a result of a fall from the tree.
13
20.   That apart, it is seen from the evidence of the autopsy surgeon

(PW-9) that there were several scratch injuries suffered by Palas near to

his left shoulder, on his left elbow, on his upper right thumb, and lower to

left knee on his left foreleg. Most importantly, there was a lacerated injury

on the corner of the tongue. It was not elicited from PW-9 how these

injuries could have been sustained by Palas; on the contrary, the chemical

examiner’s report dated 31st March 1999 (Ex. P6) reveals positive results

for Indoform, Dichromate and Ethyl Acetate tests. Presence of ethyl

alcohol in the blood, liver and kidney of Palas, which was not disputed by

PW-9 and his further statement that “liquor was remained up to 3 days”

coupled with his testimony in course of cross-examination that it is

“possible to have sustain injuries found on head if a person fallen down

from a high tree”, gives us reason to entertain serious doubts about the

prosecution case which get amplified by what is discussed now.
21.   Ex. P3, being the death intimation memo, is of some significance.

The contents thereof are not entirely in the handwriting of PW-8. PW-8

while admitting his signature at the foot of Ex. P3, cleared the position

that the contents on the first page were written by the hospital staff. The

contents on the reverse are definitely not in the handwriting of PW-8 but

reveals the words “fall from tree”. The prosecution has not made any

attempt to explain how these words came to be written on Ex. P3 and by

whom. Significantly, no circumstance has been brought on record to

attribute such writing to the appellant. Had Ex. P3 been entirely written

by PW-8 and the words “fall from tree” by someone else, this document
14
would have been of no importance at all; however, in the absence of any

explanation proffered by the prosecution, it constitutes another important

material to doubt the prosecution case of the appellant being responsible

for the death of Palas. All circumstances taken together tilt more towards

the inference that Palas was under the influence of alcohol, did fall from a

tree, had a head injury and several scratch injuries and, most importantly,

in the process of the fall and hitting the ground, bit his tongue resulting in

the lacerated injury spoken of by PW-9. These injuries, we are minded to

believe, were not suspected to be serious injuries at the inception

warranting admission of Palas in a government hospital or even to report

such incident to the police but the situation having taken a turn for the

worse and to evade responsibility, the appellant had been framed possibly

in connivance with one Radhakrishnan (not examined) whose role

surfaces from what is referred to by PW-1.
22.   The deposition of PW-1 arouses suspicion as to the incident in

question. He is the younger brother of Palas and the first informant;

however, he was declared hostile by the prosecution after having spoken

of his unawareness of the occurrence. PW-1 thereafter proceeded to give

an ocular version as if he was an eyewitness. According to him, after

seeing the occurrence, Ponnaian as well as PWs 2 and 3 came to the place

of occurrence and separated the appellant and Palas. Thereafter he (PW-
1), Ponnaian and PWs 2 and 3 took Palas to Sivanandan Nursing Home.
During   cross-examination    by   the    appellant,   PW-1   spoke   of   one

Radhakrishnan (according to PW-3, Radhakrishnan is PW-3’s sister’s
15
husband) and police of Arumanai Police Station having obtained the

signature of PW-1 on “one paper”. This is an additional circumstance that

renders the prosecution version not wholly acceptable.
23.   Although not brought to our notice in course of arguments, it is

revealed from the oral testimony of PW-11 that the appellant could be

apprehended 3 (three) years after the incident from Puliyur road junction

in (1 km. away from Ambalakalai) in Kerala after vigorous search.

However, abscondence by a person against whom an FIR has been lodged

and who is under expectation of being apprehended is not very unnatural.

Mere absconding by the appellant after alleged commission of crime and

remaining untraceable for such a long time itself cannot establish his guilt

or his guilty conscience. Abscondence, in certain cases, could constitute a

relevant piece of evidence, but its evidentiary value depends upon the

surrounding circumstances. This sole circumstance, therefore, does not

enure to the benefit of the prosecution.
24.   Viewed in the light of the delay in lodging of the FIR and on

threadbare   consideration   of   the    other   evidence   on   record,   the

circumstances surrounding the unfortunate death of Palas do not clearly

and unequivocally point to the involvement of the appellant and his false

implication cannot be wholly ruled out.
Conclusion
25.   We are of the firm opinion, having regard to the aforesaid

discussion, that the prosecution cannot be held to have established even
16
the accusation of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against the

appellant beyond reasonable doubt and to extend the benefit of doubt to

him is what the justice of the case demands; hence, he is entitled to be

acquitted. Ordered accordingly.
26.   The appeal succeeds. The judgment and order dated 12th November

2009, which is under challenge in this appeal, stands set aside. The

appellant shall be set free, unless he is wanted in any other case. He

stands discharged of his bail bonds.
…………………………………J.
                                                   (B.R. GAVAI)




                                            …………………………………J.
                                               (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                            ..………………………………J.
                                                 (ARAVIND KUMAR)
New Delhi;
December 12, 2023.
17