[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chhote Lal vs Rohtash on 14 December, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1072                                                    NON-REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2490 OF 2014


          CHHOTE LAL                                                …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

          ROHTASH & ORS.                                          …RESPONDENTS



                                                 JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.              Out of the ten accused persons before the Court of Sessions,

                         six were convicted for the offences under
Sections 148
,
201
/
149
and
302
/
149
of the Indian Penal Code1 and separate

                         punishment for each of the offences was prescribed, the
Signature Not Verified
maximum being imprisonment for life with a fine of Rs.5,000/-
Digitally signed by
and in default thereof, to undergo further imprisonment of six
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.12.14
17:28:17 IST
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as “
IPC
”
Page 1 of 7
months under
Section 302
/
149
IPC. The said conviction and

     sentence has been set aside by the High Court vide impugned

     judgment and order dated 20.11.2008.
3.   Aggrieved by the acquittal of all the six accused, the

     appellant/complainant Chhote Lal has preferred this appeal.
4.   The sole submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is

     that in matters where the accused persons are convicted and

     sentenced by the trial court, the appellate court is normally

     slow in upsetting the conviction, more particularly in the light

     of the evidence on record, especially, that of the eyewitness

     (complainant).
5.   There is no dispute to the fact that there was serious enmity

     between the two rival groups which were in fact interrelated.

     The   dispute    between    the     two   groups   was   quite   old

     commencing in the year 1986 in connection with the access to

     the public road which was being blocked by one party. The

     said dispute was compromised but still continued to persist

     which resulted in the murder of Ram Kishan. It is in

     retaliation to the above dispute, it appears that the rival group
Page 2 of 7
now killed the Kishan Sarup (victim). In connection with the

     above killing of Kishan Sarup, an FIR was allegedly lodged on

     04.11.2000 by the appellant/complainant but it was registered

     on 05.11.2000.
6.   According to the FIR, the incident occurred on 04.11.2000 at

     7 pm. At that time Kishan Sarup was returning from duty and

     the appellant/complainant was returning from Faridabad.

     They   met    at   scooter    stand,   Badshahpur    and   the

     appellant/complainant joined Kishan Sarup on motorcycle to

     proceed towards the village Aklimpur. When they reached Tikli

     Road, they saw a car parked on the road side which chased

     their motorcycle and pushed it to the left side of the road

     forcing the appellant/complainant and Kishan Sarup to fall in

     the bushes. The appellant/complainant noticed the accused

     persons alighting from the vehicle and thereafter attacking

     Kishan Sarup with knifes, iron rod etc. The accused persons

     took Kishan Sarup in injured condition in their car and left. A

     report about the said incident in writing was submitted to the

     Incharge Police Post Badshahpur under the signatures of the

     appellant/complainant.
Page 3 of 7
7.   It   may     be    pertinent       to   point     out   that    the

     appellant/complainant had worked with Delhi Police and at

     least three of the accused persons were also in Delhi Police.
8.   We have considered the findings of the two courts below and

     have also gone through the ocular testimony of PW-9 i.e. the

     sole eyewitness (complainant). His testimony reveals that on

     05.11.2000 at about 2 pm when they reached ‘Pahar’ with the

     investigation team, they found a dead body burning which had

     almost perished. The fire was extinguished and from there one

     copper ring and the buckle of a belt were recovered which were

     identified to be that of Kishan Sarup (victim).
9.   The appellant/complainant (PW-9) happened to be the sole

     eyewitness but he had neither seen anyone killing his son

     Kishan Sarup nor he had deposed that he had seen anyone

     burning the victim Kishan Sarup. Therefore, he is not actually

     an eyewitness either to the killing or to the burning of the

     deceased Kishan Sarup though he may be an eyewitness to

     the incident which took place on 04.11.2000 at 7 pm wherein

     a car had chased their motorcycle, pushed them towards the
Page 4 of 7
roadside making them fall in the bushes, thereupon assaulting

    the deceased Kishan Sarup and then taking him away in an

    injured position in the car.
10. It may be noted that he has not deposed anything as to why he

    had not tried to intervene and save his son from assault or

    stop the accused persons from taking him away in the car. He

    himself had not received any injuries. The statement that he

    could not do so on account of the threats extended by the

    accused persons appears to be a bald statement as no one in a

    situation where his son is being assaulted and carried away

    would remain a mere spectator.
11. The appellant/complainant (PW-9) stated in the FIR that the

    accused assaulted his son with a knife and iron rod. He didn’t

    mention about the use of a pistol by the accused. However, the

    police have recovered empty cartridge. Cause of death as per

    postmortem is also firing from close range.
12. In view of the above situation and the other evidence on

    record, the very presence of the appellant/complainant even

    during the incident of 04.11.2000 appears to be doubtful. He
Page 5 of 7
appears to have met Kishan Sarup on the scooter stand per

    chance whereupon he took lift from Kishan Sarup to travel

    towards the village.
13. It   may   not   be    out   of    context   to   mention   that   the

    appellant/complainant, a sole eyewitness, happens to be the

    most interested witness being the father of the deceased and

    having long enmity with the group to which the accused

    persons belong, therefore, his testimony was to be examined

    with great caution and the High Court was justified in doing so

    and in doubting it so as to uphold the conviction on his

    solitary evidence.
14. In the light of the evidence on record, both versions as was

    taken by the trial court and that by the High Court may

    appear to be the possible views. However, the conviction has to

    be based on the evidence which proves the accused guilty

    beyond reasonable doubt. The prosecution in this case has

    failed to prove the guilt of the accused both by circumstantial

    evidence and by means of evidence of the eyewitness. In

    respect of circumstantial evidence, the chain of events is not
Page 6 of 7
complete whereas the presence of eyewitness is also doubtful.
Thus, we are of the opinion that the view taken by the High

     Court in extending the benefit of doubt to the accused persons

     appears to be the most plausible view.
15. Accordingly, we do not deem it necessary to interfere with the

     opinion expressed by the High Court.
16. The appeal lacks merit and is dismissed.
……………………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)




                                            ……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 14, 2023.
Page 7 of 7