[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Haryana vs Dinesh Singh on 14 December, 2023
Author:
Aravind Kumar
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
M.M. Sundresh
1


2023 INSC 1070                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.___________ OF 2023
                                  (@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (C) NO. 21335 OF 2022)



                            State of Haryana and Others                                  …Appellants

                                                                     Versus

                            Dinesh Singh and Another                                   … Respondents



                                                            JUDGMENT
Justice Aravind Kumar, J.
1.       Leave granted.
2.       The broad issue at hand relates to recruitment and appointment to

                            the posts in the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) 1. The process of

                            recruitment to the posts in the Service are governed by Haryana Civil

                            Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 2008 [for short, ‘the Rules’].
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2023.12.15
16:00:52 IST
Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Service’
2
3.       Part II2 of the Rules is titled ‘Recruitment to Service’. For a person

to be appointed in the Service, Rule 7 3 requires that such person’s name

must be found in ‘one or other of the registers of Accepted Candidates to

be maintained under these rules. Rule 84 requires the Chief Secretary to

maintain ‘Registers of Accepted Candidates’. From among the various

Registers to be maintained, what is of relevance to us for adjudicating this

dispute is the one found in Rule 8 (a): ‘Register A-I of District Revenue

Officer/Tehsildars accepted as candidates;’
4.       Rule 9 deals with the selection of candidates for inclusion of their

names in Register A-1. According to this Rule, the Financial

Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government (hereinafter referred

as, the Commissioner) is required to prepare a list of District Revenue


2 Part II runs from Rule 3 to Rule 34.
3 Rule 7 - Members of the Service shall be appointed from time to time as required
from amongst accepted candidates whose names have been duly entered in accordance
with these rules in one or other of the registers of Accepted Candidates to be maintained
under these rules:
Provided that if in the opinion of the Government the exigencies of the Service so
require, the Government may make special recruitment to the Service by such methods
as it may by notification specify, after consultation with the Commission.
4 Rule 8- The following Registers of Accepted Candidates shall be maintained by the
Chief Secretary, namely:-
(a)    Register A-I of District Revenue Officers/Tahsildars accepted as candidates;
(b)    Register A-II of members of Group C Service accepted as candidates;
(c)      Register B of Persons accepted as candidates as a result of a
        competitive examination for the post of the Haryana Civil Services (Executive
        Branch) ; and
(d)      Register C of District Development and Panchayat Officer/Block
        Development and Panchayat Officers.
3
Officer/Tehsildars not more than five times the number of vacancies and

submit this list to the Committee5 for its consideration. Only such names

are to be forwarded to the Commission who satisfy the conditions set out

in clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 9. Clause (a) of Rule 9 contains four sub

clauses. In that sense, the conditions set out in clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 9

provide the eligibility criteria for selection of candidates in Register A-1.

We shall advert to the relevant clauses in due course.
5.      Once the names are entered in the Register, Rule 17 provides that

the Government of Haryana shall make appointments to the Service from

amongst the candidates whose names are entered in the various registers on

a rotational basis.
6.      Dinesh Singh (Respondent no. 1) was one among several

candidates, who was seeking appointment to the post in the Service. He

was appointed in the Department of Revenue and Disaster Management

(Appellant no. 3; hereinafter, ‘the Department’) on 12.08.2008 as a Naib

Tehsildar, and at the time of filing the original Writ Petition, was serving in

the post of Tehsildar. The Department has found Dinesh Singh, among

several others, to be ineligible for selection to Register A-1 on the ground



5  Rule 9 of 2008 Rules states that the Committee shall comprise of a Chief Sectary as
the Chairman and two such other officers as members, as may be nominated by the
Government from time to time.
4
that he did not satisfy the eligibility condition set out in sub clause (iii) of

clause (a) of Rule 9. Rule 9 (a)(iii) reads as follows:
“is not facing disciplinary proceedings and against whom
          action is not being contemplated”.
7.      According to the Department, Dinesh Singh, though was not facing

any disciplinary proceedings, there was action being contemplated against

him as on date of consideration, which resulted in him being declared

ineligible for selection. However, it is Dinesh Singh’s case that he was

neither facing disciplinary proceedings, nor was any action being

contemplated against him, and therefore, the action of declaring him

ineligible was erroneous and being excluded, resulted in same being

challenged before the High Court. The Ld. Single Judge dismissed the writ

petition filed by Dinesh Singh and other similarly situated persons. On

appeal, the High Court has set aside the order of the Ld. Single Judge and

directed the State to take steps to consider the case of Dinesh Singh for

appointment from Register A-1.
8.      Therefore, the crux of the litigation comes down to the question as

to whether Dinesh Singh was eligible for selection to be made in Register

A-1. In order to determine his eligibility, it will be necessary to identify the

relevant cut-off date as on which the eligibility is to be determined.
5
Submissions of Appellant’s Counsel:
9.      The Division Bench of the High Court has erred in treating

01.11.2018 as the uniform cut-off date for the purpose of determining

eligibility qua all conditions set out under Rule 9 (a) and (b).
10.     A literal reading of Rule 9 would make it clear that 01.11.2018 was

the cut-off date only in so far as the condition provided in Rule 9 (a)(ii);
that date was relevant only to determine if the candidate was within the age

limit of fifty years and nothing else; this was, in fact, clarified by the

Government through its letter dated 09.07.2019, in which it was made

clear that the said date was relevant only for purpose of determining the

age-related eligibility criterion; and the other conditions of eligibility were

to be tested as on ‘date of consideration’.
11.     Treating the said date as a uniform cut-off date vis-a-vis all the

eligibility conditions set out in Rule 9 would result in an anomaly. This is

because a candidate against whom no disciplinary action was contemplated

or pending as on 01.11.2018, but became pending subsequently as on date

of consideration, would still remain eligible under the Rules. Such could

not have been the intention of the Rule-maker.
12.     In this case, the date of consideration is the date on which the

Committee had recommended names to the Commission under Rule 9 (2),
6
that is, 30.09.2018 and as on such date, there cannot be any dispute about

the fact that disciplinary action, though not same contemplated pending

against the Respondent.
Submissions of Respondent’s Counsel:
13.      Per Contra, it is the Respondent’s case that Rule 9 contemplates

only one cut-off date. There cannot be separate cut off dates qua the

different conditions of eligibility. That Rule 9 contemplated only one

uniform cut-off date qua all eligibility conditions is evidenced by

notification dated 30.05.2019 in which it had been specified that ‘The

DRO’s/Tehsildars whose names are to be recommended should fulfil the

following conditions as on 01.11.2018’. This included condition qua

pendency/contemplation of disciplinary proceedings. Therefore, the

subsequent clarification6 brought out by the Government through its letter

dated 09.07.2018 amounts to nothing but changing the rules of the game. It

is further contended that at the previous stages of the litigation, that is

before the Single Judge and Division Bench, it was never the pleaded

stance of the State that the date of consideration was 31.08.2019. In fact,

there it was contended that 01.11.2018 was the cut-off date qua all eligible

conditions.
6 It was clarified therein that 01.11.2018 was the cut-off date in order to determine the
age-related criterion while other conditions of eligibility was to be tested as on date of
consideration.
7
14.     Even if 31.08.2019 is taken as the relevant cut-off date for

determining eligibility qua the pendency of disciplinary proceeding, in the

facts of the present case, it cannot be said that any disciplinary action was

contemplated against the Respondent.
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION :
15.     In this factual background, the following issues fall for

consideration: -
“1. On a reading of Rule 9, letter dated 30.05.2019 and letter
           dated 09.07.2019, whether 01.11.2018 can be said to be the cut-
           off period uniformly applicable qua all the eligibility conditions
           provided in Rule 9(1)(a) and (b) or is such date to be considered
           as the cut-off date only for the purpose of determining age-
           related eligibility?
2. If we are to hold that 01.11.2018 was the cut off only for
           the limited purpose, whether Dinesh Singh satisfied the other
           eligibility conditions? Most importantly, whether it can be said
           that there was any disciplinary action pending or contemplated
           against him as on date of consideration?7


ANALYSIS :
16.     Rule 9 of the 2008 Rules, as it originally stood provided as follows:
“9. Selection of candidates for Register A-I:- (1) The
           Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government,
           Haryana Revenue and Disaster Management shall, by a date to
           be determined by the Government prepare a list of District
           Revenue Officers/Tehsildars not more than five times of the
           number of vacancies and submit the same for the consideration
           of a Committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and two such
           other officers as members, as may be nominated by the
7 The answer to the second question would turn on the official noting dating 05.02.2019
in which a decision was taken proposing to file a chargesheet against Dinesh Singh – in
connection with him having absented himself from some invigilation duty.
8
government from time to time provided that unless the
           Government other directs regarding the age, the name of a
           person shall be submitted who-
(a) (i)     has completed eight years continuous Government
               service;
(ii)    has not attained the age of forty-five years; on or
               before the date on which the names are required to be
               submitted before the Committee;
(iii)   is not facing disciplinary proceedings against whom
               action is being contemplated and
(iv)    is clear from vigilance angle;
(b) is a graduate of a recognized University.”
17.     Rule 9 came to be amended by notification 8 dated 16th February

2017 and the amended Rule read as follows:
“9. Selection of Candidates for Register A-I:-
(1) The Additional Chief Secretary and Financial
               Commissioner to Government, Haryana, Revenue and
               Disaster Management shall, by a date to be determined by
               the Government, prepare a list of District Revenue
               Officers/Tehsildars not more than five times of the number
               of vacancies and submit the same for the consideration of a
               Committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and two such
               other officers as members, as may be nominated by the
               Government from time to time, the name of a person shall
               be submitted who-
(a) (i) has completed eight years continuous Government
                        service including service rendered as Naib-
                        Tehsildar;
(ii) has not attained the age of fifty years on the first
                        day of November immediately preceding the date of
                        submission of names by the concerned authority;
(iii)is not facing disciplinary proceedings and against
                        whom action is being contemplated and
(b)      is a graduate of a recognised University.”
18.     On 17.04.2017, the Department issued a communication, in which

it was stated that the State Government was looking to fill up vacancies




8 Notification No. G.S.R.3/Const./Art.309/2017 dated 16th February 2017
9
(9 vacancies) up to 2016, in the Service from the quota of Register A-1.

The relevant part of this communication is extracted below:
“ It is intimated that State Government has decided to fill up
           nine vacancies of HCS(Executive Branch) from Register A-I of
           District Revenue Officer/Tehsildars upto the vacancies of the
           year 2016 in terms of rule 9 of Haryana Civil Service (Executive
           Branch) Rules, 2008. The officers should fulfill the following
           conditions of eligibility as on 01.11.2016:-
(a) (i)        has completed eight years continuous Government
           service including service rendered as Naib-Tehsildar;
(ii)      has not attained the age of fifty years;
                 (iii)    is not facing disciplinary proceedings and against
           whom action is not being contemplated.
                 (iv)     is clear from vigilance angle;
            (b) is a graduate from a recognized University.
It is, therefore, requested to bring the same in the notice of
           all concerned Officers under your control. All the eligible and
           interested Officers should send their application in this regard
           along with certified documents regarding education to the
           Government either directly or through proper channel latest by
           24.04.2017. The applications received after 24.04.2017 will not
           be entertained.”
19.     It was clearly indicated therein that officers should fulfill the

conditions of eligibility as on 01.11.2016 as prescribed in clause(a)(i) to
(iv) therein (referred to supra): -
It was also indicated in the said letter to the following effect: -
“It is, therefore, requested to bring the same in the notice of
           all concerned Officers under your control. All the eligible
           and interested Officers should send their application in this
           regard along with certified documents regarding education
           to the Government either directly or through proper channel
           latest by 24.04.2017. The applications received after
           24.04.2017 will not be entertained.”
20.     It appears that there was no action taken in the direction of filling

up vacancies pursuant to communication dated 17.04.2017. Nearly two
10
years later, on 30th May, 2019, a fresh communication was issued from the

Chief Secretary’s Office requesting the Commissioner to forward ‘a list of

eligible District Revenue Officers/ Tehsildars not more than five times the

number of vacancies as per rules for the aforesaid recruitment’. The

relevant part of this communication is extracted below:
“2. The DROs/Tehsildars whose names are to be recommended
           should fulfill the following conditions of eligibility as on
           01.11.2018:-
(a) (i)      has completed eight years continuous Government
               service. However, the services rendered as Naib Tehsildars
               shall not be included while determining the eligibility as per
               interim orders/directions dated 26.04.2017 of Hon’ble High
               Court of Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh passed in CWP
               No. 8502 of 2017-Joginder Sharma and others versus State
               of Haryana and others.
(ii)  has not attained the age of fifty years;
(iii) is not facing disciplinary proceedings and against
              whom action is not being contemplated; and
(iv)  is clear from vigilance angle;
(b) is a graduate from a recognized University.”
21.     What needs to be noted at the very outset is that the Respondent

has not challenged the validity of Rule 9 (1)(a)(iii), which requires, as a

matter of eligibility for selection, that no disciplinary proceeding be

pending, or action be contemplated against him. This is significant

because, normally, in the context of promotion-related disputes, this Court

has consistently held9 that mere pendency or contemplated initiation of

disciplinary proceedings against a candidate must be considered to have
9
State of M.P. v. Bani Singh
, 1990 Supp SCC 738.
11
absolutely no impact upon his right to be considered. Resort is often taken

to the ‘sealed cover’ procedure in cases where a candidate/employee

seeking promotion to a higher grade is facing disciplinary proceedings. As

per this procedure, the candidate is allowed to participate in the merit-

based selection process, and the results of such candidate’s selection is

kept in a sealed cover and opened in the event where the disciplinary

proceedings are dropped/ or a finding of not guilty is passed.
22.     Since the rule disentitling a candidate for selection if disciplinary

proceeding is pending or contemplated is not under challenge in these

proceedings, we must apply it as it is.
Determination of the cut-off date qua the eligibility condition of
pending disciplinary proceedings
23.     In order to find an answer as to whether there was any disciplinary

proceeding contemplated/pending against Dinesh Singh, we are necessarily

required to determine the applicable cut-off date against which the

eligibility is to be tested. In that sense, the finding on the latter question

has a direct bearing on the outcome of the former question. Perhaps, this

also explains why the Ld. Single Judge and Ld. Division Bench have

reached opposite conclusions. According to the Ld. Single Judge,

01.11.2018 was to operate as the cut-off period only in so far as Clause (2)
12
of Rule 9(1)(a) is concerned – that is to say eligibility in so far as age of

the candidate is concerned. The date 01.11.2018 was not to be treated as

the cut-off date for all the eligibility conditions set out in Rule 9. However,

the Division Bench was of the opinion that 01.11.2018 operated as the cut-

off date qua all the clauses found in Rule 9(1)(a).
24.     If the Division Bench is right in its finding, then we need not enter

into the follow-up question as to whether any disciplinary proceeding was

pending/contemplated against Dinesh Singh, since, admittedly, as on

1.11.2018, even as per the appellant-State, no case was pending or

contemplated against him. On the other hand, if we hold the cut-off date to

be the date of consideration, then it needs to be further examined if there

was any action contemplated against the Respondent as on that date.
25.     We are of the view that Ld. Single Judge was correct in concluding

that 01.11.2018 was meant only for the purpose of determining the age-

related eligibility as provided for in Rule 9(1)(a)(ii). The cut off for the

purpose of determining eligibility in so far as Rule 9(1)(a)(iii) has to be

determined as on date of consideration.
26.     The finding of the Division Bench to the contrary was on the

premise that the subject rule in itself had provided for 01.11.2018 to
13
operate as the cut-off date qua all conditions of eligibility found in Rule 9.

The relevant observation of the High Court is extracted herein below –
           “the cut-off date, thus, has to be seen from the date which is
          provided in the rules, which would be 01.11.2018 as per Rule
          9(1)(a)(iii) of the 2008 Rules, as the process was set into motion
          on 30.05.2019. It is, thus, does not lie in the mouth of the State
          as such to say that on account of the pending litigation and on
          account of the orders of the Division Bench dated 21.08.2019
          and 29.08.2019, a different cut-off date would come into play
          and there was a distinction as such qua the names which had
          been sent later. The eligibility as such has to be seen as provided
          in the rule itself and finding of the learned Single Judge that the
          cut-off date is 12.07.2019 is based on a wrong presumption.’’
27.     As could be seen from the above, the Ld. Division Bench opines

that the cut-off date has to be seen from the date provided in the Rules,

which according to it, is 01.11.2018. Rule 9(1)(a)(iii) does not contain any

such date; it merely provides that a candidate facing disciplinary

proceedings or against whom action is contemplated becomes ineligible for

selection. Only clause (2) in Rule 9(1)(a) finds the mention of a date (1 st

day of November immediately preceding the date of submission of names

by the concerned authority) as such. Therefore, the finding that the rule

itself clearly provides for a cut-off date qua all the clauses in Rule 9(1)(a)

appears to be perverse and without any basis. The Ld. Single Judge has

rightly relied on the letter date 09.07.2019 in arriving at the conclusion that

01.11.2018 was the cut-off date only for a limited purpose. That limited

purpose can be understood if one were to read the clarification provided
14
for in the said letter. The clarification is extracted herein below for easy

reference: -
“2. The State Government has re-considered the matter and it
          has been decided that the DROs/Tehsildars whose names are to
          be recommended should fulfil the following conditions of
          eligibility:-
(a) (i)      has completed eight years continuous Government
           Service.
(ii) has not attained the age of fifty years as on 01.11.2018.
(iii) is not facing disciplinary proceedings and against
              whom action is not being contemplated; and
(iv) is clear from vigilance angle;
(b) is a graduate from a recognised University.
It is clarified for the condition (a) (i) that services rendered
        as Naib Tehsildars shall not to be included while determining the
        eligibility as per interim orders/directions dated 26.04.2017 of
        Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana Chandigarh passed in
        CWP No. 8502 of 2017-
Joginder Sharma and others versus State
        of Haryana and others
.
It is further clarified that DROs/Tehsildars, who are
        otherwise eligible being less than 50 years of age on and after
        01.11.2018, their ACRs be considered upto year 2018-2019 and
        experience be taken into consideration upto the date of
        recommendation. The DROs/Tehsildars, who had not attained the
        age of 50 years as on 01.11.2018 but attained the age of more than
        50 years on and after 01.11.2018 till the date of recommendation
        their experience and ACRs record be considered only upto
        01.11.2018. However, pending disciplinary proceedings, vigilance
        clearance and integrity be considered upto the date of consideration
        in both cases.”
28.     From this clarificatory note, it becomes clear that if a candidate

was less than 50 years of age as on 01.11.2018 and continued to be so till

the date of recommendation, then his ACR and experience was to be

counted till the date of recommendation. However, if the candidate was

less than fifty years as on 01.11.2018 but exceeded such age as on the date
15
of recommendation, such candidates ACR and experience was to be

accounted for only till 01.11.2018. In that sense, the cut-off date

(01.11.2018) was relevant only to decide the question of how much of the

ACR and experience had to be considered and till what period. Such date

was never meant to operate as the date against which all the eligibility

criteria had to be measured against. This fact stands clarified from the last

paragraph of the letter dated 09.07.2019, whereunder it has been stated that

the eligibility criteria concerning ‘pending disciplinary proceedings,

vigilance clearance and integrity’ was to be considered up to the date of

consideration in both cases. This aside, according to us fixing 01.11.2018

as the cut-off date for determining eligibility qua all conditions can bring

about undesirable outcomes. For example, if a candidate had a clean

service record, had completed 8 years continuous government service, had

no disciplinary proceedings pending or contemplated against him, was

clear from the vigilance angle but in between 01.11.2018 and the date of

consideration if he were to be facing disciplinary action concerning serious

misconduct, such a candidate would remain eligible for selection. It is in

this background the communication dated 9th July, 2019 has to be read and

understood.
29.    The Respondent had relied on letter dated 30.05.2019 to contend

that 01.11.2018 was to operate as a cut-off date qua all eligibility
16
conditions. In order to deal with this submission, we may have to refer to

the contents of the letter dated 30.05.2019 and the letter dated 09.07.2019.
30.     The State Government vide letter dated 30.05.2019 showed interest

in filling up the 23 vacancies of HCS(EB) and in this regard informed the

Additional Chief Secretary and Financial Commissioner, requesting him to

send a list of eligible candidates as contemplated under Rule 9 Paragraph 2

of this letter stated that the DROs/Tehsildars whose names are to be

recommended should fulfil the eligibility conditions provided for in Rule 9

as on 01.11.2018. What is interesting to note here is that the cut-off date

has not been confined to apply only to the eligibility criteria pertaining to

the age but to all the four criteria uniformly. This letter was followed up by

another letter dated 09.07.2019, in which the State Government appears to

have reconsidered the matter. According to this letter, the names had to be

recommended as per the conditions of eligibility found in the amended

Rule 9(1)(a) and (b). It was requested therein that the recommended names

be sent to the Committee by 12.07.2019. What we notice here is that the

uniform application of the cut-off qua all eligibility conditions was deleted

and the cut-off was restricted to the condition relating to the age of the

candidate. Thus, the Respondent cannot take umbrage under the contents

of letter dated 30.05.2019, when it had been followed up with another
17
letter on the same subject and with specific clarification regarding the

scope and relevance of the date 01.11.2018.
31.     Therefore, it cannot be held that Rule 9 contemplated a uniform

cut-off date qua all the conditions of eligibility. 01.11.2018 was relevant

only in so far as Rule 9(1)(a)(ii) was considered. For the purpose of Rule

9(1)(a)(iii), the relevant date for determining if there was any disciplinary

action contemplated or pending against a candidate “is the date of

consideration,” which is the date on which the Committee had

recommended names to the Commission under Rule 9(2), which, in the

facts of this case would be 31.08.2019.
Whether disciplinary proceedings were ‘contemplated’ against Mr.
Dinesh Singh as on date of consideration, that is, 31.08.2019
32.     What does the word ‘contemplate’ entail in the context of Rule 9(1)
(a)(iii)? Said rule provides for two conditions, both of which have to be

satisfied since the two conditions are separated by the conjunction ‘and’

instead of ‘or’. To put it differently, what Rule 9 (1)(a)(iii) mandates is that

not only there must be no pending disciplinary proceeding but there must

also not be any action contemplated against the candidate as on date of

consideration.
18
33.     It is now trite that a disciplinary proceeding is said to be pending

when a formal charge-sheet is issued to the employee.10 The stage at which

action can be contemplated has to, quite obviously, come before the time at

which a disciplinary proceeding becomes pending (i.e. at the time of

issuing a formal chargesheet). At what point between the employer having

received information/knowledge of an alleged misconduct committed by

the employee and the ultimate initiation of disciplinary proceedings by

issuing chargesheet, can it be said that disciplinary proceedings are

contemplated? The entire challenge before us is to find that point.
34.     The word contemplate has different meanings in the English

Dictionary. It can mean ‘to think deeply at length’; ‘to have in view as a

probable intention’; to think about. According to us, the second meaning

comes closest to the sense in which the rule-maker intended the rule to

operate. Probability is a step ahead of possibility but falls short of certainty.

With this basic logic in mind, we can glance through some of the rulings

which have interpreted the word ‘contemplate’ in similar contexts.


Meaning of the term “Contemplation” :
35.
In
H.Surendra Shetty v. Vijaya Bank, MG Road Bangalore &

Ors., ILR
2000 Kar 2883 wherein the disciplinary proceedings were


10 Union of India Vs. KV Janakiraman (1991) 4 SCC 109.
19
initiated against the petitioner with respect to certain irregularities. The

Karnataka High Court explained the meaning “contemplation” and made

the following observations:
“20. The meaning given in Black's Law Dictionary, 5th
          edition (1979) for the word 'contemplation' is as follows:
"The act of the mind in considering with attention.
          Continued attention of the mind to a particular subject.
          Consideration of an act or series of acts with the
          intention of doing or adopting them. The consideration of
          an event or state of facts with the expectation that it will
          transpire". Thus, contemplation is a process that goes
          on in the mind and falls far short of a 'decision' which
          refers to the culmination of the process of
          contemplation in arriving at a definite conclusion as to
          the next course of action to be taken under a set of facts
          with the intention of carrying out a certain act. Thus,
          mere contemplation cannot serve as the basis for
          adopting the sealed cover procedure as it does not
          answer to the tests adopted in the decisions relied upon
          by learned Counsel Ramadass to justify the adoption of
          the sealed cover procedure.”
21. …If the petitioner is denied promotion merely on
          the basis that a charge-sheet is contemplated or some
          investigation is ordered by the bank, it would amount
          to interfering with or denying a right to which the
          petitioner was rightfully entitled to which is per se
          improper and opposed to principles of natural justice.
          No man can be denied his due without even letting him
          have an inkling as to why he is being denied it.”
20
36.    In Govt. of India Ministry of Home Affairs & ors. v. Tarak Nath

Ghosh 1971 AIR SC 823 this Court while dealing with the disciplinary

proceedings initiated against the respondent, an IPS officer, made the

following remarks:
“13. In substance, disciplinary proceedings can be said to
         be started against an officer when complaints about his
         integrity or honesty are entertained and followed by a
         preliminary enquiry into them culminating in the
         satisfaction of the Govt. that a prima facie case has been
         made out against him for the framing of charges. When the
         order of suspension itself shows that the Govt. was of the
         view that such a prima facie case for departmental
         proceedings had been made out the fact that the order also
         mentions that such proceedings were contemplated makes
         no difference. Again, the fact that in other rules of service
         an order of suspension may be made when ‘disciplinary
         proceedings were contemplated’ should not lead us to take
         the view that a member of an All-India Service should be
         dealt with differently.”
37.    Similarly, in
P.R. Nayak v. Union of India
, (1972) 1 SCC 332 this

Court had the opportunity to consider the meaning of contemplation of

disciplinary proceedings under the All-India Services (Discipline and

Appeal) Rules, 1969 and while doing so, this Court made the following

observations:
21
“69. …Rule 3 of the All-India Services (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1969, which has already been set out in
extenso, provides for suspension during disciplinary
proceedings. Sub-rule (1) of this rule on its plain reading…
does not suggest that suspension can be ordered merely
when disciplinary proceedings are contemplated. The
language used in sub-rules (4) to (7) also suggests that
these rules do not authorise order of suspension of the
delinquent member of the Service merely because
disciplinary proceedings against him are contemplated.
Suspension under those sub-rules may be ordered only
either after conviction [deeming provision under sub-rule
(4)] or when criminal proceedings are actually in progress
[sub-rule (5)] or when after the penalty imposed on him
having been set aside, the disciplinary authority decides to
hold further enquiry [deeming provision under sub-rule
(6)]… The legislative scheme underlying Rule 3 is thus
clearly indicative of the intention of the rule-making
authority to restrict its operation only to those cases in
which the Government concerned is possessed of sufficient
material whether after preliminary investigation or
otherwise and the disciplinary proceedings have in fact
commenced and not merely when they are contemplated.
An order of suspension before the actual initiation or
commencement of disciplinary proceedings appears to us
therefore, to be clearly outside the ambit of Rule 3 and we
find no cogent ground for straining the plain language of
Rule 3(1) so as to extend it to cases in which disciplinary
proceedings are merely contemplated and not actually
initiated or commenced. It is no doubt true that this Court
(G.K. Mitter and A.N. Ray, JJ.) has in
Government of
India, Ministry of Home Affairs v. Tarak Nath Ghosh
,
[(1971) 1 SCC 734 : AIR 1971 SC 823] ‘expressed the view
that under Rule 7(1) of the All India Services (Discipline
and Appeal) Rules, 1955 [replaced in 1969 by Rule 3(1)
with which we are concerned] the Government is entitled
to place an officer under suspension even before definite
charges are communicated to him when preliminary
investigation has been made into his conduct following
allegations of corrupt or malpractice levelled against him.
In support of this view, reliance in that decision was placed
on
S. Govinda Menon v. Union of India
, [(1967) 2 SCR 566
: AIR 1967 SC 1274] ’ an earlier decision by a bench of
two Judges.”
22
38.
In
Kul Bhusan Chopra v. Punjab National Bank and Ors.
(1979)

IILLJ 86 Del the Delhi High Court while considering the suspension of the

petitioner under Clause 12 of the Punjab National Bank Officer Employees

(Discipline and Appeal) Regulation 1977 elucidated the meaning of the

term contemplation as follows:
“11. When can the disciplinary proceedings be said to be
         “contemplated” must then be determined. Can an officer be
         suspended merely during the investigation by the Bank or
         during the pendency of some sort of a preliminary of
         confidential enquiry by it and must the suspension be resorted
         to, if at all, only after a formal charge or accusation has been
         made against an officer? What does the expression
         “contemplated” connote? Does it merely mean that proceedings
         are likely in the foreseeable future or are imminent in the near
         future or are about to be initiated. These are some of the
         questions that were posed in the course of arguments.
The
         expression “contemplated” is not defined in the Regulations.
         According to the dictionary meaning, the word “contemplate”
         would mean to have in view, to expect, to take into account as
         contingency, to propose. In the case of P.R. Nayak, (5) the
         difference between “contemplation” and “initiation” was
         brought out. The relevant rule
in that case
empowered the
23
authority to suspend where the proceedings had been initiated.
The order of suspension was, however, made before the
initiation of proceedings on the ground that the same were
“contemplated”. It was held that the rules did not authorise
suspension “merely because disciplinary proceedings against
him are contemplated”.
In the case of
State of U.P. v. Jai Singh
Dixit
, (6) a Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court was
concerned with Rule 49A of the U.P. Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules which empowered
the authority to suspend a Government servant “against whose
conduct an enquiry is contemplated or is proceeding” which is
in pari materia with the Regulation in the present case.
According to the Allahabad High Court, the proper meaning
which could be assigned to the word “contemplated” in the
context of the aforesaid rule was when it was in the mind of the
appointing authority that in due course a formal departmental
enquiry shall be held or there existed a contingency for such an
enquiry. It was observed that a departmental enquiry could be
said to be contemplated when on objective consideration of the
material, the appointing authority considered the case as one
which would lead to a departmental enquiry irrespective of
whether any preliminary enquiry summary or detailed, had or
had not been made or if made is not completed, and that there
could be suspension pending enquiry even before a final
decision was taken to initiate the disciplinary proceedings i.e.
even before the framing of the charge and the communication
thereof to the Government servant.”
24
39.
In
State Of U.P v. Jai Singh Dixit and Others
(1976) ILLJ 246 All

the Allahabad High Court made the following observations regarding the

contemplation of inquiry while considering the suspension of the

respondent under Rule 49-A of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Services

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules:
“35. The inquiry contemplated by Rule 49-A cannot have
          reference to an informal preliminary inquiry or a fact-finding
          inquiry preceding the actual disciplinary proceeding, otherwise
          it shall be permissible to, suspend a Government servant
          pending such informal inquiry, but not after charges have been
          framed and regular departmental proceeding is pending. This
          shall lead to an anomalous situation. We are, therefore, of
          opinion that the “inquiry” contemplated by Rules 49-A and 1-A
          has reference to the formal departmental inquiry, and not to any
          informal preliminary or fact-finding inquiry preceding the
          initiation of the formal disciplinary proceeding.
39. The meaning of the word “contemplate” has been given
          in Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Volume I, as:
“1. To look at the continued attention, gaze upon,
               observe. Behold. 2. To view mentally; to med tate
               upon, ponder, study. 3. To consider in a certain
               aspect, regard. 4. To have in view; to expect, take
               into account as a contingency; to purpose”
25
and in the New in ernational Dictionary, Volume I, as:
“1. To view with sustained attention: give at though
     fully for a noticeable time: observe with ostensibly
     steady reflection.
2. to view mentally with continued thoughtfulness,
     attention, or reflection: muse or ponder about. 3. to
     view mentally in a stated or implied way with
     thoughtfulness and reflection: A. to think about or
     regard from a certain view point or in a certain light
     or respect, b: to have in view as a purpose:
anticipate doing or performing: plan on: INTEND,
     PLAN e. to dream of as a Cherished Aim:
ENVISION—d: to presume or imply as a
     concomitant or result: POSTULATE, PRESIOND—
     d: to presume or imply as a concomitant or result:
     POSTULATE, PRESUPPOSE 4: to view or regard
     (as an object or an objective fact) with deachment.”
40. The proper meaning which can be assigned to the word
“contemplate” used in Rule 49-A or in Rule 1-A, therefore, is to
have in view’, ‘to expect’, ‘take into account as a contingency’.
Therefore, whenever it is in the mind of the appointing authority
that in due course a formal departmental inquiry shall be held
or there exists a contingency for such an inquiry, one can say
that a formal departmental inquiry is contemplated. It is,
however, necessary that there should be application of mind, in
the eye of law, in good faith, and not arbitrarily.
41. A formal departmental inquiry is invariably preceded by an
informal preliminary inquiry which itself can be in two phases.
There can be a summary investigation to find out if the
allegations made against the Government servant have any
substance. Such investigation or inquiry is followed by a
detailed preliminary or fact-finding inquiry whereafter final
decision is taken whether to initiate disciplinary proceeding.
26
The first preliminary inquiry may be in the shape of secret
         inquiry and the other, of an open inquiry. In the alternative,
         when complaints containing serious allegations against a
         government servant are received, the authority may peruse the
         records to satisfy itself if a more detailed preliminary inquiry be
         made.”
40.    The Gujarat High Court in Santi Kumar Ganguly v. The State of

Tripura and Ors. (1982 GLR 1 21) while dealing with the suspension of

petitioner under the Central Civil Services (Classification-(SIC) Control

and Appeal) Rules, 1965 held that:
“7. The dictionary meaning of the word 'contemplate' leads to
         conclude that whenever it is in the mind of the appointing
         authority that a formal disciplinary proceeding shall be or there
         exists a contingency for such a proceeding, one can say that a
         formal disciplinary proceeding is contemplated. To contemplate
         in the context is to have in view to expect, or take into account
         as a contingency. A disciplinary proceeding is contemplated
         when on an objective consideration of the materials, the
         appointing authority considers the case as one which might lead
         to a formal disciplinary proceeding. The formation of such an
         opinion may be, on the basis of inspection of the records, though
         further investigation in some cases may be considered necessary
         to collect more materials for formal disciplinary proceeding,
         The Disciplinary Authority at that early stage can have in view
         of a contingency for disciplinary proceeding and suspend the
         Government servant, in exercise of its power under Rule 10(l)
(a) of the said Rules.”
27
41.
In
Champaklal Chimanlal Shah vs The Union of India
1964 AIR

SC 1854=1964 SCR (6) 190 this Court while considering the action taken

against the petitioner who claimed to be a quasi permanent employee under

the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1949 made the

following remarks:
“16. …The circumstances in this case are in our opinion very
         similar to the facts in Shayamlal case the difference being that
         in that case he was compulsorily retired and in this case the
         appellant's services have been terminated. In Shayamlal case
         also at one stage, the government made imputation against his
         conduct but later withdrew them and did not follow up the
         matter by holding a departmental enquiry. This is exactly what
         happened in the present case and it was more than six months
         after that the appellant who had in the meantime been
         transferred to Bombay was discharged in the terms of Rule 5
         because his work and conduct were found unsatisfactory. The
         order terminating his services makes no imputation whatsoever
         against him and in the circumstances it cannot be said that the
         termination of his service is visited with any evil consequences
         as explained in Parshotam Lal Dhingra case. We are therefore
         of opinion that on the facts of this case
Article 311(2)
has no
         application and the appellant was not entitled to the protection
         of that Article before his services were terminated under Rule 5,
         for the termination of service here does not amount to infliction
         of the penalty of dismissal or removal.”
28
42.
In
S. Govinda Menon v. Union of India
1967 AIR SC 1274= 1967

SCR (2) 566 this Court while dealing with the suspension of appellant

under Rule 7 of the All-India Services (Discipline & Appeal) Rules, 1955

made the following observations:
“14. …Rule 5(2) prescribes that the grounds on which it is
         proposed to take action shall be reduced to the form of a definite
         charge or charges. Under Rule 5(3) a member of the Service is
         required to submit a written statement of his defence to the
         charge or charges. The framing of the charge under Rule 5(2) is
         necessary to enable the member of Service to meet the case
         against him. The language of Rule 7(1) is however different and
         that rule provides that the Government may place a member of
         the Service under suspension “having regard to the nature of the
         charge/charges and the circumstances in any case” if the
         Government is satisfied that it is necessary to place him under
         suspension. In view of the difference of language in Rule 5(2)
         and Rule 7 we are of the opinion that the word “charges” in
         Rule 7(1) should be given a wider meaning as denoting the
         accusations or imputations against the member of the Service.”
43.    The Allahabad High Court in the case of
Shahroj Anwar Khan v.

State of U.P.
, 2007 SCC OnLine All 389 while dealing with the question

whether Rule 17(1)(a) of the Uttar Pradesh Police Officers of Subordinate
29
Ranks (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1991 prohibits passing of a

suspension order during the pendency of preliminary enquiry considered

the meaning of the term contemplation as follows:
“16. …The term ‘contemplation’ is quite a wide term. Webster
         Comprehensive       Dictionary,    amongst      other     defines
         ‘contemplation’ as a deliberation on something to be done. The
         Oxford Dictionary gives four different shades of meaning of the
         verb ‘to contemplate’. They are as follows: —(1) to survey with
         the eyes, or in mind, (2) to regard an event as possible, (3) to
         intend, to have as one's purpose, and (4) to meditate. When a
         disciplinary authority contemplates holding of an inquiry, it may
         take variety of steps, which may include collecting material for
         finding out the nature and details of the allegations. For that
         purpose, a preliminary inquiry can certainly be held, but as the
         rule stands, can it be read to mean that an officer cannot be
         suspended before a preliminary inquiry. It is also to be noted
         that a preliminary inquiry and the full-fledged departmental
         inquiry are not to be confused with each other as observed in
         the case of
Amalendu Ghosh
(supra).
29. In view of what is stated above, it is clear that the phrase
         ‘when an inquiry is contemplated’ will have to be read as
         meaning that an inquiry is under consideration or is thought of
         or is proposed. It cannot mean that a decision to hold an inquiry
         is arrived at. After that decision is arrived at, undoubtedly, a
         full-fledged departmental inquiry follows. Therefore, the phrase
         ‘an inquiry is contemplated’ will cover an earlier stage. It will
         certainly cover a stage when even a preliminary inquiry is
         under consideration. A preliminary inquiry cannot be excluded
         from the term ‘inquiry’ as covered under this clause. That would
         place a fetter on the powers of the administration. As noted
         earlier, the authority may be confronted with various situations
         and they ought to have the freedom to deal with those situations.
It will be for them to decide what steps they ought to take. The
         authorities may, undoubtedly, initiate a preliminary inquiry, or
         may even be required to resort to suspension while initiating a
30
preliminary investigation. It cannot be said that the authorities
           will hold the preliminary investigation or inquiry for quite some
           time, allow the officer.”
44.
In
Rajendra Shenkar Nigam v. State of U.P.
, 1973 SCC OnLine All 381 the

Allahabad High Court while dealing with the suspension of the respondent for

allegation of corruption observed the meaning of contemplation as follows:
14. The material and relevant expression in Rule 49-A is an
           inquiry is contemplated or is proceeding. The term
           “contemplated” is not a term of art. It has been used in its plain
           ordinary meaning. The Shorter Oxford Dictionary, Volume I at
           page 380 defines the word ‘contemplated’ to man “to have in
           view, to expect, to take into account as a contingency”. It
           indicates a stage where an inquiry into the conduct of a
           government servant is imminently expected with a view to
           impose some punishment upon him. On receipt of complaints
           against the conduct of a government servant the competent
           authority sets in motion an informal inquiry to certify the
           correctness of the allegations or to collect material with a view
           to hold a disciplinary inquiry so that if the alleged misconduct is
           established suitable punishment be awarded. The inquiry which
           will result in imposition of punishment can be said to be
           expected or contemplated. When the Government sets in motion
           its machinery for investigating the alleged complaints so that it
           may hold a formal inquiry more properly the formal inquiry is
           clearly contemplated, and the power to suspend comes into
           play. In S.C. Kharbdanda v. State of U.P. , a Division Bench
           observed:— “The mere fact that a preliminary enquiry has been
           admittedly instituted is proof positive of the fact that the
           departmental enquiry is contemplated. Were, it otherwise, the
31
authorities would decline to undertake the preliminary
         enquiry.”
45.
In
Dr. Subash Chand v. State of U.P.
, 2005 SCC OnLine All 1712

the Allahabad High Court while considering the suspension of the

Veterinary officer in Animal Husbandry Department of the State

Government following a government order explained the meaning of the

term contemplation of Inquiry as follows:
“13. …So far as the meaning of phrase "against whose conduct
         an inquiry is contemplated" is concerned, the full Bench
         observed that against whose conduct an inquiry is expected or
         to be initiated under Rule-55 of the C.C.A. Rules. That will be
         when a decision has been taken on the basis of material
         collected on preliminary investigation and the Appointing
         Authority is prima facie satisfied that they have substance to
         justify either of the major punishments and initiation of formal
         proceeding would be justified. At any point of time prior to
         taking of such a decision it could not be said that an inquiry
         under Rule-55 was contemplated. This stage would not be
         Cached unless the appointing authority decides in
         circumstances of the case that it will proceed to hold an inquiry
         under Rule-55. It is framing of charge or charges and their
         communication to the charged government servant, virtually
         initiates the formal departmental proceeding.
14…In as much under Clause (1) of Rule 49-A, the power of
         suspension can be exercised only when decision has been taken
32
to start an inquiry under Rule-55 which can be done only when
             on preliminary investigation, such material has been collected
             which have substance to justify the formal departmental
             proceeding and it is expected that on evidence brought before
             inquiry officer, such misconduct on the part of government
             servant will be established, which in normal course would
             justify either of the major penalties viz. dismissal, removal or
             reduction in rank, suspension is resorted to". The court further
             held that the expression "as a rule" occurring in the beginning
             of the note implies that that is always the rule to be observed.
38. Thus, we are of considered opinion that there can be no
             scope for doubt to hold that on receipt of such complaint
             containing allegations against government servant, the
             appointing authority has to be satisfied about the allegations
             contained therein and further such allegations have any
             substance enabling to hold formal disciplinary inquiry against
             the government servant for imposition of major penalty against
             him. Before such satisfaction is arrived at with regard to such
             allegations, it is not open for the appointing authority to place a
             government servant under suspension. In this connection it is
             necessary to make it clear that such satisfaction need not be in
             shape of a final and firm decision, otherwise the "inquiry"
instead of being "expected" or "as contingency", it would be
             sure and certain, which could not be said to be intention of rule-
             making authority while employing the phrase "an inquiry is
             contemplated.”
46.
In
State of U.P. v. Jawahar Lal Bhargava
, 1974 SCC OnLine All 45 the

Allahabad High Court while considering suspension order of a Judicial officer

presumably under Rule 49A of the U.P. Civil Services (Classification, control and

Appeal) Rules considered the meaning of the term “Inquiry” and “contemplation” as

follows:
33
“13. …Thus the word 'inquiry' means nothing hut the formal
disciplinary proceeding and not the investigation of an informal
character which must often precedes the initiation of formal
disciplinary proceeding envisaged by Rule 55. When the
appointing authority takes a decision to start formal
proceedings, then within 15 days of taking that decision charge
or charges should be handed over to the charged officer. Thus
there is a time lag of 15 days permitted between taking the
decision to start formal proceedings and the service of charges
on the charged officer. The direction given by the Governor
envisages that at the time when a decision is taken by the
appointing authority to start formal proceedings it must also
simultaneously decide whether the Officer should be placed
under suspension pending the inquiry. It is at this stage that it
can be said that an inquiry is contemplated against the conduct
of the Government servant. The only meaning that can be given
to the phrase 'against whose conduct an inquiry is
contemplated', occurring in Clause (I) of Rule 49-A, would be
against whose conduct an inquiry under Rule 55 is to be
initiated." This will be when a decision has been taken on the
basis of the material collected on preliminary investigation and
the appointing authority is prima facie satisfied that they have
substance and the starting of formal proceedings would be
justified. At any point of time prior to the taking of such a
decision it could not be said that an inquiry under Rule 55 was
contemplated.
14. Though the verb 'contemplate' has many meanings and has
somewhat an ambiguous import, yet it has to be given a definite
meaning in the context in which it has been used in harmony
with the scheme
laid down in
the Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules pertaining to conduct and discipline
of the Government servant who fall within the rule making
power of the Governor under
Article 309
of the Constitution.
With great respect the meaning given by Seth, J. in
Rajendra
Shanker Nigam v. State of U.P.
appears to be correct, that is to
have in view an inquiry under Rule 55 or to hold an inquiry
under Rule 55. This stage would not be reached unless the
appointing authority decides in the circumstances of the case
that it will proceed to hold an inquiry under Rule 55. Mewed in
this light and the directions of the Governor as given in para 2
of the Appendix IV, quoted above, the substance of which is
contained in the Note, the phrase 'suspension, where deemed
necessary should, as far as possible immediately precede the
framing of charges and their communication to the Government
34
servant charged occurring in the Note will mean where it is
           decided to suspend a Government servant pending an formal
           inquiry under Rule 55 the order of suspension as far as possible
           be passed immediately preceding the framing of the charges and
           their communication…The Note does not permit the appointing
           authority to suspend a Government servant before it decides to
           initiate a formal inquiry under Rule 55 against the Government
           servant. The Note fixes the earliest point of time for the exercise
           of the power of suspension. The phrase as far as possible'
           cannot be construed as leaving a power with the appointing
           authority to suspend a Government servant at a point of time
           earlier than the earliest point of time fixed by the Note.”
47.     The reason for declaring the Respondent (Dinesh Singh) ineligible

for selection as per Rule 9 was on the ground that ‘decision has been taken

on file to charge sheet him under Rule 7’11. At no point has it been asserted

by Dinesh Singh (Respondent no. 4) that disciplinary proceedings were not

contemplated against him. His entire case from the very beginning has

been that the cut-off date qua all eligibility conditions must be determined

as on 01.11.2018 and since there was no decision/contemplation to initiate

any disciplinary proceedings as of that date, he ought to have been

recommended for appointment. In fact, in the Counter-Affidavit submitted

on his behalf, there is an implicit admission that a decision to initiate

disciplinary action against him (Dinesh Singh) was taken on 09.01.2019.
48.     We have already noted above that the relevant cut-off date qua

Rule 9 (1)(a)(iii) is 31.08.2019 and therefore, it was not necessary for us to

decide anything further. However, we have surveyed the relevant

authorities dealing with the meaning of ‘contemplation’ only to satisfy
11 Rule 7 of Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 2016
35
ourselves that there was, in fact, a contemplation to initiate disciplinary

proceedings as per law.
49.     The main allegation against Respondent No.1 is that on 05.01.2019

and 06.01.2019, he was directed to act as Duty Magistrate during the

Haryana Teacher’s Eligibility Test, 2018 and he remained absent from this

duty and as such he was negligent in performing his official duties. The

Deputy Commissioner, Kurukshetra wrote a letter dated 9.01.2019 to the

Additional Chief Secretary and Finance Commissioner, Government of

Haryana, Department of Revenue and Disaster Management in this regard

and recommended that formal inquiry be initiated against the Respondent.

In view of this communication, a decision was taken on 05.02.2019 to

charge-sheet Respondent No. 1. It is not relevant for us to consider what

happened beyond the date of consideration, that is, 31.08.2019. However,

it may be recorded here that subsequent to this date, there was a charge-

sheet issued against the Respondent and ultimately, the entire proceedings

came to be dropped on 11.12.2019. Since the eligibility conditions in Rule

9 (1)(a)(iii), the validity of which is not under challenge before us, requires

us to limit our inquiry into the question of eligibility as on date of

consideration, what happens after that becomes insignificant to the inquiry.
36
50.     In the background of the above facts and position of law analysed

hereinabove, it has to be concluded that as on the date of consideration,

disciplinary action was contemplated against the writ petitioner Dinesh

Singh, and therefore he was rightly held to be ineligible for selection of his

name in Register A-1.
51.     Accordingly, this appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the

Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana is set aside and

order of the Ld. Single Judge dated 23.04.2021 is affirmed subject to

observations made hereinabove.
Costs made easy.
………………………J.
                                                    (M.M. Sundresh)



                                                    ……………………….J.
                                                    (Aravind Kumar)
New Delhi,
December 14, 2023