[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P.C.Modi vs Jawaharlal Nehru Vishwa Vidyalaya . on 13 December, 2023
Author:
Hima Kohli
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Hima Kohli
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011




2023 INSC 1067
                                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4267 OF 2011


                   P.C. MODI                                                  .…            APPELLANT

                                                                Versus

                   THE JAWAHARLAL NEHRU VISHWA
                   VIDYALAYA AND ANOTHER                                      ….            RESPONDENTS


                                                           JUDGEMENT
HIMA KOHLI, J.
1.          The present appeal has been filed by the appellant being aggrieved by the

                   judgement and order dated 14 th December, 2009, passed by the Division Bench of the

                   High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur, Bench at Indore in a Writ Appeal 1 filed by the

                   respondents herein allowing their appeal and setting aside the order dated 26 th April,

                   2005, passed by the learned Single Judge 2 wherein it was held that the appellant, who

                   was working as a sports officer/physical training instructor 3 in the respondent No. 1 –

                   Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya 4, falls under the definition of a “teacher” and is

                   entitled to retire at the age of 62 years, at par with teachers serving in the respondent no.

                   1 – University.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2023.12.13
15:59:34 IST
Reason:
1 In Writ Appeal No. 126 of 2008
2 In Writ Petition No. 1322 of 2022
                   3 For short ‘PTI’
                   4 For short ‘the University’
Page 1 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011
2.          We may first elucidate the facts relevant for deciding the case at hand.

2.1         The respondent No. 1 – University was established under the Jawaharlal Nehru

Krishi Vishwavidyalaya Act, 19635, enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature. In

exercise of the powers conferred under the Act, the Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi

Vishwavidyalaya Statute, 19646 was framed which came into force with effect from 1 st

December, 1964.
2.2         The appellant was working as a sports officer/PTI in the College of Agriculture

under the respondent No. 1 – University. Vide order dated 27th June, 2000, issued by the

respondent No. 1 – University, the appellant was informed that on attaining the age of 60

years, he would stand retired from the service of the respondent No. 1 – University with

effect from 30th June, 2000. The appellant claimed that he was entitled to be continued in

service till 30th June, 2002, which period was being illegally curtailed by the respondent

No. 1 – University. The said plea was based on the appellant’s stand that he falls in the

purview of a “teacher” in terms of Statute 32 of the J.N.K.V.V Act as also in terms of

Regulation 4 of the Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya (General Condition of

Service Regulations, 1929)7 and he would be due to superannuate only upon attaining

the age of 62 years on 30 th June, 2002. Further, the appellant relied on the letters dated

27th July, 1998, 22nd September, 1998 and 06th November, 1998 issued by the Ministry of

Human Resource Development (Department of Education) that had increased the age of

retirement of physical education personnel to 62 years. The appellant submitted a

representation to the respondents stating that by virtue of the aforesaid decision, the age
5 For short ‘the J.N.K.V.V. Act’
6 For short ‘the Statute’
7 For short ‘the Regulation’
Page 2 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



of teachers was raised by the State Government from 60 years to 62 years with effect

from the year 1998 and the said decision also covered the respondent No. 1 – University,

thereby entitling teachers serving in the University to superannuate at the age of 62 years

instead of 60 years. He urged that since sports officer/PTI working in the respondent No.

1 – University fall under the definition of “teacher”, their age of superannuation should

also be treated as 62 years.
2.3 Aggrieved by the order of retirement issued by the respondent No. 1 - University, on

the eve of his attaining the age of 60 years and on not receiving a positive response, the

appellant approached the High Court and filed a writ petition 2. The said petition was

opposed by the respondent No. 1 – University stating that the age of superannuation of

employees working in the University is governed by Statute 11(4) and sub-clause (d) of

Statute 11(4) specifically provides that the non-teaching service personnel shall be

superannuated on attaining the age of 60 years. The appellant being a non-teaching

service personnel, was therefore to retire on attaining the age of 60 years. It was also

stated that vide order dated 17th May, 2000, the Education Department of the State

Government had decided that the retirement age of sports officers/PTIs shall be 60

years. Further, the Agriculture Department of the State Government had issued a

Memorandum dated 12th July, 2000, clarifying inter alia that as per the Statute of the

University, the post of sports officers wasn’t treated as a teaching post and therefore,

their retirement age could not be raised from 60 years to 62 years. Reference was

additionally made to the minutes of the 160 th meeting conducted by the Board of

Management of the respondent No. 1 - University on 10 th June, 2000 wherein it was
Page 3 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



decided that those appointed to the post of sports officer/PTI working in the University

being non-teaching service personnel, shall superannuate on attaining the age of 60

years.
2.4         Vide judgement dated 26th April, 2005, relying on the decision of this Court in
P.S.

Ramamohana Rao v. A.P. Agricultural University and Another
8 and the decision of

coordinate benches of the High Court, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition 2

filed by the appellant. It was held that the appellant would fall within the definition of a

“teacher” in terms of Statute 32 and he was liable to be retired on attaining the age of 62

years. As a result, the order dated 27 th June, 2000, issued by the respondent No. 1 –

University retiring the appellant from service on 30 th June, 2000, was quashed and set

aside and since he had already been retired in the year 2002, the respondents were

directed to pay emoluments and other benefits including retiral benefits to the appellant

as if he had continued in service up to the age of 62 years.
2.5         Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the respondents filed a writ appeal 1 which

was originally registered as a Letters Patent Appeal and subsequently re-registered as a

Writ Appeal1 under Section 2 of the Uchha Nyalaya (Khand Nyaypeeth Ko Appeal)

Adhiniyam, 2005. By the impugned judgement, the Division Bench allowed the writ

appeal filed by the respondents and observed that Statute 32 recognizes only professors,

associate professors, assistant professors as teachers and looking at the job profile of

the appellant, he does not fall under the definition of a teacher. For holding so, the

Division Bench cited the decision of a three Judges Bench of this Court in State of



8 (1997) 8 SCC 350
Page 4 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



Madhya Pradesh and Others v. Ramesh Chandra Bajpai 9 and opined that the decision

of a two Judges Bench of this Court in P.S. Ramamohana Rao’s case (supra) relied on

by the appellant, having been duly noted in Ramesh Chandra Bajpai’s case (supra) that

was decided subsequently, the proposition laid down by the two Judges Bench should

not be automatically extended to other cases where employees are governed by a

different set of rules.
2.6         Observing further that the definition of the word ‘teacher’ in Section 2(n) of the

Andhra Pradesh Act, 196310 which was the subject matter of consideration in P.S.

Ramamohana Rao’s case (supra) was an expansive one and could not apply to the

employees of the respondent No. 1 – University who are governed by the Statute under

the Act and the Regulations made thereunder, the Division Bench held that order passed

by the learned Single Judge was unsustainable. Resultantly, the order of retirement

passed by the respondent No. 1 – University in respect of the appellant, retiring him on

attaining the age of 60 years, was upheld. Dissatisfied with the aforesaid decision, the

appellant has preferred the present appeal.
3.          For deciding as to whether a PTI/Sports Officer falls within the expression

“teacher” and if so, whether the appellant herein would have been entitled to continue in

the service of the respondent No.1 – University as a PTI till he completed the age of 62

years, at par with other teachers of the Vishwavidyalaya, we may first examine the

relevant provisions of the Act, the Statute and the Regulations.




9 (2009) 13 SCC 635
10 For short ‘the A.P. Act’
Page 5 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



3.1         Following is the definition of ‘Teacher’ of the Vishwa Vidyalaya, as prescribed in

Section 2(x) of the Act:
“2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
                        ……
(x) “Teacher of the Vishwa Vidyalaya” means a person appointed or
                        recognised by the Vishwa Vidyalaya for the purpose of imparting
                        instructions and/or conducting and guiding research and/or extension
                        programmes and includes a person who may be declared by the Statutes
                        to be teacher”

            As can be gleaned from the above definition, the word “teacher” has not been

stated precisely. The word "teacher" has simply been described to mean a person

appointed or recognized by the “Vishwa Vidyalaya” who would be required to impart

instructions, conduct and guide research, conduct other extension programmes and

extends to a person who may be declared as a teacher under the relevant Statute.
3.2         Relevant extract of Statute 11 (4) is as under:
“11.   Conditions of service etc. of other officers :-
(1)    xxxx
                        (2)    xxxx
                        (3)    xxxx
                        (4)    Every employee shall retire from the service of the Vishwa
Vidyalaya in the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he
                               attains the age of superannuating, as prescribed below :-
(a) “Officers” as defined under Section 12 of the Act and Statute 3
                                    (except the Chancellor and the Vice – Chancellor) shall be
                                    superannuated on attaining the age of 60(sixty) years,
                                    provided that those appointed as Officers by promotion or
                                    otherwise but have been engaged in teaching for not less than
                                    20 years and holds a lien on a post in the Vishwa Vidyalaya
                                    shall be superannuated on attaining the age of 62 (sixty two)
                                    years.
(b) The “Teachers” as defined under Section 2(x) of the Act
                                    and Statute 32 shall be superannuated on attaining the
                                    age of 62 (sixty two) years.
(c) “Class-IV employees” as defined in Regulation No.4 of the
                                    JNKVV Service (General Conditions of Service) Regulations,
                                    1969 shall be superannuated on attaining the age of 62 (sixty
                                    two) years.
(d) “Non-teaching service personnel” of Class-I, II & III categories
                                    as defined in Regulation No.4 of the JNKVV Service (General
                                    Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1969 shall be
Page 6 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011


                                      superannuated on attaining the age of 60 (Sixty two) years,
                                      except the teacher of primary School working in the Class III
                                      cadre of Vishwa Vidyalaya who shall be superannuated on
                                      attaining the age of 62 (sixty two) years on or after 31.10.2002.
Provided that on attaining the age of superannuation, any
                                      employee whose date of birth is the first date of the month,
                                      shall retire from the services in the afternoon of the last date of
                                      the preceding month.
Provided further that:
(i)     All Vishwa Vidyalaya employees may, in the public
                                              interest or in the Vishwa Vidyalaya interest be retired at
                                              any time after they attain the age of 50 years or 20
                                              years of qualifying service, on three months notice
                                              without assigning any reason or on payment of three
                                              months pay and allowances in lieu of such a notice;
(ii)    The cases of such persons as have been re-employed
                                              in the Vishwa Vidyalaya Service, after retirement from
                                              Government Service, shall be governed by the terms
                                              and conditions of their re-employment in this Vishwa
                                              Vidyalaya service; and,”
                                                                                 [Emphasis added]

3.3         Statute 32 defines the word “Teacher” in the following terms :
"Vishwa Vidyalaya Teachers:
(1) Teachers of the Vishwa Vidyalaya shall be either-
(a) Servants of the Vishwa Vidyalaya paid by the Vishwa Vidyalaya
                                   for imparting instructions and/or conducting and guiding research
                                   and/or extension and/or programmes as-
(i) Professor,
(ii) Associate Professor,
(iii) Assistant Professor.
Explanation :
Any "Teacher" subsequently appointed as an "Officer" as defined
                        under Section 12 of the Act and Statute 3 (except the Chancellor and the
                        Vice Chancellor) by promotion or otherwise and has been engaged in
                        teaching for not less than twenty years and holds a lien on a post in the
                        V.V. shall also be a teacher, under this Statute.
(b) Person appointed by the Board as Honorary Teachers in any of
                                   the aforementioned categories on such terms and conditions as
                                   the Board may prescribed by Regulations.
(2)     A Teacher shall be eligible to impart instructions and/or conduct of
                                guide research and/or extension programme only up to such
Page 7 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011


                               standard for which he is recognized as such in accordance with the
                               Regulations made by the Board in this behalf.
(3)    A Teacher shall perform such functions and discharge such duties as
                               may be prescribed by Regulations by the Academic Council.
(4)    The word 'Teacher/Teacher' wherever it occurs includes person
                               engaged in Research and Extension activities."
As can be seen from Statute 32 quoted above, teachers are described as those

discharging their duties by imparting instructions and/or conducting and guiding research

and/or extension programmes in different capacities as Professor/Associate

Professor/Assistant Professor.                  Statute 11(4) (b) specifies the age of retirement of

“teachers” as 62 years whereas the age of retirement of those described as non-teaching

service personnel is 60 years.
3.4         Vishwa Vidyalaya Services have been classified under Regulation 4 of the

Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya Services (General Conditions of Service)

Regulations, 19697 in the following manner:
“(i) . Officer of the Vishwa Vidyalaya U/s 12 of the Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi
                        Vishwa Vidyalaya Act, 1963 and Statute 3 except the Chancellor and the
                        Vice-Chancellor.
(ii) Teaching staff of the Vishwa Vidyalaya as defined under Statute 32 of
                        the Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya Statutes, 1964.
(iii) Non-Teaching services personnel of the JNKVV-
(a) JNKVV Service CI-I
(b) JNKVV Service CI-II
(c) JNKVV Service CI-III
(i) Ministerial
(ii) Non-Ministerial
(d) JNKVV Service CI-IV”
4.          It is evident on examining the relevant provisions of the Act, Statute and the

Regulations that they do not specifically indicate the duties required to be discharged by

a PTI/Sports Officer and therefore, one has to fall back on the definition of Sports
Page 8 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



Teacher as contained in Section 2(x) of the J.N.K.V.V Act read with Statute 32(1) of the

Statute. To examine as to whether the appellant would come within the definition of a

“teacher” and thereby be entitled to continue in service till completion of 60 years, it

would be necessary to see the nature of job performed by a PTI/Sports Officer.
5.          In the writ petition filed by the appellant, he has made a specific averment in para

6(4) that “a Sports Officer/PTI in a college is very much a "Teacher" because he imparts

instructions to the students of the college in Physical Education”.                        Pertinently, in the

counter affidavit filed by the respondent No.1 – University, it has not been disputed that

the appellant was working as a PTI/Sports Officer. Nor is there any specific denial to the

averments made by the appellant, in the corresponding para of the counter affidavit

regarding the duties discharged by the appellant, namely, imparting instructions to

students of the College in Physical Education. The learned Single Judge has taken note

of this position in the order dated 26th April, 2005 and made the following observations :
“The petitioner in ground No.4 of the petition has clearly stated Sports Officer
                   is a Teacher because he imparts instructions to the students of the College in
                   physical education and in reply to above ground the respondents has only
                   submitted that the petitioner has no ground to get any relief from this Hon'ble
                   Court. There is no specific denial on behalf of the respondent to this effect. It
                   is clear from the duties of Sports Officer that he gives instructions and
                   teaches the students with regard to sports and he is related with the sports
                   activities of the University which is a part and partial of the education.”
6.          Going further, the learned Single Judge sought to draw strength from the decision

of a Division Bench of this Court in
P.S. Ramamohana Rao
(supra) where a similar issue

relating to the entitlement of the appellant therein to continue in the service of the A.P.

Agricultural University as a Director of Physical Education till he completed the age of 58

years or 60 years came up for consideration. After examining the relevant provisions of
Page 9 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



the A.P. Act and the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University (Conditions of Service)

Regulations, 1965, the appeal filed by the appellant therein was allowed and it was held

that the duties being discharged by him as a Physical Director brought him within the

definition of a “teacher” and therefore, he was entitled to continue in service till he

completed 60 years of age. The factors that weighed with the Court for holding so, have

been expressed as below :
“9. From the aforesaid affidavit, it is clear that a Physical Director has
                   multifarious duties. He not only arranges games and sports for the students
                   every evening and looks after the procurement of sports material and the
                   maintenance of the grounds but also arranges inter-class and inter-college
                   tournaments and accompanies the students' team when they go for the inter-
                   university tournaments. For that purpose it is one of his important duties to
                   guide them about the rules of the various games and sports. It is well known
                   that different games and sports have different rules and practices and unless
                   the students are guided about the said rules and practices they will not be
                   able to play the games and participate in the sports in a proper manner.
                   Further, in our view, it is inherent in the duties of a Physical Director that he
                   imparts to the students various skills and techniques of these games and
                   sports. There are a large number of indoor and outdoor games in which the
                   students have to be trained. Therefore, he has to teach them several skills
                   and techniques of these games apart from the rules applicable to these
                   games.
xxx    xxx     xxx       xxx
19.      ……... It may be that the Physical Director gives his guidance or
                   teaching to the students only in the evenings after the regular classes are
                   over. It may also be that the University has not prescribed in writing any
                   theoretical and practical classes for the students so far as physical education
                   is concerned. But as pointed by us earlier, among various duties of the
                   Physical Director, expressly or otherwise, are included the duty to teach the
                   skills of various games as well as their rules and practices. The said duties
                   bring him clearly within the main part of the definition as a “teacher”. We,
                   therefore, do not accept the contention raised in the additional counter-
affidavit of the University.”
7.          It is noteworthy that the definition of the word “teacher” as contained in Section

2(n) of the A.P. Act is para materia with Section 2(x) of the J.N.K.V.V. Act. Both the

provisions are extracted below for comparison:
Page 10 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011




                   Section 2 (n) of the A.P. Act:
“2. (n) ‘teacher’ includes a professor, reader, lecturer or other person
                   appointed or recognised by the University for the purpose of imparting
                   instruction or conducting and guiding research or extension programmes, and
                   any person declared by the statutes to be a teacher;”

                   Section 2(x) of the J.N.K.V.V. Act :
“2 (x) Teacher of the Vishwa Vidyalaya” means a person appointed or
                   recognised by the Vishwa Vidyalaya for the purpose of imparting instructions
                   and /or conducting and guiding research and/or extension programmes and
                   includes a person who may be declared by the Statues to be teacher”
8.          Thus, it can be seen that the definition “teacher” is inclusive in nature and not just

confined to a Professor, Associate Professor or Assistant Professor, as defined in Statute
32. When Section 2(n) of the A.P. Act is read in conjunction with Statute 32, the word

“teacher” encompasses one who is enjoined to impart instructions and/or conduct and

guide research and/or extension programmes. The definition being inclusive in nature

would have to be read expansively and when read in the context of PTI/Sports Officer, it

cannot be denied that the appellant while discharging his duties was required to impart

instructions relating to the rules and practices adopted for various categories of sports.

Besides that, the appellant was also required to impart different skill sets and playing

techniques depending on the nature of the sport, for training the students. Merely

because the appellant as a PTI/Sports Officer was not expected to conduct classes

within the four walls of the College, as in the case of a Professor/Associate

Professor/Assistant Professor, would not by itself make him ineligible for being treated as

a teacher for all practical purposes inasmuch as most sports require training in open

spaces/fields/courts etc.
Page 11 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011
9.          The reliance placed by the Division Bench of the High Court on the decision of a

three-Judges Bench in the case of
State of Madhya Pradesh and Others v. Ramesh

Chandra Bajpai11
, wherein though reference was made to the decision of
P.S.

Ramamohana Rao
(supra), it was held that the proposition
laid down in
the said case

should not have been automatically extended to other cases and the whole issue would

depend on the nature of Rules under which an employee is governed, is in our opinion,

misplaced. Laying emphasis on the aforesaid observations made in the last para of the

Ramesh Chandra Bajpai’s case (supra), the impugned judgment records that the

definition of a “teacher” under the M.P. Government Service Rules cannot be imported

into Statute 32 to give it a liberal interpretation so as to include a Sports Officer as a

teacher.
10.         The relevant provisions of the Act and the Statute governing the instant case have

been extracted above and juxtaposed with the provisions of the A.P. Act and having gone

through the relevant Regulations, there is no manner of doubt that the definition of the

word “teacher” under the J.N.K.V.V. Act corresponds with the definition of “teacher” under

the A.P. Act, which was the subject matter of consideration in
P.S. Ramamohana Rao
(supra).
We are therefore of the opinion that the Division Bench of the High Court had no

reason to rely on the observations made in the case of Ramesh Chandra Bajpai (supra)

where the fact situation was entirely different. In the said case, this Court was required

to decide as to whether the private respondent therein who was working as a Physical

Training Instructor in the Government Ayurvedic College, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh could

claim parity of pay with teachers who had been granted UGC scale of pay. The view
11 (2009) 13 SCC 635
Page 12 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



expressed was that the doctrine of “equal pay for equal work” can only be invoked when

employees are similarly situated and there is wholesale identity between holders of the

two posts.
This Court did not find any substance in the plea taken by the respondent

therein that the decision in the case of
P.S. Ramamohana Rao
(supra) would have any

application to the facts of the said case and observed that
the said decision
had been

misapplied and misconstrued by the High Court to give benefit to the private respondent.
11.
In the case at hand, a comparison of the fact situation and the provisions of the

relevant Act and Regulations with those analysed in the case of
P.S. Ramamohana Rao
(supra), would show clear parity. Just as under the A.P. Act where the definition of a

“teacher” contained in Section 2(n) was an expansive one and extended not only to those

persons who impart instructions, conduct and carry on research work for extension

programme, but also those who were declared to be a teacher within the purview of the

definition under the Statute framed by the State Government, same is the position under

the J.N.K.V.V. Act, the Statute and relevant Regulations.
We are therefore of the opinion

that the Division Bench of the High Court fell into an error by placing reliance on the

decision in Ramesh Chandra Bajpai (supra), where the issue involved was at variance.
12.         In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is deemed appropriate to quash and set

aside the impugned order dated 14 th December, 2009 and restore the judgment dated

26th April, 2005 passed by the learned Single Judge. It is declared that the appellant,

who was discharging the duties of a PTI/Sports Officer, would fall within the definition of a

“teacher” and would have been entitled to be continued in service till completion of 62

years of age. As the appellant was prematurely retired by the respondents at the age of
Page 13 of 14
CIVIL APPEAL NO 4267 of 2011



60 years, it is held that he shall be entitled to all consequential and monetary benefits

including, arrear of salary, etc., had he continued in service upto to the age of 62 years.

The retiral benefits of the appellant shall also be computed on a presumption that his age

of retirement was 62 years. The entire amount due and payable to the appellant shall

be computed by the respondents and paid over to him along with a copy of the said

computation within a period of six weeks from today.
13.         The appeal is allowed on the aforesaid terms.    However, in the facts and

circumstances of the present case, there shall be no orders as to costs.
…………………….J.
                                                                     [HIMA KOHLI]



                                                                      …………………….J.
                                                                      [RAJESH BINDAL]
New Delhi;
December 13, 2023
Page 14 of 14