[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Surjit Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 7 December, 2023
Author:
Abhay S.Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S.Oka
NON-REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1069
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 565/2012

        SURJIT SINGH                                                                        APPELLANT(S)

                                                               VERSUS


        STATE OF PUNJAB                                                                     RESPONDENT(S)

                                                          J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S.OKA, J.
1.                  Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.                  The   appellant,        who   is   the    husband   of   the    deceased,    was

        convicted by the Trial Court for the offence punishable under
Section                   302
of    the   Indian     Penal    Code,   1860   (for    short,    the

        “
IPC
”). He was sentenced to undergo life imprisonment by the

        Trial Court. The conviction of the appellant has been confirmed

        by the High Court by the impugned judgment.
3.                  According to the prosecution case, there used to be constant

        disputes between the deceased and the appellant (her husband)

        from the day of their marriage.                                Though the couple was blessed

        with a son and a daughter, the disputes continued.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.12.14
4.
   10:07:24 IST
   Reason:                  As    per   the   prosecution       case,    on   6th   July,   1999,   in   the
1
evening,      while    giving    drinking       water    to    the     deceased,     the

appellant mixed certain substance in the water.                        It is alleged

that thereafter her health started deteriorating.                        On 7 th July,

1999, Kaushalya Devi (PW-7), the mother of the deceased, came to

the   matrimonial      home     of    the   deceased     to    enquire       about   her

health.       It was Kaushalya Devi (PW-7) who took the deceased to

Dr. Pirthipal Memorial Hospital, Kotkapura.                      On the next day

i.e.,   8th    July,   1999,     the    deceased      was     taken    to    the   Civil

Hospital, Kotkapura.          After the deceased was taken to the Civil

Hospital, Dr. B.K. Kapoor (PW-1) found that the case was of

suspected poisoning and the condition of the deceased was very

serious.       Therefore, after sending an intimation to the Police

Station, Dr. B.K. Kapoor (PW-1) referred the case to GGS Medical

College, Faridkot.        On receipt of the information, Surjit Singh,

ASI   (PW-10)     went   to     GGS    Medical     College      and    submitted      an

application to the doctor to certify the fitness of the deceased

to make a statement.            Accordingly, on the application itself,

the   doctor    certified       her    fitness   at     4:30    p.m.        Thereafter,

Surjit Singh (PW-10) proceeded to record her statement, which is

treated as the dying declaration in which the deceased stated

that it was the appellant who administered poison to her.                            The

cause of death, as certified by the Forensic Department, was

poisoning due to aluminium phosphide.                 Initially, an offence was

registered under
Section 307
of the IPC which was converted into
Section 302
of the IPC after the deceased died at 6:50 p.m on
2
8th July, 1999.
5.    Both the Courts believed the prosecution case regarding the

dying declaration recorded by Surjit Singh (PW-10).             The Courts

discarded the testimony of Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13), who was

running Dr. Pirthipal Memorial Hospital.           The Courts have also

relied upon the testimony of Kaushalya Devi (PW-7), the mother

of the deceased.
6.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has taken us

through the evidence of the material prosecution witnesses and

the documents on record.         According to him, as the doctor has

not   certified   that   the   deceased   was    fit   enough   to   give   a

statement when Surjit Singh (PW-10) allegedly recorded her dying

declaration, the same will have to be discarded.            He urged that

the first dying declaration has been made before Dr. Manvir

Gupta (PW-13), who was the prosecution witness.            He stated that

the deceased disclosed to him that she herself consumed the

aluminium phosphide tablets.        The learned counsel pointed out

several lacunae in the prosecution case.
7.    On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the

State   submitted   that   the   Courts   have   rightly   discarded    the

testimony of Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13) on the ground that while

informing the Police regarding the medico-legal case admitted to

his Hospital, he did not inform the Station House Officer (SHO)
3
about the disclosure allegedly made to him by the deceased.

Moreover, the learned counsel submitted that one hour before the

dying declaration was recorded by Surjit Singh (PW-10), a doctor

attached to the Hospital gave fitness certificate.                    Therefore,

there is no reason to discard the testimony of Surjit Singh (PW-
10) and the genuineness of the dying declaration recorded by

him.    He would, therefore, submit that the Courts have rightly

appreciated the evidence and no interference is called for.
8.     The   case   of   the   prosecution    mainly   rests   on     the   dying

declaration of the deceased recorded by Surjit Singh (PW-10).

It is not in dispute that at the instance of Kaushalya Devi (PW-
7), the deceased was taken to Dr. Pirthipal Memorial Hospital,

which    was   being     run   by   Dr.   Manvir   Gupta   (PW-13).      In   the

evidence of Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13), he has stated that the

deceased was brought to his Hospital at 12 noon on 7 th July, 1999

by the appellant.        In his examination-in-chief, Dr. Manvir Gupta

(PW-13) has stated thus:
“ ... There were not recoded. I asked the patient
         as what has happened to her. She told that she got
         vomiting since yesterday night. Condition of the
         patient was so bad, therefore this could not be the
         cause of vomiting alone. On my persistent, she told
         me that she had a fight a night before with her
         husband and she took aluminum phosphide tablets
         herself. After that I found it a medical legal case
         and I asked the person who brought her to take her
         away. The mother of the patient came and she and
         husband of that lady started fighting. Scene was
         created, many people collected there. They all
         requested me to tell her till the matter is sorted
         out. Husband gave me the consent to treat his wife
         and inform the police. The said consent is Ex. PW.I
4
inform the police vide Ex. PX. The police came and
          treated her. Her condition was very bad. She was
          given lot of drug. She started moving. On 8.7.99
          who stood improved somewhat and the family wanted
          to take her away, particularly mother wanted to
          take her. Thana Singh one of the relative of the
          deceased took her after discharge. Though I told
          that her condition was very serious. ...”

                                               (underlines supplied)
9.   Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13) was not declared as hostile.               In a

sense, Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13) was the first independent person

who asked the deceased about the incident.                 There is nothing

brought on record to show why Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13) would lie

before the Court.         There is no reason to discard his testimony.

He has further stated the appellant gave consent to him to treat

his wife and inform the Police.             It is further stated that Thana

Singh, one of the relatives of the deceased, took the deceased

after     her   discharge     from    Dr.    Pirthipal   Memorial    Hospital.

According to him, at that stage, the condition of the deceased

was very serious.         But the said Thana Singh gave him a writing

stating that he was voluntarily taking the deceased to another

hospital.       In fact, the writing of Thana Singh records that he

was taking the deceased at his free will to the Civil Hospital

on the ground that the deceased was alright.              Thus, there is no

reason to discard the testimony of Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13),

especially about the dying declaration made before him by the

deceased     that   she     herself    consumed    the   tablets    containing

poison.     His version cannot be discarded only on the ground that

he did not inform the Police in writing about the disclosure
5
made by the deceased.
10.   Now, we come to the dying declaration relied upon by the

prosecution   which   is   recorded       by   Surjit    Singh   (PW-10).   He

recorded the alleged dying declaration at 5:30 p.m on 8 th July,

1999.   A request was made by him to the doctor attached to the

GGS Medical College to certify whether the deceased was fit to

make a statement.     An endorsement, according to him, was made by

Dr. Sudhir Sharma at 4:30 p.m recording that the patient was fit

for making the statement.       In the examination-in-chief, Surjit

Singh (PW-10) has not stated that Dr. Sudhir Sharma examined the

deceased before giving the fitness certificate.                  He has stated

that Dr. Sudhir Sharma remained present by his side when he

recorded the statement of the deceased.                 What is most relevant

is the admission given by Surjit Singh (PW-10) in paragraph 2 of

his cross-examination, which reads thus:
“2. It is correct that doctor remained beside Reeta Rani
        throughout when I recorded her statement. It is correct
        that I sought the opinion of the doctor regarding the
        fitness of Reeta Rani throughout her statement but he
        refused   to   give   this  certificate   i.e.   fitness
        certificate. ...”
                                           (underlines supplied)
11.   Thus, even according to Surjit Singh (PW-10), the doctor,

who gave certificate at 4:30 p.m, declined to give a certificate

that when the statement of the deceased was being recorded, she

was fit to give a statement.      There is nothing brought on record

to show that Dr. Sudhir Sharma examined the deceased before

giving certificate of fitness at 4:30 p.m.               What is most crucial
6
is that Dr. Sudhir Sharma has not been examined as a prosecution

witness.      In view of the what is admitted by Surjit Singh (PW-
10)    in    paragraph    2    in   his   cross-examination,    which    we    have

quoted above, an adverse inference will have to be drawn against

the prosecution for not examining the said doctor. Therefore,

for    the    aforesaid       reasons,    the   dying   declaration     allegedly

recorded by Surjit Singh (PW-10) will have to be discarded.

Then   the    other   dying     declaration     recorded   by   an   independent

doctor, namely Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13), holds the field.
12.    Now, what remains is the evidence of Kaushalya Devi (PW-7),

the mother of the deceased.               It is a version of an interested

witness.       A serious doubt is created in the mind of the Court

about the entire prosecution case as Dr. Manvir Gupta (PW-13),

who was the prosecution witness, was not declared as hostile and

as one of the most crucial witnesses i.e., Dr. Sudhir Sharma was

not examined.         The dying declaration before Dr. Manvir Gupta

(PW-13) is completely contrary to the version of Kaushalya Devi

(PW-7).        According       to   Dr.   Manvir   Gupta   (PW-13),     when   the

deceased was shifted to the Civil Hospital, her condition was

very serious.         The deceased died within one hour of recording

the alleged dying declaration by Surjit Singh (PW-10).
13.    Therefore, we are of the considered view that the case made

out by the prosecution is not free from doubt and, therefore, we

have no hesitation in holding that the guilt of the appellant
7
has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
14.   Hence, the Appeal succeeds.       The impugned judgments are set

aside.    The   appellant   is   acquitted    of   the   offence   alleged

against him.    As the appellant is on bail, his bail bonds stand

cancelled.
..........................J.
                                       (ABHAY S.OKA)



                                       ..........................J.
                                       (PANKAJ MITHAL)


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 07, 2023.
8