[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohit Singhal vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 1 December, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1035


                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3578 OF 2023

                            Mohit Singhal & Anr.                             … Appellants


                                                           v.


                            The State of Uttarakhand & Ors.                ... Respondents

                                                   JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.    The appellants were shown as accused in the First
                            Information Report registered at the instance of the third
                            respondent for an offence punishable under
Section 306
of IPC
                            (for short, ‘
IPC
’).
2.    It is an admitted position that the third respondent, who
                            is the widow of deceased Ashok Kumar, had borrowed a sum
                            of Rs.40,000/- from one Sandeep Bansal @ Sandeep Lala. The
                            first appellant is the son of the said Sandeep Bansal. The third
                            respondent, in her complaint to the police, stated that
                            subsequently, she borrowed a sum of Rs.60,000/- from
                            Sandeep. While paying the said amount, Sandeep deducted a
                            sum of Rs.15,000/- towards interest.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
3.    The third respondent in her complaint stated that on 8th
   Anita Malhotra
   Date: 2023.12.01
   16:20:38 IST
   Reason:
June 2017, she received a call from Sandeep. He abused her
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                      Page 1 of 6
for not repaying the loan. The third respondent sought time of
       two months to repay the loan. On 15th June 2017, the first
       appellant came to the shop of the third respondent, where her
       husband was sitting.       The first appellant demanded money,
       and the deceased husband of the third respondent pleaded
       with him to give him some time within which he could arrange
       for the money. It is alleged that the first appellant abused the
       deceased and assaulted the deceased with a belt.        He also
       assaulted the third respondent and the mother of the deceased.
       It is alleged that the first appellant threatened the third
       respondent to abduct her daughter.
4.      The third respondent alleges that Sandeep had taken 10
       to 12 cheques from her.       One cheque was dishonoured, so
       Sandeep issued a legal notice dated 27th June 2017 to the
       deceased. The third respondent alleges that her husband was
       under tension due to these events and, therefore, he was very
       upset.     She alleges that due to the acts of the appellant of
       threatening him, the deceased took recourse to the extreme
       step of committing suicide. The prosecution is also relying
       upon the alleged suicide note written by the deceased on 30th
       June 2017. The deceased ended his life on 4th July 2017. By
       the impugned judgment, the High Court rejected the prayer of
       quashing the offence.
SUBMISSIONS
5.      The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
       appellants is that even going by the case made out by the third
       respondent, the deceased was under tension as he could not
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                 Page 2 of 6
repay the amount borrowed by the third respondent and had
       received a notice from Sandeep, as cheque issued to Sandeep
       was dishonoured. Learned counsel submitted that taking the
       suicide note and complaint of the third respondent as correct,
       by no stretch of the imagination, an offence punishable under
Section 306
of IPC is made out.
6.      The learned counsel appearing for the State and learned
       counsel      appearing     for   the   respondents   supported    the
       impugned judgment. Their submission is that the allegations
       in the suicide note are sufficient to make out a prima facie case
       against the appellants. Their submission is that the issue of
       whether the offence under
Section 306
of IPC is made out can
       be decided only after evidence is adduced.
OUR VIEW
7.      The suicide note records that the third respondent had
       borrowed a sum of Rs.60,000/-. According to the deceased, he
       had paid more than half of the amount to Sandeep. The suicide
       note records that as he could not pay the rest of the money, the
       first appellant came to his house and started abusing him. He
       stated that the first appellant had assaulted him, and
       therefore, he complained to the police. He further noted that
       the business of giving money on interest was prospering.           He
       stated that the third respondent is not a prudent woman, and
       due to her habit of intoxication and due to her conduct, she got
       trapped in this. In the suicide note, it is further stated that the
       first appellant has made his life a hell.
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                     Page 3 of 6
8.      According to the complaint of the third respondent, the
       incident in her shop of the first appellant threatening and
       assaulting her and her husband was on 15th June 2017. After
       that, notice under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments
       Act, 1881, was issued by Sandeep to the deceased on 27th June
       2017. The suicide note was written three days after that, on
       30th June 2017. The deceased committed suicide three days
       thereafter. Neither in the complaint of the third respondent nor
       in the suicide note, it is alleged that after 15th June 2017, the
       appellants or Sandeep either met or spoke to the third
       respondent and her deceased husband.
Section 306
of the IPC
       makes abetment to commit suicide as an offence.
Section 107
of the IPC, which defines the abetment of a thing, reads thus:
“
Section 107
-- Abetment of a thing.-
                      A person abets the doing of a thing, who—

                      First.—Instigates any person to do that
                      thing; or

                      Secondly.—Engages with one or more other
                      person or persons in any conspiracy for the
                      doing of that thing, if an act or illegal
                      omission takes place in pursuance of that
                      conspiracy, and in order to the doing of
                      that thing; or

                      Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or
                      illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful
                      misrepresentation,     or     by     wilful
                      concealment of a material fact which he is
                      bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or
                      procures, or attempts to cause or procure,
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                     Page 4 of 6
a thing to be done, is said to instigate the
                      doing of that thing.”
                                             (underline supplied)
9.      In the facts of the case, secondly and thirdly in
Section
       107
, will have no application. Hence, the question is whether
       the appellants instigated the deceased to commit suicide. To
       attract the first clause, there must be instigation in some form
       on the part of the accused to cause the deceased to commit
       suicide. Hence, the accused must have mens rea to instigate
       the deceased to commit suicide. The act of instigation must be
       of such intensity that it is intended to push the deceased to
       such a position under which he or she has no choice but to
       commit suicide. Such instigation must be in close proximity to
       the act of committing suicide.
10.     In the present case, taking the complaint of the third
       respondent and the contents of the suicide note as correct, it
       is impossible to conclude that the appellants instigated the
       deceased to commit suicide by demanding the payment of the
       amount borrowed by the third respondent from her husband
       by using abusive language and by assaulting him by a belt for
       that purpose. The said incident allegedly happened more than
       two weeks before the date of suicide.        There is no allegation
       that any act was done by the appellants in the close proximity
       to the date of suicide. By no stretch of the imagination, the
       alleged acts of the appellants can amount to instigation to
       commit suicide. The deceased has blamed the third respondent
       for landing in trouble due to her bad habits.
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                      Page 5 of 6
11.     Therefore, in our considered view, the offence punishable
       under
Section 306
of IPC was not made out against the
       appellants.       Therefore, the continuation of their prosecution
       will be nothing but an abuse of the process of law.
12.     Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgment and
       quash the summoning order dated 23rd January 2019 in
       Criminal Case No. 454 of 2019 passed by the learned
       Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate Ist, Dehradun, District
       Dehradun.
13.     The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
….…………………….J.
                                                   (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                    …..…………………...J.
                                                    (Pankaj Mithal)
       New Delhi;
December 1, 2023.
Criminal Appeal no.3578 of 2023                                   Page 6 of 6