[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Koushik Mutually Aided Cooperative ... vs Ameena Begum on 1 December, 2023
Author:
B.V. Nagarathna
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
REPORTABLE


2023 INSC 1065
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF 2023
                                     (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.5489 OF 2021)


        THE KOUSHIK MUTUALLY AIDED COOPERATIVE
        HOUSING SOCIETY                                                       ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

        AMEENA BEGUM & ANOTHER                                                ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        O R D E R
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  Being    aggrieved   by   order   dated   08.01.2021   passed    by   the

        learned Single Judge of the High Court for the State of Telangana

        at Hyderabad in Civil Revision Petition No. 4866/2018, this appeal

        has been preferred.
3.                  We have heard Sri C. S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel

        along with Sri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned senior counsel for

        the appellant and Sri Sajan Poovayya, learned senior counsel for

        the first respondent and perused the material on record. The second

        respondent has been deleted from the array of parties in terms of

        this Court’s Order dated 25.04.2023.
4.                  Briefly stated, the facts are that the appellant herein had

        filed O.S. No.1144/1988 on the file of the V-Senior Civil Judge,
Signature Not Verified
City
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.12.12
Civil    Court,     Hyderabad    seeking   a   decree    of    specific
17:16:05 IST
Reason:
performance of an agreement to sell dated 26.04.1985. In the said
1
suit, the respondent(s) herein were set ex-parte. Thereafter, an

ex-parte     decree      was    passed       on    15.02.1999.        It    is     stated   that

execution     proceedings        as   against       the     ex-parte       decree    are    still

pending before the Executing Court.                      However, the first respondent

herein filed an application on 07.01.2016 seeking setting aside of

ex-parte decree dated 15.02.1999 along with an application under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963 seeking condonation of 5767

days delay in filing the said application seeking setting aside of

ex-parte decree.
5.    By    order    dated      07.06.2018,        the     V-Senior    Civil       Judge,   City

Civil Court, Hyderabad dismissed I.A. No.30/2016 filed for seeking

condonation of delay of 5767 days in filing the application seeking

setting aside of the ex-parte decree under Oder IX
Rule 13 Code of

Civil Procedure
, 1908 (‘
CPC
’ for the sake of convenience). The said

application was considered by the Trial Court and by order dated

07.06.2018,        the   application         seeking       condonation        of    delay    was

dismissed. Consequently, the petition filed under
Order IX Rule 13

CPC
seeking       setting     aside    of       the    ex-parte      decree       also    stood

dismissed.
6.    Being aggrieved, the first respondent herein filed a Civil

Revision Petition under
Section 115
of the CPC before the High

Court contending that Trial Court was not right in dismissing the

application seeking condonation of delay of 5767 days in filing the

petition to set aside the ex-parte decree dated 15.02.1999.
7.    By the impugned order dated 08.01.2021, the High Court has set

aside      Order    dated      07.06.2018         passed    in I.A. No.30/2016 in O.
S.
2
No.1144/1988,       which    also    implies        that   the    petition    filed    under
Order   IX   Rule    13     CPC
which       had   also   stood    dismissed    has   been

allowed. In the Civil Revision Petition, the High Court condoned

the delay of 5767 days in filing the petition filed under
Order IX

Rule    13   CPC
seeking       setting      aside   the       ex-parte    decree    dated

15.02.1999 by directing the Trial Court to dispose of the petition

filed under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
and to complete the trial of the

suit expeditiously, within a period of four months from the date of

receipt of certified copy of this order.
8.     Being aggrieved by the said order passed in Civil Revision

Petition by the High Court, the plaintiff/appellant has preferred

this appeal.
As noted above, we have heard learned senior counsel for the

respective parties and perused the material on record.
9.     At the outset, this Court queried as to how a Civil Revision

Petition was maintainable against an order passed by the Trial

Court dismissing the application filed seeking condonation of delay

in filing the petition under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
and consequently

rejecting or dismissing the said petition also.
10.    During the course of submissions, it was noted that, in fact,

the rejection of a petition filed under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
is an

appealable order and, therefore under Order XLIII Rule 1(d)
CPC
, an

appeal ought to have been filed before the High Court rather than a

Civil Revision Petition under
Section 115
of the CPC.
11.    For the sake of immediate reference, Order XLIII Rule 1(d)
CPC
3
is extracted as under in juxtaposition to
Section 115
of the CPC:
“Order XLIII Rule 1. Appeal from orders – An appeal
    shall lie from the following orders under the provisions
    of section 104, namely:-
(a) xxx
(c) xxx
(d)   an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting
         an application (in a case open to appeal) for an
         order to set aside a decree passed ex-parte.”

    Section 115 – Revision.
(1) The High Court may call for the record of any case
    which has been decided by any Court subordinate to such
    High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if
    such subordinate Court appears-
a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in
         it by law, or
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so
         vested, or
(c) to have     acted in    the   exercise    of its
         jurisdiction    illegally    or     with     material
         irregularity,

    the High Court may make such order in the case as it
    thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not, under this
    section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order
    deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other
    proceeding, except where the order, if it had been made
    in favour of the party applying for revision, would have
    finally disposed of the suit or other proceedings.
(2) The High Court shall not, under this section, vary
    or reverse any decree or order against which an appeal
    lies either to the High Court or to any Court
    subordinate thereto.
(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or
    other proceeding before the Court except where such suit
    or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “any
    case which has been decided” includes any order made, or
    any order deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or
    other proceeding.”
4
12.    As against the ex-parte decree, a defendant has three remedies

available to him. First, is by way of filing an application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
seeking for setting aside ex-parte decree;

the second, is by way of filing an appeal against the ex-parte

decree under
Section 96(2)
of the CPC and the third, is by way of

review before the same court against the ex-parte decree.
13.    The filing of an application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
as

well   as   the     filing    of   appeal   under
Section     96(2)
of     the   CPC

against the ex-parte decree are concurrent remedies available to a

defendant. However, once the appeal preferred by the defendant

against     the    ex-parte      decree    is   dismissed,      except     when    it   is

withdrawn,        the   remedy     under
Order    IX   Rule   13   CPC
cannot      be

pursued. Conversely, if an application filed under
Order IX Rule

13 CPC
is rejected, an appeal as against the ex-parte decree can

be preferred and continued under
Section 96(2)
of the CPC. Thus,

an appeal against an ex-parte decree even after the dismissal of

an application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
is maintainable.
14.
In
Bhanu Kumar Jain vs. Archana Kumar
, AIR 2005 SC 626 :
(2005) 1 SCC 787, speaking through Sinha, J. observed in paragraph

26 as under:
“When an ex parte decree is passed, the defendant (apart
       from filing a review petition and a suit for setting
       aside the ex parte decree on the ground of fraud) has
       two clear options, one, to file an appeal and another to
       file an application for setting aside the order in terms
       of Order IX Rule 13 of the Code. He can take recourse to
       both the proceedings simultaneously but in the event the
       appeal is dismissed as a result whereof the ex parte
       decree passed by the trial court merges with the order
       passed by the appellate court, having regard to
       Explanation appended to Order IX Rule 13 of the Code a
       petition   under  Order   IX  Rule   13  would   not  be
       maintainable. However, the Explanation I appended to the
5
said provision does not suggest that the converse is
       also true.”
15.    Against the order passed under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
rejecting

an application for seeking setting aside the decree passed                           ex-

parte, an appeal is provided. When an application is filed seeking

condonation of delay for seeking setting aside an ex-parte decree

and the same is dismissed and consequently, the petition is also

dismissed,     the     appeal    under    Order   XLIII     Rule       1(d)
CPC
is

maintainable. Thus, an appeal only against the refusal to set aside

the ex-parte decree is maintainable whereas if an order allowing

such an application is passed, the same is not appealable.
16.    Thus, when an application or petition filed under
Order IX Rule

13 CPC
is dismissed, the defendant can avail a remedy by preferring

an appeal in terms of
Order XLIII Rule 1 CPC
. Thus, Civil Revision

Petition under
Section 115
of the CPC would not arise when an

application/petition under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
is dismissed. Thus,

when an alternative and effective appellate remedy is available to

a     defendant,     against    an    ex-parte    decree,    it        would   not    be

appropriate for the defendant to resort to filing of revision under
Section 115
of the CPC challenging the order refusing to set aside

the    order   of    setting    the   defendant   ex-parte.       In    view   of    the

appellate remedy under Order XLIII Rule 1(d)
CPC
being available,

revision under
Section 115
of the CPC filed in the instant case was

not maintainable.
17.    When there is an express provision available under
the CPC
or

any statute under which an appeal is maintainable, by-passing the

same, a    Revision     Petition      cannot   be filed.    It     is needless to
6
observe that in the absence of an appellate remedy, a revision may

be maintainable.
18.   It   is   clarified     that    once   the    Trial    Court    dismissed     the

application seeking condonation of delay in filing petition under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
, and consequently, the main petition under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC
also stood dismissed which is also noted by

the trial Court as “In the result, the petition is dismissed”.
19.   Realising    this     aspect    regarding      the    maintainability     of    a

revision    petition      before     the   High    Court,   Sri     Sajan   Poovayya,

learned senior counsel submitted that liberty may be reserved to

the first respondent herein to file                  an appeal and if such an

appeal is filed within a time frame to be granted by this Court,

the issue of limitation in filing the appeal under Order XLIII Rule

1(d)
CPC
may not be raised by the High Court

      By way of response, Sri C. S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior

counsel    submitted   that    if    the   impugned    order   is    set    aside   and

liberty is reserved to the first respondent herein, the appellant

may not be prejudiced by such an order.
20.   In the circumstances, we set aside the impugned order on the

ground that the said order was passed in a Civil Revision Petition

which was not at all maintainable under
Section 115
of the CPC.

However, liberty is reserved to the first respondent herein to file

an appeal under Order XLIII Rule 1(d)
CPC
, if so advised, on or

before 31.12.2023.
21.   If such an appeal is filed before the High Court, the point of

limitation ought not to be raised by the High Court.
7
22.   It is needless to observe that the High Court shall dispose of

the appeal to be filed by the first respondent herein in accordance

with law.
23.   All contentions on both sides are left open, to be advanced in

the appeal to be filed before the High Court.
24.   This Appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
Pending application (s) shall stand disposed of.
……………………………………………………J.
                                               [B.V. NAGARATHNA]




                                            ……………………………………………………J.
                                                [UJJAL BHUYAN]
 NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 01, 2023.
8