[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maheshwari Yadav vs The State Of Bihar on 13 December, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1068

                                                                         Non­Reportable


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1515 OF 2011

                            Maheshwari Yadav & Anr.                       … Appellants



                                                       versus




                            The State of Bihar                           … Respondent



                                                  JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   This is an appeal preferred by the accused nos.1 and 2.
                            The learned Trial Court convicted accused no.3 – Paro Yadav,
                            for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the Indian
                            Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘
IPC
’).    The appellants were
                            convicted for the offences punishable under
Section 302
read
                            with
Section 34
of the IPC and
Section 325
read with
Section
                            34
of the IPC. The appellants were sentenced to undergo life
                            imprisonment for the offence punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC. They were also sentenced to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years for the offence
   Date: 2023.12.13

                            punishable under
Section 325
read with
Section 34
of the
   17:10:29 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                              Page 1 of 9
IPC
. Separate appeals were preferred by the appellants and
        accused no.3 before the Patna High Court. By the impugned
        judgment and order dated 7 th October 2005, the appeals have
        been dismissed.           The accused no.3 – Paro Yadav filed a
        Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal) no.4802 of
        2006, which this Court dismissed vide its order dated 11 th
        December 2006.
2.      We are setting out the prosecution case in brief. PW­4
        (Jagdish Manjhi) is the first informant. The incident occurred
        on     10th    March      1997   when   the   PW­4   visited   Village­
        Shrirampur to participate in a Baraat.           At about noon, he
        went to Village­Chhitmakhanpur to meet his maternal
        nephew Gholti Yadav (deceased).           After that, PW­4 and his
        cousin Narayan Manjhi (PW­5) and Gholti Yadav (deceased)
        proceeded to catch a train. They crossed the railway line, and
        when they were moving further, they found appellant no.1 –
        Maheshwari Yadav, standing there with a lathi (stick) in his
        hand. On seeing appellant no.1, the deceased warned PW­4
        not to talk to appellant no.1.          In the meanwhile, appellant
        no.2 – Mannu Yadav, and the accused no.3 came there.              The
        appellant no.2 exhorted the accused no.3 to kill the deceased.
The deceased tried to run away when the accused no.3 fired a
        bullet at him by a musket.          The bullet hit the back of the
        deceased. He tried to run away. However, he fell near the
        wheat field of one Chadi Rai. After that, all the three accused
        started assaulting the PW­4. When PW­5 tried to intervene,
        he was also assaulted by the accused no.3. The accused no.3
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                               Page 2 of 9
assaulted PW­4 with the butt of the musket. On hearing the
        noise, villagers came there when the accused ran away.
        According to the prosecution case, apart from PW­4 and PW­
        5, the incident was witnessed by PW­1 (Rinku Yadav), PW­2
        (Pinku Yadav) and PW­3 (Subodh Pd. Yadav). Jawahar Yadav
        and one Tribedanand were also the witnesses who were not
        examined.
3.      The motive pleaded by the prosecution is that two
        months before the incident, the accused no.3 had brought a
        horse of one Awadhi Yadav by committing theft.            After
        learning about the theft, Awadhi Yadav called upon the
        accused no.3 to return the horse.      When the accused no.3
        tried to assault the said Awadhi Yadav, the deceased saved
        him, and therefore, the accused no.3 was annoyed with the
        deceased. Both the courts have believed the testimony of the
        eye­witnesses.
SUBMISSIONS
4.      The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
        appellants is that the only allegation against the appellant
        no.2 was of exhortion.       There was no allegation against
        appellant no.1 of assaulting the deceased. The submission of
        the learned counsel appearing for the appellants is that there
        was no evidence of common intention shared by the
        appellants and the accused no.3.      Therefore, the appellants
        could not have been convicted for the offences punishable
        under
Section 302
with the aid of
Section 34
of the IPC. His
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                       Page 3 of 9
submission is that apart from the fact that the motive was not
        proved, in any case, even according to the prosecution, there
        was enmity between the deceased and the accused no.3. He
        submitted that PW­1, PW­2 and PW­3 were the sons and real
        brother of the deceased respectively and were interested
        witnesses.        It is doubtful whether PW­4 and PW­5 had
        actually seen the incident. According to the prosecution case,
        PW­4, PW­5, and the deceased were proceeding towards the
        railway station to board a train. However, the version of PW­4
        and     PW­5      is      that   they   were   proceeding   towards   the
        bus/motor stand.             He submitted that the conduct of PW­1,
        PW­2 and PW­3 was unnatural as they did not try to save the
        deceased. He pointed out that two alleged eye­witnesses have
        not been examined, and, therefore, adverse inference deserves
        to be drawn against the prosecution. He submitted that there
        was a delay of eight hours in registering the First Information
        Report.
5.      The learned counsel appearing for the respondent–State
        of Bihar submitted that as the conviction of the accused no.3
        has been confirmed by this Court, no interference can be
        made with the conviction of the appellants who had been
        convicted with the aid of
Section 34
of the IPC. He urged that
        both the courts have appreciated the evidence of the eye­
        witnesses and have believed their version.                   Hence, no
        interference is called for.
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                                 Page 4 of 9
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
6.      We may note here that the accused no.3 was charged
        only under
Section 302
of the IPC and
Section 34
was not
        applied.
Section 34
of the IPC has been applied only to the
        present appellants. One of the questions is when the main
        accused, who is the author of the fatal injuries sustained by
        the deceased, was not charged with
Section 34
of the IPC,
        whether conviction of the appellants can be sustained.
Section 34
of the IPC reads thus:
“34. Acts done by several persons in
                          furtherance of common intention.—
                          When a criminal act is done by several
                          persons in furtherance of the common
                          intention of all, each of such persons is
                          liable for that act in the same manner
                          as if it were done by him alone.”
7.
Section 34
essentially introduces vicarious liability. In a
        given case, where the offence is punishable under
Section 302
of IPC, when the common intention is proved, but no overt act
        of assaulting the deceased is attributed to the accused who
        have been implicated based on
Section 34
, vicarious liability
        under
Section 34
will be attracted.        In this case, the bullet
        was fired by the accused no.3, as a result of which, the
        deceased lost his life.        Even without the applicability of
Section 34
, the accused no.3 could have been convicted for
        the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC.            To
        punish him under
Section 302
, it was not necessary to apply
Section 34
of the IPC.
Section 34
was applied to the
        appellants as they were sought to be roped in by alleging that
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                           Page 5 of 9
they shared common intention with accused no.3. To bring a
        case within
Section 34
, it is not necessary to prove prior
        conspiracy or pre­meditation. It is possible to form a common
        intention just before or during the occurrence.
8.      One of the grounds of challenge is the failure to examine
        other eye­witnesses. However, in the facts of the case, a total
        of five eye­witnesses were examined. It is not axiomatic that
        in every case where the eye­witnesses are withheld from the
        court, an adverse inference must be drawn against the
        prosecution.         The totality of the circumstances must be
        considered for concluding whether an adverse inference could
        be drawn.         We have perused the notes of evidence of the
        material witnesses.
9.      PW­1 to PW­5 are eye­witnesses. They are consistent on
        the role played by the accused no.3 of using a musket for
        firing the bullet at the deceased. They have deposed that the
        present appellants were present at the scene of occurrence
        along with the accused no.3.       The appellants were carrying
        sticks in their hands, and the accused no.3 had a musket
        which was used to fire the bullet at the deceased. The said
        witnesses have deposed that the appellants assaulted PW­4
        (Jagdish – the first informant). As found by the High Court
        and the Trial Court, PW­4 suffered a fracture. We may note
        here that the evidence of PW­5 has been discarded by the
        High Court mainly on the ground that he failed to identify
        accused no.3, who was the main accused.
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                         Page 6 of 9
10.     PW­1 to PW­4 stated that appellant no.2 exhorted the
        accused no.3 to fire a bullet at the deceased. PW­1 is the son
        of the deceased. PW­4 (Jagdish) and PW­5 (Narayan) are the
        brothers­in­law of the deceased, and therefore, they are the
        maternal uncles of PW­1. PW­2 is the son of the deceased,
        and PW­3 is the deceased's brother. It is true that PW­1 has
        stated that at the time of the assault, other persons named by
        him were present.               They have not been examined as
        witnesses. We have carefully perused the cross­examination
        of PW­1 to PW­3.             Nothing is brought on record that will
        shake the credibility of the said witnesses. As regards PW­4,
        he stated that he, along with PW­5 and the deceased, started
        proceeding towards the bus stand. When they arrived near
        the railway station, they saw the three accused.                  A
        contradiction is sought to be pointed out by the learned
        counsel appearing for the appellants by stating that in the
        FIR, it is stated by the PW­4 that he along with his brother
        and the deceased, were going towards the railway station to
        catch a train and he did not state in the FIR that they were
        going towards the bus stand.              This inconsistency is not
        significant, as his version of the main incident has not been
        shaken at all.            It is true that the eye­witnesses examined
        before the court were close relatives of the deceased.         That
        itself is no ground to discard their testimony. However, their
        evidence may require closer scrutiny.            After having made
        closer scrutiny, we find their versions are of a very sterling
        quality. Moreover, all the persons named by PW­1 who were
        present were not independent witnesses.             In a given case,
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                            Page 7 of 9
when independent witnesses are available who are not
        connected with the rival parties and the prosecution omits to
        examine them by confining its case to examining related
        witnesses, an adverse inference can undoubtedly be drawn
        against the prosecution.       When the evidence of the eye­
        witnesses is of sterling quality, an adverse inference need not
        be drawn. Quality is more important than quantity.
11.     Merely because they made no attempt to save the
        deceased or resist the accused is no ground by itself to
        disbelieve their case. The accused were carrying sticks and a
        gun. Therefore, the conduct of the appellants cannot be said
        to be unnatural.
12.     The appellants were together and were in the company
        of the accused no.3.      Obviously, they acted in concert. The
        appellants were carrying lathi, and the accused no.3, was
        moving with a musket.        There was time available for the
        meeting of minds. Thus, the existence of common intention
        will have to be accepted.
13.     Hence, we find every justification for convicting the
        appellants by both the Courts. Accordingly, we find no merit
        in the case, and the appeal is dismissed. As the appellants
        are on bail, we direct the appellants to surrender before the
        Trial Court within one month from today to undergo the
        remaining sentence.
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                       Page 8 of 9
14.     As and when they undergo the requisite period of
        sentence and qualify for consideration for a grant of
        permanent remission as per the applicable policy, the State
        Government shall consider their case in accordance with the
        law.
….…………………….J.
                                              (Abhay S. Oka)


                                              …..…………………...J.
                                              (Pankaj Mithal)
        New Delhi;
December 13, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.1515 of 2011                                   Page 9 of 9