[Cites
53
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shakti Yezdani vs Jayanand Jayant Salgaonkar on 14 December, 2023
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Hrishikesh Roy
2023 INSC 1076

                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7107 OF 2017




     SHAKTI YEZDANI & ANR.                                       APPELLANT(S)


                                               VERSUS


     JAYANAND JAYANT SALGAONKAR & ORS.                            RESPONDENT(S)




                                          JUDGMENT
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
1.               Heard Mr. Abhimanyu Bhandari, learned counsel appearing for

     the appellants. Also heard Mr. Rohit Anil Rathi, learned counsel

     representing respondent no. 1. Mr. Aniruddha A. Joshi, learned

     counsel appears for respondent nos. 4, 6, 7 and 8.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
The appellants and respondent nos. 1 to 9 are the legal heirs
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2023.12.15
17:06:35 IST
Reason:
and representatives of an individual – Jayant Shivram Salgaonkar.
1 of 42
The family patriarch executed a will on 27.06.2011 making provisions

for the devolution of his estates upon the successors. Apart from the

properties mentioned in the will, the testator had certain fixed

deposits (FDs) for the sum of Rs. 4,14,73,994/- in respect of which

the respondent nos. 2, 4 and appellant no. 2 were made nominees.

Additionally, there were certain mutual fund investments (MFs) of the

amount of Rs. 3,79,03,207/- in respect of which appellants and Jay

Ganesh Nyas Trust (respondent no. 9) were made nominees. The

testator Jayant Shivram Salgaonkar passed away on 20.08.2013.
3.   On 29.04.2014, the respondent no. 1 filed Suit No. 503/2014

with the prayer for declaration inter alia that the properties of the

testator may be administered under the court’s supervision and

seeking absolute power to administer the same. He also prayed for

permanent    injunction   restraining     all   other   respondents   and

appellants from disposing, transferring, alienating, assigning and/or

creating any third-party interests in respect of the properties in

Exhibit A.
4.   In their reply to the notice of motion in Suit No. 503/2014, the

appellants pleaded that they were the sole nominee(s) to the MFs. The



                                2 of 42
essence of their claim was that the appellants being nominees were

absolutely vested with the securities on the testator’s death. The

appellant no.2 was additionally nominated and entitled to the FDs of

the testator in the IDBI Bank. It was also the appellants’ contention

that nominations made under/in Jayant Shivram Salgaonkar’s

MFs/shares were made as per
Section 109A
&
109B
of Companies Act,

1956 and bye-law 9.11.7 of the
Depositories Act, 1996
.
Section 109A
and
109B
of the Companies Act, 1956 must be read as a code in

themselves, wherein the meaning of words ‘vest’ and ‘nominee’ are to

be seen from the statute alone bearing in mind the non-obstante

clause contained therein. Therefore, the provisions should be

interpreted without reference to any outside consideration.
5.     On 31.03.2015, the learned Single Judge of the Bombay High

Court while passing the order in the Notice of Motion mainly

considered whether the law laid down in the case of
Harsha Nitin

Kokate v. The Saraswat Co-operative Bank Limited and Others
1 was

per incuriam. Further, the contentions of the appellants were rejected

by the court by observing that
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of the Companies

Act, 1956 cannot be read in a vacuum and it is permissible for the

1(2010) SCC Online Bom 615.
3 of 42
court to look at pari materia provisions in other statutes. The court,

while considering the argument of a ‘statutory testament’ raised in
Sarbati Devi v. Usha Devi2
, expressly negated those and opined that it

would not be proper to limit the ratio in
Sarbati Devi
(supra) to the

narrow confines of
Section 39
of the Insurance Act, 1939.
The same

was thereafter reaffirmed in
Vishin N. Khanchandani and Anr. v. Vidya

Lachmandas Khanchandani & Anr.3
,
Shipra Sengupta v. Mridual

Sengupta & Ors.4
, Ramchander Talwar & Ors. v. Devendra Kumar

Talwar & Ors.5,
Nozer Gustad Commissariat v. Central Bank of India &

Ors.6
and
Antonio   Joao   Fernandes   v.   Asst
.   Provident   Fund

Commissioner7.
According to the learned judge, the decision in
Kokate
(supra) failed to consider the decision of the Supreme Court in
Khanchandani
(supra),
Shipra Sengupta
(supra) or even those of the

Single Judge of the Bombay High Court in
Nozer Gustad Commissariat
(supra) and
Antonio Joao Fernandes
(supra), although each of these

decisions were binding on the court, while it was deciding Kokate.


2(1984) 1 SCC 424

3(2000) 6 SCC 724

4(2009) 10 SCC 680

5(2010) 10 SCC 671

6(1993) 1 Mah LJ 228

7(2010) 4 Mah LJ 751


                                        4 of 42
6.   It was accordingly expressed that the decision in
Kokate
(supra)

is per incuriam as it was rendered without considering relevant and

binding precedents. The learned Judge also opined that the

fundamental focus of
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of the Companies Act, 1956

and Bye-law 9.11.7 of the
Depositories Act
is not the law of succession

nor it is intended to restrict the law of succession in any manner.

Addressing the mischief that was sought to be avoided by the two

statutory provisions, the court observed that it was intended to afford

the company or the depository in question, a legally valid quittance so

that it does not remain answerable forever to succession litigations

and endless slew of claims under the succession law. It was therefore

opined that the statutory provisions allow for the liability to be moved

from the company or the depository to the nominee but the nominee

continues to hold the shares/securities in fiduciary capacity and is

also answerable to all claims in the succession law.
7.   With the above understanding of the legal provisions, the

learned Judge declared that the view in
Kokate
(supra) generates

inconsistencies as it renders a nomination under the
Companies Act
the status of a ‘superwill’ that is bereft of the rigour applicable to a

will for its making or the test of its validity under the Indian

                                 5 of 42
Succession Act, 1925
. According to the ruling,
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of

the Companies Act, 1956 and the Bye-law 9.11 of the
Depositories Act,

1996
does not displace the law of succession nor does it stipulate a

third line of succession.
8.   Even while declaring
Kokate
(supra) to be per incuriam, it was

made clear that the aforesaid judgment (31.3.2015) does not dispose

of the Notice of Motion No. 822/2014 in Suit No. 503/2014 and

Chamber Summons No. 72/2014 in Testamentary Petition No.

457/2014 and those were posted for final hearing on the basis of the

law as declared.
9.   The appellants being aggrieved by the decision (dated 31.3.2015)

of the learned Single Judge, filed Appeal No. 313/2015 to challenge

the order. Appeal No. 311/2015 was also filed in the Testamentary

Petition No. 457/2014.
10. While dealing with the appeals, the Division Bench at the outset

noticed that the consideration to be made is whether the view taken

by the learned Single Judge vis-a-vis the
Kokate
(supra) judgment is

the correct opinion. Accordingly, the following questions were

formulated for decision in the appeals:
6 of 42
         “(i) Whether a nominee of a holder of shares or securities
         appointed under
Section 109A
of the Companies Act, 1956
         read with the Bye-laws under the
Depositories Act, 1996
is
         entitled to the beneficial ownership of the shares or securities
         subject matter of nomination to the exclusion of all other
         persons who are entitled to inherit the estate of the holder as
         per the law of succession?
(ii)Whether    a     nominee      of   a    holder of shares or
         securities on the basis of the nomination made under the
         provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
read with the Byelaws
         under the
Depositories Act, 1996
is entitled to all rights in
         respect of the shares or securities subject matter of nomination
         to the exclusion of all other persons or whether he continues to
         hold the securities in trust and in a capacity as a beneficiary
         for the legal representatives who are entitled to inherit
         securitie or shares under the law of inheritance?
(iii) Whether a bequest made in a Will executed in accordance
         with the Inidan Succession Act, 1925 in respect of shares or
         securities of the deceased supersedes the nomination made
         under the provisiosn of
Sections 109A
and Bye Law No. 9.11
         framed under the
Depositories Act, 1996
?”
11. To appreciate the precise ratio in
Kokate
(supra), the following

two paragraphs of the Kokate judgment were extracted by the Division

Bench:
“24. In the light of these judgments
section 109A
of the
         Companies Act is required to be interpreted with regard to the
         vesting of the shares of the holder of the shares in the nominee
         upon his death. The act sets out that the nomination has to be
         made during the life time of the holder as per procedure
         prescribed by law. If that procedure is followed, the nominee
         would become entitled to all the rights in the shares to the
         exclusion of all other persons. The nominee would be made
         beneficial owner thereof. Upon such nomination, therefore, all the
         rights incidental to ownership would follow. This would include
         the right to transfer the shares, pledge the shares or hold the
         shares. The specific statutory provision making the nominee
         entitled to all the rights in the shares excluding all other persons
         would show expressly the legislative intent. Once all other
         persons are excluded and only the nominee becomes entitled

                                      7 of 42
         under the statutory provision to have all the rights in the shares,
         none other can have it. Further,
section 9
.11 of the
Depositories
         Act
1996 makes the nominee's position superior to even a
         testamentary disposition. The non-obstante Clause in
section
         9
.11.7 gives the nomination the effect of the Testamentary
         Disposition itself. Hence, any other disposition or nomination
         under any other law stands subject to the nomination made
         under the
Depositories Act
.
Section 9
.11.7 further shows that the
         last of the nominations would prevail. This shows the revocable
         nature of the nomination much like a Testamentary Disposition.
A nomination can be cancelled by the holder and another
         nomination can be made. Such later nomination would be relied
         upon by the Depository Participant. That would be for conferring
         of all the rights in the shares to such last nominee.
25. A reading of
section 109A
of the Companies Act and bye-law
         9.11 of the
Depositories Act
makes it abundantly clear that the
         intent of the nomination is to vest the property in the shares
         which includes the ownership rights thereunder in the nominee
         upon nomination validly made as per the procedure prescribed,
         as has been done in this case. These sections are completely
         different from
section 39
of the Insurance Act set out (supra)
         which require a nomination merely for the payment of the
         amount under the Life Insurance Policy without confirming any
         ownership rights in the nominee or under
section 30
of the
         Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act which allows the Society
         to transfer the shares of the member which would be valid
         against any demand made by any other person upon the
         Society. Hence these provisions are made merely to give a valid
         discharge to the Insurance Company or the Co-operative Society
         without vesting the ownership rights in the Insurance Policy or
         the membership rights in the Society upon such nominee. The
         express legislature intent under
section 109A
of the Companies
         Act and
section 9
.11 of the
Depositories Act
is clear.”
12. The Division Bench under the impugned judgment (dated

01.12.2016) observed that the object and provisions of the
Companies

Act, 1956
is not to either provide a mode of succession or to deal with

succession at all. The object of
S. 109A
Companies Act, 1956 is to



                                     8 of 42
ensure that the deceased shareholder is represented, as the value of

the shares is subject to market forces and various advantages keep on

accruing to the shareholders, such as allotment of shares &

disbursement of dividends. Moreover, a shareholder is required to be

represented in the general meetings of the Company and therefore,

the court opined that the provision is enacted to ensure that

commerce does not suffer due to delay on part of the legal heirs in

establishing their rights of succession and then claiming shares of a

Company. Adverting to and interpreting the pari materia provisions

relating to nominations under various statutes, the Division Bench

felt that the consistent view in the various judgments of the Supreme

Court and the Bombay High Court must be followed and those do not

warrant any departure. It was expressly opined that the so-called

‘vesting’ under
S. 109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 does not create a

third mode of succession and the provisions are not intended to

create another mode of succession.
In fact, the
Companies Act, 1956
has nothing to do with the law of succession. Accordingly, the

Division Bench declared that the nominee of a holder of a share or

securities is not entitled to the beneficial ownership of the shares or

securities which are the subject matter of nomination to the exclusion


                                 9 of 42
of all other persons who are entitled to inherit the estates of the

holders as per the law of succession. Answering the third question,

the Division Bench held that a bequest made in a Will executed in

accordance with the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
in respect of shares

or securities of the deceased, supersedes the nomination made under

the provision of
S. 109A
of Companies Act and Bye-law 9.11 framed

under the
Depositories Act, 1996
. The bench accordingly ruled that an

incorrect view was taken in
Kokate
(supra).
13. The object of
S. 109A(3)
of the Companies Act, 1956, according to

the Division Bench, is not materially different from
S. 6(1)
of the

Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959 and
S. 109B
of the

Companies Act, 1956 is likewise similar to
S. 45-ZA(2)
of the Banking

Regulation Act, 1949. The law relating to
S. 6(1)
of the Government

Savings Certificates Act, 1959 has already been settled in the case of
N. Khanchandani
(supra) where the Supreme Court upheld the law

declared in
Sarbati Devi
(supra).
14. Looking at the provisions relating to nominations under different

statutory enactments and the way the courts have interpreted those

to the effect that the nominee does not get absolute title to the


                                    10 of 42
property which is the subject matter of nomination, the Division

Bench interpreting the provisions under
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
Companies Act, 1956 declared that they do not override the law in

relation to testamentary or intestate succession. The judgment in
Kokate
(supra) was declared to be incorrect as it failed to consider the

law
laid down in
Khanchandani
(supra) and Talwar (supra) as these

cases preceded
Kokate
(supra).
ARGUMENTS
15. The learned counsels for the appellants and the respondents put

forth the following arguments for consideration:
15.1      Mr. Abhimanyu Bhandari, the learned counsel for the

appellants argues that the scheme of nomination as provided in the
Companies Act, 1956
is not analogous to nomination as provided

under other legislations. Unlike in other legislations, the term ‘vesting’

& ‘to the exclusion of others’ along with a ‘non-obstante clause’ are

placed together in the
Companies Act, 1956
. Therefore, it would be

incorrect to rely on the ratio of the judgments pertaining to other

legislations (such as the
Insurance Act, 1939
,
Banking Regulation Act,

1949
,
National Savings Certificates Act, 1959
, Employees Provident


                                 11 of 42
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952) to then interpret the

provisions of
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of the Companies Act, 1956.
Provisions pertaining to the same in other legislations cannot be the

basis for interpretation of the term ‘nomination’ under the
Companies

Act
as those are not pari materia with
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
(now
S. 72
of the Companies Act, 2013) of the
Companies Act, 1956
.


15.2    It is contended that
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
(now
S. 72
of the

Companies Act, 2013) introduced in the
Companies Act, 1956
by the

legislature on 31.08.1988 with the language so used makes it clear

that a nominee, upon the death of the shareholder/debenture holder,

will secure full and exclusive ownership rights in respect of the

shares/debentures for which he/she is the nominee. In fact, adverting

to the hierarchy laid down under the provision, shareholding in an

individual capacity (
S. 109A(1)
), then a joint shareholder owning the

shares jointly (
S. 109A(2)
) and then finally, a nominee (
S. 109A(3)
) in

whom    the   shares   shall   vest   in     the    event   of   death   of   the

shareholder/joint shareholders, it is contended that the intent is clear

that   such   nomination   would      trump        any   disposition,    whether

testamentary or otherwise.
12 of 42
15.3     It is further contended that
S. 187C
&
S. 109A(3)
of the

Companies Act, 1956 have to be read together, to mean that shares

shall ‘vest’ with the nominee to the exclusion of all other persons

unless nomination is varied or cancelled. It is argued that
S. 187C
itself provides for the mechanism to vary the nomination by making

appropriate declaration and therefore, these provisions are to be

understood as complete codes within themselves. When read together,

no declaration varying the nomination would imply that the intention

was to grant beneficial ownership of the shares to the appellants

through a mechanism of nomination of rights. As Mr. Jayant S.

Salgaonkar’s Will had categorically mentioned all other properties of

the deceased except the shares for which the appellants were named

as nominees, the implication is naturally that the ownership rights of

such shares would pass on to the nominees after the death of the

testator i.e., the appellants’ grandfather.


15.4   The learned counsel for appellants would then refer to Bye-law

9.11 of the
Depositories Act, 1996
which provides for transmission of

securities in case of nomination. Within the provision, the presence of

a non-obstante clause would reasonably imply that the effect of

nomination under the said bye-law is that it would vest in the

                                  13 of 42
nominee a complete title of the shares notwithstanding anything

contained in the testamentary disposition(s) or nomination(s) made

under other laws dealing with securities.
15.5    In addition, it is argued that the nomination for shares i.e.,

Form SH-13 provided under Rule 19(1) of the Companies (Share

Capital & Debentures) Rules, 2014 indicates that the shareholder or

joint shareholder may nominate one or more persons as nominee in

whom all rights of the holder shall vest. Since such nomination can

also be in the favour of a third party or a minor (who can never be a

trustee or executor), it is argued that the legislature under the
Companies Act
intended to give complete ownership to the nominee.


15.6 Mr. Bhandari then refers to Regulation 29A of SEBI (Mutual

Funds) Regulations, 1996, by virtue of which an asset management

company is required to provide the option to its unit holder to

nominate a person in whom all rights of the units shall vest in the

event of the death of the unit holder. It is contended that when a joint

shareholder cannot make any change to the nomination without the

consent of the other joint shareholder (since such shares continue in

the ownership of the remaining shareholders in the event of the death


                                 14 of 42
of one of the shareholders), the same cannot be done by way of a Will

or testamentary disposition or law of succession either.


15.7      Therefore, as per Mr. Bhandari, the interpretation accorded by

the High Court is not in sync with the developments of law intended

by insertion of
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
to the
Companies Act, 1956
. The

ease of succession planning which the legislature intended would be

rendered otiose if the interpretation given by the High Court on the

implication for the nominee under
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of the

Companies Act is accepted.
16.      Canvassing the opposite view, Mr. Rohit Anil Rathi, the learned

counsel appearing for Respondent No. 1 would argue that on account

of the consistent view taken by this Court while interpreting various

legislative         enactments   pertaining      to   nominations   and   more

particularly, in view of the latest interpretation in the case of
Indrani

Wahi v. Registrar of Cooperative Societies and Others
8, departure from

the consistent view is not warranted and ‘vesting’ provided under
S.

109A
would not create a third mode of succession.




8(2016) 6 SCC 440


                                      15 of 42
16.1     The learned counsel submits that the
Companies Act
has

nothing to do with the law of succession. In support of his contention,

Mr. Rathi would refer to
Part IV of the Companies Act, 1956
which

deals with share capitals and debentures as well as
S. 108
to
S. 112
in Part IV which relate to ‘transfer of shares and debentures’. Adverting

to the aforesaid provisions, it is argued that the limited object is to

provide a facility for transfer of shares or debentures through a proper

instrument of transfer and consequential actions such as registration

and in case of grievances, appeal thereof. The introduction of
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
merely provides for facility of nomination aiding in the

process of such transfer. Therefore, no third mode of succession by

way of nomination has been contemplated and the position has

remained unaltered, despite numerous amendments made to the
Companies Act
from time to time.
16.2    On the other hand, the object behind the
Indian Succession

Act, 1925
is to provide for an act to consolidate and amend the law

applicable to intestate and testamentary succession. It is argued by

Mr. Rathi that the legislature in no uncertain terms recognised a

transfer being made by a legal representative as a valid mode of

transfer and the legal representative is vested with the properties of

                                 16 of 42
the deceased as a custodian subject to devolution in terms of the

applicable law i.e., the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
as per
S. 211
within Part VIII of the same.
16.3     Further, it is argued by the learned counsel for the Respondent

No. 1 that the terms ‘transfer’, ‘transmission’ and ‘transmission by

operation of law’ are distinct and convey different meanings, i.e.,

transfer inter vivos in case of the term ‘transfer’ and devolution by

operation of law in case of ‘transmission’. Since these phrases have

been retained even under the
Companies Act, 2013
, there is no

alteration of the position of law on transfer and transmission of

securities. In addition, several provisions provide an unfettered power

to   a   company    to   register   any        person   to    whom   rights    to

shares/debentures had been transmitted by operation of law as a

shareholder/debenture      holder    (second       proviso,
S.   108
of   the

Companies Act, 1956). Moreover, there is an obligation to inform the

transferor, transferee or the person who gave intimation of transfer,

the reason for refusing the registration or transmission by operation

of law (
S. 111
of the Companies Act, 1956).
17 of 42
17.    Mr. Aniruddha Joshi, learned counsel for the Respondent Nos.

4 and 6 to 8 would argue that in light of the consistent view taken by

this Court and most High Courts on the question of nominee not

becoming a full owner of the estate of which he has been nominated

by the deceased owner of the property, the nominee by virtue of
S.

109A
&
S. 109B
of the Companies Act, 1956 cannot impact the rights

of the legal heirs/legatees obtained through application of the

succession law.
17.1   The learned counsel accepts the position that the languages

used in the enactments interpreted by the court are not alike. Some

enactments possess a non-obstante clause while some do not. Few use

the term ‘vest’ while others do not. However, since none of the Acts

define the terms ‘nominee’ and ‘nomination’, it is contended by Mr.

Joshi that those terms are to be considered as ordinarily understood

by persons making the nomination, for their moveable or immovable

properties.
17.2     Mr. Joshi therefore argues that the term ‘vest’ must be

understood in a limited sense and would not necessarily confer

ownership. Addressing the implication of the non-obstante clause in


                                18 of 42
the
Companies Act
, the counsel submits that the same is intended to

offer a discharge to the company and to facilitate the company in their

dealings after the death of the shareholder/securities holder. More

specifically, it is to protect the company from being dragged into a

succession litigation. Therefore, the term ‘vest’ must be interpreted in

a limited sense to the effect that the nominee would deal with the

company but not in the capacity as a title holder but more in the

nature of a trustee holding the estate for the lawful successor(s) and

would be accountable to the successor(s) of the estate. In the same

context, the term ‘vest’ as used in the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
would be understood to mean that neither the administrator nor the

executor would become the owner of the property. Such vesting is

therefore limited to the specific purpose of distribution of the estate

amongst the lawful successor(s).
17.3   The counsel submits that the
Companies Act, 1956
and/or the
Companies Act, 2013
is referable to Entry 43 and/or Entry 44 of List I,

Schedule VII of the Constitution which provide for incorporation,

regulation and winding up of companies. Therefore, the legislation

deals with the limited aspects of birth of a legal entity/company, its

management/the affairs of the company and its death/winding up of

                                 19 of 42
the company. It was argued that the widest interpretation of the same

would still not attract or cover succession or estate planning of an

individual, even if the said person were to be a member of a company.

On the other hand, the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
or
Hindu

Succession Act, 1956
or other enactments pertaining to succession

relate to Entry 5 in List III, Schedule VII of the Constitution. Therefore,

their source of power is entirely different. In light of the same, it is

argued that a third mode of succession not contemplated by laws

would be provided through an interpretative exercise instead of a

legislative exercise.
17.4    As per Mr. Joshi, if the contention of appellants were to be

accepted, nomination would be rendered similar to a ‘will’ or a

‘testamentary disposition’ to the extent of securities, of a particular

company. However, the Indian Succession Act, 1925 prescribes a

detailed judicial process to obtain letters of administration or

succession certificates or probates, as the case may be. Therefore, in

case the contentions of the appellants are accepted, the judicial

process for determination of successors’ rights would not be required

at all and the nominee(s) would be able to claim the estate without

verification of the claimants’ rights by the prescribed judicial process.
20 of 42
17.5 Finally, it is submitted that as per
Article 141
of the

Constitution, only this Court’s interpretation on provisions become

binding. It cannot however be said that the legislature has taken note

of the interpretation of the High Court judgment and accepted the

interpretation.
DISCUSSION
18. Before we proceed any further, it would be appropriate to

indicate the position of the contesting parties vis-à-vis the testator,

Jayant Shivram Salgaonkar.
21 of 42
                                                      R-2/Late Ms. Jayashree
                               Late Jayant Shivram
                                                        Jayant Salgaonkar
                                    Salgaonkar
                                                      (Wife of Testator/ grand
                               (Testator/Nominator)
                                                       mother of appellants)




    Jayraj Jayant                Jayanand Jayant         Jayendra Jayant
Salgaonkar/R-3/S/o             Salgaonkar/R-1/S/o      Salgaonkar/R-4/S/o
Nominator (Father of           Nominator (Uncle of     Nominator (Uncle of
     appellants)                    appellants)             appellants)




R-5/Bharti Salgaonkar                                      R-6/Seema
Wife of R-3 (Mother of                                Salgaonkar/Wife of R-4
     appellants)                                       (Aunt of appellants)




       Appellant-1 - Shakti                                     R-7/Samarth
     Yezdani/Daughter of R-3                                Salgaonkar/Son of R-4
     & R-5 (Granddaughter of                                (Cousin of appellants)
            Nominator)



       Appellant 2 - Lalita
              Laxmi                                         R-8/Siddhi Salgaonkar/
     Salgaonkar/Daughter of                                 Daughter of R-4 (Cousin
            R-3 & R-5                                           of appellants)
        (Granddaughter of
           Nominator)
19. Having considered the submissions and the materials placed

on record, the following issues require our careful attention and

have been discussed at length below:
(i.) The scheme, intent & object behind the Companies (Amendment)
Act, 1999,

(ii.) The implication of the scheme of ‘nomination’ under the
Companies Act, 1956
as well as other comparable legislations,

(iii.) The use of the term ‘vest’ and the presence of the non-obstante
clause within the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
,



                                         22 of 42
  (iv.) Nomination under the
Companies Act, 1956
vis-à-vis law of
  succession.
SCHEME OF THE COMPANIES ACT
20. Both sides’ lawyers have relied on the intent & purpose behind

  the introduction of
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
in the larger context of the
Companies Act, 1956
or the pari materia provisions (
Section 72
,

  Companies Act, 2013) in support of their respective stand. Having

  perused the scheme behind the
Companies Act, 1956
and the

  Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999 that also introduced
S. 109A
&
S. 109B
of the Companies Act, 1956, the relevant extracts are

  reproduced as follows:
“…………….2. (b) to provide for nomination facility to the holders of
        shares, debentures and fixed deposit holders; ……………………………

        …………………….. 3. The corporate sector is going through difficult
        times. The capital market is also at low ebb, which requires immediate
        morale boosting efforts on the part of the Government to promote
        investors' confidence. Besides, the economy needs certain impetus for
        promoting inter-corporate investments considering slow flow of funds in
        new investments. In order to overcome these adverse conditions faced
        by the corporate sector. it was felt that the company should be
        permitted to buy-back their own shares, to make investments or loans
        freely without prior approval of the Central Government, to provide for
        nomination facility to the holders of shares, deposits and debentures
        and also to make provision in law for establishment of Investors
        Education and Protection Fund broadly on the line of provisions
        contained in the Companies Bill, 1997…………………………………..”9

        “…………… Under the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999, the
        shareholders have been allowed to nominate a person for their shares,

9Statement of Objects & Reasons, The Companies (Amendment) Act 1999


                                             23 of 42
         debentures and deposits………. Earlier, holders of shares and
         debentures in a company did not enjoy the nomination facility for
         shares, debentures and deposits, which caused hardships to them.
They were required to obtain a letter of succession from the competent
         authority. The facility of nomination is intended to make the company
         law in tune with the present-day economic policies of liberalisation and
         deregulation. This is also intended to promote investors’ confidence in
         capital market and to promote the climate for inter-corporate investment
         in the country.”10
21. The object behind the introduction of a nomination facility as

   can be appreciated was to provide an impetus to the corporate

   sector in light of the slow investment during those times. In order to

   overcome such conditions, boosting investors’ confidence was

   deemed necessary along with ensuring that company law remained

   in     consonance            with       contemporary    economic    policies     of

   liberalisation. In fact, the provision of nomination facility was made

   in order to ease the erstwhile cumbersome process of obtaining

   multiple letters of succession from various authorities and also to

   promote a better climate for corporate investments within the

   country. In contrast, one must note that ownership of the securities

   is not granted to the nominee nor there is any distinct legislative

   move to revamp the extant position of law, with respect to the same.




10Press Information Bureau, Press Release, July 23, 1999


                                                24 of 42
22. At this juncture, it would hold us in good stead to note what

   the Court succinctly held in Salomon v. Salomon & Co.11:
“In a Court of Law or Equity, what the Legislature intended
              to be done or not to be done can only be legitimately
              ascertained from that which it has chosen to enact, either in
              express words or by reasonable and necessary implication."
In this context, the act of the legislature to enact
S. 109A
in the
Companies Act, 1956
and provide a nomination facility to holders

   also aids in ascertaining the intent.
The Companies Act, 1956
and

   subsequent amendments as parliamentary legislations are rooted in

   Entry 43, List I of Seventh Schedule, which deals with incorporation,

   regulation and winding up of corporations. There is no mention of

   nomination and/or succession within the provisions or the

   statement of objects & reasons or any other material pertaining to

   the
Companies Act, 1956
. Same is also not seen in subsequent

   amendments to the Act.
23. Reading the provision of nomination within the
Companies

   Act, 1956
with the broadest possible contours, it is not possible to

   say that the same deals with the matter of succession in any

   manner. There is no material to show that the intent of the


11(1897) AC 22, 38


                                       25 of 42
legislature behind introducing a method of nomination through the

Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999 was to confer absolute title of

ownership of property/shares, on the said nominee.
24. In fact, while interpreting other enactments that are similar in

nature by virtue of the fact that the provision of nomination within

the statute begins with a non-obstante clause and/or is armed with

the term ‘vest’ such as the
(Banking Regulation Act, 1949
, the
Government Savings Certificate Act, 1959
and/or the
Employees

Provident Fund Act, 1952
), multiple courts have rejected the

argument that the nominee would become the absolute owner to

the exclusion of the legal heirs. To hold otherwise would, in our

opinion, exceed the scope and extent of
S. 109A
of the Companies

Act, 1956.
NOMINATION UNDER VARIOUS LEGISLATIONS
25. In an illuminating list of precedents, this Court as well as

several High Courts have dealt with the concept of ‘nomination’

under legislations like the
Government Savings Certificate Act
1959,

the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949
, the
Life Insurance Act, 1939
and

the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,


                              26 of 42
  1952. It would be apposite to refer to what the Court said on

  nomination, in reference to these legislations:
Case Law/Precedent                          Held
Sarbati Devi & Anr. v. Usha Nomination under
S. 39
of the Insurance Act
Devi12                      1938 is subject to the claim of heirs of the
                            assured under the law of succession.
Nozer Gustad Commissariat Nomination under
S. 10(2)
of the EPF & Misc.
v. Central Bank of India13 Provisions Act 1952 cannot be made in favour
                           of a non-family person. Relied upon
Sarbati
                           Devi
(supra) to state that the principles
                           therein were applicable to the
Employees
                           Provident Funds Act
as well and not merely
                           restricted to the
Insurance Act
.
Vishin N. Khanchandani & Nominee entitled to receive the sum due on
Anr.    v.      Vidya  L.
the savings certificate under
S. 6(1)
of the
14
Khanchandani              Govt. Savings Certificate Act 1959, but cannot
                          utilise it. In fact, the nominee may retain the
                          same for those entitled to it under the
                          relevant law of succession.
Ram Chander Talwar & Anr. Nomination made under provisions of S. 45ZA
v. Devender Kumar Talwar & of the Banking Regulation Act 1949 entitled
Ors.15                     the nominee to receive the deposit amount on
                           the death of the depositor.
26. A consistent view appears to have been taken by the courts,

  while interpreting the related provisions of nomination under

  different statutes. It is clear from the referred judgments that the

  nomination so made would not lead to the nominee attaining

12(1984) 1 SCC 424

13(1993) 1 Mah LJ 228

14(2000) 6 SCC 724

15(2010) 10 SCC 671


                                   27 of 42
absolute title over the subject property for which such nomination

was made. In other words, the usual mode of succession is not to

be impacted by such nomination. The legal heirs therefore have not

been excluded by virtue of nomination.
27. The presence of the three elements i.e., the term ‘vest’, the

provision excluding others as well as a non-obstante clause under
S.109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 have not persuaded us in the

interpretation to be accorded vis-à-vis nomination, in any different

manner.   Different   legislations   with   provisions   pertaining   to

nomination that have been a subject of adjudication earlier before

courts, have little or no similarity with respect to the language used

or the provisions contained therein.
While the Government Savings

Certificates Act, 1959
,
Banking Regulation Act, 1949
and
Public

Debts Act, 1944
contain a non-obstante clause, the
Insurance Act,

1939
and
Cooperative Societies Act, 1912
do not.
28. Similarly, there are variations with respect to the word ‘vest’

being present in some legislations (the
Employees Provident Fund

Act, 1952
) and absent in others (the
Insurance Act, 1939
, the
Cooperative Societies Act, 1912
). Looking at the dissimilarities and


                               28 of 42
the fact that uniform definition is not available relating to the rights

of ‘nominee’ and/or whether such ‘nomination’ bestows absolute

ownership over nominees, it is only appropriate that the terms are

considered as ordinarily understood by a reasonable person making

nominations,    with   respect    to    their   movable   or   immovable

properties. A reasonable individual arranging for the disposition of

his property is expected to undertake any such nomination, bearing

in mind the interpretation on the effect of nomination, as given by

courts consistently, for a number of years. The concept of

nomination if interpreted by departing from the well-established

manner would, in our view, cause major ramifications and create

significant impact on disposition of properties left behind by

deceased nominators.
29. The legislative intent of creating a scheme of nomination under

the
Companies Act, 1956
in our opinion is not intended to grant

absolute rights of ownership in favour of the nominee merely

because the provision contains three elements i.e., the term ‘vest’, a

non-obstante clause and the phrase ‘to the exclusion of others’,

which are absent in other legislations, that also provide for

nomination.
29 of 42
    EFFECT OF ‘VEST’ IN
S. 109A
OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 & BYE-LAW

                      9.11.1 OF THE DEPOSITORIES ACT, 1996
30. The appellants’ case is grounded in the interpretation of the

  term ‘vest’ in
Section 109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 and Bye-law

  9.11.1 under the
Depositories Act, 1996
, and according to them, the

  use of the term ‘vest’ indicates the intent to bestow ownership of the

  securities upon the nominee on the shareholder’s death. To address

  the aforesaid argument, it is apposite to note how the term ‘vest’ or

  ‘vesting’ has been defined by the courts, from time to time.
31.
In
Fruits & Vegetable Merchant Union v. Delhi Improvement

  Trust,16
the Supreme Court held that the term ‘vest’ has a variety of

  meanings dependent on the context within which it operates.
“11. . . . . . . In this chapter occur
Sections 45
to
48
which provide for
        the vesting of certain properties in the Trust.
Section 45
lays down the
        conditions and the procedure according to which any building, street,
        square or other land vested in the Municipality or Notified Area
        Committee may become vested in a Trust. Similarly,
Section 46
deals
        with the vesting in the Trust of properties like a street or a square as
        are not vested in a Municipality or Notified Area Committee. These
        sections, as also
Sections 47
and
48
make provision for compensation
        and for empowering the Trust to deal with such property vested in it.
        The vesting of such property is only for the purpose of executing any
        improvement scheme which it has undertaken and not with a view to
        clothing it with complete title. As will presently appear, the term
        “vesting” has a variety of meaning which has to be gathered from the
16AIR 1957 SC 344


                                         30 of 42
        context in which it has been used. It may mean full ownership, or only
        possession for a particular purpose, or clothing the authority with
        power to deal with the property as the agent of another person or
        authority.”                                      (Emphasis supplied)
32.
In
Vatticherukuru Village Panchayat v. Nori Venkatarama

Deekshithulu,17
this Court considered the question of the effect of

‘vesting’ under S. 85 of the AP Gram Panchayat Act, 1964 of the

water works & appurtenant land on the Gram Panchayat. It was

held that the word ‘vesting’ in
S. 85
did not confer absolute title

on the Gram Panchayat. Even after vesting, the Government, in

appropriate cases, was amenable to place restrictions on the

Gram Panchayat on enjoyment of such waterworks & lands. It is

apposite to refer to the discussion at para 10, wherein the varied

meaning of the term ‘vest’ was considered:
“10. The word ‘vest’ clothes varied colours from the context and situation in
    which the word came to be used in a statute or rule. Chamber's Mid-
    Century Dictionary at p. 1230 defines ‘vesting’ in the legal sense “to settle,
    secure, or put in fixed right of possession; to endow, to descend, devolve or
    to take effect, as a right”. In Black's Law Dictionary, (5th edn. at p. 1401)
    the meaning of the word ‘vest’ is given as : “to give an immediate, fixed
    right of present or future enjoyment; to accrue to; to be fixed; to take effect;
    to clothe with possession; to deliver full possession of land or of an estate;
    to give seisin; to enfeoff”. In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, (4th edn., Vol. 5
    at p. 2938), the word ‘vested’ was defined in several senses. At p. 2940 in
    item 12 it is stated thus “as to the interest acquired by public bodies,
    created for a particular purpose, in works such as embankments which are
171991 Supp (2) SCC 228


                                         31 of 42
    ‘vested’ in them by statute”, see
Port of London Authority v. Canvey Island
    Commissioners
[(1932) 1 Ch 446] in which it was held that the statutory
    vesting was to construct the sea wall against inundation or damages etc.
    and did not acquire fee simple. Item 4 at p. 2939, the word ‘vest’, in the
    absence of a context, is usually taken to mean “vest in interest rather than
    vest in possession”. In item 8 to ‘vest’, “generally means to give the
    property in”. Thus the word ‘vest’ bears variable colour taking its content
    from     the    context    in    which      it  came     to    be     used.”
    (Emphasis supplied)
33.
In
Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Hindustan

Petroleum Corpn.,18
it was observed that the term ‘vesting’ is

capable of bearing the meaning of limited vesting, in title as well

as possession, and is referrable to the context and situation

within which it operates. The above would suggest that the word

‘vest’ has variable meaning and the mere use of the word ‘vest’ in

a statute does not confer absolute title over the subject matter.
34.     Further, the term ‘vesting’ is also used in other contexts

such as the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
wherein
S. 211
vests the

deceased’s estate in the administrator or executor, although

neither become the owner of the said property but merely hold

the same until it is distributed among the lawful successor(s).




18(2001) 8 SCC 143


                                       32 of 42
The term ‘vests’ in
S. 109A
of the Companies Act 1956 is therefore

required to be interpreted in these logical lines.
35. In the context of the facts of the present case,
S. 109A
of the

Companies Act (pari materia to
S. 72
of the Companies Act, 2013)

provides for vesting of shares/debentures of a share/debenture

holder unto his nominee ‘in the event of his death’. Similarly, Bye-

law 9.11.1 under the
Depositories Act, 1996
provides for ‘vesting’

of the securities unto the nominee on the death of the beneficial

owner. Applying the law
laid down in
the aforenoted decisions of

this Court, the use of the word ‘vest’ does not by itself, confer

ownership of the shares/securities in question, to the nominee.

The vesting of the shares/securities in the nominee under the
Companies Act, 1956
and the
Depositories Act, 1996
is only for a

limited purpose, i.e., to enable the Company to deal with the

securities   thereof,   in   the   immediate    aftermath   of   the

shareholder’s death and to avoid uncertainty as to the holder of

the securities, which could hamper the smooth functioning of the

affairs of the company. Therefore, the contrary argument of the

appellants on this aspect is rejected.
33 of 42
                       EFFECT OF NON-OBSTANTE CLAUSE
36.     In a similar vein, the appellants contend that the ‘non-

obstante clause’ in
S. 109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 confers

overriding effect to the nomination over any other law and

disposition, testamentary or otherwise, and entitles the nominee

absolute rights over the shares/securities. Such a clause was

also found in the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949
and the
Government           Savings   Certificate   Act,   1959
.   However,      while

interpreting the provision concerning nomination in those

enactments, this Court in Talwar (supra) rejected the argument

that the nominee would be the absolute owner of the subject

matter, to the exclusion of the legal heirs, because of the non

obstante clause.
In addition, in
Vishin N. Khanchandani v. Vidya

Lachmandas Khanchandani19
, it was held that the non-obstante

clause is to be applied in view of the scheme and object of the

enactment in question. The relevant extract on the ruling is

reproduced herein:
“11. It is contended on behalf of the appellants that the non obstante
     clause in
Section 6
excludes all other persons, including the legal heirs
     of the deceased holder, to claim any right over the sum paid on account

19(2000) 6 SCC 724


                                        34 of 42
      of the National Savings Certificates, to the nominee. There is no doubt
      that by the non obstante clause the legislature devises means which are
      usually applied to give overriding effect to certain provisions over some
      contrary provisions that may be found either in the same enactment or
      some other statute. In other words, such a clause is used to avoid the
      operation and effect of all contrary provisions. The phrase is equivalent
      to showing that the Act shall be no impediment to the measure
      intended. To attract the applicability of the phrase, the whole of the
      section, the scheme of the Act and the objects and reasons for which
      such an enactment is made have to be kept in mind.”

                                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
37.       It is settled law that general words and phrases used in a

statute, regardless of their wide ambit, must be interpreted taking

into account the objects of the statute. The clauses & sections

within a statute are not to be read in isolation, but their textual

interpretation is determined by the scheme of the entire statute. 20

Notably, a non-obstante clause is to be considered on the basis of

the context within which it is used, as has also been observed in

R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka.21 Applying the aforestated

rule of interpretation, the non-obstante clause in
S. 109A
of the

Companies Act, 1956 should also be interpreted keeping in mind

the scheme of the
Companies Act, 1956
and the intent of

introduction of nomination facility under
S. 109A
& S.
109B
of the

Companies Act, 1956 vide the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999

20Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.
, (1987) 1 SCC 424
21(1992) 1 SCC 335


                                                 35 of 42
wherein emphasis was laid on building investor confidence and

bringing the company law in tune with policies of liberalisation &

deregulation. With this backdrop, it can be concluded that the

use of the non-obstante clause, serves a singular purpose of

allowing the company to vest the shares upon the nominee to the

exclusion of any other person, for the purpose of discharge of its

liability against diverse claims by the legal heirs of the deceased

shareholder. This arrangement is until the legal heirs have settled

the affairs of the testator and are ready to register the

transmission of shares, by due process of succession law.
38.   As per Bye-law 9.11.7 of the
Depositories Act, 1996
, the non-

obstante clause confers overriding effect to the nomination over

any other disposition/nomination ‘for the purposes of dealing with

the securities lying to the credit of deceased nominating person(s)

in any manner’. Therefore, the purpose of invoking such a non-

obstante clause is clearly delineated and limited to the extent of

enabling the depository to deal with the securities, in the

immediate aftermath of the securities holder’s death. The upshot

of the above discussion is that the non-obstante clause in both
S.

109A(3)
of the Companies Act, 1956 & Bye-law 9.11.7 of the

                                36 of 42
Depositories Act, 1996
cannot be held to exclude the legal heirs

from their rightful claim over the securities, against the nominee.


NO THIRD LINE OF SUCCESSION CONTEMPLATED UNDER COMPANIES ACT
39. The appellants also contend that a nomination validly made

under
S. 109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 and Bye-law 9.11 of the
Depositories Act, 1996
constitutes a ‘statutory testament’ that

overrides testamentary/intestate succession. It is worth noting

that the argument of nomination as a ‘statutory testament’ in

respect of instruments such as life insurance policies, government

savings certificates, provident fund etc. were considered and

emphatically rejected by this Court in multiple rulings.
40.
In
Sarbati Devi
(supra) this Court held that nomination

under
S. 39
of the Life Insurance Act, 1938 does not contemplate a

third line of succession styled as a ‘statutory testament’ and any

amount paid to a nominee on the policy holder’s death forms a

part of the estate of the deceased policy holder and devolves upon

his/her heirs, as per testamentary or intestate succession.
Further, in Ram Chander Talwar (supra), while discussing the

rights of a nominee of a deceased depositor (S. 45-ZA(2) Banking


                                 37 of 42
Regulation Act, 1949
), this court concluded that the right to

receive the money lying in the depositor’s account was to be

conferred on the nominee but the nominee would not become the

owner of such deposits. The said deposit is a part of the deceased

depositor’s estate and is subject to the laws of succession, that

governs the depositor.
41.    The appellants’ have contended that nominations under
S.

109A
of the Companies Act, 1956 & Bye-law 9.11 of the
Depositories Act, 1996
suggest the intention of the shareholder, to

bequeath the shares/securities absolutely to the nominee, to the

exclusion of any other persons (including legal representatives)

and    constitutes   a   ‘statutory    testament’.   However,   aforesaid

argument is not acceptable for the following reasons:
a.
The Companies Act, 1956
does not contemplate a
        ‘statutory testament’ that stands over and above the laws
        of succession,

  b.
The Companies Act, 1956
as iterated above is concerned
        with regulating the affairs of corporates and is not
        concerned with laws of succession.
c.    The ‘statutory testament’ by way of nomination is not
        subject to the same rigours as is applicable to the
        formation & validity of a will under the succession laws,
        for instance,
S. 63
of the Indian Succession Act, wherein
        the rules for execution of a Will are laid out.
38 of 42
42. Therefore, the argument by the appellants of nomination as

a ‘statutory testament’ cannot be countenanced simply because

the
Companies Act, 1956
does not deal with succession nor does

it override the laws of succession. It is beyond the scope of the

company’s   affairs   to   facilitate   succession   planning   of   the

shareholder. In case of a will, it is upon the administrator or

executor under the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
, or in case of

intestate succession, the laws of succession to determine the line

of succession.
CONCLUSION
43. Consistent interpretation is given by courts on the question

of nomination, i.e., upon the holder’s death, the nominee would

not get an absolute title to the subject matter of nomination, and

those would apply to the
Companies Act, 1956
(pari materia

provisions in
Companies Act, 2013
) and the
Depositories Act, 1996
as well.
39 of 42
44. An individual dealing with estate planning or succession

laws understands nomination to take effect in a particular

manner and expects the implication to be no different for

devolution of securities per se. Therefore, an interpretation

otherwise would inevitably lead to confusion and possibly

complexities, in the succession process, something that ought to

be eschewed. At this stage, it would be prudent to note the

significance of a settled principle of law.
In
Shanker Raju v. Union

of India
, the Court held:22

        “10. It is a settled principle of law that a judgment, which has held the
        field for a long time, should not be unsettled. The doctrine of stare
        decisis is expressed in the maxim stare decisis et non quieta movere,
        which means “to stand by decisions and not to disturb what is settled”.
        Lord Coke aptly described this in his classic English version as “those
        things which have been so often adjudged ought to rest in peace”. The
        underlying logic of this doctrine is to maintain consistency and avoid
        uncertainty. The guiding philosophy is that a view which has held the
        field for a long time should not be disturbed only because another view
        is possible.”
45. The        vesting   of   securities    in     favour   of   the   nominee

contemplated under
S. 109A
of the Companies Act 1956 (pari

materia
S. 72
of Companies Act, 2013) & Bye-Law 9.11.1 of
Depositories Act, 1996
is for a limited purpose i.e., to ensure that

there exists no confusion pertaining to legal formalities that are to

22(2011) 2 SCC 132


                                        40 of 42
be undertaken upon the death of the holder and by extension, to

protect the subject matter of nomination from any protracted

litigation until the legal representatives of the deceased holder are

able to take appropriate steps. The object of introduction of

nomination facility vide the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999

was only to provide an impetus to the investment climate and

ease the cumbersome process of obtaining various letters of

succession, from different authorities upon the shareholder’s

death.
46. Additionally, there is a complex layer of commercial

considerations that are to be taken into account while dealing

with the issue of nomination pertaining to companies or until

legal heirs are able to sufficiently establish their right of

succession to the company. Therefore, offering a discharge to the

entity once the nominee is in picture is quite distinct from

granting ownership of securities to nominees instead of the legal

heirs. Nomination process therefore does not override the

succession laws. Simply said, there is no third mode of

succession that the scheme of the
Companies Act, 1956
(pari




                                 41 of 42
materia provisions in
Companies Act, 2013
) and
Depositories Act,

1996
aims or intends to provide.
47. Upon a careful perusal of the provisions within the
Companies Act
, it is clear that it does not deal with the law of

succession. Therefore, a departure from this settled position of

law is not at all warranted. The impugned decision takes the

correct view. The appeal is accordingly dismissed without any

order on cost.
...……………………J.
                                            [HRISHIKESH ROY]


                                            ………….…………..J.
                                             [PANKAJ MITHAL]
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 14, 2023




                               42 of 42