[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajpal vs State Of Rajasthan on 12 December, 2023
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
C.T. Ravikumar
1

                                                                                  REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1089                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 15585 OF 2023


        RAJPAL                                                              Petitioner(s)

                                                              VERSUS

        STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                                  Respondent(s)



                                                    O R D E R
1.                  After arguing for some time, learned counsel for the

        petitioner                 sought    permission       to   withdraw    this   special

        leave                 petition.      Recording       the   said    submission,     this

        special leave petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
2.                  However,   on   going    through       the    pleadings   in   the

        special leave petition, it is evident that the case of

        the petitioner is founded on parity in the sense that his

        co-accused was granted bail by a coordinate bench of the

        High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur.

        The impugned judgment would reveal that even after going

        through the order dated 29.8.2023 passed in the case of
Signature Not Verified
co-accused by the Coordinate Bench did not reveal that
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2024.01.05
16:46:03 IST
Reason:
the judgment of this Court in
Narcotics Control Bureau

        Vs. Mohit Aggarwal
reported in 2022 (6) WLC 58 (SC).
2
3.   In view of the grant of permission to withdraw the

special leave petition, we do not think it necessary to

delve into the matter further.               However, we are of the

view that the concern of this Court, in deciding bail

applications arising out of the same FIR before different

Benches of the High Court, which was deprecated by this

Court earlier, has to be reiterated.
4.   A three-Judge Bench of this Court in SLP(Criminal)

No. 7203/2023 as per order dated 31.7.2023, took note of

such a situation and observed as follows:-
7. We have come across various matters from the

     High Court of Allahabad, wherein matters arising

     out of the same FIR are placed before different

     Judges.   This     leads   to          anomalous     situation.
Inasmuch as some of the learned Judges grant bail

     and some other Judges refuse to grant bail, even

     when the role 3 attributed to the applicants is

     almost similar.
8. We find that it will be appropriate that all

     the   matters    pertaining       to    one   FIR    are   listed

     before    the    same   Judge          so     that    there    is

     consistency in the orders passed.
3
5.   After making such observations,         this Court issued a

direction to the Registrar (Judicial) of this Court to

communicate the said order to the Registrar (Judicial) of

the High Court of Allahabad.
6.   Now, taking note of the fact that such situations are

occurring in different High Courts, we are of the view

that a further direction is to be issued in that regard.

The Registrar (Judicial) of the Registry of this Court is

directed   to   communicate   this   order    to   the   Registrar

(Judicial) of all the High Courts and they are directed

to place the same before the Chief Justice of the High

Court for consideration.
..................,J.
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR)




                                        ..................,J.
(SANJAY KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 12, 2023.