[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Odisha Forest Development Corporation ... vs M/S Anupam Traders on 28 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1909, (2019) 17 SCALE 531, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2717
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
A.S. Bopanna
,
R. Banumathi
REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9083             OF 2019
                              (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.17627 of 2019)


                         Odisha Forest Development Corporation    …Appellant(s)
                         Ltd.

                                                 Versus


                         M/s Anupam Traders & Anr.            …. Respondent(s)


                                                   WITH

                         C.A.NO.    9084   /2019 @ SLP(C)No.18726/2019

                         C.A.NO.   9088    /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18575/2019

                         C.A.NO.    9089     /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18846/2019

                         C.A.NO.   9091       /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18664/2019

                         C.A.NO. 9092        /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18876/2019
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2019.11.28
                         C.A.NO.   9093        /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18916/2019
14:15:48 IST
Reason:



                         C.A.NO.    9094       /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18939/2019

          Page 1 of 26
     C.A.NO. 9095              /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18890/2019

      C.A.NO.      9096        /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18800/2019

      C.A.NO.         9097     /2019 @ SLP(C) No.18945/2019

      C.A.NO.       9098       /2019 @ SLP(C) No. 24167/2019

      C.A.NO.       9099       /2019 @ SLP(C) No.24166/2019



                             JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
Leave granted.
2.         The appellants in eleven of these appeals are the

    Odisha Forest Development Corporation Ltd. (“OFDC

    Ltd.” for short) and the State of Odisha is the appellant in

    two other appeals.         The appeals filed by the State of

    Odisha relate to the same orders in respect of the same

    private      respondents    who   were   the   writ   petitioners

    regarding       whom     the   Odisha    Forest   Development

    Corporation Ltd. has also filed the appeal.             Further,

    though separate orders passed by the High Court in
Page 2 of 26
different writ petitions relating to various petitioners are

    assailed in all these appeals, the issue involved is the

    same.        Hence all these appeals were clubbed, heard

    together and are accordingly disposed of by this common

    judgment. For the purpose of narration of facts, the case

    as in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No.17627/2019,

    titled Odisha Forest Development Corporation Ltd. vs.

    M/s Anupam Traders & Anr. is taken note, which reads

    as hereunder.
3.         The appellant OFDC Ltd. issued an e­tender

    notification dated 22.11.2016 inviting offers online from

    intending purchasers for advance sale of phal Kendu leaf

    (KL) of 2017 crop as per the ‘lots’ indicated in the

    notification.        The private respondent had responded to

    the notification and made its offer. The bid was opened

    on 07.12.2016.               The private respondent being the

    successful bidder was required to execute an agreement

    and        deposit     the    provisional     security    deposit   of

    Rs.5,00,000/­          (Rupees    Five      Lakh).       The   private

    respondent           herein    executed     an   agreement      dated
Page 3 of 26
20.01.2017.          In terms of the agreement, on the actual

    quantity of leaves collected, the additional security

    deposit covering 25% of the purchase price of the lot was

    to   be      deposited    before    31.05.2017.   The   private

    respondent in the instant case was therefore required to

    deposit        the      differential   security   amount     of

    Rs.27,14,765/­less,           the      security   amount     of

    Rs.5,00,000/­ (Rupees Five Lakh) already paid.
4.         In view of the requirement to pay the same before

    31.05.2017, the private respondent addressed a letter

    dated 02.06.2017 seeking extension of time to pay the

    said security amount.               The extension sought was

    declined by the appellant through the communication

    dated 06.06.2017.           Since the amount required to be

    deposited was not made, the appellant cancelled the

    agreement dated 20.01.2017 by issuing the notice dated

    21.08.2017.          Since such cancellation would be at the

    ‘cost and risk’ of the private respondent, the lot was to be

    put to re­tender. The appellant accordingly proceeded to
Page 4 of 26
issue a fresh e­tender notification on 22.08.2017 for sale

    of the same ‘lots’ of the phal Kendu leaves.
5.         At that stage the private respondent aggrieved by

    extension of time not being granted, filed the writ petition

    in W.P.(C) No.11498/2017, the same was withdrawn and

    a writ petition bearing W.P.(C) No.18718/2017 was filed

    wherein the order dated 21.08.2017 passed by the

    appellant cancelling the agreement dated 20.01.2017 as

    also the subsequent Auction Notice dated 22.08.2017,

    were assailed.      In the said writ petition, interim order

    against the subsequent auction through notice dated

    22.08.2017 was sought. While considering the same, the

    High Court while allowing the appellant to proceed with

    the    subsequent      tender   process,   had   stayed   the

    finalization of the sale subject to the private respondent

    herein depositing an amount of Rs.20,00,000/­ (Rupees

    Twenty Lakhs only) within one week with the appellant

    herein.       The said order was passed on 08.09.2017

    wherein it was further directed that the said amount

    would be kept in a separate deposit by the appellant.
Page 5 of 26
The application filed by the appellant herein seeking

    vacation of the interim order was considered and at that

    stage since the vacation of the stay was not opposed by

    the private respondent herein, it was vacated on

    28.03.2018 due to which the subsequent sale was

    completed on 24.04.2018. The private respondent herein

    thereafter sought leave to withdraw the writ petition in

    W.P.(C) No.18718/2017 thereby giving up the challenge

    to the cancellation of the auction process wherein the

    private respondent had taken part and also the challenge

    to the subsequent auction which had been conducted by

    the appellant. The High Court while disposing of the writ

    petition as withdrawn, despite objection put forth by the

    appellant herein directed refund of the deposit which was

    made pursuant to its interim order dated 08.09.2017.

    The appellant herein is, therefore, aggrieved by the order

    dated 30.04.2019 only to the extent whereby the High

    Court has directed refund of the amount available with

    the appellant.
Page 6 of 26
6.         The facts in the connected appeals is to the same

    effect except the variation in the ‘lot’ number, quantity of

    Kendu leaves which was purchased by each of the private

    respondents therein and the number of the writ petition

    filed before the High Court. The names of the different

    tenderers in the individual writ petitions that were filed

    and the quantum of amount ordered to be deposited by

    the High Court will be detailed in later part of this

    judgment.       However, in all the cases the writ petitions

    have been withdrawn and the refund of the deposit

    ordered is directed to be refunded. In that view, the basic

    contention which is common, on consideration would

    answer all the appeals herein.
7.        In that backdrop we have heard Mr. S.K. Padhi,

    learned senior advocate for the appellants – OFDC Ltd,

    Ms. Anindita Pujari, learned advocate for the appellant

    State of Odisha and Mr. Aditya Kumar Choudhary,

    learned advocate for the private respondents in all the

    appeals and perused the materials on record in the

    appeals.
Page 7 of 26
8.         As noticed, though the private respondents herein

    had filed the writ petition at the stage when the earlier

    agreement entered into pursuant to the tender process in

    their favour had been cancelled and a subsequent

    auction was notified, keeping in view the fact that all the

    private respondents herein had chosen to withdraw the

    writ petitions, which was permitted by the High Court

    through the order dated 30.4.2019, the consideration of

    that aspect is not required to be made. The only question

    for consideration herein is with regard to the correctness

    or otherwise of direction issued by the High court to the

    appellant herein to refund the amount which was a

    deposit made by the private respondents with the

    appellant       pursuant    to   the   interim   order   dated

    08.09.2017.
9.         The learned senior advocate for the appellant while

    contending that the High court was not justified in

    ordering the refund has taken us through the tender

    notification dated 22.11.2016, as also the purchase

    agreement dated 20.1.2017. In that light, it is pointed out
Page 8 of 26
that apart from the Earnest Money Deposit (“EMD” for

    short) to enable a tenderer to participate in the tender

    process, the successful purchaser was required to

    initially     pay   the   provisional   security   deposit   of

    Rs.5,00,000/­ (Rupees Five Lakhs only) and after final

    collection of the leaves the differential amount to the

    extent of 25% of the purchase price was to be paid within

    31.05.2017. It is contended that if the said amount was

    not paid, the security amount already paid was to be

    forfeited and if any further recoveries are to be made, the

    appellant had the liberty to do so.
10.        In that light, it is contended that in the instant

    facts only the initial deposit of Rs.5,00,000/­ (Rupees

    Five Lakhs only) was made, apart from the EMD. The

    default was committed relating to payment of 25% of the

    additional security amount which was to be made within

    the time frame. Since, the extension of time as requested

    was rejected and the amount was not deposited, the

    appellant was left with no other alternative but to

    terminate the agreement and forfeit the security deposit.
Page 9 of 26
It is the contention of the learned senior advocate that

    though the High Court has not specifically indicated

    deposit to be made as the additional security deposit, the

    extent of deposit ordered in each of the cases makes it

    clear that it is relatable to the extent of the additional

    security amount which was to be deposited. In that light,

    he contends that when the writ petition was not pressed,

    the termination of the agreement would remain valid and

    in such circumstance since the clause contained in the

    agreement permits the forfeiture of the preliminary

    security deposit, the direction to refund the same was not

    justified.   On the other hand, the High Court ought to

    have allowed retention of the said amount and the liberty

    to recover additional amount, if any, should have been

    left open. Hence, he contends that the direction issued by

    the High Court to refund the amount is not justified.
11.     The learned advocate for the respondent would

    also refer to the very same clauses as contained in the

    agreement. He contends that the private respondents

    herein were before the High Court seeking to exercise
Page 10 of 26
their right by assailing the order of termination so as to

    complete the transaction. With reference to the objection

    statement, the learned advocate would contend that there

    were circumstances which indicated that the price offered

    by the private respondent was at higher rate when the

    panchayat had fixed a lower price for the Kendu leaf. It is

    his contention that, in any event, the forfeiture can only

    be to the extent of the amount that had already been

    deposited, namely, the EMD and the initial deposit

    regarding which the private respondents have not made a

    grievance. On referring to the tender conditions as also

    the clauses contained in the agreement, he contends that

    as per Clause 9 (iv) even if the additional security is not

    deposited or if any loss is suffered, the provision made

    therein is to recover the amount by way of initiating legal

    proceedings or through the
Orissa Public Demand

    Recovery Act
which option has been left open to the

    appellant by the High Court and as such the appellant

    cannot make out any grievance. It is his contention that

    the very fact that the High Court while granting the

    interim order, though had directed deposit of the amount
Page 11 of 26
had further directed the appellant to keep it in a separate

    fixed deposit, will indicate that the said amount had no

    reference whatsoever to the additional security deposit

    but it was only to establish the bonafide of the private

    respondent who was the writ petitioner. Hence, in that

    circumstance when the High Court has directed refund

    the order does not call for interference.
12.     In the light of the above, what is required to be

    noticed at the outset is the provision relating to the

    security deposit contained in Clause 9 of the tender

    notification on which reliance was placed by both sides,

    which reads as hereunder:
“Security Deposit
(i)   The successful purchaser shall have to pay
                  provisional Security Deposit @ Rs.5.00 lakhs
                  (Rupees Five Lakh) per lot(s) within 21 [Twenty­
                  one] days of issue of ratification order. If the
                  provisional security deposit is not paid at
                  Corporate Office within 21 days from the date of
                  issue of ratification order, the sale of the lot(s) will
                  be cancelled and the EMD/part S.D. will be
                  forfeited to OFDC.         However in exceptional
                  circumstances, the period of 21 days may be
                  extended for a further period of 7 (seven) days by
                  the Director (C)/Managing Director of OFDC Ltd.
by depositing of non­refundable fees of Rs.2000/­
                  (Rupees two thousand only) by the purchaser.
(ii)   After final collection of leaves, the purchaser has to
                   pay the differential amount up to the extent of 25%
                   of Purchase price of the lot towards final Security
                   deposit within 31.5.2017, failing which it will be
Page 12 of 26
considered as violation of purchaser’s agreement
                    and the provisional security deposit will be
                    forfeited.
(iii)   The Security Deposit can be adjusted either wholly
                    or in part, as the case may be, by the Director
                    (C)/Managing Director, OFDC Ltd. towards any
                    amount recoverable from the purchaser, including
                    the purchase price under provisions of the Acts,
                    Rules & Notification of Govt., Purchaser’s
                    agreement and the terms and conditions of the
                    sale notice and all such deductions shall have to
                    be made good by the purchaser by depositing an
                    equal amount within 15 days of issue of the notice
                    to that effect.
(iv)    If the dues to be recovered from the purchaser
                    exceed the amount of security deposit, the amount
                    in excess shall unless made good to the
                    Corporation within 15 days from the date of issue
                    of the notice to that effect, be recoverable by way of
                    initiating legal proceedings or through
Orissa
                    Public Demand Recovery Act
1962 (Orissa Act­I of
                    1963).”
13.     Similarly, the agreement entered into between the

    parties, apart from containing a similar clause for

    security deposit as at Clause No.11, also contains Clause

    13 relating to the termination of the agreement. The said

    clause reads as under: ­

       “13. Termination of Purchaser’s Agreement
(i)    If the purchaser fails to pay the first instalment
            before the due date of 2nd instalment or 2nd instalment
            before due date of the 3rd instalment or third instalment
            within 15 days after its due date or any other amount
            due or to comply with any of the provisions of the
            agreement, the Director (C)/Managing Director of OFDC
            Ltd. may at his discretion and without prejudice to any
            other right and remedies that may be available to him,
            terminate this agreement after giving 15 days notice and
Page 13 of 26
an opportunity of hearing to the purchaser and blacklist
            the purchaser for a period up to 3 years.
(ii)   The order of termination of the agreement shall be
            delivered in person to the purchaser or sent by
            Registered/Speed Post. The termination shall be effective
            from the date of order terminating the agreement.
(iii)  On termination of the agreement the Corporation
            shall be entitled to:
a. Forfeit the provisional as well as final security
                deposit in full.
b. Forfeit the undelivered stocks of Kenduleaves in
                storage in favour of the Corporation for which payment
                has been made.
c. Cancel the customer registration with OFDC along
                with forfeiture of registration fees.
d. (i) Sell the Kenduleaves in the godown for which
                   amount due has not been paid and undelivered
                   stock of Kenduleaves in storage which has been
                   forfeited in favour of the Corporation under
                   condition 13 (iii) (b) and recover the loss. The
                   same shall also be recoverable by encashment of
                   the Bank guarantee, if any such guarantee has
                   been furnished by the purchaser under clause­7,
                   as also from sale of such leaves which has been
                   forfeited in favour of the Corporation under
                   condition 13(iii)(b). Provided if the lot is not resold
                   in the first sale after issue of order of termination
                   of agreement, loss will be recovered from the
                   purchaser treating the value of the lot as zero.
                   However, if the lot is sold in subsequent sale, the
                   amount of sale price recovered as such shall be
                   adjustable against balance amount of loss or be
                   refunded to the purchaser as the case may be.
                   However no interest will be payable to the
                   purchaser on such amount.           In the event of
                   cancellation of purchaser’s agreement the loss to
                   be recovered from 1st purchaser will be computed
                   as follows: ­

                    Total expected receipts including all taxes in
                    concerned sale (+) expenditure on storage,
                    supervision etc. up to disposal (­) receipts
                    including taxes from subsequent sale.
(ii) Recover any amount of loss still remaining due
                    through Legal proceedings.
Page 14 of 26
(iii) Retain the full amount, if on such resale,
                   higher amount is received than is due in respect of
                   the lot and the purchaser shall have not right or
                   claim there to.
e.    Recover all cost and expenses incurred for
                recovering loss.
f. Recover all penalties imposed and compensation
                assessed not yet paid.”




    In addition to the same, it is noticed that in the

    communication dated 02.08.2017 (Annexure P/8) while

    issuing the notice calling upon to pay the additional

    security deposit, the appellant has indicated that if the

    same is not paid the provisional security deposit will be

    forfeited and the ‘lot’ will be sold in the ensuing sale.

    That apart, in the order dated 21.08.2017 whereby the

    agreement was terminated, it was intimated that the

    provisional security is forfeited and that the stock

    contained in ‘lot’ No. 42 would be resold at the ‘cost and

    risk’ of the private respondent herein.
14.     In the above background, a perusal of the interim

    order dated 08.09.2017 passed in writ petition would

    indicate that the High Court on considering the facts and

    circumstances of the case has directed that the private
Page 15 of 26
respondents herein deposit the amount as indicated in

    the order, which is shown against their respective names

    here below in tabular format for easy reference: ­




          S.No. SLP (C)      Name of the   Amt. deposited
                No.          Firm          as per Interim
                                           Orders (In Rs.)
1.   17627   ANUPAM            20,00,000
                             TRADERS
2.   18726   NABILA            15,00,000
                             ENTERPRISE
3.   18575   RAFIK             50,00,000
                             FURNITURE
                             MART
4.   18846   SAIYED            20,00,000
                             SULTAN
5.   18664   VIJAY             20,00,000
                             ENTERPRISE
6.   18876   JAI BABA          10,00,000
                             BHOLANATH
                             ENTERPRISE
7.   18916   T. PRASAD         50,00,000
                             RAO
8.   18939   ANANYA            35,00,000
                             ENTERPRISE
9.   18890   YASEEN            35,00,000
                             KHAN
10. 18800    KARIM              5,00,000
                             KHAN
11. 18945    SHEIKH            15,00,000
                             ZAKIR
Page 16 of 26
The High Court does not specifically indicate that the

    amount is relatable to the additional security that was

    required to be deposited by the writ petitioners.
15.     In a circumstance of the present nature, when it is

    noticed that the termination of the agreement itself was

    for non­deposit of the additional security amount to the

    extent of 25% of the value, the deposit ordered by the

    High Court cannot be classified as additional deposit in

    terms of the contract, at that stage. If ultimately the writ

    petition was taken to its logical conclusion and the

    private respondents had succeeded in such proceedings,

    only in such event the said amount could have been

    considered as a belated payment towards additional

    security deposit and in any event, the consideration in

    that regard would be in terms of the directions that

    would have been issued by the High Court. Though that

    be the position and presently since the writ petition was

    withdrawn unconditionally, the question is as to whether

    the respondents were entitled to refund of the amount as

    a matter of right when all future action for disposal of the
Page 17 of 26
subject Kendu leaves was at the ……. ‘cost and risk’ of

    the private respondents as per Clause 13 of the

    agreement which is extracted supra. Hence even if the

    said amount is not considered as the additional security

    amount in its true spirit as per the agreement and the

    right of forfeiture at this stage is not accepted in its

    technical sense in favour of the appellant, the right of the

    appellant to recover the loss suffered in terms of the

    agreement cannot be ignored.
16.     In the above backdrop, before we proceed any

    further, the intent of such conditional interim orders

    passed by the Courts will have to be gathered. In order

    to aid the same it will be apposite to take note of the

    observations contained in the decision of this Court in

    the case of M/s. Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd. vs. M/s.

    Federal Motors Pvt. Ltd. (2005) 1 SCC 705 which is as

    hereunder,

          “The power to grant stay is discretionary and flows from
          the jurisdiction conferred on an appellate Court which is
          equitable in nature. To secure an order of stay merely by
          preferring an appeal is not the statutory right conferred on
          the appellant. So also, an appellate Court is not ordained
          to grant an order of stay merely because an appeal has
          been preferred and an application for an order of stay has
Page 18 of 26
been made. Therefore, an applicant for order of stay must
          do equity for seeking equity. Depending on the facts and
          circumstances of a given case an appellate Court, while
          passing an order of stay, may put the parties on such
          terms the enforcement whereof would satisfy the demand
          for justice of the party found successful at the end of the
          appeal.
In
South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. Vs. State of M.P.
          & Ors.
, (2003) 8 SCC 648, this Court while dealing with
          interim orders granted in favour of any party to litigation
          for the purpose of extending protection to it, effective
          during the pendency of the proceedings, has held that
          such interim orders, passed at an interim stage, stand
          reversed in the event of the final decision going against the
          party successful in securing interim orders in its favour;
          and the successful party at the end would be justified in
          demanding compensation and being placed in the same
          situation in which it would have been if the interim order
          would not have been passed against it. The successful
          party can demand (a) the delivery to it of benefit earned by
          the opposite party under the interim order of the High
          Court, or (b) compensation for what it has lost, and to
          grant such relief is the inherent jurisdiction of the Court.
          In our opinion, while granting an order of stay under
Order
          41 Rule 5 of the CPC
, the appellate court does have
          jurisdiction to put the party seeking stay order on such
          terms as would reasonably compensate the party
          successful at the end of the appeal in so far as those
          proceedings are concerned.”

    Though the said observation was made in the context of

    interim order being considered under
Order 41 Rule 5

    CPC
, it would be more appropriate in a writ proceedings

    in as much as, not only the interim prayer but the very

    writ petition will be entertained in the discretionary

    jurisdiction unlike the statutory appeal under Section

    96 read with
Order 41 of CPC
. In such circumstance,

    though it is not necessary that a condition is to be

    imposed in every case for grant of interim order, if the
Page 19 of 26
Court in a given case imposes the condition, the same is

    to be treated as being with a purpose and not as an

    empty formality.
17.     In that regard, it is to be noticed that in the instant

    case in a circumstance where the private respondent had

    filed the writ petition, even though the High court had

    permitted the process of re­tender to progress, the

    finalization thereof had been stayed. If that be the

    position, the appellant herein was not in a position to

    immediately bring the Kendu leaves for re­auction by

    receiving the amount from the subsequent purchaser and

    the same is likely to have dissuaded purchasers to offer

    the best price due to uncertainty looming large. Whether

    all these and any other factor has caused the loss to the

    appellant and the public exchequer is a matter to be

    determined based on materials and evidence but the fact

    remains that such resultant delay was at the instance of

    the private respondent. As noticed from the terms of the

    agreement, any loss caused was permissible to be

    recovered from the respondent after            adjusting the
Page 20 of 26
security deposit available. Therefore, even if the amount

    of deposit made pursuant to the order passed by the High

    Court is not considered as an additional security deposit,

    the right of the appellant to proceed in accordance with

    law to assess the damage suffered and to recover the

    same from the private respondents, would still remain

    intact.     As such the deposit ordered will have to be

    considered as a conditional deposit to protect the interest

    of the appellant as well.
18.     In such event, the issue for consideration is as to

    whether in view of the clause contained in 9(iv) of the

    tender notification the appellant should be driven to

    initiate the legal proceedings or for public demand

    recovery after refunding the amount which is deposited,

    as contended by the learned Advocate for the private

    respondents despite taking note of the intent of such

    deposit. It is no doubt true, dehors the writ proceedings

    initiated by the private respondents and in the absence of

    such deposit, option in any event was open to the

    appellant     to   make     the   recovery   through   such
Page 21 of 26
proceedings.     It is noticed that apart from the right

    available   to   recover   the   amount   by   forfeiting   the

    additional security deposit, the appellant had also clearly

    indicated that the subsequent sale would be made at the

    ‘……cost and risk’ of the private respondents herein

    which would mean that the difference of the cost between

    the first and second auction and the resultant loss to the

    appellant if attributable to the private respondents, is

    recoverable from the private respondents. However, it is

    no doubt true that such recovery is to be made after

    quantifying the same by following due process of law.
19.     Presently, though the learned senior advocate for

    the appellant had furnished a chart showing the original

    price as against the resale price, thereby projecting the

    net loss suffered by the appellant, the correctness of the

    same cannot be adjudicated in a proceeding of the

    present nature arising out of a writ proceeding. The

    matter being contractual and also requiring factual

    determination, the same can only be done in an

    appropriate proceeding. Therefore, though at this stage
Page 22 of 26
the said amount of deposit as ordered by the High Court

    cannot be considered as additional security deposit nor

    the actual determination of the loss suffered, when in a

    circumstance the action of the appellant to re­tender was

    caused to be deferred, through a proceedings initiated at

    the instance of the private respondent, the condition to

    deposit the amount should have been considered by the

    High Court in the background of its intent to protect the

    interest of appellant. In that circumstance, when the

    contention of loss being caused was put forth the amount

    ought to have been allowed to be retained till the

    procedure as contemplated in law is followed and a

    decision is taken though not directly as forfeiture.
20.     As noticed above, the appellant in any event would

    have the right to determine the loss suffered and recover

    the same in accordance with law as the process to re­

    tender, was at the ‘…...cost and risk’ of the private

    respondent as stated in the notice of termination. In that

    circumstance, when it is prima­facie indicated that due

    to the delay caused at the instance of the private
Page 23 of 26
respondents the value of the Kendu leaves had reduced,

    thereby causing loss, in view of legal proceedings initiated

    by the private respondents, the Court will have to bear in

    mind the maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit, namely,

    no party should suffer due to the act of Court. In such

    event, since the interim order was at the instance of the

    respondent the appellant should in our opinion be

    permitted to retain the amount and complete the process

    by providing opportunity to the private respondents.
21.     In the above circumstance, the direction to refund

    the amount unconditionally is not found justified and is

    accordingly    set   aside.        The     appellant   shall   issue

    appropriate    notice(s)      to     the     private   respondents

    indicating details about the manner in which they

    computed the loss after conducting the second auction at

    the ‘cost and risk’ of the private respondent. On receiving

    response to the same, a detailed consideration be made

    and a speaking order be passed in that regard. The

    respondents are at liberty to challenge the speaking order

    to be passed by the appellant and the process being
Page 24 of 26
pursuant to a contractual matter the private respondent

    if aggrieved are entitled to avail their legal remedy before

    the appropriate forum, in accordance with law and the

    entitlement of the amount will be decided therein. As per

    the speaking order passed by the appellant, if it is found

    that the loss suffered is within the amount available in

    deposit, appropriate adjustment should be made and the

    balance if any, be refunded. On the other hand, if the

    loss caused is found to be more than the amount in

    deposit, the amount available shall be adjusted and the

    appellant would have the liberty of initiating action for

    the recovery of the additional amount, if any, in

    accordance with law. Such procedure shall be completed

    within the outer limit of two months from the date on

    which a copy of this order is available. Until such time,

    the amount available in fixed deposit as ordered by the

    High Court shall be retained in the same position and

    shall not be appropriated for the benefit of the appellant.

    The adjustment of the amount by the appellant if made

    after passing the speaking order, the same shall be

    without prejudice to the contention of both parties and
Page 25 of 26
the same shall be subject to the outcome of the

    proceedings in the matters where the respondents may

    challenge the speaking order in accordance with law.
22.     Accordingly, all the appeals are allowed in part

    with no order as to costs. Pending applications, if any,

    shall stand disposed of.
………………………..J.
                                       (R. BANUMATHI)



                                       .……………………….J.
                                        (A.S. BOPANNA)




                                      ………………………….J.
                                      (HRISHIKESH ROY)

    New Delhi,
    November 28, 2019
Page 26 of 26