[Cites
12
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Oriental Kuries Ltd. Rep. By Its ... vs Lissa on 6 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 115, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1425, (2019) 14 SCALE 758, (2019) 204 ALLINDCAS 7, (2019) 4 KER LJ 878, 2019 (4) KLT SN 60 (SC), (2020) 138 ALL LR 220, (2020) 1 BANKCAS 305, (2020) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 160, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 690
Author:
Indu Malhotra
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Indu Malhotra
REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5401 OF 2009

          M/s Oriental Kuries Ltd. represented by its
          Chairman P.D. Jose                                              …Appellant


                                                   versus

          Lissa & Ors.                                                 …Respondents

                                             JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
1.             The issue which has arisen for consideration in the present

                         Civil Appeal is with respect to the jural relationship between

                         a chit fund entity and the subscribers, created by a chitty

                         agreement; and whether it is a debt in prasenti or a promise

                         to discharge a contractual obligation.
2.             The present Appeal arises out of a Chit Fund conducted by
Signature Not Verified   the Appellant, a chit fund entity. The duration of the chit
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
Date: 2019.11.07
09:58:24 IST
Reason:
1
fund was from 1978 to 1990. The Respondents were

subscribers of the chit fund. During the subsistence of the

chit fund, the Respondents defaulted in the payment of 12

installments from 24.11.1981 to 24.11.1984.

2.1   The Appellant – chit foreman instituted two Suits

      against the Respondent – subscribers before the

      Subordinate Judge, Thrissur, Kerala. The first Suit

      bearing O.S. No. 323/1984 was filed for recovery of 12

      installments for the period 24.11.1981 to 24.11.1984;

      and, the second Suit bearing O.S. No. 548/1987 was

      filed for recovery of future subscriptions due under the

      chit fund after 24.11.1984.
2.2   The Subordinate Judge, Thrissur, Kerala decreed both

      the Suits in favour of the Appellant – Company on

      09.04.1990.
In O.S. No. 323/1984, the Respondents were

      directed to pay the Appellant – Company a sum of Rs.

      40,915/­ with Interest @12% on the sum of Rs.

      34,800/­ from the date of filing the Suit till the date of
2
decree, and thereafter Interest @6% per annum from

      the date of the decree till the date of realization.
In O.S. No. 548/1987, the Respondents were

      directed to pay the Appellant – Company a sum of Rs.

      83,820.68/­ with Interest @12% on a sum of Rs.

      63,800/­ from the date of filing of the Suit till the date

      of decree, and thereafter Interest @6% per annum from

      the date of the decree till the date of realization.

2.3   Aggrieved by the aforesaid Judgment and Decree dated

      09.04.1990     passed       by   the   Subordinate     Judge,

      Thrissur, the Respondents herein filed two Appeals

      bearing A.S. No. 326/1992 and A.S. No. 346/1992

      before the Single Judge of the Kerala High Court.
The learned Single Judge of the High Court

      dismissed both the Appeals filed by the Respondents

      vide    a   common      Judgment       and   Order      dated

      27.06.1994.
The Single Judge held that the
Kerala Chitties

      Act, 1975
does not apply to the Chit Fund in question,
3
since     the   same   was   started   from   Mangalore,

             Karnataka. The Appellant being a trading company,

             was exempted under
Section 13(1)(e)
of the Companies

             Act, 1956 from specifying the States to which the

             objects would extend in the Memorandum and Articles

             of Association.
Reliance was placed by the Single Judge on the

             Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in
P.K.

             Achuthan and Anr. v. State Bank of Travancore,

             Calicut,1
wherein it was held that a chit fund is

             essentially a debt in praesenti, but permitted to be paid

             in installments. The facility of this debt is available to

             the debtor so long as the installments are regularly

             paid. The nature of the transactions under a chit fund

             are essentially that of a debtor­creditor relationship.
It was noted that the judgment in
P.K. Achutan
(supra) had been affirmed by the Supreme Court in




1 AIR 1975 Ker 47.
4
K.P. Subbarama Sastri and Ors. v. K.S. Raghavan and

             Ors.2
2.4     Aggrieved by the common Judgment and Order dated

             27.06.1994 passed by the learned Single Judge, the

             Respondent filed two Second Appeals bearing AFA Nos.

             84 of 1994 and 85 of 1994 before the Division Bench of

             the Kerala High Court.
The Division Bench vide the impugned Judgment

             and Order dated 15.01.2009, allowed AFA No. 84 of

             1994, and dismissed AFA No. 85 of 1994.
The division bench noted that the decision of the

             full bench in
P.K. Achutan
(supra) had been over­ruled

             in
Janardhana Mallan & Ors. v. Gangadharan & Ors.,3
wherein a five­judge bench of the Kerala High Court

             held that future installments payable by a chit

             subscriber are not a debt owed to the chit foreman,

             and therefore, could not be recovered in case of default

             in payment of an installment.
2 (1987) 2 SCC 424.
3 AIR 1983 Ker 178.
5
The subsequent larger bench decision of five

judges in
Janardhana Mallan
(supra) was evidently not

brought to the notice of the Supreme Court in
K.P.

Subbarama Sastri
(supra). The decision in Achutan’s

case would no longer hold the field, since it had been

over­ruled by the larger bench in Janardhana Mallan’s

case.
The Division Bench held that by entering into a

chitty agreement, a debt is not created at once by the

subscriber    in   respect    of   payment    of   all   future

installments, as the chitty variola only contains a

promise to pay, which is not a promise to repay an

existing debt, but only to pay and discharge a

contractual obligation. The execution of the security

bond is to ensure fulfillment of the terms of the

contract by the parties. If the subscriber fails to pay

future    installments   in   terms   of     the   contractual

obligations, then the subscriber would become a

defaulter, he would incur a debt to the foreman, and
6
would not be a liability to pay in future of an existing

      liability.
On the facts of the case, the division bench held

      that the Appellant – Company was entitled to recover

      12 installments from the Respondents for the period

      from 24.11.1981 to 24.11.1984. However, future

      installments could not be recovered.
2.5   Aggrieved by the judgment of the Division Bench, the

      Appellant – chit fund company filed the present Special

      Leave Petition. This Hon'ble Court vide Order dated

      10.08.2009 granted special leave to appeal. The

      dispute between the parties got resolved during the

      pendency of the present appeal.
This Court vide Order dated 13.11.2009 noted the

      submission made by the Counsel for the Appellant that

      several suits had been filed by the Appellant –

      Company against the subscribers, which had been

      dismissed on the basis of the impugned judgment. In
7
these circumstances, the present Appeal was pressed

           for determination.
3.   DISCUSSION   AND   ANALYSIS

     At the time when modern banking was not fully developed in

     small towns and rural areas, chit fund institutions emerged

     to cater to the financial needs of low­income households. A

     conventional chit fund is an old indigenous financial

     institution involving periodic subscriptions by a group of

     persons. It is, in law, a contract between the subscribers and

     the foreman, which provides that the subscribers shall

     subscribe a certain sum by way of regular installments for a

     specified period of time. Each subscriber in his turn, as

     determined by lot, or auction, or in any other manner

     specified, is entitled to the prize amount. The number of

     subscribers in a chit fund would constitute the number of

     installments, so that every subscriber is assured of receiving

     the prize amount. As there is a mutuality of interest amongst
8
the subscribers to each chit fund, it constitutes a convenient

     instrument which combines savings and borrowings.
The duties of the foreman of the chit fund include

     enrolling subscribers, and drawing up the terms and

     conditions of the scheme in the form of an agreement. For

     these services, the foreman charges a commission, on which

     a ceiling is fixed.
Each    prized   subscriber   must   furnish   acceptable

     security against the remaining installments, so as to be

     eligible to receive the lumpsum payment. The security is to

     be furnished by the subscriber directly to the foreman. In the

     event of default by a subscriber to pay his installments on

     the due date, the chit fund scheme may provide for forfeiture

     of dividend, or levy of penal interest.
4.   A full bench of the Kerala High Court in
P.K. Achutan
(supra),

     held that it is manifest that what actually transpires when a

     prized subscriber is allowed to draw the kuri amount is the

     grant of loan to him from the common fund in the hands of
9
the foreman with the concessional facility of effecting re­

payment in installments, which is subject to the stipulation

that the said concession is liable to be withdrawn in the

event of default being committed in payment of any of the

installments. It is a debt in praesenti, but permitted to be

paid in installments, for the benefit of the debtor so long as

the installments are regularly paid. This being the true

nature of the, the stipulation for furnishing a security bond

which would enable the foreman to recover from the prized

subscriber, the whole of the balance amount due from him in

a lump sum when default occurs in payment of any of the

installments. Such a stipulation cannot be regarded as a

penalty clause. It is necessary for the foreman of a chit who

occupies a special relationship with all the subscribers of the

chit fund, which would justify stringent provisions being

incorporated in the agreement for safeguarding the interest of

all the subscribers. Without punctual payments by the

individual subscribers, the foreman will not be in a position

to discharge his obligations to the other subscribers. It is
10
therefore necessary that the foreman should reserve to

     himself the power to recover in a lump sum, the entire

     balance amount due in respect of future installments, on a

     default being committed by a prized subscriber. In the

     context of the special features and incidents of chit fund

     transactions, the incorporation of a stipulation in the chitty

     hypothecation    bond,    cannot     be   regarded    to   be

     unconscionable or penal in nature.
5.
In
Janardhana Mallan
(supra), a five­judge bench of the

     Kerala High Court overruled the decision in
P.K. Achutan
(supra), and held that it would not be possible to say that on

     entering into the chitty agreement a debt is incurred by the

     subscriber for the amount of all the future installments, and

     in respect of such amount there is a debtor – creditor

     relationship. The chitty variola embodies a promise to pay on

     future dates. It is not a promise to repay an existing debt,

     but in discharge of a contractual obligation. The prize
11
amount is not received as a loan, but by virtue of the terms

     of the contract between the parties.
6.
The Chits Funds Act, 1982
(hereinafter referred to as “the

     1982 Act”) was enacted by Parliament, and came into force

     on 19.08.1982. The issue of the applicability of the 1982 Act

     to the State of Kerala was considered by a Constitution

     Bench of this Court in
State of Kerala and Ors. v. Mar

     Appraem Kuri Company Ltd. and Ors.
4 The Constitution

     Bench held that on the enactment of the
Chit Funds Act,

     1982
which covered the entire field of “chits” under Entry 7

     of
List III of the Constitution, the Kerala Chitties Act, 1975
stood impliedly repealed. As a consequence, the Central Act

     became applicable forthwith in the State of Kerala, even

     though the Kerala legislature notified the 1982 Act on

     30.04.2012.
4 (2012) 7 SCC 106.
12
7.   The constitutional validity of the
Chit Funds Act, 1982
was

     challenged before this Court in Shriram Chits & Investment

     (P.)
Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.5 The
challenge to the vires of

     the various provisions under the 1982 Act was repelled. This

     Court held that all the provisions under the 1982 Act are

     relevant     and    material     to    protect   the    interest      of   the

     subscribers. The three­judge bench held that :
“15. We were referred to the decision of this Court in
K.P. Subbarama Sastri and Ors. v. K.S. Raghavan
                and Ors.
: [1987]2SCR767 wherein a contract
                providing for payment of money in installments and
                stipulating that on default in payment of any of the
                installments all the future installments shall be
                payable at a time with interest was held not penal in
                nature in the case of kuri transaction under the
Kerala Chitties Act, 1975
.
While upholding the
                transaction a Bench of this Court approved the
                decision of the earlier Full Bench decision of the
                Kerala High Court in the case
P.K. Achuthan
(supra)
                wherein the Kerala High Court had upheld such a
                transaction and held it, to be of not a penal nature. In
                this context Eradi, J. (as His Lordship then was)
                speaking for the Full Bench observed that a
                subscriber truly and really becomes a debtor for the
                prized amount paid to him.
It will be noticed that the
                later Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in
Janardhana Mallan and Ors.
(supra) was not brought
                to the notice of this Court and the Court was referred
                to the over­ruled decision of the Kerala High Court.
                The fact remains that the question involved before us
                as to the true nature of transaction for the purpose of


5 AIR 1993 SC 2063.
13
finding out the relevant entry in the Constitution into
             which it may fall, was not involved
in that case
.
16. It appears to us, but for the discordant note
             struck by the other Full Bench of the Kerala High
             Court in the aforesaid case of
P.K. Achuthan
(Supra),
             the consistent view of all the High Courts has been
             that it is not a moneylending transaction and that
             there is no relationship of debtor and creditor for the
             purpose of it being treated as a money lending
             transaction.”
                                                (emphasis supplied)



          The reference made to the judgment in
P.K. Achutan
(supra) and
Janardhana Mallan
(supra) was in passing, and

     this Court did not either affirm, or reject the
ratio
laid down

     in
either of these cases.
8.   Where a contract provides for payment of money in

     installments, and contains a stipulation that on default being

     committed in paying any of the installments, the whole sum

     shall become payable at once, such a stipulation would not

     be in the nature of a penalty.
9.   The division bench in the impugned Judgment dated

     15.01.2009, held that by entering into a chitty agreement, a
14
debt is not created at once by the subscriber with respect to

   the amount of all the future installments. The chitty

   agreement embodies a promise to pay and discharge a

   contractual obligation, and not a promise to repay an existing

   debt.
10. We do not agree with the view expressed by the division

   bench. When a prized subscriber is allowed to draw the chit

   amount, which is in the nature of a grant of a loan to him

   from the common fund in the hands of the foreman, with the

   concessional facility of effecting re­payment in installments;

   this is subject to the stipulation that the concession is liable

   to be withdrawn in the event of default being committed in

   payment of any of the installments.
The chit subscriber at the time of subscription, incurs a

    debt which is payable in installments. If a subscriber is

    permitted to withdraw the collected sum on his turn,

    without being bound to pay the future installments, it would
15
jeopardize the interest of all other subscribers, and the

    entire mechanism of the chit fund system would collapse.
11. A perusal of the provisions of Chapter V of the 1982 Act

   makes it clear that if a prized subscriber defaults in making

   payment of an installment, the chit foreman has the right to

   recover the amount covering all future subscriptions from the

   defaulting subscriber as a consolidated amount.
Section 32
of the 1982 Act empowers the foreman to recover

   the   consolidated     payment       of   all   future     subscriptions

   forthwith in the case of a default.
Chapter V of the Chit Funds Act, 1982
prescribes the rights

   and duties of prized subscribers.
Section 31
to
33
in Chapter

   V read as follows :
“31. Prized subscriber to furnish security.— Every
           prized subscriber shall, if he has not offered to deduct
           the amount of all future subscriptions from the prize
           amount due to him, furnish, and a foreman shall
           take, sufficient security for the due payment of all
           future subscriptions and, if the foreman is a prized
           subscriber, he shall give security for the due payment
           of all the future subscriptions to the satisfaction of the
           Registrar.
16
32. Prized subscriber to pay subscriptions regularly.
— Every prized subscriber shall pay his subscriptions
regularly on the dates and times and at the place
mentioned in the chit agreement and, on his failure to
do so, he shall be liable to make a consolidated
payment of all the future subscriptions forthwith.
33. Foreman to demand future subscriptions by
written notice.— A foreman shall not be entitled to
claim a consolidated payment from a defaulting
prized subscriber under
Section 32
unless he makes
a demand to that effect in writing.
(2) Where a dispute is raised under this Act by a
foreman for a consolidated payment of future
subscriptions from a defaulting prized subscriber and
if the subscriber pays to the foreman on or before the
date to which the dispute is posted for hearing the
arrears of subscriptions till that date together with
the interest thereon at the rate provided for in the chit
agreement and the cost of adjudication of the dispute,
the Registrar or his nominee hearing the dispute
shall, notwithstanding any contract to the contrary,
make an order directing the subscriber to pay to the
foreman the future subscriptions on or before the
dates on which they fall due, and that, in case of any
default of such payments by the subscriber, the
foreman shall be at liberty to realise, in execution of
that order, all future subscriptions and interest
together with the costs, if any, less the amount, if
any, already paid by the subscriber in respect
thereof:
Provided that if any such dispute is on a promissory
note, no order shall be passed under this sub­section
unless such promissory note expressly states that the
amount due under the promissory note is towards the
payment of subscriptions to the chit.
(3) Any person who holds any interest in the property
furnished as security or part thereof, shall be entitled
to make the payment under sub­section (2).
(4) All consolidated payments of future subscriptions
realised by a foreman shall be deposited by him in an
approved bank mentioned in the chit agreement
17
before the date of the succeeding instalment and the
           amount so deposited shall not be withdrawn except
           for payment of future subscriptions.
(5) Where any property is obtained as security in lieu
           of the consolidated payment of future subscriptions, it
           shall remain as security for the due payment of future
           subscriptions.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)
12. The object is to empower the foreman to recover the amount

   in a lump sum from a defaulting subscriber, so as to secure

   the interest of the other subscribers, and ensure smooth

   functioning of the Chit Fund. Such a provision would not

   amount to a penalty.
13. The relationship between the foreman and the subscribers in

   a chit fund transaction is of such a nature that there is a

   necessity and justification for making stringent provisions to

   safeguard the interest of the other subscribers, and the

   foreman. If a prized subscriber defaults in payment of his

   subscriptions, the foreman will be obliged to obtain the

   equivalent   amount      from    other    sources,     to   meet   the

   obligations for payment of the chit amount to the other
18
members, who prize the chit on subsequent draws. For

    raising such an amount, the foreman may be required to pay

    high rates of interest.
14. The stipulation of empowering the foreman to recover the

    entire balance amount in a lump sum, in the event of default

    being committed by a prized subscriber, is to ensure

    punctual payment by each of the individual subscribers of

    the chit fund. Without punctual payments, the system would

    become unworkable, and the foreman would not be in a

    position to discharge his obligations to the other members of

    the chit fund.
15. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the relationship between

    a chit subscriber and the chit foreman is a contractual

    obligation, which creates a debt on the day of subscription.
On default taking place, the foreman is entitled to recover the

    consolidated amount of future subscriptions from the

    defaulting subscriber in a lump sum.
19
16. The impugned judgment dated 15.01.2009 passed by the

   Division Bench of the High Court in AFA No. 85 of 1994 is set

   aside. The Civil Appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. All

   pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.

   Ordered accordingly.
.....................................J.
                                                (INDU MALHOTRA)




                                      .…...............………………J.
                                                (SANJIV KHANNA)




New Delhi,
November 6, 2019.
20