[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rameshchandra Daulal Soni vs Devichand Hiralal Gandhi (Dead) Thr. ... on 14 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2015, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2410
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
A.S. Bopanna
,
R. Banumathi
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9834 OF 2016


                         Rameshchandra Daulal Soni & Anr.              .… Appellant(s)

                                                    Versus

                         Devichand Hiralal Gandhi (Dead)             ….Respondent(s)
                         Thr.Lrs. Smt. Gulabbai Devichand
                         Gandhi & Ors.

                         WITH

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.8450/2019

                                              JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
1.     Though different orders, dated 20.07.2015 passed in

                         CRA No.112/2012 and dated 15.10.2018 passed in CRA

                         No.157/2018 are assailed in these two appeals, issues for

                         consideration however arise out of the common lis between

                         the parties based on the judgment passed in the Regular Civil
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Suit   No.253/1989   to   which    the   appellants   in   C.A.
Date: 2019.11.14
14:10:15 IST
Reason:
No.9834/2016 were defendants No.1 and 2 while the
Page 1 of 26
predecessor       of   appellants   in   C.A.   No.8450/2019   was

    defendant No.5.         Hence both these appeals were taken

    together for hearing and are being disposed by this common

    judgment. For the sake of convenience and clarity the parties

    would be referred in the same rank assigned to them in the

    suit. Since the claim of the appellants in C.A. No.8450/2019

    is in the capacity of legal representatives of the deceased

    original defendant No.5, the case put forth by them will be

    considered by referring to them as defendant No.5.
2.         The brief facts noticed for the purpose of disposal of

    these appeals is as hereunder.           The property bearing S.No.

    9/1/A measuring 22 guntas situate at Chahurana Bk.,

    Taluka Nagar, Ahmednagar District presently bearing Plot

    No.19 within Ahmednagar Municipal Limits, measuring 2656

    sq mtrs (hereinafter referred to as the ‘suit property’) which

    earlier belonged to Deshmukh Brothers was purchased by the

    plaintiff under a Sale Deed dated 08.08.1986. The plaintiff

    thereafter secured the Revenue entries to be recorded in his

    name.        As on the date of purchase the predecessor of

    defendants No.1 and 2 was the tenant in respect of the suit
Page 2 of 26
property paying the rent of Rs.31/­ per annum.                The

    defendants No.1 and 2 thereafter continued as the tenants.

    The plaintiff informed the defendants No. 1 and 2 through the

    communication dated 06.12.1986 about the purchase and

    had sought for payment of the rents. The defendants No. 1

    and 2 failed to pay the same and since according to the

    plaintiff the defendants were also not using the premises for

    the purpose for which it was let out, the plaintiff termed the

    defendants No. 1 and 2 as defaulters and instituted the

    Regular Civil Suit No.253/1989 seeking eviction of the

    defendants No. 1 and 2 as also the defendants No.3 to 7

    whom the plaintiff described as the sub­tenants in the

    premises.
3.         The defendants in the suit were issued with the suit

    summons. The defendants No. 1 and 2 appeared and filed

    their respective written statement. The defendants No. 3 and

    5 did not choose to file the written statement while the

    defendants No. 4, 6 and 7 did not appear before the Trial

    Court       and   were   therefore,   proceeded   ex­parte.   The

    defendants No. 1 and 2 opposed the claim made in the plaint
Page 3 of 26
on merits, apart from contending that the suit was barred by

    limitation.   The fact that their predecessor had taken the

    premises under lease deed dated 22.05.1928 for a period of

    31 years on the annual rent of Rs.31/­ was admitted and that

    the lease deed expired by efflux of time on 22.05.1959 was

    also stated. The said defendants however contended that they

    were not informed about the purchase by the plaintiff. The

    Trial Court based on the rival pleadings had framed as many

    as eleven issues.    The parties in order to discharge their

    burden cast under the issues had tendered evidence.      The

    Trial Court by its judgment dated 13.10.1998 decreed the

    suit and directed the defendants No.1 to 7 to handover actual

    physical possession of the suit property and also to pay the

    amount of Rs.162/­.      Further, enquiry regarding mesne

    profits was also ordered. The defendants No.1 and 2 claiming

    to be aggrieved by the said judgment preferred an appeal

    before the Principal District Judge, Ahmednagar in Regular

    Civil Appeal No.315/1998.      The Appellate Court having

    adverted to the rival contentions has dismissed the appeal

    through the judgment dated 18.02.2012. The cross objections

    filed by the plaintiff and the defendants No.2 to 6 was also
Page 4 of 26
dismissed.       The defendants No.1 and 2 claiming to be

    aggrieved by the said judgment were before the High Court of

    Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad in CRA

    No.112/2012. The High Court having taken note of the rival

    contentions has by a detailed order dismissed the revision

    application. The analogous Civil Revision Applications filed

    by the remaining defendants in CRA No.113/2012 and

    114/2012 were also disposed of by the same common

    judgment dated 20.07.2015.     It is in that background, the

    defendants No.1 and 2 claiming to be aggrieved by the

    concurrent judgments are before this Court in this appeal.

    The connected appeal in C.A. No. 8450/2019 is against the

    order dated 15.10.2018 arising out of execution proceedings

    in regular darkhast No. 15 of 2016.
4.         We have heard Mr. Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned

    senior advocate for the appellants in C.A. No.9834/2016

    (defendants No.1 and 2), Mr. Siddhartha Dave, learned senior

    advocate for the appellants in C.A. No.8450/2019 (legal

    representatives of defendant No.5) Mr. Uday B. Dube, learned
Page 5 of 26
counsel for the respondent (plaintiffs in the suit) and perused

    the appeal papers.
5.         As noticed, the suit in question was filed by the

    plaintiffs seeking eviction of the defendants No.1 and 2 who

    were the tenants and also the remaining defendants who

    were described as the sub­tenants. Before adverting to the

    nature of contentions put forth by the respective learned

    senior advocates for the defendants which is emphasised on

    the very maintainability of the suit, it is necessary to, at the

    outset, take note of the nature of consideration made by the

    Trial Court which has been upheld by the Lower Appellate

    Court and the High Court respectively.              The nature of the

    contentions put forth by the parties is adverted to above. On

    the rival pleadings to that effect the Trial Court framed the

    following issues which read as hereunder:
ISSUES
1.    Does the plaintiff prove that there is relation of tenant and
          landlord between the defendant and himself ?
2.    Does the plaintiff prove that defendants are wilful defaulter?
3.    Whether suit notice given by the plaintiff is legal and valid?
4.    Does the plaintiff prove that suit premises is not used by the
          defendants for more than 6 months before filing this suit
          without reasonable cause?
5.    Whether plaintiff proves that defendant Nos. 1 and 2 have
          sub­let some portion of the suit premises to the defendants
          Nos.3 to 7?
Page 6 of 26
6.    Whether the suit is barred by Law of Limitation?
6A.   Is the suit bad for mis­joinder of necessary parties?
    6B.   Is the suit properly valued stamped?
6C.   Whether this Court has jurisdiction to try the suit?
7.    What due towards the defendants?
8.    Is plaintiff entitled to receive amount mentioned in para No.7
          of the plaint?
9.    Is plaintiff entitled for actual physical possession of suit
          property from defendants Nos.1 to 7 after removing structure
          thereon?
10.   Is plaintiff entitled for damages from the defendants from
          the date of suit till recovery of the possession?
11.   What order and decree?
6.         In the background of the issues framed, the plaintiff

    No.1 examined himself as PW­1 and the Trial Court has

    taken note of his deposition as at Exhibit 78. The manner in

    which the plaintiff had acquired right to the property has

    been stated and the Sale Deed was also marked in evidence

    as Exhibit 77/4. The fact of purchase was informed to the

    defendants No.1 and 2 through the notice dated 16.12.1986

    which was marked as Exhibit 80.                 The said notice was

    essentially in the nature to attorn the tenancy whereupon the

    defendants No.1 and 2 were required to recognise the plaintiff

    as the landlord and pay the rent accordingly. The fact that

    the defendants No.1 and 2 were continuing as the tenants in

    respect of the suit schedule property under the lease deed

    dated 16.07.1928 was also brought in evidence by marking
Page 7 of 26
the same as Exhibit 100 whereunder the predecessor of the

    vendors of the plaintiff had leased the property to the

    predecessor of the defendants No.1 and 2. The fact that the

    lease was for 31 years was established and the Trial Court in

    that regard had also taken into consideration that the lease

    had come to an end by efflux of time as contemplated under
Section 111
of the Transfer of Property Act.          In that

    circumstance, the defendants No.1 and 2 were considered to

    be the statutory tenants under the
Bombay Rents, Hotel &

    Lodging Houses Rates Control Act, 1947
(‘
Rent Act
’ for short).

    Thus, having determined the relationship of landlord and

    tenant between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1 and 2 the

    Trial Court proceeded to consider the other aspects of the

    matter. In that regard the provision as contained in
Section

    5(11)
of the Rent Act was taken note.
7.         Insofar as the defendants No.3 to 7 though the

    plaintiffs had contended that they are the sub­tenants under

    the defendants No.1 and 2, in the absence of there being

    plausible evidence relating to subletting, the Trial Court

    rejected the contention and held them to be the trespassers
Page 8 of 26
liable to be evicted and, in such event, directed all the

    defendants to vacate.     Insofar as the ground on which the

    eviction was sought, namely, the defendants No.1 and 2 had

    failed to pay the rent and, therefore, they were defaulters and

    also that the property was not being put to use for the

    purpose which it had been rented out, the trial court

    considered these aspects while answering issue Nos.2 to 4.

    In that regard the notice issued by the plaintiff at Exhibit 96

    and the postal receipts at Exhibits 97 and 98 was taken into

    consideration   whereby    the   plaintiff   had   demanded   for

    payment of the rents. In that background the reply issued by

    the defendants No.1 and 2 at Exhibit 99 was taken note and

    the Court was of the view that the defendants No.1 and 2 did

    not indicate their readiness and willingness to pay the arrears

    of rent. Further the evidence tendered by defendant No.1 at

    Exhibit 106 was taken note wherein he had stated that the

    rent had not been paid from the year 1959 as nobody had

    demanded the rent from him. While taking note of the same

    the trial court has taken into consideration that the said

    statements of defendant No.1 cannot be accepted inasmuch

    as the plaintiff in fact had issued the notice on 01.09.1988
Page 9 of 26
whereby the demand had been made. In that background the

    default in payment of rent was accepted and held against the

    defendants No.1 and 2.
8.      Insofar as the non­user of the premises for the purpose

    which it had been rented out, the evidence to the effect that

    the premises was given for the purpose of storage of goods

    namely cotton was taken into consideration.       The fact that

    there was a shed and the same not being put to use for the

    last several years as it was in a dilapidated condition was also

    taken note.     Though a report of the Commissioner as at

    Exhibit 10 was available on record the same was not taken

    into consideration and relied upon for technical reasons. Be

    that as it may, the trial court has also taken into

    consideration the deposition of the defendant No.1 that he

    has been practising as an advocate in the High Court of

    Bombay and that at the point when the premises was taken

    on lease the grandfather of defendant No.1 was doing

    business of cotton ginning factory and he was also doing

    business in foodgrain. He had admitted that the business of

    cotton ginning factory is closed due to ban imposed by
Page 10 of 26
Maharashtra Cotton Act and the premises is not used for

    storage of cotton but was being used for storing agricultural

    equipments and cement. In that view, the trial court had also

    held that the premises was not being used for the purpose it

    had been leased and accordingly the grounds on which the

    eviction petition had been filed was upheld.
9.      On the contention relating to the defendants Nos.3 to 5

    the same was considered while answering issue No.5 and as

    indicated above though they were not accepted to be the sub­

    tenants as claimed by the plaintiff, the trial court has held

    that they are trespassers and not entitled to continue in the

    premises.    The lower appellate court had taken note of the

    evidence, reappreciated the same and in that background had

    upheld the judgment passed by the trial court.
10.     On the factual aspects of the matter though Mr.

    Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned senior advocate sought to

    assail the concurrent judgements, we notice that the evidence

    available on record has been assessed by the trial court as

    also the appellate court and have recorded a finding of fact

    with regard to the relationship between the parties and also
Page 11 of 26
the ground on which the eviction had been sought. In that

    circumstance when we notice that such finding is with

    reference to the oral evidence tendered and the documents

    that were relied upon and marked before the trial court, the

    finding of fact recorded cannot be considered as perverse so

    as to interfere in a proceeding of the present nature.          The

    learned senior advocate would, however, contend that the

    suit   schedule   property     admittedly   was   leased   to   the

    predecessor of defendants No.1 and 2 and in view of the

    death of the original tenant the defendants No.1 and 2 have

    been arrayed as parties. It is contended that the defendants

    No.1 and 2 had two sisters who were also the legal heirs of

    the original tenant but not made defendants. In that regard

    it   was    contended   that   in   a   circumstance   where    the

    predecessor was a statutory tenant, on the death of such

    statutory tenant the tenancy is inheritable by all the legal

    heirs and all of them were proper and necessary parties. To

    contend so the learned senior advocate has referred to the

    provision contained in
Section 5(11)(c)(ii)
which reads as

    hereunder:
Page 12 of 26
“In this Act unless there is anything
            repugnant to the subject or context.
            (11) “rent” means any person by whom or
            on whose account rent is payable for any
            premises and include,
(c)(ii) in relation to any premises let for the
            purposes of education, business, trade or
            storage, when the tenant dies, whether the
            death has occurred before or after the
            commencement of the said Act, any
            member of the tenant’s family using the
            premises for the purposes of education of
            carrying on business, trade or storage in
            the premises, with the tenant at the time of
            his death, or, in the absence of such
            member, any heir of the deceased tenant,
            as may be decided in default of agreement
            by the Court.”
11.     The learned senior advocate in that regard, to contend

    that all the legal representatives of the statutory tenant would

    be entitled to continue as tenants and that the High Court

    has committed an error in holding that they are not the

    tenants in common, has referred to the decisions in the case

    of Damadi Lal & Ors. vs. Parash Ram & Ors. 1976(4) SCC

    855 wherein inter alia it is held that the statutory tenancy

    under the
Rent Act
is heritable.
To the same effect the

    decision in the case of
Gian Devi Anand vs. Jeevan Kumar
Page 13 of 26
& Ors.
1985 (2) SCC 683 is relied upon.
Further, the

    decision in the case of
Uttam vs. Saubagh Singh & Ors.
2016 (4) SCC 68 is relied upon to contend that when a male

    Hindu dies after commencement of
Hindu Succession Act
1956, and in view of the second exception engrafted on

    proposition (i) is contained in the proviso to
Section 6
, which

    states that if such a male Hindu had died living behind a

    female relative specified in class 1 of the schedule such

    female relative surviving him would have interest in the

    coparcenary property to contend that the statutory tenancy

    being heritable with rights attached to it, the sisters of

    defendants No. 1 and 2 are also entitled to such right.
12.     Having taken note of the contentions put forth, to the

    extent of the position of law as enunciated in the decisions

    cited supra there can be no quarrel whatsoever.      However,

    what is necessary to be taken note is the fact situation in the

    instant case to arrive at a conclusion.      The provision in
Section 5(11)(c)(ii)
noted supra is clear that the persons

    carrying on the business with the statutory tenant at the time

    of death would be entitled to continue as a tenant.        The
Page 14 of 26
second part of the said provision is that in the absence of

    such member any heir of the deceased tenant as may be

    decided by the Court in default of agreement, would get the

    right. In the instant case the contention being urged that the

    two daughters of the deceased tenants were also entitled to

    be considered as the tenants under the statutory tenant, is a

    belated claim as an afterthought.       As taken note while

    considering the factual aspect it has come on record that the

    plaintiff after having purchased the property under a

    registered sale deed had issued the notice dated 16.12.1986

    as at Exhibit 80 and the trial court has also recorded a

    finding that through the said notice the plaintiff had informed

    the defendants No. 1 and 2 about the purchase of the suit

    property. That apart, subsequently a notice as at Exhibit 96

    was issued to the defendants No. 1 and 2 demanding the

    arrears of rent. The said notice in fact had been replied by

    the defendants No. 1 and 2 through the reply marked at

    Exhibit 99. Neither at the first instance when the notice at

    Exhibit 80 was issued was it indicated by the defendants No.

    1 and 2 that their sisters had also become the statutory

    tenants and the notice in the nature of attornment of tenancy
Page 15 of 26
should be issued to them as well, nor in the reply which had

    been issued when the arrears of rent was demanded did the

    defendants No. 1 and 2 contend that they were not the only

    one who were involved in the business along with the original

    statutory tenant and, therefore, all the legal heirs had

    succeeded as tenants on the death of the statutory tenant

    and, therefore, the demand, if any, is to be made from all of

    them.
13.     Though such contention is put forth the defendants

    No.1 and 2 did not attribute any right in favour of the sisters.

    In fact, as noted by the trial court the defendants No. 1 and 2

    have filed on record pursis with a Exhibit 137­A claiming to

    have deposited Rs. 1000/­ on 09.9.2007 at ‘C’ Register No.

    465 without prejudice to their rights towards the rent, causes

    of the suit etc. This in our opinion would indicate that the

    defendants No. 1 and 2 were claiming right for themselves

    and did not at that stage state about the right if any,

    possessed by their sisters as well and have now raised the

    contention as an afterthought.     Further in the evidence of

    defendant No. 1 he states that his grandfather took the suit
Page 16 of 26
premises on lease for the purpose of business of cotton

    ginning factory and he further states that the defendant No. 1

    used the premises to store food grain and equipment of

    agricultural and also cement. This would indicate that the

    defendant was referring to the business being carried on by

    him alone and there is no reference to the business being

    jointly carried on with his sisters or that none of the legal

    representatives including defendant No. 1 were carrying on

    business with the statutory tenant so as to claim benefit of

    the second part of
Section 5 (11) (c) (ii)
and claim joint

    inheritance of tenancy. Further the said position is also clear

    from the evidence of the defendant witness Shri Vanaji

    Dhoodiram Dani who was examined to indicate that the

    premises was being used for the business and in that regard,

    in the course of his evidence he has stated that the

    defendants No. 1 and 2 are keeping cement and food grain in

    the godown and that he is serving with the defendants 1 and

    2 since last 10 to 12 years but has not stated about the

    sisters also being involved in the business.      If that be the

    position even from the evidence of the said witness, it would

    be clear that only first part of
Section 5 (11) (c) (ii)
would be
Page 17 of 26
available and the sisters of defendant No. 1 and 2 cannot

    claim right merely due to the fact that they are the legal heirs

    of the deceased tenant.
14.     That apart the suit had been filed in the year 1989 and

    the same had crossed the stage of appeal as well as revision

    before the High Court which had come to an end on

    20.07.2015. In none of these proceedings the said sisters of

    defendants No.1 and 2 have taken any steps to get

    themselves impleaded by contending that they are proper and

    necessary parties failing which their right would be affected.

    At this stage it is necessary to take note that the learned

    counsel for the parties have brought to the notice of this

    Court that the said two sisters have filed a Civil Suit bearing

    No.516/2015 for declaration of their right which is pending

    before the Civil Court.     The very sequence noticed above

    would indicate that the said sisters had not put forth their

    claim earlier and the present suit appears to be a ploy to put

    a spoke in the wheel on realising that the contention as put

    forth by defendants No.1 and 2 did not yield the desired

    result inasmuch as the Civil Revision Application came to be
Page 18 of 26
dismissed in the year 2015.   Hence, neither the provision of

    the
Rent Act
or the decisions relied upon supra will be of

    assistance to the defendants No. 1 and 2.            In that

    circumstance the contention as put forth by the learned

    senior advocate for the defendants No.1 and 2 is liable to be

    rejected, which we accordingly do.
15.     Mr. Siddhartha Dave, learned senior advocate for the

    legal representatives of defendant No.5 would contend that

    defendant No.5 was an agricultural tenant in respect of the

    suit schedule property and as such the rights inter­se

    between the parties is governed under the
Maharashtra

    Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act
(‘MTAL Act’ for short).

    He contends that under the said Act there is a bar

    contemplated under
Section 85
of the Act against the Civil

    Court entertaining any question which is required to be

    settled, decided or dealt with by the Mamlatdar or Tribunal,

    Manager, the Collector or the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal.

    In that view, it is contended that the suit schedule property

    being an agricultural property, the Civil Court did not have

    the jurisdiction. The learned senior advocate has referred to
Page 19 of 26
a document at Annexure P­1, namely, 7/12 extract to

    indicate that the name of the defendant No.5 is depicted as

    tenant in respect of a portion of the suit schedule property. It

    is his further contention that in the lease deed dated

    22.05.1928 (Annexure P­2) executed by the predecessor of

    the plaintiff in favour of the predecessor of the defendants

    No.1 and 2, in Clause 6 thereof it makes a reference to the

    existence of a hut of the agricultural tenant in the land and

    that it should be kept as it is and that the lessee will not

    obstruct them.       In that view, it is contended that the said

    document would establish that the land in question is an

    agricultural land and the Civil Court ought not to have

    entertained the suit.       The learned senior advocate in that

    regard has referred to the decision in the case of
Amrit

    Bhikaji Kale and Ors. Vs. Kashinath Janardhan Trade

    & Anr
, (1983) 3 SCC 437 wherein it is held as hereunder:
“6.
The Tenancy Act
was comprehensively
            amended by
Amending Act
15 of 1957. The
            amendment brought in a revolutionary measure
            of agrarian reforms making tiller of the soil the
            owner of the land. This was done to achieve the
            object of removing all intermediaries between
            tillers of the soil and the State.
Section 32
provides that by mere operation of law, every
            tenant of agricultural land situated in the area to
Page 20 of 26
which the Act applies shall become by the
            operation of law, the owner thereof. He is
            declared to be a deemed purchaser without
            anything more on his part. A Constitution Bench
            of this court in Sri Ram Ram Narain
            Medhiv. State of Bombay [1959 Supp 1 SCR 489,
            518-19 : AIR 1959 SC 459 : 1959 SCJ 679] held
            that:
“The title of the landlord to the land passes
            immediately to the tenant on the tillers' day and
            there is a completed purchase or sale thereof as
            between the landlord and the tenant. The title of
            the land which was vested originally in the
            landlord passes to the tenant on the tillers' day
            and this title is defeasible only in the event of
            the tenant failing to appear or making a
            statement that he is not willing to purchase the
            land or commit default in payment of the price
            thereto as determined by the Tribunal.”
            Therefore, it is unquestionably established that
            on the tillers' day, the landlord's interest in the
            land gets extinguished and simultaneously by a
            statutory sale without anything more by the
            parties, the extinguished title of the landlord is
            kindled or created in the tenant. That very
            moment       landlord-tenant    relationship     as
            understood in common law or
Transfer of
            Property Act
comes to an end. The link and chain
            is broken. The absent non-cultivating landlord
            ceases to have that ownership element of the
            land and the cultivating tenant, the tiller of the
            soil becomes the owner thereof. This is
            unquestionable. The landlord from the date of
            statutory sale is only entitled to receive the
            purchase price as determined by the Tribunal
            under Section 32-G. In other words, the landlord
            ceases to be landlord and the tenant becomes
            the owner of the land and comes in direct
            contact with the State. Without any act of
            transfer inter vivos the title of the landlord is
            extinguished and is created simultaneously in
            the tenant making the tenant the deemed
            purchaser. It is an admitted position that on April
            1, 1957 Tarachand was the landlord and
            Janardhan was the tenant. Tarachand landlord
            was under no disability as envisged by Section
            32-F. Therefore on April 1, 1957 Janardhan
            became deemed purchaser and Mr Lalit could
            not controvert this position.”
Page 21 of 26
16.     The position of law and decision cited cannot be

    applied in abstract.      Therefore, the fact situation is to be

    noticed.    Hence having taken note of the above contention

    what is noticed at the outset is that the predecessor of the

    appellants, namely, the defendant No.5 did not choose to file

    the written statement in the suit. In that circumstance the

    contention to the effect that the suit schedule property or a

    portion thereof was an agricultural property was never the

    contention raised in the suit or as to whether the issue in the

    suit should be referred to the Authority under the MTAL Act.
In that view no issue in that regard arose before the trial

    court to consider as to whether the Civil Court had the

    jurisdiction to entertain the suit. That apart the undisputed

    fact is that the legal representatives of defendant No.5 had

    assailed    the   judgment       of    the   court     below     in   CRA

    No.114/2012       which    was        considered     along     with   CRA

    No.112/2012 and claiming to be aggrieved by the dismissal of

    the CRA No.114/2012 had preferred SLP(C) No.31644/2015

    before this Court.        This Court through the order dated

    23.11.2015     had   dismissed         the   Special   Leave     Petition.
Page 22 of 26
Despite failing in the very proceeding relating to which the

    execution    petition   has   been   initiated   the   said   legal

    representatives of defendant No.5 filed the application in

    execution proceedings claiming to be agricultural tenants and

    defeat the execution by terming the decree as a nullity. It is

    in the said proceedings the executing court having taken into

    consideration all aspects, dismissed the application by the

    order dated 15.10.2018.       The executing court thus having

    taken into consideration the order dated 20.07.2015 passed

    by the High Court in CRA Nos.112, 113 and 114 of 2012 has

    dismissed the application.     Further the right as claimed by

    the said legal representatives based on the entry contained in

    7/12 extract has been rejected. We find no error committed

    by the executing court for the following reasons.
17.     In our view even assuming for a moment that the name

    of the predecessor was indicated in the 7/12 extract, the

    basis of such entry is not demonstrated to be made after the

    procedure being followed.        Though the learned senior

    advocate has relied on the reference contained in the lease

    deed dated 22.05.1928 that the hut of the agricultural tenant
Page 23 of 26
is situate in the leased land, there is no reference made to the

    name of such tenant so as to indicate that the reference is to

    their predecessor i.e. defendant No.5 nor can the co­existence

    of the agricultural operations being carried out in the land

    which was leased for storage of goods be assumed without

    definite material or demarcation indicated from records. The

    reference is only to the existence of a hut. That apart even if

    the same is taken as a reference to the defendant No.5 in the

    year 1928 the tenancy being continued and being operational

    on the tiller’s day i.e. 01.04.1957 is to be established to claim

    right under MTAL Act. Further while the MTAL Act creates

    right in favour of the agricultural tenant as on the appointed

    day the further procedure as contemplated is also required to

    be followed under Section 32G of the said Act. In the instant

    case apart from the fact that no such contention was urged in

    the suit by filing a written statement, no document to

    indicate that the procedure contemplated under the MTAL

    Act has been followed is available so as to conclude that the

    defendant No.5 had become the landlord of the property by

    operation of law so as to bar the jurisdiction of the Civil

    Court.
Page 24 of 26
18.     In that view, the decision referred to supra by learned

    senior advocate would not be of assistance in the present

    case since
the said decision
only indicates the legal position

    and was applicable in the said case since
in that case
it was

    an admitted position that as on 01.04.1957 Tara Chand was

    the landlord and Janardan was the tenant.        On the other

    hand, in the present facts as already noticed no such

    contention was taken at the first instance nor has it been

    conclusively established that the defendant No.5 was an

    agricultural tenant more so in the circumstance where the

    suit schedule property did not continue to exist as an

    agricultural property but was within Ahmednagar Municipal

    Limits which was a Town Planning Scheme as on the date of

    the suit. Though we are not oblivious to the fact that certain

    agricultural properties would subsequently get included in

    the Town Planning Scheme, in the instant facts if the claim of

    the defendant No.5 is to be taken note, not only the reliance

    on 7/12 extract but a subsequent inclusion of the name in

    the Municipal records based on any right that was crystalized

    in favour of defendant No. 5 based on the MTAL Act was also

    necessary to be established. In the absence of the same the
Page 25 of 26
contention put forth by the learned senior advocate cannot be

    accepted.
19.     In the above circumstance, when the contentions as

    urged by the learned senior advocate for defendants No.1 and

    2 as also the defendant No.5 are unsustainable and in that

    background when we have noticed that all three Courts have

    concurrently appreciated the material available on record and

    have recorded a finding of fact to order eviction of the

    defendants, we see no reason to interfere either with the

    judgment dated 20.07.2015 passed in CRA No.112/2012 or

    the judgment dated 15.10.2018 in CRA No.157/2018.
20.     Both the appeals accordingly stand dismissed with no

    order as to costs.     Pending applications if any are also

    disposed of.
….……………………….J.
                                     (R. BANUMATHI)


                                     ….……………………….J.
                                      (A.S. BOPANNA)

                                     ….……………………….J.
                                     (HRISHIKESH ROY)
    New Delhi,
    November 14, 2019
Page 26 of 26