[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Naresh vs Hemant on 19 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2450, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2005, (2019) 16 SCALE 465, (2019) 4 CURCC 371, (2019) 6 ALL WC 6242, (2020) 129 CUT LT 393, (2020) 1 RECCIVR 347, (2020) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 125
Author:
Navin Sinha
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Ashok Bhushan
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).8859 OF 2019
                              (arising out of SLP (Civil) No(s). 16697 of 2018)

                NARESH AND OTHERS                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                 VERSUS
                HEMANT AND OTHERS                                ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
2.       The appellants who were the original defendants in the Suit

                are aggrieved by the order of the High Court allowing the

                respondents­plaintiffs’ Second Appeal, upsetting the concurrent

                findings of facts by two courts. The parties shall be referred to by

                their respective positions in the Suit for better appreciation and

                convenience.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
3.       The predecessors of the plaintiffs and the defendants were
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2019.11.19
18:05:10 IST
Reason:
brothers namely, Ramchandrarao Ingole and Trimbakrao Ingole.
1
They partitioned among themselves in 1952. The suit property

consists of 7011 sq. ft. of lands, with a house constructed in 1974­

75 thereupon leaving substantial vacant lands, was purchased

jointly in the name of the two brothers by sale deed dated

29.03.1957. Trimbakrao Ingole expired in 1980 and Ramchandrarao

Ingole also passed away on 22.03.1995. The plaintiffs as legal heirs

of Ramchandrarao Ingole, relying on the sale deed filed Special Civil

Suit No.268 of 1995 seeking partition and possession of their half

share in the suit property.
4.   The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court. The first appeal

preferred by the plaintiffs was also dismissed. Both the courts

arrived at concurrent findings of facts that the plaintiffs had failed

to prove that Ramchandrarao Ingole had contributed to the

purchase of the suit property or that at any time he had been a

beneficiary of the purchase by residence or possession. The house

had been constructed exclusively by Trimbakrao Ingole from his

own funds and who remained in exclusive possession of the same

relying on the admissions of PW­1 in his evidence. Ramchandrarao

Ingole was held not to be a vendee of the suit property.
2
5.     Shri V.C. Daga, learned senior counsel appearing for the

appellants, submitted that the High Court in a Second Appeal under

Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code should not have interfered

with    the   concurrent    findings       of   facts   by   two   courts   that

Ramchandrarao Ingole was not and was never intended to be a

beneficiary of the purchase. The presumption under
Section 45
of

the Transfer of Property Act (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’), by

reason of his name being mentioned in the sale deed as a vendee

also was rebuttable and not absolute. Two courts on appreciation of

the oral evidence, were satisfied for reasons recorded that

Ramchandrarao Ingole was never a beneficiary or in joint ownership

of the suit property.      Trimbakrao Ingole alone was present at the

time of registration and the stamp papers were also purchased by

him. The construction was also raised by him alone from his own

funds, acknowledged by PW­1 in his evidence. Ramchandrarao

Ingole never raised any claim for share in the property either during

the life time of Trimbakrao Ingole or for fifteen years thereafter till

his own death. It is only after the passing away of Ramchandrarao

Ingole that his legal heirs staked claim for partition based merely on
3
the recitals in the sale deed.
Section 92
of the Indian Evidence Act

has no application in the facts of the case as it is applicable only in

case of a bilateral document relying on
Bai Hira Devi and others

vs. Official Assignee of Bombay
, AIR 1958 SC 448. The present

sale deed was a unilateral document executed by the vendor alone.

It was lastly submitted that the house was built in ‘L’ shape and by

design was incapable of being divided. The plaintiffs, as evident from

their own pleadings were indulging in speculative litigation, eyeing

the vacant area of the suit property.
6.   Shri Pallav Sisodiya, learned senior counsel appearing for the

respondents, submitted that the suit property was purchased by

both the brothers together in view of their cordial relations. The

cordiality ended with the death of Ramchandrarao Ingole. Thus, the

suit came to be filed after his death. Relying on the recitals in the

sale deed, reading the same in conjunction with
Section 45
of the

Act, it was submitted that Ramchandrarao Ingole was co­owner by

operation of law. The fact that he may not have been in possession

does not raise any estoppel precluding him or his legal heirs from

asserting their rights, relying upon
Suraj Rattan Thirani and
4
others vs. Azamabad Tea Co. Ltd. And others
, (1964) 6 SCR 192.
Signature of the vendee on the sale deed was not mandatory, as

held in Aloka Bose vs. Parmatma Devi and others, (2009) 2 SCC
582. The fact that Trimbakrao Ingole may have signed at the time

of registration on the reverse of the deed or that his name may have

been mentioned as the purchaser of the stamp papers does not

make him and his legal heirs the exclusive owners of the property.

The oral evidence by both sides was insufficient to exclude the

rights of the plaintiffs. The appellants were unable to lead any

evidence under the second and third proviso to
Section 92
for

rebutting the presumption in the law in favour of the plaintiffs

under
Section 45
of the Act. The fact that the original sale deed

may have been produced by the defendants cannot be proof of

exclusive ownership. The findings in favour of the defendants by

the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court are only in the realm of

probabilities.   The High Court rightly held in the nature of the

evidence, that the conclusions arrived at by the two courts below

were, therefore, perverse.
5
7.   We have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties,

perused the respective pleadings and the evidence on record. The

plaintiffs acknowledged the construction of a house on the suit

property, seeking a share in the vacant lands fully aware of the

nature of the construction which could not be partitioned. The

defendants in their additional written statement had stated that

originally both the brothers proposed to purchase the property

together.    Subsequently Ramchandrarao Ingole retracted and was

not interested in purchasing the property due to funds crunch.

Trimbakrao Ingole therefore alone paid the entire consideration.

Since the stamp papers had already been purchased and the sale

deed drafted in name of both the brothers, registration followed

without any change. It is very important to notice that no rejoinder

or replication was filed by the plaintiffs to this additional written

statement.
8.   The evidence was in the nature of oath versus oath by the legal

heirs of the two brothers. No documentary evidence except for the

sale deed was led. The Trial Court correctly noticed the gap of 36

days between the preparation of the sale deed on 29.03.1957 and its
6
subsequent registration on 03.05.1957 as a circumstance to accept

the contention of the defendants that Ramchandrarao Ingole

retracted from any contribution and his status as a vendee or

beneficiary of the purchase. Since registration on 03.05.1957 till the

institution of the suit by the legal heirs of Ramchandrarao Ingole,

38 years later, he did not prefer any claim since 03.05.1957 till his

brothers death in 1980, including for 15 long years till his own

death on 23.03.1995. Thereafter, PW­1 in his evidence admitted

that the construction of the house had been made by Trimbakrao

Ingole alone. There is no evidence that this construction was made

from joint family funds. It is an undisputed fact that the plaintiffs

at no point of time ever since purchase resided in the house or upon

the suit lands or enjoyed the same in any manner let alone incurred

any expenditure on the same.
9.   The claim for a presumption under
Section 45
of the Act in

favour of the plaintiffs was raised for the first time before the First

Appellate Court but was negated in light of the factual findings.

Importantly, it was held that mere failure of the defendants to

adduce satisfactory evidence that Trimbakrao Ingole had paid the
7
entire consideration did not absolve the plaintiffs of their duty to

establish their own claim in accordance with law by satisfactory

evidence to substantiate the presumption sought to be relied upon.

In other words, the appellate court correctly held that the weakness

of the defence could not become the strength of the plaintiff,

especially when the defendants were disputing their claims.
10.
Section 45
of the Transfer of Property Act read as follows:
“45.    Joint   transfer   for   consideration.—Where
      immoveable property is transferred for consideration
      to two or more persons and such consideration is paid
      out of a fund belonging to them in common, they are,
      in the absence of a contract to the contrary,
      respectively entitled to interests in such property
      identical, as nearly as may be, with the interests to
      which they were respectively entitled in the fund; and,
      where such consideration is paid out of separate
      funds belonging to them respectively, they are, in the
      absence of a contract to the contrary, respectively
      entitled to interests in such property in proportion to
      the shares of the consideration which they
      respectively advanced.
In the absence of evidence as to the interests in the
      fund to which they were respectively entitled, or as to
      the shares which they respectively advanced, such
      persons shall be presumed to be equally interested in
      the property.”
8
11.   The High Court invoked the presumption without proper

consideration and appreciation of the facts considered and dealt

with by two courts holding by reasoned conclusions why the

presumption stood rebutted on the facts.      The High Court also

committed an error of record by holding that there was no evidence

that Trimbakrao Ingole alone had constructed the house, a finding

patently contrary to the admission of PW­1 in his evidence. The fact

that mutation also was done in the name of Trimbakrao Ingole alone

which remain unchallenged at any time was also not noticed. The

conclusion of the High Court that improper appreciation of evidence

amounted to perversity is completely unsustainable. No finding has

been arrived at that any evidence had been admitted contrary to the

law or that a finding was based on no evidence only in which

circumstance the High Court could have interfered in the second

appeal.
12.   The High Court therefore manifestly erred by interfering with

the concurrent findings on facts by two courts below in exercise of

powers under
Section 100
, Civil Procedure Code, a jurisdiction
9
confined to substantial questions of law only. Merely because the

High Court may have been of the opinion that the inferences and

conclusions on the evidence were erroneous, and that another

conclusion to its satisfaction could be drawn, cannot be justification

for the High Court to have interfered.
13.   In Madamanchi Ramappa vs. Muthaluru Bojappa, (1964) 2

SCR 673, this court with regard to the scope for interference in a

second appeal with facts under
Section 100
of the Civil Procedure

Code observed as follows:
“12. ….The admissibility of evidence is no doubt a
        point of law, but once it is shown that the evidence
        on which courts of fact have acted was admissible
        and relevant, it is not open to a party feeling
        aggrieved by the findings recorded by the courts of
        fact to contend before the High Court in second
        appeal that the said evidence is not sufficient to
        justify the findings of fact in question. It has been
        always recognised that the sufficiency or adequacy
        of evidence to support a finding of fact is a matter
        for decision of the court of facts and cannot be
        agitated in a second appeal. Sometimes, this
        position is expressed by saying that like all
        questions of fact, sufficiency or adequacy of
        evidence in support of a case is also left to the jury
        for its verdict. This position has always been
        accepted without dissent and it can be stated
        without any doubt that it enunciates what can be
10
properly     characterised     as   an    elementary
        proposition. Therefore, whenever this Court is
        satisfied that in dealing with a second appeal, the
        High Court has, either unwittingly and in a casual
        manner, or deliberately as in this case,
        contravened the limits prescribed by
s. 100
, it
        becomes the duty of this Court to intervene and
        give effect to the said provisions. It may be that in
        some cases, the High Court dealing with the
        second appeal is inclined to take the view that
        what it regards to be justice or equity of the case
        has not been served by the findings of fact recorded
        by courts of fact; but on such occasions it is
        necessary to remember that what is administered
        in courts is justice according to law and
        considerations of fair play and equity however
        important they may be, must yield to clear and
        express provisions of the law. If in reaching its
        decisions in second appeals, the High Court
        contravenes the express provisions of
section 100
,
        it would inevitably introduce in such decisions an
        element of disconcerting unpredictability which is
        usually associated with gambling; and that is a
        reproach which judicial process must constantly
        and scrupulously endeavour to avoid.”
14.   Though precedents abound on this settled principle of law, we

do not consider it necessary to burden our discussion unnecessarily

except to rely further on
Gurdev Kaur and others vs. Kaki and

others
, (2007) 1 SCC 546, holding as follows:
“71. The fact that, in a series of cases, this Court
        was compelled to interfere was because the true
        legislative intendment and scope of
Section 100
CPC
11
have neither been appreciated nor applied. A class
of judges while administering law honestly believe
that, if they are satisfied that, in any second appeal
brought before them evidence has been grossly
misappreciated either by the lower appellate court
or by both the courts below, it is their duty to
interfere, because they seem to feel that a decree
following upon a gross misappreciation of evidence
involves injustice and it is the duty of the High
Court to redress such injustice. We would like to
reiterate that the justice has to be administered in
accordance with law.
xxxx
73. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council as
early as in 1890 stated that there is no jurisdiction
to entertain a second appeal on the ground of an
erroneous finding of fact, however gross or
inexcusable the error may seem to be, and they
added a note of warning that no court in India has
power to add to, or enlarge, the grounds specified in
Section 100
.
xxxx
81. Despite repeated declarations of law by the
judgments of this Court and the Privy Council for
over a century, still the scope of
Section 100
has not
been correctly appreciated and applied by the High
Courts in a large number of cases. In the facts and
circumstances of this case the High Court interfered
with the pure findings of fact even after the
amendment of
Section 100
CPC in 1976. The High
Court would not have been justified in interfering
with the concurrent findings of fact in this case even
prior to the amendment of
Section 100
CPC. The
judgment of the High Court is clearly against the
provisions of
Section 100
and in no uncertain terms
clearly violates the legislative intention.
12
82. In view of the clear legislative mandate
           crystallised by a series of judgments of the Privy
           Council and this Court ranging from 1890 to 2006,
           the High Court in law could not have interfered with
           pure findings of facts arrived at by the courts below.
Consequently, the impugned judgment is set aside
           and this appeal is allowed with costs.”
15.   The order of the High Court interfering with concurrent

findings    of   facts   by   two   courts   is,   therefore,   held   to   be

unsustainable in exercise of the powers under
Section 100
of the

Civil Procedure Code. The order of the High Court is consequently

set aside. The orders dated 06.03.1998 and 13.06.2002 of the Trial

Court and the First Appellate Court are restored. The suit of the

plaintiffs is dismissed. The present appeal is allowed.
.……………………….J.
                                                        (Ashok Bhushan)




                                                     ………………………..J.
                                                        (Navin Sinha)
New Delhi,
November 19, 2019.
13