[Cites
3
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Lt. Col Om Dutt Sharma (Retd)Dead Thr. ... on 5 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2054, 2020 (2) SCC 133, (2019) 14 SCALE 728, (2019) 4 SCT 801, (2020) 1 ESC 10, (2020) 1 MAD LJ 389, (2020) 1 SERVLJ 57, (2020) 1 SERVLR 175
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE



                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8139 OF 2019
                               (DIARY NO. 38432 OF 2017)

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                          .....APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

LT. COL. OM DUTT SHARMA (RETD.) DEAD
THROUGH LRS & ORS.                                           .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                   JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1)       The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the

         Armed Forces Tribunal, Regional Bench, Jabalpur1 on 9th February,

         2017 whereby, an Original Application filed by the respondent - Lt.

         Col. Om Dutt Sharma was allowed holding that the respondent is

         entitled to the benefit of One Rank One Pension2.
2)       The respondent died during pendency of the appeal.           His legal

         heirs have been brought on record, whereas respondent Nos. 3 to

         86 have been impleaded as intervenors vide order dated 14 th May,


1    for short, ‘Tribunal’
2    for short, ‘OROP’
1
2018 in view of the fact that the said intervenors claim the same

        benefit as claimed and granted to the deceased respondent.

        Since the issue is purely legal and the fact that large numbers of

        personnel of Army Postal Service 3 are involved, we have heard

        learned counsel for the parties on merits in respect of their

        entitlement to OROP in terms of Government of India’s Circular

        dated 7th November, 2015.
3)      The respondents were working on the non-gazetted posts in the

        Department of Posts under the Government of India and were

        taken on deputation in the APS from time to time. The deceased

        respondent was taken on deputation in the year 1962.           He

        relinquished his Temporary Commission in the Army as Lt. Colonel

        on 31st December, 1984 and retired on 14 th May, 1985 after

        repatriation to his parent department i.e. Department of Posts.

        The stand of the intervenors is that they joined APS on deputation

        either as Junior Commissioned Officer (JCO) or the Warrant Officer

        (WO) and were not repatriated to their parent department. All the

        intervenors retired from the APS on attaining the age of

        superannuation, therefore, they claim benefit of OROP.
4)        Learned counsel for the appellants refers to the different Army

        Instructions issued from time to time to contend that for service

        pension, officers of APS on deputation from the Department of

        Posts are governed by civil pension rules, whereas in respect of


3    for short, ‘APS’
2
disability or special family pension, the option is available to be

        governed by military or civil rules. It is also contended that age of

        superannuation of a Lt. Colonel in the Army is 54 years, whereas a

        person holding civil post under the Union continues to discharge

        the duties up to the age of superannuation i.e. up to the age of 58

        or 60 Years.          It is also contended that the members of APS on

        deputation from the Department of Posts serve till the age of

        superannuation meant for civil employees of the Union.                   The

        personnel of the Department of Posts are not granted pension by

        the Ministry of Defence but are in receipt of pension from the

        Department of Posts as the members of the Union holding civil

        posts.
5)      The relevant extracts of the different Army Instructions issued from

        time to time read as under:
“Army Instructions Nos. 107 of 19534
1. Temporary Commissions of a period of one year and for
                  so long thereafter as their services may be required will be
                  granted in the Army Postal Service or the Regular Army on
                  the terms and conditions laid down in the Annexure to this
                  AI.
2. Eligibility:- JCOs of the APS and such WOs as have
                  passed the IPOs/IRMs examination of the P and T
                  Department.
3.   Length of Commission:- The Commission will be
                  granted for a period of one year and for so long thereafter
                  as their services may be required.
xx   xx          xx



4    For short “Army Instructions 1953”
3
10. Advance of Pay:- As admissible under the rules of the
                 P and T Department.
Annexure to Army Instructions No. 107 of 1953
1.                           xx        xx        xx
2. Rank, seniority and Promotion:-
(a) JCOs/WOs will be granted Temporary Commission in
                 the rank of 2/Lt except that JCOs/WOs I having 8 years
                 service as JCO/WO I and in the ranks would be
                 commissioned as Lt and granted 2 years ante date for the
                 purpose of pay only.
(b) Officers will be governed by the Acting Promotion
                 Rules in force from time to time. All gazetted service will
                 count as Commissioned service for the purpose of acting
                 promotions.
xx        xx        xx
6. (a) Disability and family pensions:-
(i) Officers governed by chapter XXXVIII C.S. R. may elect
                 to be governed either by military or civil rules.       When
                 electing military rules the officers will be granted disability
                 element of pension like regular I.C. OS.
(ii)     Those governed by Central Civil Services
                 (Extraordinary Pension) Rules will be eligible for
                 disability/family pensions under military rules.           The
                 disability element of pension will be as for regular I.C. Os.
Army Instructions No. 295 of 19595
1. In supersession of the orders contained in A.I. 107/53,
                 insofar as they relate to the grant of commissions to
                 gazetted officers of the Post and Telegraphs Department,
                 temporary commission in the Army Postal Service will be
                 granted in future on the terms and conditions laid down in
                 annexure ‘A’ to this Army Instruction.
2. Eligibility:- Gazetted officers (substantive or officiating)

5   For short “Army Instructions 1959”
4
of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, preferably with
previous service in the Army, Navy or Air Force, will be
eligible.
3.    Length of Commission:- The Commission will be
granted for a period of one year and for so long thereafter
as their services may be required but not exceeding the
age of compulsory retirement in the Army. The officers
will, however, normally be retained in the Army Postal
Service for minimum period of four years.
xx           xx            xx
12. Option – All officers of the Posts and Telegraph
Department at present serving in the Army Postal Service
will be allowed to opt for the terms and conditions
contained in Annexure ‘A’ to this Army Instructions from
the date of its issue provided that they satisfy the
conditions laid down therein. On exercising such option,
they will be regarded as newly commissioned for purposes
of the option to draw civil or military rates of pay under
paragraph 3(b) of annexure ‘A’. The existing orders will
continue to apply to other serving officers.

Annexure ‘A’ to Army Instructions No. 295 of 1959
1.                    xx           xx            xx
2. Rank, Promotion and seniority-
(a) On commissioning in the Army Postal Service, officers
will be ranked as follows:
Class II Officers with less than 2 years         2nd
 gazette service                                  Lieutenant
 Class II/Class I officers with over 2 years      Lieutenant
 but not over 4 years gazetted service
 Class II officers with over 5 years but not      Captain
 over 8 years gazetted service and class I
 officers with over 3 years but not over 5
 years gazetted service
 Class I officers with over 5 years               Major
 but not over 12 years gazetted service
 Class I (Senior scale) officers with over 12     Lieutenant
 years gazetted service                           Colonel

                 xx           xx            xx



The Director General, Post and Telegraphs, may, however,
5
recommend variations in ranking when it is necessary due
to paucity of suitable volunteers.
(e)   An officer serving in the rank of Major, who is
promoted to the grade of Director, Postal Service, in his
parent department, will be reverted to civil employment.
Such an officer may however be retained in the Army
Postal Service for a period not exceeding four months at
the discretion of the Quartermaster General.
3. Pay and Allowances
(a)                  xx          xx           xx
(b) An officer will however have an option at the time of
commissioning and a further option on each occasion of
promotion in Army rank to draw either military pay and
allowances or civil pay plus a deputation allowance as
under:-
An officer below the grade of Director Postal Services –
20%

An officer of the grade of Director Postal Services and
above – 12½%

The term ‘civil pay’ will take into account increments of
civil pay, as they become due and the operations of the
‘Next Below Rule’ affecting officiating promotions under
the civil rules applicable to the officers’ permanent cadre.
(c) Pay and allowances during the joining period prior to
being commissioned as well as during transit on reversion
will be on the Civil rates only, and no deputation
allowance will be allowed in addition.
xx          xx           xx

6. Pension
(a) For service pension, officers will be governed by civil
rules.
(b) For disability and special family pension, officers will
be permitted to elect to be governed by either military or
civil rules. The election may be made by an officer at any
time during service with the Army or after it, and once
made will be final. When an officer dies without making
6
the election, his family will be eligible to receive awards
                 under the civil or the military rules whichever was more
                 favourable. Those who elect military rules for disability
                 pension will be entitled to only disability element of
                 disability pension as for regular commissioned officers in
                 addition to civil pay and allowances or service pension as
                 the case may be.
xx        xx        xx
9. Special Provisions Applicable to Officers Electing Civil
                 Rates of Pay –
(a)   In regard to other conditions service including
                 dearness and compensatory allowances and other
                 concessions, officers on civil rates of pay will be governed
                 by the rules applicable to them in their civil appointments
                 except to the extent indicated on the succeeding sub-
paragraphs.
Army Instructions No. 29 of 19856
                 In supersession of the orders contained in A.I. 107/53, and
                 AI 295/59, terms and conditions laid down in annexure ‘A’
                 to this Army Instructions will apply to the Temporary
                 Commissions granted in the Army Postal Service of
                 Regular Army.
Annexure ‘A’
1.                           xx        xx        xx
2. Rank, Promotion and seniority –
(a) In the case of JCOs/WOs of APS – JCOs/WOs will be
                 granted temporary commission in the rank of 2 Lt except
                 that JCOs/WOs having 8 years service as JCO/WO and in
                 the ranks would be commissioned as Lt and granted 2
                 years ante date for the purpose of pay only.
(b) In the case of gazetted officers of the Department of
                 Posts – On commissioning in the Army Postal Service,
                 Officers of the Department of Posts will be ranked as
                 follows:-
PSS/PMS Group ‘B’ Officers                  -    Lt/Capt

6   For short “Army Instructions 1985”
7
IPS Group ‘A’ Officers – Junior Scale           -    Capt
     IPS Group ‘A’ Officers – Senior Scale           -    Major
     IPS Group ‘A’ Officers with over ten years      -    Lt. Col.
     Service or Director Postal Services             -    Col.
     Director Postal Services drawing base pay            Rs.1800/- or
     of                                                   more
     Postmaster General Level II                     -    Brig
     Postmaster General Level I                      -    Major Gen
The Director General, Postal Services, may, however,
recommend variation in ranking when it is necessary due
to paucity of suitable volunteers.
3. (a)                xx             xx              xx
(b) An officer will however have an option at the time of
commissioning and a further option on each occasion of
promotion in Army rank to draw either military pay and
allowances or civil pay plus a deputation allowance as
under:
An officer below the grade of Director Postal   -    20%
     Services
     An officer of the grade of Director             -    12½%
     Postal Services and above

The term ‘civil pay’ will take into account increments of
civil pay, as they become due and the operations of the
‘Next Below Rule’ affecting officiating promotions under
the civil rules applicable to the officers’ permanent cadre.
(c)   Pay and allowances of officers joining from the
Department of Posts during the period prior to being
commissioned as well as transit on reversion will be on the
civil rates only and no deputation allowance will be
allowed in addition.
4.                    xx             xx              xx
5.                    xx             xx              xx
6. Pension
(a) For service pension, officers will be governed by civil
rules.
(b) For disability and family pension, the officer or, when
the officer dies in service, his family will be eligible to
receive awards under AI 64/76 as amended from time to
time.
8
7.                xx           xx           xx
8.                xx           xx           xx
9. Relinquishment of Commission and repatriation to the
           Department of Posts

           (1) An officer shall relinquish his temporary commission in
           Army Postal Service and be repatriated to the Department
           of Posts or proceed on compulsory retirement on
           superannuation by order of the Central Government or the
           authority specified in sub-para (2) with effect from the
           afternoon of the date specified in the orders.

           (2) The authority specified in Sub Para (1) shall be the
           Additional Director General Army Postal Service.

           (3) Approval of the Central Government will be obtained
           by the Additional Director General Army Postal Services
           prior to the issue of orders in all cases except the
           following:-
(a) Where an officer has completed the minimum period
           of engagement as specified in Para 3 of AI 29/85 and
           seeks repatriation to the Department of Posts.
(b) Where the service of the officer is recalled by the
           Department of Posts.
(c)  Where the officer has completed his period of
           engagement and has outlived his utility to the APS and
(d) Where an officer has attained the age of compulsory
           retirement in the Army Postal Service and instead of being
           repatriated to the Department of Posts seeks retirement
           from Army Postal Service.
(4) The consent of the Department of Posts will be
           obtained and a minimum not of three months shall be
           given to the officer before his relinquishment of
           commission and repatriation to the Department of Posts.”
6)   Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel for the respondents

     argued that the respondents are not the Gazetted Officers of the

     Department of Posts to whom the Army Instructions 1959 are
9
applicable. In fact, Mr. Ahmadi relies upon Army Instructions 1953

     and Army Instructions 1985 to contend that the respondents are

     entitled to the benefit of OROP. It is submitted that the argument

     of the appellants that the respondents held a lien on equivalent

     posts in the Department of Posts when they retired from APS, is not

     tenable as the pension of the respondent is higher than their

     respective counterparts in the Department of Posts, therefore,

     there is no parity with the pension drawn by the respondents with

     the person who continue to work in the Department of Posts.
7)   It is argued that the pension of the respondent is calculated on the

     basis of last pay drawn which includes the components of Military

     Pay Scale, Military Service Pay, whereas, the civil posts in the Postal

     Department do not have such component of Military Service Pay.
Therefore, their last pay drawn is not comparable to any other civil

     pay and also their pension. Their pension has always been equal to

     other Army Officers.
8)   It is argued that the Instructions to grant OROP on 7 th November,

     2015 w.e.f. 1st July, 2014 is a beneficial provision for the ‘Ex-

     servicemen’. Since the respondents were holding Army rank and

     were entitled to the benefits of medical and other benefits at par

     with the officers of the Army, therefore, the respondents being Ex-

     servicemen are entitled to the benefit of OROP. Learned counsel

     for the respondents refers to the Ex-servicemen (Re-employment in
10
Central Civil Services and Posts) Rules, 1979 7. In terms of Rule 2(c)

        as amended, the Ex-servicemen include the personnel retired from

        APS.     Learned counsel also refers to Army Instructions 1953 to

        contend that the Annexure attached to the said Instructions

        permits service pension. Mr. Ahmadi argued that the respondents

        were conferred Army rank and carry such rank even after

        retirement.        It is argued that it cannot be imagined that in the

        Department of Posts, a civilian would hold a rank of Lt. Colonel,

        therefore, the respondents as Ex-servicemen are entitled to the

        benefit of Circular dated 7 th November, 2015 granting OROP. It is

        also argued that the Circular dated 3rd February, 2016 makes the

        policy of OROP applicable to all Commissioned Officers including

        honorary Commissioned Officers which would include Temporary

        Commissioned Officers such as the respondents. Therefore, the

        respondents are covered by the clarification dated 3 rd February,

        2016.
9)      The Ministry of Defence, Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare on

        7th November, 2015 issued a letter to the Chiefs of Army Staff,

        Naval Staff and Air Staff to implement OROP for the Ex-servicemen

        w.e.f. 1st July, 2014. Relevant clause reads as under:
“2. It has now been decided to implement ‘One Rank One
                  Pension’ (OROP) for the Ex-Servicemen with effect from
                  01.07.2014. OROP implies that uniform pension be paid to
                  the Defence Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank
                  with the same length of service, regardless of their date of
                  retirement, which, implies bridging the gap between the

7    for short, ‘1979 Rules’
11
rates of pension of current and past pensioners at periodic
            intervals.”
10) Subsequently, another letter was issued by the Ministry of Defence,

     Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare on 3 rd February, 2016

     wherein it was decided that the benefit of OROP was being

     conferred to Defence Forces Personnel and to all pensioners in the

     rank of honorary Commissioned Officers etc. Relevant clause reads

     as under:
“4. The provisions of this letter shall be applicable to all
            pensioners/family pensioners who had been retired/
            discharged/invalidated out from service/died in service or
            after retirement in the rank of Commissioned Officers,
            honorary Commissioned Officers, JCOs/Ors and Non-
            Combatants (Enrolled) of Army, Navy, Air Force, Defence
            Security Corps, Territorial Army & Ex-State Forces and are
            in receipt of pension/family pension as on 1.7.2014.

            4.1. The provisions of this order, however, do not apply to
            UK/HKSRA/KCIO pensioners, Pakistan & Burma Army
            pensioners, Reservist pensioners and pensioners in receipt
            of Ex-gratia payments.”
11) We have considered the respective arguments of learned counsel

     for the parties. The JCOs of Armed Forces and Warrant Officers who

     have passed IPO/IRM examination of Posts & Telegraph Department

     are eligible for the grant of Commission for a period of one year

     and   for   such   period,   their   service   may   be   required.     The

     Commission     under   such    instructions    was   meant    for     Junior

     Commissioned Officers and the Warrant Officers who have passed

     examination of the Department of Posts for Commission which is

     for a period of one year and as long services are required. Thus,
12
the officials of the Department of Posts continue to have lien over

     the posts under the Union.
12) The next Army Instructions 1959 supersede the earlier Army

     Instructions in so far as they relate to the grant of the Commission

     to the Gazetted Officers of the Posts & Telegraph Department. The

     eligibility for grant of Temporary Commission was in respect of the

     Gazetted Officers, (substantive or officiating) of the Posts &

     Telegraph Department. In terms of Clause 12 of the Army

     Instructions 1959, all officers of the Posts & Telegraph Department,

     which will include Non-Gazetted Offices, were given an option to

     opt for terms and conditions contained in Annexure ‘A’ to these

     Instructions. On exercise of such option, they will be regarded as

     newly commissioned officers with an option to draw civil or military

     rates of pay. In respect of pension, there is no option and that the

     officers would be governed by civil rules for service pension.
13) As per Army Instructions 1985, the eligibility for grant of Temporary

     Commission in the APS is Gazetted Officers (substantive or

     officiating) of the Department of Posts and JCOs of the APS and

     such WOs who have earned competitive vacancies in the Rank of

     JAOs/IPOs/IRMs in examination of the Department of Posts. Clause

     12 of such instructions gives an option to all officers which will

     include the Gazetted and Non-Gazetted Officers of the Department

     of Posts serving in the APS to opt for the terms and conditions

     contained in Annexure ‘A’ to these instructions.     On exercise of
13
such instructions, they will be regarded as newly commissioned for

     the purpose of option to draw civil or military rates of pay. Such

     Annexure ‘A’ to the Instructions again has a clause that the officers

     will be governed by civil rules for service pension. There is no

     option to opt for military pension.
14) Therefore, we do not find any merit in the argument raised that

     Army Instructions only cover the Gazetted Officers. The eligibility

     for grant of a Temporary Commission is the Gazetted Officers and

     JCOs etc. but clause 12 of Army Instructions 1959 and 1985 cover

     all officers of the Department of Posts. It is not the case of the

     respondents that their lien in the Department of Posts was ever

     terminated.
15) The argument that the respondents were drawing more pension

     than their counterparts in the Department of Posts, therefore, they

     are entitled to the periodical increase of pension on the parity of

     the personnel of the Armed Forces, is not tenable. The respondents

     have discharged their duties as per Army Instructions issued from

     time to time. If they have drawn higher salaries while working in

     the APS than other counterparts in the Department of Posts that

     will not make them at par with the members of the Armed Forces.

     Their birth mark is with the Department of Posts which mark was

     never removed, when they were serving as members of APS. The

     Instructions provided for an option on promotion on every rank in

     the Army to draw either military pay and allowances or civil pay
14
plus deputation allowances meaning thereby that they continue to

     hold their lien on the civil posts in the Department of Posts. Since

     they hold a lien in the Department of Posts they could be recalled

     by the Department of Posts as well as they could seek reversion to

     their parent Department.
16) The respondents were appointed in the Department of Posts and

     were sent on deputation to the APS.           They hold a lien in the

     Department of Posts inasmuch as they can be recalled by the

     Department of Posts and that they can seek reversion to the parent

     department.    Clause 3 (a) of Annexure ‘A’ to Army Instructions

     1959 gives an officer an option at the time of commissioning and a

     further option on each occasion of promotion in Army rank to draw

     either military pay and allowances or civil pay and the deputation

     allowance. Sub clause (c) further provides that pay and allowances

     during the joining period prior to being commissioned as well as

     during transit on reversion will be on the civil rates only, and no

     deputation allowance will be allowed. Such Instructions also state

     that an officer serving in the rank of Major, who is promoted to the

     grade of Director, Postal Service in his parent department will be

     reverted to civil employment but he can be retained in the APS for

     a period not exceeding four months at the discretion of the

     Quartermaster General.         In respect of pension, there is a

     categorical instruction that the officers would be governed by civil

     rules for service pension. An option is available to opt for military

     or civil rules in respect of disability or special family pension.
15
17) In the subsequent Instructions 1985, superseding the earlier

     Instructions, the members of Department of Posts have an option

     at the time of Commission and further option on each occasion of

     promotion in Army rank to draw either military pay and allowances

     or civil pay plus a deputation allowance. The condition of pay and

     allowances of officers joining from the Department of Posts during

     the period prior to Commission as well as on transit on reversion

     will be on the civil rates and that no deputation allowance will be

     allowed remain unchanged. Again, the officers will be governed by

     civil rules for service pension, whereas for disability and family

     pension, Army Instructions No. 64 of 1976 is applicable.
18) In the first Army Instructions issued in the year 1953, there is no

     specific clause pertaining to pension but for disability and family

     pension, an option is given to opt for military or civil rules governed

     by Chapter XXXVIII of Civil Service Regulations.          The service

     element of disability is contemplated on service share basis at the

     time of eventual retirement from the service.       Such Instructions

     were superseded in 1959 and it was those Instructions or later

     Army   Instructions of    1985   which were in force when the

     respondents joined APS.
19) Such Instructions clearly stipulate that the pension to the members

     of APS will be as per civil rules. Such Instructions also contemplate

     that at every stage of promotion in APS, an option is available to

     the officer to choose military pay or the civil pay. These conditions
16
show that the members of the APS continue to hold lien in the

     Department of Posts though they were conferred ranks in the Army

     and were also entitled to certain benefits as the members of the

     Armed Forces but being members of the Armed Forces during the

     period of their Temporary Commission does not make them a

     pensioner of the Armed Forces as contemplated in the Circular

     dated 7th November, 2015.
20) The said Circular confers benefit of OROP upon Ex-servicemen,

     whereas the subsequent Circular dated 3 rd February, 2016 grants

     benefit of OROP to all pensioners in the rank of Commissioned

     Officers and honorary Commissioned Officers etc. who are in

     receipt of pension or family pension as on 1 st July, 2014.    This

     Circular, as explained by Circular dated 7 th February 2016 is

     applicable only to personnel who are drawing pension from the

     Defence Establishments as the said Circular is addressed to the

     Chiefs of three armed forces of the country including personnel

     from Territorial Army. Such Circular has limited application and is

     not applicable to the other civil pensioners of the Union.

     Admittedly, none of the respondents are in receipt of the pension

     from Defence but were granted pension by the Department of

     Posts.
21) We do not find merit in the argument that the benefit of OROP is

     not extended to certain category of pensioners as mentioned in

     para 4.1 of the Circular dated 7 th November 2015 only. Therefore,
17
the pensioners of APS having not been excluded in such Circular,

    would be covered by the decision to grant OROP. Such circular

    excludes only those pensioners who are in receipt of pension for

    the services rendered in the armed forces of the country or the

    armed forces prior to the Independence of the Country or the

    forces which are getting pension for the reason that they were

    members of the State forces at the time of merger of the States

    with Indian Union after independence. Such exclusion is of distinct

    category who are pensioners of the Army at some stage but have

    no relation with the pensioners of defence forces as on 1 st July

    2014. There was never any condition in any policy decision that the

    members of APS will be treated as pensioners of the Armed Forces.
22) The reliance of Mr. Ahmadi on 1979 Rules wherein the Ex-

    servicemen have been defined to include the members of APS, is

    again not tenable. Such Rules are applicable for the purpose of

    recruitment to certain posts in the Central Civil Services. The wide

    definition and purport of the Rules is to provide reservation for Ex-

    servicemen    for   the   purpose   of   employment    in   the   civil

    administration. Such provision is not of general application so as to

    extend the meaning assigned in a particular rule to another set of

    Instructions. Similarly, the Circular dated 3 rd February, 2016 is

    applicable to the defence pensioners.       The Circulars dated 7 th

    November, 2015 and 3rd February, 2016 were addressed to the

    Chiefs of the Armed Forces in respect of the pensioners of the

    forces which is evident from clause 4 of the Circular dated 3 rd
18
February, 2016 when, the benefit of OROP is conferred on all

      pensioners including the Commissioned Officers.
23) The respondents were holders of Temporary Commission only to fa-
cilitate the grant of rank and other benefits but they cannot be

      called as Commissioned Officers.          Even the argument that the

      members of Territorial Army have been granted benefit of OROP is

      again not tenable for the reason that the Territorial Army is gov-

      erned by a statute and is Armed Forces of the Union, who have

      been specifically included in the Circular dated 3 rd February, 2016.

      This Court in exercise of judicial review will interpret the policy de-

      cisions as they exist rather than to expand the scope of Circulars

      when such benefits were not conferred on the members of APS.
24) This Court in a judgement reported as Major M.R. Penghal v.
Union of India8 examined somewhat similar question but in

      different context. In that case, a clerk of the Department of Posts

      was promoted as Major in the APS. He initially sought voluntary

      retirement from the Department of Posts but subsequently sought

      to withdraw his such request. The question was as to whether the

      appellant        therein   can   invoke   jurisdiction   of   the   Central

      Administrative Tribunal or the High Court, it being a case prior to

      the enactment of
Armed Forced Tribunal Act
2007. This Court held

      as under: -
“9. As stated above, although the appellant was selected
               by the Postal Department for appointment to the post of
               clerk, but he could not be given any appointment due to

8   (1998) 5 SCC 454
19
want of vacancy in the unit of his choice. Under such
            circumstances, the appellant was offered an appointment
            to work as a clerk in the Army Postal Service on the
            condition that he would remain a civilian employee on
            deputation in the Army. The appellant accepted the
            aforesaid offer and agreed to the conditions that he would
            revert to the civil appointment in Posts and Telegraphs
            Department on his release from the Indian Army Postal
            Service. With these conditions, the appellant continued to
            serve in the Army as a permanent employee of the Posts
            and Telegraphs Department on deputation and was
            promoted up to the rank of a Major in the Indian Army.
However, the appellant was only given a temporary
            commission and he worked as such till the date when his
            relinquishment was ordered. The aforesaid facts clearly
            demonstrate that the appellant has a lien with the Posts
            and Telegraphs Department working on deputation in the
            Indian Army Postal Service and at no point of time the
            appellant became a full-fledged army personnel. Since the
            appellant was not a member of the Armed Forces and
            continued to work as a civilian on deputation to the Army
            Postal Service, his case was covered under
Section 14(1)
(a) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act
. In that view of the
            matter, the High Court was right in rejecting the writ
            petition filed by the appellant, whereas the Central
            Administrative Tribunal erroneously accepted the claim of
            the appellant that he is an army personnel………... “
25) Another undisputed fact that the respondents have retired from

     service corresponding to the age of the retirement of the

     Department of Posts i.e. 58 years or 60 years. It is not disputed

     that retirement age of a regular Commissioned Officer of the rank

     of Lt. Colonel is 54 years.         Such fact only shows that the

     respondents are the holders of civil posts entitled to civil pension

     and are not the Ex-servicemen to which benefit of OROP was

     conferred. If the respondents are to be accepted as members of

     the Armed Forces in respect of retrial benefits, they would have

     been made to retire at the age of 54 years i.e. the age of the

     superannuation of the personnel of the Armed Forces in the rank of
20
Lt. Colonel.
26) We, thus, hold that the persons such as the respondent and the

     intervenors on deputation to APS from Department of Posts are not

     entitled to the benefit of OROP.       Therefore, the order of the

     Tribunal is not sustainable in law and hence set aside. The appeal

     is allowed.
.............................................J.
                                                   (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                    .............................................J.
                                                         (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 05, 2019.
21