[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ravindra Singh vs District Inspector Of Schools on 6 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1538, 2019 (10) SCC 679, (2019) 137 ALL LR 902, (2019) 14 SCALE 699, (2020) 1 ESC 49, (2020) 1 SERVLJ 104, (2020) 1 SERVLR 402
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
A.S.Bopanna
,
R.Banumathi
[REPORTABLE]

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.9228 OF 2016


          RAVINDRA SINGH                                                        APPELLANT(S)


                                                       VERSUS


          DISTRICT INSPECTOR OF SCHOOLS AND ORS.                                RESPONDENT(S)


                                                 J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
This appeal is directed against the Judgment and Order

          dated 20.05.2016 in the Special Appeal No. 345 of 2016, of

          the            High    Court    of    Judicature      of   Allahabad.    Under    the

          impugned order, the Division Bench rejected the Appeal of

          the Writ Petitioner and upheld the judgment dated 12.04.2016

          whereby, the learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ - A

          No.38790 of 2000, filed by the present appellant.
2.             Before the High Court, the appellant challenged the
Signature Not Verified
decision
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
dated    16.02.2000     of   the     District   Inspector   of
Date: 2019.11.06
14:21:13 IST
Reason:
Schools,               Kanpur        Nagar    whereunder,       the     appellant’s
Page 1/14
representation for financial consent and approval for his

service was negated.            While rejecting the representation,

the authority observed in the speaking order that Government

has   placed    a   ban    on    all   types    of   recruitment       by   the

Management and that the concerned Bilhaur Inter College,

(hereinafter, “the Institution”), was not empowered to make

any appointment.          Moreover, the appellant was found to be

appointed without any financial implication.                  The District

Inspector of Schools passed the impugned speaking order in

pursuance      to   the   High    Court’s      earlier     direction    dated

10.07.1998 in the Writ Petition (C) No.21713 of 1998 and

hearing was afforded to the appellant and the Manager of the

Institution.
3.    Adverting to the speaking order (16.02.2000) of the

Inspector of Schools, which was challenged in the Writ - A

No.38790 of 2000, the Learned Judge noted that the appellant

was appointed in a substantive vacancy which has occurred

after transfer of one Ramesh Chandra Pandey who was serving

in the Institution as a LT Grade Teacher. While appointing

against a substantive vacancy, the Management according to

the   High     Court,      failed      to   adhere    to    the   procedure

contemplated in paragraph 5 of the First Removal of the
Page 2/14
Difficulties Order, 1981.            The Learned Judge in his Judgment

dated     12.04.2016    accordingly        found   no   infirmity    in   the

authority’s      decision,      to   refuse    financial    approval      for

appellant’s appointment.
4.      The above decision was challenged in the Special Appeal

where the appellant reiterated his argument that Management

is competent to appoint even against a substantive vacancy.

The full Bench Judgment in Radha Raizada vs. Committee of

Management Vidyawati Darbari Girls Inter College and Ors.1,

was     cited   to   argue   that    the    Managing    Committee    is   not

denuded of its power during the ban period, to make ad hoc

appointment under Section 18 of the U.P. Act No.5 of 1982.
5.      However those contentions did not impress the Division

Bench and the High Court observed in the impugned order

dated     20.05.2016     that    the       procedure    prescribed     under

paragraph 5 of the First Removal of Difficulties Order, was

disregarded by the Management, in appointing the appellant.

Accordingly, the appeal was found devoid of merit and same

was dismissed resulting in the present challenge.




11994   All.L.J. 1077
Page 3/14
6.   We    have      heard    Mr    Manoj     Prasad,    the     learned      Senior

Advocate representing the appellant.                     The State of Uttar

Pradesh and their officers (Respondent Nos.1, 2 & 4) are

represented by Mr. Harish Pandey, the learned Counsel.                             We

have perused the impugned judgment and considered other the

materials on record.
7.   Assailing the legality of the impugned judgment of the

Allahabad High Court, Mr Manoj Prasad, the learned Senior

Counsel    projects      that       the     appellant    has     served      without

remuneration since 1997 and, therefore, approval for paying

his salary should have been accorded by the authorities.

According       to     the     learned        Counsel,        the     High     Court

misconstrued the ratio in Radha Raizada. The counsel argues

that the Management of the Institution is competent to make

short term ad hoc appointment in available vacancies and

since     the   appellant          was    appointed     after       selection     and

advertisement, his salary should have been approved by the

authorities.
8.   Per    contra,      Mr    Harish       Pandey,     the     learned      Counsel

representing the authorities of the State of Uttar Pradesh

firstly    argues      that        during    the   Government        imposed      ban

period, the Management of the Institution had no authority
Page 4/14
to   make       appointment       against        substantive         vacancy.       The

Government       Counsel        then    refers     to     the    Uttar       Pradesh

Secondary Education Services Commission Procedure (Removal

of Difficulties) Order, 1981 notified under Section 18 of

the Uttar Pradesh Act No.5 of 1982 and submits that at first

instance,       the    Management       should    attempt       to    fill   up     the

substantive          vacancy    by     promotion     and    should         not    take

recourse to direct recruitment.                   Mr Pandey then refers to

the decision/ratio in
Prabhat Kumar Sharma and Others vs.

State of U.P. and Ors.2
, to point out that the High Court’s

Judgment in Radha Raizada(supra) was approved by this Court

and it is too late in the day for the appellant to argue

that he is entitled to financial approval for his service,

although        he     was     unauthorizedly        appointed            against     a

substantive          vacancy,    by    the     Managing    Committee         of     the

Institution.
9.   The    UP       Secondary    Education       Services       Commission         and

Selection Boards Act, 1982 hereinafter “the Act, 1982”, was

enacted to constitute Selection Committees and Selection

Boards     to   select       teachers    for     appointment         in   Government

Aided Private Educational Institutions. Since the Commission

2(1996)   10 SCC 62
Page 5/14
failed to commence functioning before 01.11.1983, in order

to     address    the     difficulties       in    the      interregnum,     the

Government       had   issued   the   First       Uttar     Pradesh    Secondary

Education    Service       Commission    (Removal           of   Difficulties)

Order    dated     1981    followed     by    the     2nd    Removal    of   the

Difficulties Order, 1981, to fill up short term vacancies.

The Section 16 of the Act of 1982, provides for recruitment

of teachers by the Commission on the requisition made by the

Management and then the selected teachers are allotted to

the Intuitions/Colleges as per their requirement.                      When the

Commission is unable to allot teachers, Section 18 comes

into operation and permits appointment of ad hoc teachers,

as a transient measure.
10.1        Analyzing the above prescription of the 1982 Act

and also the provisions of the Removal of the Difficulties

Order, the Allahabad High Court in Radha Raizada(supra) had

formulated for itself the following two questions to be

answered by the Full Bench:
“. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
QUESTION NO. (c)

                What would be the criteria and procedure
             for ad hoc appointment of a teacher or
             Principal   either    under   Removal    of
Page 6/14
Difficulties Order or under Section 18 of
           the U.P. Act, No. 5 of 1982?
QUESTION NO. (d)

              Whether any approval or prior approval
           of the District Inspector of Schools or
           Regional Inspectors of Girls Schools, as the
           case may be, is necessary for making ad hoc
           appointment of a teacher or Principal either
           under Removal of Difficulties Order or under
           Section 18 of the Act?”
           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.2 The Court then observed the following:
“......................................
AD HOC APPOINTMENT BY PROMOTION
35. Paragraph 5 of the First Removal of
           Difficulties Order provides that where any
           vacancy cannot be filled by promotion under
           Paragraph 4 of the order, same may be filled
           by direct recruitment in accordance with the
           procedure laid down in Clauses 2 to 5 of
           Paragraph 5 of the order.
36. Second Removal of Difficulties Order
           provides for ad hoc appointment against the
           short-term vacancy in the posts of teacher
           caused by grant of leave to him or on
           account of his suspension duly approved by
           the   District    Inspector   of   Schools   or
           otherwise. Thus, these provisions show that
           section 18 and First Removal of Difficulties
           Order,   both    independently    empower   the
           Management of Institutions to make ad hoc
           appointment of teachers in the institutions.
But section 18 does not provide the method
           and manner of such appointment. Whereas
           Removal    of    Difficulties    Order    while
           empowering     the     Management     of    the
           Institutions to appoint teachers on ad hoc
           basis further lay down the procedure of such
           ad hoc appointment of teachers.
Page 7/14
37. When a substantive vacancy has been
notified to the Commission and duly selected
teacher is not available for appointment,
controversy has arisen as to whether the
management is required to appoint teacher
either   by   direct   recruitment   or   by
promotion. The power of ad hoc appointment
either by direct recruitment or by promotion
can be exercised only when the management
has notified the substantive vacancy to the
Commission and the Commission has failed to
recommend the name of suitable candidate
within one year from the date of such
notification or the posts of teacher has
actually remained vacant for more than two
months. Thus one of the two conditions is
sine qua non for enabling the management to
exercise the power to appoint a teacher on
ad hoc basis, either by promotion or by
direct recruitment in the institution. If
the condition is absent, such a power to
appoint on ad hoc basis either by promotion
or direct recruitment is not available to
the management of the institution. In case
the pre-condition is found to be present,
the management is first required to fill up
the substantive vacancy by promotion on ad
hoc basis from amongst the senior most
teachers of the institution. Paragraph 4 of
the First Removal of Difficulties Order
provides that every vacancy in the posts of
teacher in lecturer grade shall be filled by
promotion of the senior most teachers in the
institution   in   the   trained   graduate.
Similarly, every vacancy in the post of
teacher in the trained graduate (grade) is
to be filled by promotion by the senior most
teacher of the institution from the trained
undergraduate grade C.T. (grade (now we are
not concerned with it since it is reported
abolished).
38. Paragraph 5 of the First Removal of
Difficulties Order provides that where any
Page 8/14
vacancy cannot be filled by promotion under
paragraph 4 of the Order, same may be filled
by direct recruitment. Thus, it is mandatory
on the part of the Management to first fill
up the vacancy by promotion on the basis of
seniority alone. This method has to be
resorted to as the teachers are available in
the institution and any other method of
recruitment   may    cause    disturbance    in
teaching of the institution which may affect
the career of student. Another reason why
the vacancy has to be filled by ad hoc
appointment by promotion is that it is a
short term appointment in the sense that
shortly a duly selected teacher would be
available for appointment against the said
vacancy. So long the posts can be filled
under paragraph 4 of the Order by promotion,
it is not open to the Management to take
resort to the power to appoint ad hoc
teacher   by    direct    recruitment     under
paragraph   5  of   the    First   Removal   of
Difficulties Order.
AD HOC APPOINTMENT    OF   TEACHERS   BY   DIRECT
RECRUITMENT:
40. It has already been noticed that Section
18 of the Principal Act provides for power
to appoint a teacher purely on ad hoc basis
either by promotion or by direct recruitment
against the substantive vacancy in the
institution when the condition precedent for
exercise of powers exist namely that the
Management has notified the said vacancy to
the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the Commission has
failed to recommend the name of any suitable
candidate for being appointed as teacher
within one year from the date of such
notification or the post of such teacher has
actually remained vacant for more than two
months. However, since the State Government
was   alive  to   the  situation   that  the
Page 9/14
establishment of the Commission may take
long time and even after it is established,
it may take long time to make available the
required teacher in the institution and as
such issued three Removal of Difficulties
Orders namely Removal of Difficulties Order
dated 11-9-1981, Removal of Difficulties
Order   dated  30-1-1982   and   Removal  of
Difficulties Order dated 14-4-1982. In fact
these Removal of Difficulties Orders were
issued to remove the difficulties coming in
the way of a Management in running the
institution in absence of teachers. This
power to appoint ad hoc teachers by direct
recruitment thus, is available only when
pre-conditions mentioned in Section 18 of
the Act are satisfied, secondly the vacancy
is substantive vacancy and thirdly, the
vacancy could not be filled by promotion.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Thus, if contingency arises for ad hoc
appointment of teacher by direct recruitment
the procedure provided under the First
Removal of Difficulties Order has to be
followed. Paragraph 5 of the First Removal
of Difficulties Order provides that the
management shall, as soon as may be, inform
the District Inspector of Schools about the
details    of    vacancy   and   the     District
Inspector      of    Schools    shall      invite
application     from   the   local    employment
Exchange      and     also    through      public
advertisement in at least two newspapers
having    adequate     circulation    in    Uttar
Pradesh.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41. In view of these provisions the ad hoc
appointment   of   a   teacher   by   direct
recruitment can be resorted to only when the
condition precedent for exercise of such
powers as stated in paragraph 18 of the Act
Page 10/14
are present and only in the manner provided
            for in paragraph 5 of the Removal of
            Difficulties Order. However, it goes without
            saying   that   if  a   management   without
            following the procedure indicated above
            makes an ad hoc appointment the District
            Inspector of Schools possess general power
            under the Payment of Salaries Act to stop
            payment of salary to such teachers.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .”
11. The above analysis would suggest that the Management has

very limited scope to make appointment to the substantive

vacancy in their Institution. Adverting to the ratio in

Radha Raizada, the Division Bench observed in the present

impugned order that the Management of the Institution failed

to adhere to the procedure under paragraph 5 of the First

Removal of Difficulties Order, in appointing the appellant,

against a substantive vacancy.          On this basis, the High

Court   declined   to    interfere   with   the   salary   disapproval

decision of the District Inspector of Schools, Kanpur Nagar.
12. Section 18 of the Act of 1982, lays down the process

for direct appointment of ad hoc teachers but before the

Management takes any step to fill up vacancy, the conditions

laid therein must be peremptorily satisfied. The Management

is required to firstly notify the vacancy to the Commission

and   in   turn,   the   Selection    Commission    is     expected   to
Page 11/14
recommend      a    suitable     candidate         within        one    year    of    such

notification. Secondly, the post should have remained vacant

for more than 2 months. Only if these two conditions are

satisfied,      the     Management      can    take       short        term    measures.

Further      stipulations        to     this       process        are    provided      in

paragraphs 4 and 5 of the First Removal of Difficulties

Order. As can be seen, only when the vacancy cannot be

filled    by    promotion       under    paragraph          4,    the    paragraph      5

permits ad hoc appointment by direct recruitment. Besides,

recourse       to   direct      appointment          is     visualized         only    in

accordance under sub-clauses 2 to 5 of paragraph 5. It is

also important to bear in mind that when ad hoc appointments

are   made      under    paragraph       2     of     the        First    Removal      of

Difficulties Order, the duration of such ad hoc appointment

automatically         expires    after       six    months,        under       paragraph

3(b) of the Order.
13. Proceeding with the above understanding of the norms the

question to be decided now is whether the High Court was

correct in its view that the Management of the Institution,

did not adhere to the procedure prescribed under the First

Removal of Difficulties Order to make appointment against a

substantive vacancy.             The paragraph 2 of the Removal of
Page 12/14
Difficulties Order, was substituted by the 2nd Removal of

the Difficulties Order, which enabled the Management to make

appointment against substantive vacancy either by promotion

or by direct recruitment.            In the present matter, it was not

the District Inspector of Schools but the Management, which

resolved     to   appoint     the     appellant.               But     as     earlier

discussed, this is contrary to the prescribed process in

paragraph 5(4) of the First Removal of Difficulties Order.

The learned Single Judge in the High Court specifically

noted   that      there    was   no     adherence         to     the        procedure

prescribed     under      paragraph    5    of      the   First        Removal     of

Difficulties Order. There was concurrence of views of the

learned Single Judge and the Division Bench to the effect

that the State authorities rightly denied financial approval

to the illegal appointment of the appellant.
14. When the impugned judgment is analysed in light of the

applicable norms, there is no escape from the conclusion

that the appellant’s appointment by the Management, was not

in   accordance      with     paragraph        5     of    the        Removal      of

Difficulties Order.         We are also of the view that the ratio

in   Radha   Raizada       (supra)     of     the    Allahabad         High     Court

(approved    by   the     Supreme     Court    in
Prabhat         Kumar     Sharma
Page 13/14
(supra)) was correctly applied to the present facts. The

State coffer should not according to us, be burdened with

salary obligation for an appointment, not made by them. The

decision repudiating the salary claim for the appellant is

also found to be in order since the Management failed to

adhere to the due process in filling up the substantive

vacancy.   Moreover,   the    State     had   imposed   a    ban   on

appointment   during   the   relevant    period.   Therefore,      the

appellant cannot enforce a claim for salary against the

State. The Appeal accordingly is found devoid of merit and

is dismissed. The parties to bear their respective cost.
………………………………………………J.
                                              [R.BANUMATHI]



                                              ………………………………………………J.
                                              [A.S.BOPANNA]



                                              ………………………………………………J.
                                              [HRISHIKESH ROY]

NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 6, 2019
Page 14/14