[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Kamlesh vs Shriram General Insurance Company Ltd on 19 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2004
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1



                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.8796 OF 2019



     KAMLESH                                                                            Appellant(s)

                                                            VERSUS


     SHRIRAM GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY LTD                                              Respondent(s)


                                                        O R D E R
UDAY UMESH LALIT. J
1)                  This appeal arises out of order dated 21.6.2019 passed by the

     National                    Consumer     Disputes        Redressal     Commission      (“National

     Commission” for short) at New Delhi in First Appeal No.797 of 2015.
2)                  In respect of an accident which had occurred in the night

     intervening                  1st/2nd     June,    2009    in   which   a   truck   owned   by   the

     appellant was damaged in fire, a claim was raised by the appellant.

     The                 claim   was   however,       repudiated     by   the   respondent-insurance

     company vide letter dated 9.9.2009 on the basis of a report of a

     Surveyor/Investigator that the fire was not natural.
3)                   In the circumstances, Consumer Complaint No.81/2010 was filed

     by               the   appellant       before    the   State    Consumer    Disputes    Redressal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Commission (“State Commission” for short), Lucknow, U.P. alleging
INDU MARWAH
Date: 2019.11.19
18:30:17 IST
Reason:
deficiency on part of the respondent.                           The principal prayer made in

     the complaint was:
2
“a) That a direction may be issued to the opposite party
     no.1   for  repudiating   the   insurance  claim   of   the
     complainant amounting to Rs.13,50,000/- in his favour;”
4)   The   appellant   also   claimed       compensation   and   costs.   In   its

counter affidavit the stand taken by the respondent was as under:
“6. That the respondent appointed independent surveyor
     Shri S.K. Tiwari for spot survey on intimation of the
     alleged fire loss of the insured Truck.       The Surveyor
     submitted spot report dated 23.6.2009 after inspecting the
     spot and vehicle on 3.6.2009.    The spot surveyor in its
     report apart from pointing out the damages to the insured
     truck due to alleged fire, specifically gave observations
     to the effect that “it is the case of manipulations and
     fabrication.   It needs further investigation”.   The spot
     surveyor also submitted zerox copy of newspaper (Dainik
     Jagaran Daily) dated 3.6.2009.     The observation of the
     spot surveyor to the effect that green grass and leaves
     etc. surrounding the burnt parts was well in order i.e.
     smiling, is very significant.
7.    That in the light of observations and recommendation
     made by Spot Surveyor, the answering respondent got the
     matter investigated and through Sri Prabhakar Rai,
     Advocate who submitted is detailed report dated 31.8.2009.
The investigator also categorically concluded in his
     report   based   upon   various  facts,   statements   and
     circumstances that the said incident of accident and fire
     is doubtful.”
5)   The matter was considered by the State Commission and by its

order dated 11.8.2015. The State Commission rejected the case set

up by the respondent that there was no natural fire and the vehicle

was set afire.   It was, therefore concluded as under:
“It is established from the evidence produced by the
     opponent   insurance  company  that   the  truck   of  the
     complainant was found in burnt condition at the place of
     accident on the next day of alleged incident.     In these
     circumstances, we are of the view that the opponent
3
insurance company is deficient in services by repudiating
     the insurance claim of the complainant. The insured value
     of the Truck in question is admittedly Rs.13 Lakh 50
     Thousand.    Therefore, we are of the view that the
     complainant is entitled to this amount with interest from
     the opponent insurance company.”


     The   claim    of   the   appellant    was     accepted     and   following

directions were issued:
“The opponent insurance company is hereby directed
     to pay the complainant 13,50,000 with 9% interest from the
     date of institution of the complaint till its payment
     within a period of one month. The opponent will also pay
     a Rs.10,000/- to the complainant as litigation expenses
     within the fixed period.
If the above amount is not paid within the time
     fixed then the opponent will be liable to pay interest at
     the rate of 12% on the entire amount to the complainant.
Both    the   parties   will   bear    their   own   litigation
     expenses.”
6)   The respondent being aggrieved, filed First Appeal No.797 of

2015 before the National Commission.              It was observed that the

incident occurred during the night of 1st/2nd June, 2009 but the

intimation to the respondent was given only on 3.6.2009 and as such

there was infraction on part of the appellant.                  Relying on the

decision of this Court in Amalendu Sahu vs. Oriental Insurance Co.
Ltd. [(2010) 4 SCC 536], the National Commission quantified the

claim at 60% of IDV of the vehicle. The matter was considered by

the National Commission as under:-
“7. I have given a thoughtful consideration to the
     arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties.
     Though it has been argued by the learned counsel for the
4
appellant that the truck was deliberately put on fire to
get the insurance claim, but no independent proof has been
filed by the appellant to prove that the damage was stage
managed. Even the statements of the reporter as well as of
the sales man of the petrol pump relied upon by the
investigator have not been filed because those persons have
refused to give any statement in writing. This appeals to
logic that if a truck is purchased only 2-3 months back,
why the truck owner will put the truck into fire, because
in any case the insurance claim can be awarded to the value
of IDV at the most.     Learned counsel for the Insurance
Company has not been able to pin point any purpose behind
the deliberate action of the owner of the truck to put the
truck on fire. Clearly there is delay in giving intimation
to the police and no proper justification has been given by
the complainant. Though, it is true that it is not a case
of theft where immediate intimation to the police is
required yet the role of FIR in such a case cannot be
minimised.
8.    In the present case, the truck body has been burned
as stated by surveyor/investigator, still the matter could
not be investigated by the police properly as information
was given to the police on 06.06.2009 with delay of 4 days.
It is also important to note that the intimation to the
Insurance Company has been given on 03.06.2005 whereas the
condition No.1 of the policy requires that in case of
accident immediate notice will be given to the Insurance
Company to enable the Insurance Company to appoint a
surveyor to have the spot inspection as quickly as
possible.   Here, the surveyor could only be appointed on
03.06.2005 who could not verify the recovery of truck by
the crane which is a crucial factor in the present case.
Definitely the respondent/complainant has violated the
condition of the policy by not immediately giving
information to the Insurance Company. The State Commission
has not given any importance to this delay and has allowed
the insurance claim for full IDV of the vehicle. Clearly,
the delay in giving intimation to the Insurance Company is
an   important   factor,  which   should   be  taken   into
consideration while deciding the insurance claim.        As
observed   above,   the  accident   of   the  vehicle   and
consequently the vehicle catching fire are the proved
facts, respondent/complainant is entitled to insurance
claim. Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Amalendu Sahu vs. Oriental
Insurance Co. Ltd. II
(2010) C.P.J. 9 (S.C.), has observed:
“14.
In this connection reference may be made to a
decision of National Commission in the case of
New India
Assurance Company Limited v. Narayan Prasad Appaprasad
Pathak
, reported in (2006) CPJ 144 (NC). In that case also
5
the question was, whether the insurance company can
repudiate the claims in a case where the vehicle carrying
passengers and the driver did not have a proper driving
licence and met with an accident. While granting claim on
non-standard basis the National Commission set out in its
judgment the guidelines issued by the Insurance Company
about settling all such non-standard claims.     The said
guidelines are set out below:-
Sl.                                      Percentage of
No.    Description                       settlement

(I)    Under declaration of licensed     Deduct 3 years’
       carrying capacity                 difference in
                                         premium from the
                                         amount of claim
                                         or deduct 25% of
                                         claim amount,
                                         whichever is
                                         higher

(ii)   Overloading of vehicles beyond    Pay claims not
       licensed carrying capacity        exceeding 75% of
                                         admissible claim.

(iii) Any other breach of                Pay upto 75% of
      warranty/condition of policy       admissible claim.
      including limitation as to use.



9.    Relying upon the above guidelines given       by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, it is seen that in the       present
matter one of the policy conditions has been        clearly
violated and that being an important condition, I   deem it
appropriate to allow the insurance claim @ 60% of   the IDV
of the vehicle.
10.   On the basis of the above discussion, the first
appeal No.797 of 2015 is partly allowed and the order of
the State Commission is modified to the extent that instead
of full IDV Rs.13,50,000/-, the appellant Company shall
be liable to pay 60% of the IDV i.e. Rs.8,10,000/- (rupees
eight lakh ten thousand only). This amount shall be paid by
the Insurance Company along with 7% p.a. interest from the
date of filing of the complaint. The litigation expenses
of Rs.10,000/- awarded by the State Commission is
maintained. The appellant is directed to comply with the
order within 45 days from the date of service/receipt of
this order.”
6
7)   In this appeal questioning the correctness of the decision of

the National Commission, Mr. Ajay Kumar, learned advocate for the

appellant submitted that        the intimation was given as early as

possible and there was no delay on part of the appellant; that

reliance on the decision in       Amalendu Sahu was not quite correct;
and that the National Commission ought not to have reduced             the

claim amount.
Ms.   Meenakshi   Midha,   learned   advocate   appearing   for   the

respondent supported the decision of the National Commission and

submitted that there was delay in intimating the Insurance Company

and as such there was breach of warranty/condition of Policy. She

also submitted that the intimation to Police was given only on

6.6.2009 and therefore, the National Commission was justified in

reducing the claim amount.
8)   We have gone through the policy in question. Under the caption

“conditions” which are part of the Policy, the relevant condition

states:-
“1. Notice shall be given in writing to the Company
     immediately upon the occurrence of any accidental loss or
     damage in the event of any claim and thereafter the
     insured shall give all such information and assistance as
     the Company shall require.       Every letter claim writ
     summons and/or process or copy thereof shall be forwarded
     to the Company immediately on receipt by the Insured.
     Notice shall also be given in writing to the Company
     immediately the Insured shall have knowledge of any
     impending prosecution, inquest or fatal inquiry in respect
     of any occurrence which may give rise to a claim under
     this Policy. In case of theft or criminal act which may be
7
the subject of a claim under this Policy the Insured shall
      give immediate notice to the police and co-operate with
      the Company in securing the conviction of the offender.”
9)    The aforesaid condition has two limbs:-
i)    Notice shall be given in writing to the Company
            immediately upon the occurrence of any accidental
            loss or damage; and
ii)   In case of theft or criminal act which may be the
            subject of a claim under this Policy, the Insured
            shall give immediate notice to the police.
The second limb contemplates issuance of immediate notice to

the police only in cases of theft or criminal act.   In the event of

an occurrence of any accidental loss or damage, the condition does

not contemplate issuance of any notice to the police.
10)   The case that the appellant came up with was of an accidental

loss, and, therefore, if no immediate notice was issued to the

police, there was no infraction on part of the appellant.          The

accident had occurred during the night of 1 st and 2nd June, 2009 and

the intimation was given to the respondent on 3rd of June, 2009.    In

our view, the notice was not delayed on any count and did satisfy

the requirements contemplated by the conditions in the policy.
11)   The decision of this Court in
Amalendu Sahoo
(supra) had dealt

with fact situation where, in violation of the terms of the policy,

the vehicle in question was being used for hire and, therefore, the

guidelines, as set out in para 8 of the order impugned herein were
8
referred to and relied upon.            As there was no violation on part of

the appellant, the principle on the basis of which the admissible

claim could be reduced, does not apply.
12)   In   our   view,   there    was    thus     no   reason    for   the    National

Commission to hold that there was any violation of the requisite

conditions on part of the appellant and there was no justification

to reduce the claim to the extent of 60% of the IDV of the vehicle.

The   conclusions    drawn    and      the   directions    issued      by    the   State

Commission, in our view, were quite correct and did not call for

any interference.
13)   We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the view taken by

the   National   Commission      and    restore    the   order    dated     11.08.2015

passed by the State Commission.
14)   The appeal is thus allowed without any order as to costs.
........................J.
                                                       (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                                                       .......................J.
                                                       (VINEET SARAN)
      New Delhi
      November 19, 2019.