[Cites
147
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Cen.Pub.Information Officer,Sci . vs Subhash Chandra Agarwal on 13 November, 2019
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
N.V. Ramana
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
Deepak Gupta
,
Sanjiv Khanna
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10044 OF 2010


               CENTRAL PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER,
               SUPREME COURT OF INDIA                                      …..     APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

               SUBHASH CHANDRA AGARWAL                                     ….. RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                 WITH

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10045 OF 2010

                                                                 AND

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2683 OF 2010




                                                        JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
This judgment would decide the afore-captioned appeals

                                preferred by the Central Public Information Officer (‘CPIO’ for

                                short), Supreme Court of India (appellant in Civil Appeal Nos.

                                10044 and 10045 of 2010), and Secretary General, Supreme
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2019.11.13
Court of India (appellant in Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010), against
18:38:18 IST
Reason:
the common respondent – Subhash Chandra Agarwal, and seeks
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 1 of 108
to answer the question as to ‘how transparent is transparent

          enough’1 under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
(‘
RTI Act
’ for

          short) in the context of collegium system for appointment and

          elevation of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts;

          declaration of assets by judges, etc.
2.        Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 titled Central Public Information

          Officer, Supreme Court of
India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
arises from an application moved by Subhash Chandra Agarwal

          before the CPIO, Supreme Court of India on 6th July, 2009 to

          furnish a copy of the complete correspondence with the then Chief

          Justice of India as the Times of India had reported that a Union

          Minister had approached, through a lawyer, Mr. Justice R.

          Reghupathi of the High Court of Madras to influence his judicial

          decisions. The information was denied by the CPIO, Supreme

          Court of India on the ground that the information sought by the

          applicant-respondent was not handled and dealt with by the

          Registry of the Supreme Court of India and the information

          relating thereto was neither maintained nor available with the

          Registry. First appeal filed by Subhash Chandra Aggarwal was



1   Heading of an article written by Alberto Alemanno: “How Transparent is Transparent Enough?
    Balancing Access to Information Against Privacy in European Judicial Selection” reproduced in
    Michal Bobek (ed.) Selecting Europe’s Judges: A Critical Review of the Appointment Procedures to
    the European Courts (Oxford University Press 2015).
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                 Page 2 of 108
dismissed by the appellate authority vide order dated 05th

       September, 2009. On further appeal, the Central Information

       Commission (‘CIC’ for short) vide order dated 24th November,

       2009 has directed disclosure of information observing that

       disclosure would not infringe upon the constitutional status of the

       judges. Aggrieved, the CPIO, Supreme Court of India has

       preferred this appeal.
3.     Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 arises from an application dated

       23rd January, 2009 moved by Subhash Chandra Agarwal before

       the CPIO, Supreme Court of India to furnish a copy of complete

       file/papers as available with the Supreme Court of India inclusive

       of copies of complete correspondence exchanged between the

       concerned constitutional authorities with file notings relating to the

       appointment of Mr. Justice H.L. Dattu, Mr. Justice A.K. Ganguly

       and Mr. Justice R.M. Lodha superseding seniority of Mr. Justice A.

       P. Shah, Mr. Justice A.K. Patnaik and Mr. Justice V.K. Gupta,

       which was allegedly objected to by the Prime Minister. The CPIO

       vide order dated 25th February, 2009 had denied this information

       observing that the Registry did not deal with the matters pertaining

       to the appointment of the judges to the Supreme Court of India.

       Appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts

       are made by the President of India as per the procedure
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 3 of 108
prescribed by law and the matters relating thereto were not dealt

         with and handled by the Registry of the Supreme Court. The

         information was neither maintained nor available with the Registry.

         First appeal preferred by Subhash Chandra Agarwal was rejected

         vide order dated 25th March, 2009 by the appellate authority. On

         further appeal, the CIC has accepted the appeal and directed

         furnishing of information by relying on the judgment dated 02nd

         September, 2009 of the Delhi High Court in Writ Petition (Civil)

         No. 288 of 2009 titled Central Public Information Officer,

         Supreme Court of
India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal &

         Another
.
The CIC has also relied on the decision of this Court in
S.P. Gupta v. Union of India & Others2
to reach its conclusion.

         Aggrieved, the CPIO, Supreme Court of India has preferred the

         present appeal stating, inter alia, that the judgment in Writ Petition

         (Civil) No. 288 of 2009 was upheld by the Full Bench of the Delhi

         High Court in LPA No. 501 of 2009 vide judgment dated 12th

         January, 2010, which judgment is the subject matter of appeal

         before this Court in Civil Appeal No.2683 of 2010.
4.       Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 arises from an application dated

         10th November, 2007 moved by Subhash Chandra Agarwal



2   (1981) Supp SCC 87
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                               Page 4 of 108
seeking information on declaration of assets made by the judges

       to the Chief Justices in the States, which application was

       dismissed by the CPIO, Supreme Court of India vide order/letter

       dated 30th November, 2007 stating that information relating to

       declaration of assets of the judges of the Supreme Court of India

       and the High Courts was not held by or was not under control of

       the Registry of the Supreme Court of India. On the first appeal, the

       appellate authority had passed an order of remit directing the

       CPIO, Supreme Court of India to follow the procedure under
Section 6(3)
of the RTI Act and to inform Subhash Chandra

       Agarwal about the authority holding such information as was

       sought. The CPIO had thereafter vide order dated 07th February,

       2008 held that the applicant should approach the CPIO of the

       High Courts and filing of the application before the CPIO of the

       Supreme Court was against the spirit of
Section 6(3)
of the RTI

       Act. Thereupon, Subhash Chandra Agarwal had directly preferred

       an appeal before the CIC, without filing the first appeal, which

       appeal was allowed vide order dated 06th January, 2009 directing:
“… in view of what has been observed above, the
                 CPIO of the Supreme Court is directed to provide the
                 information asked for by the appellant in his RTI
                 application as to whether such declaration of assets
                 etc. has been filed by the Hon’ble Judges of the
                 Supreme Court or not within ten working days from the
                 date of receipt of this decision notice.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                              Page 5 of 108
5.    Aggrieved, the CPIO, Supreme Court of India had filed Writ

      Petition (Civil) No. 288 of 2009 before the Delhi High Court, which

      was decided by the learned Single Judge vide judgment dated 02nd

      September, 2009, and the findings were summarised as:
“84. […]
                 Re Point Nos. 1 & 2 Whether the CJI is a public
                 authority and whether the CPIO, of the Supreme Court
                 of India, is different from the office of the CJI; and if so,
                 whether the Act covers the office of the CJI;
Answer: The CJI is a public authority under the
Right to
                 Information Act
and the CJI holds the information
                 pertaining to asset declarations in his capacity as Chief
                 Justice; that office is a “public authority” under the Act
                 and is covered by its provisions.
Re Point No. 3: Whether asset declaration by Supreme
                 Court Judges, pursuant to the 1997 Resolution are
                 “information”, under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
.
Answer: It is held that the second part of the
                 respondent's application, relating to declaration of
                 assets by the Supreme Court Judges, is “information”
                 within the meaning of the expression, under
Section 2
(f) of the Act. The point is answered accordingly; the
                 information pertaining to declarations given, to the CJI
                 and the contents of such declaration are “information”
                 and subject to the provisions of the
Right to Information
                 Act
.
Re Point No. 4: If such asset declarations are
                 “information” does the CJI hold them in a “fiduciary”
                 capacity, and are they therefore, exempt from
                 disclosure under the Act

                 Answer: The petitioners' argument about the CJI
                 holding asset declarations in a fiduciary capacity,
                 (which would be breached if it is directed to be
                 disclosed, in the manner sought by the applicant) is
                 insubstantial. The CJI does not hold such declarations
                 in a fiduciary capacity or relationship.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 6 of 108
Re Point No. 5: Whether such information is exempt
                 from disclosure by reason of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act.
                 Answer: It is held that the contents of asset
                 declarations, pursuant to the 1997 resolution—and the
                 1999 Conference resolution—are entitled to be treated
                 as personal information, and may be accessed in
                 accordance with the procedure prescribed under
Section 8(1)(j)
; they are not otherwise subject to
                 disclosure. As far as the information sought by the
                 applicant in this case is concerned, (i.e. whether the
                 declarations were made pursuant to the 1997
                 resolution) the procedure under
Section 8(1)(j)
is
                 inapplicable.
Re Point No. (6): Whether the lack of clarity about the
                 details of asset declaration and about their details, as
                 well as lack of security renders asset declarations and
                 their disclosure, unworkable.
Answer: These are not insurmountable obstacles; the
                 CJI, if he deems it appropriate, may in consultation with
                 the Supreme Court Judges, evolve uniform standards,
                 devising the nature of information, relevant formats,
                 and if required, the periodicity of the declarations to be
                 made. The forms evolved, as well as the procedures
                 followed in the United States—including the redaction
                 norms—under the Ethics in Government Act, 1978,
                 reports of the US Judicial Conference, as well as the
                 Judicial Disclosure Responsibility Act, 2007, which
                 amends the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 to: (1)
                 restrict disclosure of personal information about family
                 members of Judges whose revelation might endanger
                 them; and (2) extend the authority of the Judicial
                 Conference to redact certain personal information of
                 judges from financial disclosure reports may be
                 considered.”
6.     On further appeal by the CPIO, Supreme Court of India, LPA No.

       501 of 2009 was referred to the Full Bench, which has vide its

       decision dated 12th January, 2010 dismissed the appeal. This
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 7 of 108
judgment records that the parties were ad-idem with regard to

       point Nos. 1 and 2 as the CPIO, Supreme Court of India had fairly

       conceded and accepted the conclusions arrived at by the learned

       Single Judge and, thus, need not be disturbed. Nevertheless, the

       Full Bench had felt it appropriate to observe that they were in full

       agreement with the reasoning given by the learned Single Judge.

       The expression ‘public authority’ as used in the
RTI Act
is of wide

       amplitude and includes an authority created by or under the

       Constitution of India, which description holds good for the Chief

       Justice of India. While the Chief Justice of India is designated as

       one of the competent authorities under
Section 2(e)
of the RTI

       Act, the Chief Justice of India besides discharging his role as

       ‘head of the judiciary’ also performs a multitude of tasks assigned

       to him under the Constitution and various other enactments. In the

       absence of any indication that the office of the Chief Justice of

       India is a separate establishment with its own CPIO, it cannot be

       canvassed that “the office of the CPIO of the Supreme Court is

       different from the office of the CJI” (that is, the Chief Justice of

       India). Further, neither side had made any submissions on the

       issue of ‘unworkability’ on account of ‘lack of clarity’ or ‘lack of

       security’ vis-à-vis asset declarations by the judges. The Full
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                            Page 8 of 108
Bench had, thereafter, re-casted the remaining three questions as

       under:
“(1) Whether the respondent had any "right to
                 information" under
Section 2(j)
of the Act in respect of
                 the information regarding making of declarations by the
                 Judges of the Supreme Court pursuant to 1997
                 Resolution?
(2) If the answer to question (1) above is in affirmative,
                 whether CJI held the "information" in his "fiduciary"
capacity, within the meaning of the expression used in
Section 8(1)(e)
of the Act?
(3) Whether the information about the declaration of
                 assets by the Judges of the Supreme Court is exempt
                 from disclosure under the provisions of
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act?”

               The above questions were answered in favour of the

       respondent-Subhash Chandra Aggarwal as the Full Bench has

       held that the respondent had the right to information under
Section

       2(j)
of the RTI Act with regard to the information in the form of

       declarations of assets made pursuant to the 1997 Resolution. The

       Chief Justice did not hold such declarations in a fiduciary capacity

       or relationship and, therefore, the information was not exempt

       under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act. Addressing the third

       question, the Bench had observed:
“116. In the present case the particulars sought for by
                 the respondent do not justify or warrant protection
                 under
Section 8(1)(j)
inasmuch as the only information
                 the applicant sought was whether 1997 Resolution was
                 complied with. That kind of innocuous information does
                 not warrant the protection granted by
Section 8(1)(j)
.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 9 of 108
We concur with the view of the learned single Judge
                 that the contents of asset declarations, pursuant to the
                 1997 Resolution, are entitled to be treated as personal
                 information, and may be accessed in accordance with
                 the procedure prescribed under
Section 8(1)(j)
; that
                 they are not otherwise subject to disclosure. Therefore,
                 as regards contents of the declarations, information
                 applicants would have to, whenever they approach the
                 authorities, under the Act satisfy them under
Section
                 8(1)(j)
that such disclosure is warranted in “larger
                 public interest.”
7.     The afore-captioned three appeals were tagged to be heard and

       decided together vide order dated 26th November, 2010, the

       operative portion of which reads as under:
“12. Having heard the learned Attorney General and
                 the learned counsel for the respondent, we are of the
                 considered opinion that a substantial question of law as
                 to the interpretation of the Constitution is involved in
                 the present case which is required to be heard by a
                 Constitution Bench.       The case on hand raises
                 important questions of constitutional importance
                 relating to the position of Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
                 India under the Constitution and the independence of
                 the Judiciary in the scheme of the Constitution on the
                 one hand and on the other, fundamental right to
                 freedom of speech and expression.              Right to
                 information is an integral part of the fundamental right
                 to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by
                 the Constitution.
Right to Information Act
merely
                 recognizes the constitutional right of citizens to
                 freedom of speech and expression. Independence of
                 Judiciary forms part of basic structure of the
                 Constitution of India. The independence of Judiciary
                 and the fundamental right to free speech and
                 expression are of a great value and both of them are
                 required to be balanced.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                Page 10 of 108
8.     This order while referring the matter to a larger bench had framed

       the following substantial questions of law as to the interpretation of

       the Constitution, which read as under:
“1. Whether the concept of independence of judiciary
                 requires and demands the prohibition of furnishing of
                 the information sought? Whether the information
                 sought for amounts to interference in the functioning of
                 the Judiciary?
2. Whether the information sought for cannot be
                 furnished to avoid any erosion in the credibility of the
                 decisions and to ensure a free and frank expression of
                 honest opinion by all the constitutional functionaries,
                 which is essential for effective consultation and for
                 taking the right decision?
3. Whether the information sought for is exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Right to Information Act?”
9.     We have heard Mr. K.K. Venugopal, Attorney General of India, Mr.

       Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India on behalf of the Supreme

       Court of India and Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned advocate for

       Subhash Chandra Agarwal. The appellants have contended that

       disclosure      of    the    information   sought   would   impede     the

       independence of judges as it fails to recognise the unique position

       of the judiciary within the framework of the Constitution which

       necessitates that the judges ought not to be subjected to ‘litigative

       public debate’ and such insulation is constitutional, deliberate and

       essential to the effective functioning of the institution. Right to

       information is not an unfettered constitutional right, albeit a right
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                Page 11 of 108
available within the framework of the
RTI Act
, which means that

        the right is subject, among other conditions, to the exclusions,

        restrictions and conditions listed in the Second Schedule and in
Sections 8
to
11
of the RTI Act. In support, the appellants have

        relied upon Re Coe’s Estate Ebert et al v. State et. al3, Bhudan

        Singh and Another v. Nabi Bux and Another4, Kailash Rai v.
Jai Ram5 and Dollfus Mieg et Compagnie S.A. v. Bank of

        England6. Information sought when exempt under
Section 8
of the

        RTI Act cannot be disclosed. Information on assets relates to

        personal information, the disclosure of which has no bearing on

        any public activity or interest and is, therefore, exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. Similarly, information of prospective

        candidates who are considered for judicial appointments and/or

        elevation relates to their personal information, the disclosure of

        which would cause unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy

        and serves no larger public interest. Further, the information on

        assets is voluntarily declared by the judges to the Chief Justice of

        India in his fiduciary capacity as the pater familias of the judiciary.

        Consultations and correspondence between the office of the Chief

        Justice of India and other constitutional functionaries are made on


3 33 Cal.2d 502
4 1969 (2) SCC 481
5 1973 (1) SCC 527
6 (1950) 2 All E.R. 611
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                              Page 12 of 108
the basis of trust and confidence which ascribes the attributes of a

         fiduciary to the office of the Chief Justice. Information relating to

         the appointment of judges is shared among other constitutional

         functionaries in their fiduciary capacities, which makes the

         information exempt under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act.
The

         respondent, on the other hand, has by relying on the dicta in
State

         of U.P. v. Raj Narain and Others7 and S. P. Gupta
(supra)

         argued that disclosure of the information sought does not

         undermine the independence of the judiciary. Openness and

         transparency in functioning would better secure the independence

         of the judiciary by placing any attempt made to influence or

         compromise the independence of the judiciary in the public

         domain. Further, the citizens have a legitimate and constitutional

         right to seek information about the details of any such attempt.

         Thus, disclosure, and not secrecy, enhances the independence of

         the judiciary. No legitimate concerns exist which may inhibit

         consultees from freely expressing themselves or which might

         expose candidates to spurious allegations by disclosing the

         consultative process for appointing judges. Given the nature of the

         information sought, disclosure of the information will serve the

         larger public interest and, therefore, such interest outweighs the


7   (1975) 4 SCC 428
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 13 of 108
privilege of exemption granted to personal information under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. If any personal information is

         involved, the same could be dealt with on a case-by-case basis by

         disclosing the information that serves public interest after severing

         the records as per
Section 10
of the RTI Act. There is no fiduciary

         relationship between the Chief Justice and the judges or among

         the constitutional functionaries as envisaged under
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act which could be a ground for holding back the

         information.
Reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in
Central Board of Secondary Education and Another v. Aditya

         Bandopadhyay and Others8
and
Reserve Bank of India v.

         Jayantilal N. Mistry9
, to contend that the duty of a public servant

         is not to act for the benefit of another public servant, that is, the

         Chief Justice and other functionaries are meant to discharge their

         constitutional duties and not act as a fiduciary of anyone, except

         the people. In arguendo, even if there exists a fiduciary

         relationship among the functionaries, disclosure can be made if it

         serves the larger public interest. Additionally, candour and

         confidentiality are not heads of exemption under the
RTI Act
and,

         therefore, cannot be invoked as exemptions in this case.



8   (2011) 8 SCC 497
9   (2016) 3 SCC 525
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 14 of 108
10.    For clarity and convenience, we would deal with the issues point-
wise, albeit would observe that Point no. 1 (referred to as point

       Nos.1 and 2 in the judgment in LPA No. 501 of 2009 dated 12th

       January, 2010) was not contested before the Full Bench but as

       some clarification is required, it has been dealt below.


POINT NO. 1: WHETHER THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA AND
             THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA ARE TWO
             SEPARATE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES?
11.   Terms ‘competent authority’ and ‘public authority’ have been

      specifically defined in clauses (e) and (h) to
Section 2
of the RTI

      Act, which read:
“(e) "competent authority" means—
(i)   the Speaker in the case of the House of the
                       People or the Legislative Assembly of a State or a
                       Union territory having such Assembly and the
                       Chairman in the case of the Council of States or
                       Legislative Council of a State;
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the
                       Supreme Court;
(iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court in the
                       case of a High Court;
(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case
                       may be, in the case of other authorities
                       established or constituted by or under the
                       Constitution;
(v)   the administrator appointed under
article 239
of the Constitution;
xx    xx       xx
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 15 of 108
(h) "public authority" means any authority or body or
                   institution  of    self-government  established    or
                   constituted—
(a)   by or under the Constitution;
(b)   by any other law made by Parliament;
(c)   by any other law made by State Legislature;
(d)   by notification issued or order made by the
                              appropriate Government, and includes any—
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially
                                   financed;
(ii) non-Government organisation substantially
                                   financed,
                                   directly or indirectly by funds provided by
                                   the appropriate Government;”
12.      Term ‘public authority’ under
Section 2(h)
of the RTI Act includes

         any authority or body or an institution of self-government

         established by the Constitution or under the Constitution.
Interpreting the expression ‘public authority’ in
Thalappalam

         Service Cooperative Bank Limited and Others v. State of

         Kerala and Others10
, this Court had observed:
“30. The legislature, in its wisdom, while defining the
                   expression “public authority” under
Section 2(h)
,
                   intended to embrace only those categories, which are
                   specifically included, unless the context of the Act
                   otherwise requires.
Section 2(h)
has used the
                   expressions “means” and “includes”. When a word is
                   defined to “mean” something, the definition is prima
                   facie restrictive and where the word is defined to
                   “include” some other thing, the definition is prima facie
                   extensive. But when both the expressions “means” and
                   “includes” are used, the categories mentioned there


10   (2013) 16 SCC 82
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 16 of 108
would exhaust themselves. The meanings of the
                 expressions “means” and “includes” have been
                 explained by this Court in
DDA v. Bhola Nath Sharma
(in paras 25 to 28). When such expressions are used,
                 they may afford an exhaustive explanation of the
                 meaning which for the purpose of the Act, must
                 invariably be attached to those words and expressions.
31.
Section 2(h)
exhausts the categories mentioned
                 therein. The former part of
Section 2(h)
deals with:
(1) an authority or body or institution of self-
government established by or under the
                     Constitution,
                 (2) an authority or body or institution of self-
government established or constituted by any other
                     law made by Parliament,
                 (3) an authority or body or institution of self-
government established or constituted by any other
                     law made by the State Legislature, and
                 (4) an authority or body or institution of self-
government established or constituted by
                     notification issued or order made by the appropriate
                     Government.”
13.
Article 124
of the Constitution, which relates to the establishment

       and constitution of the Supreme Court of India, states that there

       shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice

       and other judges. It is undebatable that the Supreme Court of

       India is a ‘public authority’, as defined vide clause (h) to
Section 2
of the RTI Act as it has been established and constituted by or

       under the Constitution of India. The Chief Justice of India as per

       sub-clause (ii) in clause (e) to
Section 2
is the competent authority

       in the case of the Supreme Court. Consequently, in terms of
Section 28
of the RTI Act, the Chief Justice of India is empowered
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                              Page 17 of 108
to frame rules, which have to be notified in the Official Gazette, to

       carry out the provisions of the
RTI Act
.
14.    The Supreme Court of India, which is a ‘public authority’, would

       necessarily include the office of the Chief Justice of India and the

       judges in view of
Article 124
of the Constitution. The office of the

       Chief Justice or for that matter the judges is not separate from the

       Supreme Court, and is part and parcel of the Supreme Court as a

       body, authority and institution. The Chief Justice and the Supreme

       Court are not two distinct and separate ‘public authorities’, albeit

       the latter is a ‘public authority’ and the Chief Justice and the

       judges together form and constitute the ‘public authority’, that is,

       the Supreme Court of India. The interpretation to
Section 2(h)
cannot be made in derogation of the Constitution. To hold to the

       contrary would imply that the Chief Justice of India and the

       Supreme Court of India are two distinct and separate public

       authorities, and each would have their CPIOs and in terms of sub-

       section (3) to
Section 6
of the RTI Act an application made to the

       CPIO of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice would have to be

       transferred to the other when ‘information’ is held or the subject

       matter is more closely connected with the ‘functions’ of the other.

       This would lead to anomalies and difficulties as the institution,

       authority or body is one. The Chief Justice of India is the head of
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 18 of 108
the institution and neither he nor his office is a separate public

       authority.
15.    This is equally true and would apply to the High Courts in the

       country as
Article 214
states that there shall be a High Court for

       each State and
Article 216
states that every High Court shall

       consist of a Chief Justice and such other judges as the President

       of India may from time to time deem it appropriate to appoint.


POINT NO. 2: INFORMATION AND                   RIGHT       TO   INFORMATION
             UNDER THE RTI ACT
16.    Terms ‘information’, ‘record’ and ‘right to information’ have been

       defined under clauses (f), (i) and (j) to
Section 2
of the RTI Act

       which are reproduced below:
“(f) “information” means any material in any form,
                 including records, documents, memos, e-mails,
                 opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
                 logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models,
                 data material held in any electronic form and
                 information relating to any private body which can be
                 accessed by a public authority under any other law for
                 the time being in force;
xx         xx          xx

                 (i) "record" includes—

                      (a) any document, manuscript and file;
(b) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a
                      document;
(c) any reproduction of image or images embodied in
                      such microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                              Page 19 of 108
(d) any other material produced by a computer or any
                      other device;
(j) “right to information” means the right to information
                 accessible under this Act which is held by or under the
                 control of any public authority and includes the right to—
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;
(ii) taking notes, extracts       or   certified   copies   of
                         documents or records;
(iii) taking certified samples of material;
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes,
                         floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other
                         electronic mode or through printouts where such
                         information is stored in a computer or in any other
                         device;”
17.    ‘Information’ as per the definition clause is broad and wide, as it is

       defined to mean “material in any form” with amplifying words

       including records (a term again defined in widest terms vide

       clause (i) to
Section 2
of the RTI Act), documents, emails, memos,

       advices, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models,

       data material held in electronic form, etc. The last portion of the

       definition clause which states that the term ‘information’ would

       include ‘information relating to any private body which can be

       accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time

       being in force’ has to be read as reference to ‘information’ not

       presently available or held by the public authority but which can be

       accessed by the public authority from a private body under any
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 20 of 108
other law for the time being in force. The term – ‘private body’ in

       the clause has been used to distinguish and is in contradistinction

       to the term – ‘public authority’ as defined in
Section 2(h)
of the RTI

       Act. It follows that any requirement in the nature of precondition

       and restrictions prescribed by any other law would continue to

       apply and are to be satisfied before information can be accessed

       and asked to be furnished by a private body.
18.    What is explicit as well as implicit from the definition of

       ‘information’ in clause (f) to
Section 2
follows and gets affirmation

       from the definition of ‘right to information’ that the information

       should be accessible by the public authority and ‘held by or under

       the control of any public authority’. The word ‘hold’ as defined in

       Wharton’s Law Lexicon, 15th Edition, means to have the

       ownership or use of; keep as one’s own, but in the context of the

       present legislation, we would prefer to adopt a broader definition

       of the word ‘hold’ in Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th Edition, as

       meaning; to keep, to retain, to maintain possession of or authority

       over. The words ‘under the control of any public authority’ as per

       their natural meaning would mean the right and power of the

       public authority to get access to the information. It refers to

       dominion over the information or the right to any material,

       document etc. The words ‘under the control of any public
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                            Page 21 of 108
authority’ would include within their ambit and scope information

       relating to a private body which can be accessed by a public

       authority under any other law for the time being in force subject to

       the pre-imposed conditions and restrictions as applicable to

       access the information.
19.    When information is accessible by a public authority, that is, held

       or under its control, then the information must be furnished to the

       information seeker under the
RTI Act
even if there are conditions

       or prohibitions under another statute already in force or under the
Official Secrets Act, 1923
, that restricts or prohibits access to

       information by the public. In view of the non-obstante clause in
Section 2211
of the RTI Act, any prohibition or condition which

       prevents a citizen from having access to information would not

       apply. Restriction on the right of citizens is erased. However,

       when access to information by a public authority itself is prohibited

       or is accessible subject to conditions, then the prohibition is not

       obliterated and the pre-conditions are not erased.
Section

       2(f)
read with
Section 22
of the RTI Act does not bring any

       modification or amendment in any other enactment, which bars or


11Section 22 of the
RTI Act
reads:
"22. Act to have overriding effect. -The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
 anything inconsistent therewith contained in the
Official Secrets Act, 1923
(19 of 1923), and any
 other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other
 than this Act.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                Page 22 of 108
prohibits or imposes pre-condition for accessing information of the

       private bodies. Rather, clause (f) to
Section 2
upholds and

       accepts the said position when it uses the expression – “which

       can be accessed”, that is the public authority should be in a

       position and be entitled to ask for the said information.
Section

       22
of the RTI Act, an overriding provision, does not militate

       against the interpretation as there is no contradiction or conflict

       between the provisions of
Section 2(f)
of the RTI Act and other

       statutory enactments/law.
Section 22
of the RTI Act is a key that

       unlocks prohibitions/limitations in any prior enactment on the right

       of a citizen to access information which is accessible by a public

       authority. It is not a key with the public authority that can be used

       to undo and erase prohibitions/limitations on the right of the public

       authority to access information. In other words, a private body will

       be entitled to the same protection as is available to them under

       the laws of this country.
20.    Full Bench of the Delhi High Court in its judgment dated 12th

       January 2010 in LPA No. 501 of 2009 had rightly on the

       interpretation of word ‘held’, referred to Philip Coppel’s work

       ‘Information Rights’ (2nd Edition, Thomson, Sweet & Maxwell
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 23 of 108
2007)12 interpreting the provisions of the
Freedom of Information

           Act, 2000
(United Kingdom) in which it has been observed:
“When information is “held” by a public authority

                      For the purposes of the
Freedom of Information Act
2000,
                      information is “held” by a public authority if it is held by the
                      authority otherwise than on behalf of another person, or if
                      it is held by another person on behalf of the authority.
The
                      Act
has avoided the technicalities associated with the law
                      of disclosure, which has conventionally drawn a
                      distinction between a document in the power, custody or
                      possession of a person. Putting to one side the effects of
                      s.3(2) (see para.9-009 below), the word “held” suggests a
                      relationship between a public authority and the
                      information akin to that of ownership or bailment of goods.
Information:
- that is, without request or arrangement, sent to or
                      deposited with a public authority which does not hold itself
                      out as willing to receive it and which does not
                      subsequently use it;
- that is accidentally left with a public authority;
- that just passes through a public authority; or
- that “belongs” to an employee or officer of a public
                      authority but which is brought by that employee or officer
                      onto the public authority’s premises,

                      will, it is suggested, lack the requisite assumption by the
                      public authority of responsibility for or dominion over the
                      information that is necessary before it can be said that the
                      public authority can be said to “hold” the information. …”

           Thereafter, the Full Bench had observed:
“59. Therefore, according to Coppel the word “held”
                      suggests a relationship between a public authority and


12   Also, see Philip Coppel, ‘Information Rights’ (4th Edition, Hart Publishing 2014) P. 361-62
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                      Page 24 of 108
the information akin to that of an ownership or bailment
                   of goods. In the law of bailment, a slight assumption of
                   control of the chattel so deposited will render the
                   recipient a depository (see Newman v. Bourne and
                   Hollingsworth (1915) 31 T.L.R. 209). Where, therefore,
                   information has been created, sought, used or
                   consciously retained by a public authority will be
                   information held within the meaning of the Act.
However, if the information is sent to or deposited with
                   the public authority which does not hold itself out as
                   willing to receive it and which does not subsequently
                   use it or where it is accidentally left with a public
                   authority or just passes through a public authority or
                   where it belongs to an employee or officer of a public
                   authority but which is brought by that employee or
                   officer unto the public authority’s premises it will not be
                   information held by the public authority for the lack of
                   the requisite assumption by the public authority of
                   responsibility for or dominion over the information that
                   is necessary before the public authority can be said to
                   hold the information… .”

                Therefore, the word “hold” is not purely a physical concept

        but refers to the appropriate connection between the information

        and the authority so that it can properly be said that the

        information is held by the public authority.13
21.
In
Khanapuram Gandaiah v. Administrative Officer and

       Others14
, this Court on examining the definition clause 2(f) of the
RTI Act
had held as under:
“10. […] This definition shows that an applicant under
Section 6
of the RTI Act can get any information which



13 New Castle upon Tyne v. Information Commissioner and British Union for Abolition of Vivisection,
[2011] UKUT 185 AAC
14 (2010) 2 SCC 1
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                Page 25 of 108
is already in existence and accessible to the public
                 authority under law. ...
xx             xx          xx
12. […] the Public Information Officer is not supposed
                 to have any material which is not before him; or any
                 information he could (sic not) have obtained under law.
Under
Section 6
of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled
                 to get only such information which can be accessed by
                 the “public authority” under any other law for the time
                 being in force. …”

               The aforesaid observation emphasises on the mandatory

       requirement of accessibility of information by the public authority

       under any other law for the time being in force. This aspect was

       again     highlighted       by        another    Division   Bench   in
Aditya

       Bandopadhyay
(supra), wherein information was divided into

       three categories in the following words:
“59. The effect of the provisions and scheme of the
RTI
                 Act
is to divide “information” into three categories. They
                 are:
(i) Information which promotes transparency and
                 accountability in the working of every public authority,
                 disclosure of which may also help in containing or
                 discouraging corruption [enumerated in clauses (b) and
(c) of
Section 4(1)
of the RTI Act].
(ii) Other information held by public authority [that is, all
                 information other than those falling under clauses (b)
                 and (c) of
Section 4(1)
of the RTI Act].
(iii) Information which is not held by or under the
                 control of any public authority and which cannot be
                 accessed by a public authority under any law for the
                 time being in force.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                      Page 26 of 108
Information under the third category does not fall within
                    the scope of the
RTI Act
.
Section 3
of the RTI Act gives
                    every citizen, the right to “information” held by or under
                    the control of a public authority, which falls either under
                    the first or second category. In regard to the
                    information falling under the first category, there is also
                    a special responsibility upon the public authorities to
                    suo motu publish and disseminate such information so
                    that they will be easily and readily accessible to the
                    public without any need to access them by having
                    recourse to
Section 6
of the RTI Act. There is no such
                    obligation to publish and disseminate the other
                    information which falls under the second category.”

                  The first category refers to the information specified in

          clause (b) to sub-section (1) to
Section 4
which consists of as

          many as seventeen sub-clauses on diverse subjects stated

          therein. It also refers to clause (c) to sub-section (1) to
Section 4
by which public authority is required to publish all relevant facts

          while formulating important public policies or pronouncing its

          decision which affects the public. The rationale behind these

          clauses is to disseminate most of the information which is in the

          public interest and promote openness and transparency in

          government.
22.       The expressions ‘held by or under the control of any public

          authority’ and ‘information accessible under this Act’ are

          restrictive15 and reflect the limits to the ‘right to information’



15   See
‘Central Board of Secondary Education v. Aditya Bandopadhyay’
(2011) 8 SCC 497
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                              Page 27 of 108
conferred vide
Section 3
of the RTI Act, which states that subject

       to the provisions of the
RTI Act
, all citizens shall have the right to

       information. The right to information is not absolute and is subject

       to the conditions and exemptions under the
RTI Act
.
23.    This aspect was again highlighted when the terms ‘information’

       and ‘right to information’ were interpreted in
Thalappalam

       Service Cooperative Bank Limited
(supra) with the following

       elucidation:
“63.
Section 8
begins with a non obstante clause,
                 which gives that section an overriding effect, in case of
                 conflict, over the other provisions of the Act. Even if,
                 there is any indication to the contrary, still there is no
                 obligation on the public authority to give information to
                 any citizen of what has been mentioned in clauses (a)
                 to (j). The public authority, as already indicated, cannot
                 access all the information from a private individual, but
                 only those information which he is legally obliged to
                 pass on to a public authority by law, and also only
                 those information to which the public authority can
                 have access in accordance with law. Even those
                 information, if personal in nature, can be made
                 available only subject to the limitations provided in
Section 8(j)
of the RTI Act. Right to be left alone, as
                 propounded in Olmstead v. United States is the most
                 comprehensive of the rights and most valued by
                 civilised man.
xx      xx          xx
67. The Registrar of Cooperative Societies functioning
                 under the
Cooperative Societies Act
is a “public
                 authority” within the meaning of
Section 2(h)
of the Act.
As a public authority, the Registrar of Cooperative
                 Societies has been conferred with lot of statutory
                 powers under the respective Act under which he is
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 28 of 108
functioning. He is also duty-bound to comply with the
                 obligations under the
RTI Act
and furnish information to
                 a citizen under the
RTI Act
. Information which he is
                 expected to provide is the information enumerated
                 in
Section 2(f)
of the RTI Act subject to the limitations
                 provided under
Section 8
of the Act. The Registrar can
                 also, to the extent law permits, gather information from
                 a Society, on which he has supervisory or
                 administrative control under the
Cooperative Societies
                 Act
. Consequently, apart from the information as is
                 available to him, under
Section 2(f)
, he can also gather
                 those information from the society, to the extent
                 permitted by law. The Registrar is also not obliged to
                 disclose those information if those information fall
                 under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act. No provision has been
                 brought to our knowledge indicating that, under
                 the
Cooperative Societies Act
, a Registrar can call for
                 the details of the bank accounts maintained by the
                 citizens or members in a cooperative bank. Only those
                 information which a Registrar of Cooperative Societies
                 can have access under the
Cooperative Societies
                 Act
from a society could be said to be the information
                 which is “held” or “under the control of public authority”.
                 Even those information, the Registrar, as already
                 indicated, is not legally obliged to provide if those
                 information falls under the exempted category
                 mentioned in
Section 8(j)
of the Act. Apart from the
                 Registrar of Co-operative Societies, there may be other
                 public authorities who can access information from a
                 co-operative bank of a private account maintained by a
                 member of society under law, in the event of which, in
                 a given situation, the society will have to part with that
                 information. But the demand should have statutory
                 backing.
68. Consequently, if an information which has been
                 sought for relates to personal information, the
                 disclosure of which has no relationship to any public
                 activity or interest or which would cause unwarranted
                 invasion of the privacy of the individual, the Registrar of
                 Cooperative Societies, even if he has got that
                 information, is not bound to furnish the same to an
                 applicant, unless he is satisfied that the larger public
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 29 of 108
interest justifies the disclosure of such information, that
                 too, for reasons to be recorded in writing.”

               Thus, the scope of the expressions ‘information’ and ‘right to

       information’ which can be accessed by a citizen under the
RTI Act
have to be understood in light of the above discussion.


POINT NO. 3:          SECTIONS 8, 9, 10 AND 11 OF THE RTI ACT
24.    To ensure transparency and accountability and to make Indian

       democracy more participatory, the
RTI Act
sets out a practical and

       pragmatic regime to enable citizens to secure greater access to

       information available with public authorities by balancing diverse

       interests including efficient governance, optimum use of limited

       fiscal operations and preservation of confidentiality of sensitive

       information.      The     preamble    to    the
RTI    Act
appropriately

       summarises the object of harmonising various conflicts in the

       following words:
“                      xx        xx           xx

                 AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed
                 citizenry and transparency of information which are
                 vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption
                 and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities
                 accountable to the governed;
AND WHEREAS revelation of information in actual
                 practice is likely to conflict with other public interests
                 including efficient operations of the Governments,
                 optimum use of limited fiscal resources and the
                 preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information;
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 30 of 108
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise these
                 conflicting interests while preserving the paramountcy
                 of the democratic ideal;
xx      xx           xx”
25.    An attempt to resolve conflict and disharmony between these

       aspects is evident in the exceptions and conditions on access to

       information set out in
Sections 8
to
11
of the RTI Act. At the

       outset, we would reproduce
Section 8
of the RTI Act, which reads

       as under:
“8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
                 there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,—
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially
                 affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
                 security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of
                 the State, relation with foreign State or lead to
                 incitement of an offence;
(b) information which has been expressly forbidden to
                 be published by any court of law or tribunal or the
                 disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court;
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a
                 breach of privilege of Parliament or the State
                 Legislature;
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade
                 secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which
                 would harm the competitive position of a third party,
                 unless the competent authority is satisfied that larger
                 public interest warrants the disclosure of such
                 information;
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary
                 relationship, unless the competent authority is satisfied
                 that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of
                 such information;
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 31 of 108
(f) information received in confidence from foreign
                 Government;
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger
                 the life or physical safety of any person or identify the
                 source of information or assistance given in confidence
                 for law enforcement or security purposes;
(h) information which would impede the process of
                 investigation or apprehension or prosecution of
                 offenders;
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of
                 the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other officers:
Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministers, the
                 reasons thereof, and the material on the basis of which
                 the decisions were taken shall be made public after the
                 decision has been taken, and the matter is complete,
                 or over:
Provided further that those matters which come under
                 the exemptions specified in this section shall not be
                 disclosed;
(j) information which relates to personal information the
                 disclosure of which has no relationship to any public
                 activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted
                 invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the
                 Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
                 Information Officer or the appellate authority, as the
                 case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest
                 justifies the disclosure of such information:
Provided that the information which cannot be denied
                 to the Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be
                 denied to any person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the
Official Secrets Act,
                 1923
nor any of the exemptions permissible in
                 accordance with sub-section (1), a public authority may
                 allow access to information, if public interest in
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 32 of 108
disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected
                 interests.
(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a), (c) and (i)
                 of sub-section (1), any information relating to any
                 occurrence, event or matter which has taken place,
                 occurred or happened twenty years before the date on
                 which any request is made under
section 6
shall be
                 provided to any person making a request under that
                 section:
Provided that where any question arises as to the date
                 from which the said period of twenty years has to be
                 computed, the decision of the Central Government
                 shall be final, subject to the usual appeals provided for
                 in this Act.”

               Sub-section (1) of
Section 8
begins with a non-obstante

       clause giving primacy and overriding legal effect to different

       clauses under the sub-section in case of any conflict with other

       provisions of the
RTI Act
.
Section 8(1)
without modifying or

       amending the term ‘information’, carves out exceptions when

       access to ‘information’, as defined in
Section 2(f)
of the RTI Act

       would be denied. Consequently, the right to information is

       available when information is accessible under the
RTI Act
, that is,

       when the exceptions listed in
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act are not

       attracted. In terms of
Section 3
of the RTI Act, all citizens have

       right to information, subject to the provisions of the
RTI Act
, that

       is, information ‘held by or under the control of any public authority’,

       except when such information is exempt or excluded.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 33 of 108
26.    Clauses in sub-section (1) to
Section 8
can be divided into two

       categories: clauses (a), (b), (c), (f), (g), (h) and (i), and clauses (d),
(e) and (j). The latter clauses state that the prohibition specified

       would not apply or operate when the competent authority in

       clauses (d) and (e) and the PIO in clause (j) is satisfied that larger

       public       interest       warrants        disclosure         of    such       information.16

       Therefore, clauses (d), (e) and (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act

       incorporate qualified prohibitions and are conditional and not

       absolute exemptions. Clauses (a), (b), (c), (f), (g), (h) and (i) do

       not have any such stipulation. Prohibitory stipulations in these

       clauses do not permit disclosure of information on satisfaction of

       the larger public interest rule. These clauses, therefore,

       incorporate absolute exclusions.
27.    Sub-section (2) to
Section 8
states that notwithstanding anything

       contained in the
Official Secrets Act, 1923
or any of the

       exemptions permissible in accordance with sub-section (1), a

       public authority may allow access to information if the public

       interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected

       interests. The disclosure under
Section 8(2)
by the public authority


16For the purpose of the present decision, we do not consider it appropriate to decide who would be
 the ‘competent authority’ in the case of other public authorities, if sub-clauses (i) to (v) to clause (e)
 of
Section 2
are inapplicable. This ‘anomaly’ or question is not required to be decided in the present
 case as the Chief Justice of India is a competent authority in the case of the Supreme Court of
 India.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                      Page 34 of 108
is not a mandate or compulsion but is in the form of discretionary

       disclosure.
Section 8(2)
acknowledges and empowers the public

       authority to lawfully disclose information held by them despite the

       exemptions under sub-section (1) to
Section 8
if the public

       authority is of the opinion that the larger public interest warrants

       disclosure. Such disclosure can be made notwithstanding the

       provisions of the
Official Secrets Act
.
Section 8(2)
does not create

       a vested or justiciable right that the citizens can enforce by an

       application before the PIO seeking information under the
RTI Act
.

       PIO is under no duty to disclose information covered by

       exemptions under
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act. Once the PIO

       comes to the conclusion that any of the exemption clauses is

       applicable, the PIO cannot pass an order directing disclosure

       under
Section 8(2)
of the RTI Act as this discretionary power is

       exclusively vested with the public authority.
28.
Section 9
provides that without prejudice to the provisions of
Section 8
, a request for information may be rejected if such a

       request for providing access would involve an infringement of

       copyright subsisting in a person other than the State.
29.
Section 10
deals with severability of exempted information and

       sub-section (1) thereof reads as under:
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 35 of 108
“10. Severability.– (1) Where a request for access to
                 information is rejected on the ground that it is in
                 relation to information which is exempt from disclosure,
                 then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
                 access may be provided to that part of the record
                 which does not contain any information which is
                 exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can
                 reasonably be severed from any part that contains
                 exempt information.”
30.
Section 11
, which deals with third party information, and

       incorporates        conditional   exclusion   based     on    breach     of

       confidentiality by applying public interest test, reads as under:
“11. (1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or a
                 State Public Information Officer, as the case may be,
                 intends to disclose any information or record, or part
                 thereof on a request made under this Act, which relates
                 to or has been supplied by a third party and has been
                 treated as confidential by that third party, the Central
                 Public Information Officer or State Public Information
                 Officer, as the case may be, shall, within five days from
                 the receipt of the request, give a written notice to such
                 third party of the request and of the fact that the
                 Central Public Information Officer or State Public
                 Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to
                 disclose the information or record, or part thereof, and
                 invite the third party to make a submission in writing or
                 orally, regarding whether the information should be
                 disclosed, and such submission of the third party shall
                 be kept in view while taking a decision about disclosure
                 of information:
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial
                 secrets protected by law, disclosure may be allowed if
                 the public interest in disclosure outweighs in
                 importance any possible harm or injury to the interests
                 of such third party.
(2) Where a notice is served by the Central Public
                 Information Officer or State Public Information Officer,
                 as the case may be, under sub-section (1) to a third
                 party in respect of any information or record or part
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 36 of 108
thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from the
                 date of receipt of such notice, be given the opportunity
                 to make representation against the proposed
                 disclosure.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 7
,
                 the Central Public Information Officer or State Public
                 Information Officer, as the case may be, shall, within
                 forty days after receipt of the request under
section 6
, if
                 the third party has been given an opportunity to make
                 representation under sub-section (2), make a decision
                 as to whether or not to disclose the information or
                 record or part thereof and give in writing the notice of
                 his decision to the third party.
(4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall include a
                 statement that the third party to whom the notice is
                 given is entitled to prefer an appeal under
section 19
against the decision.”

               We shall subsequently interpret and expound on
Section 11
of the RTI Act.
31.    At the present stage, we would like to quote from
Aditya

       Bandopadhyay
(supra) wherein this Court, on the aspect of

       general principles of interpretation while deciding the conflict

       between the right to information and exclusions under
Section 8
to
11
of the RTI Act, had observed:
“61. Some High Courts have held that
Section 8
of the
                 RTI Act is in the nature of an exception to
Section 3
which empowers the citizens with the right to
                 information, which is a derivative from the freedom of
                 speech; and that, therefore,
Section 8
should be
                 construed strictly, literally and narrowly. This may not
                 be the correct approach.
The Act
seeks to bring about
                 a balance between two conflicting interests, as
                 harmony between them is essential for preserving
                 democracy. One is to bring about transparency and
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 37 of 108
accountability by providing access to information under
                 the control of public authorities. The other is to ensure
                 that the revelation of information, in actual practice,
                 does not conflict with other public interests which
                 include efficient operation of the governments,
                 optimum use of limited fiscal resources and
                 preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information.
                 The Preamble to the Act specifically states that the
                 object of the Act is to harmonise these two conflicting
                 interests. While
Sections 3
and
4
seek to achieve the
                 first objective,
Sections 8
,
9
,
10
and
11
seek to achieve
                 the second objective. Therefore, when
Section 8
exempts certain information from being disclosed, it
                 should not be considered to be a fetter on the right to
                 information, but as an equally important provision
                 protecting other public interests essential for the
                 fulfilment and preservation of democratic ideals.
62. When trying to ensure that the right to information
                 does not conflict with several other public interests
                 (which     includes    efficient operations    of   the
                 Governments, preservation of confidentiality of
                 sensitive information, optimum use of limited fiscal
                 resources, etc.), it is difficult to visualise and
                 enumerate all types of information which require to be
                 exempted from disclosure in public interest. The
                 legislature has however made an attempt to do so. The
                 enumeration of exemptions is more exhaustive than
                 the enumeration of exemptions attempted in the earlier
                 Act, that is,
Section 8
of the Freedom to Information
                 Act, 2002. The courts and Information Commissions
                 enforcing the provisions of the
RTI Act
have to adopt a
                 purposive construction, involving a reasonable and
                 balanced approach which harmonises the two objects
                 of the Act, while interpreting
Section 8
and the other
                 provisions of the Act.
63. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some
                 misconceptions about the
RTI Act
.
The RTI Act
provides access to all information that is available and
                 existing. This is clear from a combined reading of
Section 3
and the definitions of “information” and “right
                 to information” under clauses (f) and (j) of
Section 2
of
                 the Act. If a public authority has any information in the
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 38 of 108
form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or
                 statistics, an applicant may access such information,
                 subject to the exemptions in
Section 8
of the Act. But
                 where the information sought is not a part of the record
                 of a public authority, and where such information is not
                 required to be maintained under any law or the rules or
                 regulations of the public authority, the Act does not
                 cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect
                 or collate such non-available information and then
                 furnish it to an applicant. A public authority is also not
                 required to furnish information which require drawing of
                 inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
                 required to provide “advice” or “opinion” to an
                 applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any
                 “opinion” or “advice” to an applicant. The reference to
                 “opinion” or “advice” in the definition of “information” in
Section 2(f)
of the Act, only refers to such material
                 available in the records of the public authority. Many
                 public authorities have, as a public relation exercise,
                 provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens.
But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
                 with any obligation under the
RTI Act
.”

               Paragraph 63 quoted above has to be read with our

       observations on the last portion of clause (f) to
Section 2
defining

       the word ‘information’, albeit, on the observations and findings

       recorded, we respectfully concur. For the present decision, we are

       required to primarily examine clauses (e) and (j) of sub-section (1)

       to
Section 8
and
Section 11
of the RTI Act.
Point No. 3 (A): Fiduciary Relationship under Section 8(1)(e) of the
                 RTI Act
32.    Clause (e) to
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act states that information

       made available to a person in his fiduciary relationship shall not be

       disclosed unless the competent authority is satisfied that the
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 39 of 108
larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information.
The expression ‘fiduciary relationship’ was examined and

       explained in
Aditya Bandopadhyay
(supra), in the following

       words:
“39. The term “fiduciary” refers to a person having a
                 duty to act for the benefit of another, showing good
                 faith and candour, where such other person reposes
                 trust and special confidence in the person owing or
                 discharging the duty. The term “fiduciary relationship”
                 is used to describe a situation or transaction where one
                 person (beneficiary) places complete confidence in
                 another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
                 business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a
                 person who holds a thing in trust for another
                 (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
                 confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the
                 beneficiary, and use good faith and fairness in dealing
                 with the beneficiary or the things belonging to the
                 beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
                 the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute
                 certain acts in regard to or with reference to the
                 entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in confidence
                 and is expected not to disclose the thing or information
                 to any third party.
40. There are also certain relationships where both the
                 parties have to act in a fiduciary capacity treating the
                 other as the beneficiary. Examples of these are: a
                 partner vis-à-vis another partner and an employer vis-
à-vis employee. An employee who comes into
                 possession of business or trade secrets or confidential
                 information relating to the employer in the course of his
                 employment, is expected to act as a fiduciary and
                 cannot disclose it to others. Similarly, if on the request
                 of the employer or official superior or the head of a
                 department, an employee furnishes his personal details
                 and information, to be retained in confidence, the
                 employer, the official superior or departmental head is
                 expected to hold such personal information in
                 confidence as a fiduciary, to be made use of or
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 40 of 108
disclosed only if the employee’s conduct or acts are
                 found to be prejudicial to the employer.
41. In a philosophical and very wide sense, examining
                 bodies can be said to act in a fiduciary capacity, with
                 reference to the students who participate in an
                 examination, as a Government does while governing
                 its citizens or as the present generation does with
                 reference to the future generation while preserving the
                 environment. But the words “information available to a
                 person in his fiduciary relationship” are used in
Section
                 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act in its normal and well-recognised
                 sense, that is, to refer to persons who act in a fiduciary
                 capacity, with reference to a specific beneficiary or
                 beneficiaries who are to be expected to be protected or
                 benefited by the actions of the fiduciary—a trustee with
                 reference to the beneficiary of the trust, a guardian with
                 reference to a minor/physically infirm/mentally
                 challenged, a parent with reference to a child, a lawyer
                 or a chartered accountant with reference to a client, a
                 doctor or nurse with reference to a patient, an agent
                 with reference to a principal, a partner with reference to
                 another partner, a director of a company with reference
                 to a shareholder, an executor with reference to a
                 legatee, a receiver with reference to the parties to a lis,
                 an employer with reference to the confidential
                 information relating to the employee, and an employee
                 with reference to business dealings/transaction of the
                 employer. We do not find that kind of fiduciary
                 relationship between the examining body and the
                 examinee, with reference to the evaluated answer
                 books, that come into the custody of the examining
                 body.”

               This Court held that the exemption under
section 8(1)(e)
of

       the RTI Act does not apply to beneficiaries regarding whom the

       fiduciary holds information. In other words, information available

       with the public authority relating to beneficiaries cannot be

       withheld from or denied to the beneficiaries themselves. A
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 41 of 108
fiduciary would, ergo, be duty-bound to make thorough disclosure

       of all relevant facts of all transactions between them in a fiduciary

       relationship to the beneficiary. In the facts of the said case, this

       Court had to consider whether an examining body, the Central

       Board of Secondary Education, held information in the form of

       evaluated answer-books of the examinees in fiduciary capacity.

       Answering in the negative, it was nevertheless observed that even

       if the examining body is in a fiduciary relationship with an

       examinee, it will be duty-bound to disclose the evaluated answer-

       books to the examinee and at the same time, they owe a duty to

       the examinee not to disclose the answer-books to anyone else,

       that is, any third party. This observation is of significant

       importance as it recognises that
Section 8(1)(j)
, and as noticed

       below -
Section 11
, encapsulates another right, that is the right to

       protect privacy and confidentiality by barring the furnishing of

       information to third parties except when the public interest as

       prescribed so requires. In this way, the
RTI Act
complements both

       the right to information and the right to privacy and confidentiality.

       Further, it moderates and regulates the conflict between the two

       rights by applying the test of larger public interest or comparative

       examination of public interest in disclosure of information with

       possible harm and injury to the protected interests.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                            Page 42 of 108
33.
In
Reserve Bank of India
(supra) this Court had expounded upon

       the expression ‘fiduciary relationship’ used in clause (e) to sub-

       section (1) of
Section 8
of the RTI Act by referring to the definition

       of ‘fiduciary relationship’ in the Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd Edition,

       2005, which reads as under:
“57. [...] Fiduciary relationship. — A relationship in
                 which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit
                 of the other on matters within the scope of the fiduciary
                 relationship. Fiduciary relationship usually arises in one
                 of the four situations: (1) when one person places trust
                 in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
                 superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one
                 person assumes control and responsibility over
                 another, (3) when one person has a duty to act for or
                 give advice to another on matters falling within the
                 scope of the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific
                 relationship that has traditionally been recognised as
                 involving fiduciary duties, as with a lawyer and a client,
                 or a stockbroker and a customer.”

               Thereafter, the Court had outlined the contours of the

       fiduciary relationship by listing out the governing principles which

       read:
“58. [...] (i) No conflict rule — A fiduciary must not place
                 himself in a position where his own interest conflicts
                 with that of his customer or the beneficiary. There must
                 be ‘real sensible possibility of conflict’.
(ii) No profit rule — A fiduciary must not profit from his
                 position at the expense of his customer, the
                 beneficiary.
(iii) Undivided loyalty rule — A fiduciary owes undivided
                 loyalty to the beneficiary, not to place himself in a
                 position where his duty towards one person conflicts
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 43 of 108
with a duty that he owes to another customer. A
                 consequence of this duty is that a fiduciary must make
                 available to a customer all the information that is
                 relevant to the customer’s affairs.
(iv) Duty of confidentiality — A fiduciary must only use
                 information obtained in confidence and must not use it
                 for his own advantage, or for the benefit of another
                 person.”
34.    Fiduciary relationships, regardless of whether they are formal,

       informal, voluntary or involuntary, must satisfy the four conditions

       for a relationship to classify as a fiduciary relationship. In each of

       the four principles, the emphasis is on trust, reliance, the

       fiduciary’s superior power or dominant position and corresponding

       dependence of the beneficiary on the fiduciary which imposes

       responsibility on the fiduciary to act in good faith and for the

       benefit of and to protect the beneficiary and not oneself.
Section

       8(1)(e)
is a legal acceptance that there are ethical or moral

       relationships or duties in relationships that create rights and

       obligations,      beyond         contractual,   routine   or   even   special

       relationships with standard and typical rights and obligations.

       Contractual or non-fiduciary relationships could require that the

       party should protect and promote the interest of the other and not

       cause harm or damage, but the fiduciary relationship casts a

       positive obligation and demands that the fiduciary should protect

       the beneficiary and not promote personal self-interest. A
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 44 of 108
fiduciary’s loyalty, duties and obligations are stricter than the

          morals of the market place and it is not honesty alone, but the

          punctilio of an honour which is the most sensitive standard of

          behaviour which is applied {See – Opinion of Cardozo, J. in

          Meinhard v. Salmon17}. Thus, the level of judicial scrutiny in cases

          of fiduciary relationship is intense as the level of commitment and

          loyalty expected is higher than non-fiduciary relationships.

          Fiduciary relationship may arise because of the statute which

          requires a fiduciary to act selflessly with integrity and fidelity and

          the other party, that is the beneficiary, depends upon the wisdom

          and confidence reposed in the fiduciary. A contractual, statutory

          and possibly all relationships cover a broad field, but a fiduciary

          relationship could exist, confined to a limited area or an act, as

          relationships can have several facets. Thus, relationships can be

          partly fiduciary and partly non-fiduciary with the former being

          confined to a particular act or action which need not manifest itself

          in entirety in the interaction and relationship between two parties.

          What would distinguish non-fiduciary relationship from fiduciary

          relationship or an act is the requirement of trust reposed, higher

          standard of good faith and honesty required on the part of the

          fiduciary with reference to a particular transaction(s) due to moral,


17   (1928) 164 N.E. 545, 546
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                               Page 45 of 108
personal or statutory responsibility of the fiduciary as compared to

       the beneficiary, resulting in dependence of the beneficiary. This

       may arise due to superior knowledge and training of the fiduciary

       or the position he occupies.
35.    Ordinarily the relationship between the Chief Justice and judges

       would not be that of a fiduciary and a beneficiary. However, it is

       not an absolute rule/code for in certain situations and acts,

       fiduciary relationship may arise. Whether or not such a

       relationship arises in a particular situation would have to be dealt

       with on the tests and parameters enunciated above.


Point No. 3 (B): Right to Privacy under Section 8(1)(j)                 and
                 Confidentiality under Section 11 of the RTI Act
36.    If one’s right to know is absolute, then the same may invade

       another’s right to privacy and breach confidentiality, and,

       therefore, the former right has to be harmonised with the need for

       personal privacy, confidentiality of information and effective

       governance.
The RTI Act
captures this interplay of the competing

       rights under clause (j) to
Section 8(1)
and
Section 11
. While

       clause (j) to
Section 8(1)
refers to personal information as distinct

       from information relating to public activity or interest and seeks to

       exempt disclosure of such information, as well as such information

       which, if disclosed, would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 46 of 108
of an individual, unless public interest warrants its disclosure,
Section       11
exempts        the     disclosure        of    ‘information        or

       record…which relates to or has been supplied by a third party and

       has been treated as confidential by that third party’. By differently

       wording and inditing the challenge that privacy and confidentiality

       throw to information rights, the
RTI Act
also recognises the

       interconnectedness, yet distinctiveness between the breach of

       confidentiality and invasion of privacy, as the former is broader

       than the latter, as will be noticed below.
37.    Breach of confidentiality has an older conception and was

       primarily an equitable remedy based on the principle that one

       party is entitled to enforce equitable duty on the persons bound by

       an obligation of confidentiality on account of the relationship they

       share, with actual or constructive knowledge of the confidential

       relationship. Conventionally a conception of equity, confidentiality

       also arises in a contract, or by a statute.18 Contractually, an

       obligation to keep certain information confidential can be

       effectuated expressly or implicitly by an oral or written agreement,

       whereas in statutes certain extant and defined relationships are

       imposed with the duty to maintain details, communication

18See Prince Albert v. Strange, (1849) 1 Mac.&G 25, and Lord Oliver of Aylmerton, Spycatcher:
Confidence, Copyright and Contempt, Israel Law Review (1989) 23(4), 407 [as also quoted in Philip
 Coppel, Information Rights, Law and Practice (4th Edition Hart Publishing 2014)].
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                              Page 47 of 108
exchanged and records confidential. Confidentiality referred to in

          the phrase 'breach of confidentiality' was initially popularly

          perceived and interpreted as confidentiality arising out of a pre-
existing confidential relationship, as the obligation to keep certain

          information confidential was on account of the nature of the

          relationship.     The      insistence     of   a    pre-existing     confidential

          relationship did not conceive a possibility that a duty to keep

          information confidential could arise even if a relationship, in which

          such information is exchanged and held, is not pre-existing. This

          created a distinction between confidential information obtained

          through the violation of a confidential relationship and similar

          confidential information obtained in some other way. With time,

          courts and jurists, who recognised this anomaly, have diluted the

          requirement of the existence of a confidential relationship and held

          that three elements were essential for a case of breach of

          confidentiality to succeed, namely – (a) information should be of

          confidential     nature;      (b)   information         must   be   imparted    in

          circumstances importing an obligation of confidentiality; and (c)

          that there must be unauthorised use of information (See Coco v.
AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd.19). The “artificial”20 distinction was

          emphatically abrogated by the test adopted by Lord Goff of

19   [1969] RPC 41
20   Campbell v. Mirror Group Newspapers Limited (2004) UKHL 22
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                          Page 48 of 108
Chieveley in Attorney-General v. Guardian Newspaper Limited

          (No. 2)21, who had observed:
“a duty of confidence arises when confidential
                       information comes to the knowledge of a person... in
                       circumstances where he has notice, or is held to have
                       agreed, that the information is confidential, with the
                       effect that it would be just in all the circumstances that
                       he should be precluded from disclosing the information
                       to others.”

                 Lord Goff, thus, lifted the limiting constraint of a need for

          initial confidential relationship stating that a 'duty of confidence'

          would apply whenever a person receives information he knows or

          ought to know is fairly and reasonably to be regarded as

          confidential. Therefore, confidential information must not be

          something which is a public property and in public knowledge/

          public        domain      as    confidentiality     necessarily     attributes

          inaccessibility, that is, the information must not be generally

          accessible, otherwise it cannot be regarded as confidential.
However, self-clarification or certification will not be relevant

          because whether or not the information is confidential has to be

          determined as a matter of fact. The test to be applied is that of a

          reasonable person, that is, information must be such that a

          reasonable person would regard it as confidential. Confidentiality

          of information also has reference to the quality of information


21   (1990) 1 AC 109
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                        Page 49 of 108
though it may apply even if the information is false or partly

         incorrect. However, the information must not be trivial or useless.
38.      While previously information that could be considered personal

         would have been protected only if it were exchanged in a

         confidential relationship or considered confidential by nature,

         significant developments in jurisprudence since the 1990’s have

         posited the acceptance of privacy as a separate right and

         something worthy of protection on its own as opposed to being

         protected under an actionable claim for breach of confidentiality. A

         claim to protect privacy is, in a sense, a claim for the preservation

         of confidentiality of personal information. With progression of the

         right to privacy, the underlying values of the law that protects

         personal information came to be seen differently as the courts

         recognised that unlike law of confidentiality that is based upon

         duty of good faith, right to privacy focuses on the protection of

         human autonomy and dignity by granting the right to control the

         dissemination of information about one’s private life and the right

         to the esteem and respect of other people (See - Sedley LJ

         in Douglas v. Hello! Ltd22). In PJS v. News Group Newspapers

         Ltd.23, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom had drawn a


22   (2001) QB 967
23   (2016) UKSC 26
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 50 of 108
distinction between the right to respect private and family life or

       privacy and claims based upon confidentiality by observing that

       the law extends greater protection to privacy rights than rights in

       relation to confidential matters. In the former case, the claim for

       misuse of private information can survive even when information

       is in the public domain as its repetitive use itself leads to violation

       of the said right. The right to privacy gets the benefit of both the

       quantitative and the qualitative protection. The former refers to the

       disclosure already made and what is yet undisclosed, whereas the

       latter refers to the privateness of the material, invasion of which is

       an illegal intrusion into the right to privacy. Claim for confidentiality

       would generally fail when the information is in public domain. The

       law of privacy is, therefore, not solely concerned with the

       information, but more concerned with the intrusion and violation of

       private rights. Citing an instance of how publishing of defamatory

       material can be remedied by a trial establishing the falsity of such

       material and award of damages, whereas invasion of privacy

       cannot be similarly redressed, the Court had highlighted the

       reason why truth or falsity of an allegation or information may be

       irrelevant when it comes to invasion of privacy. Therefore, claims

       for protection against invasion of private and family life do not

       depend upon confidentiality alone. This distinction is important to
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                               Page 51 of 108
understand the protection given to two different rights vide
Section

          8(1)(j)
and
11
of the RTI Act.
39.
In
District Registrar and Collector v. Canara Bank24
this Court

          had referred to the judgment of the U.S. Supreme Court in United

          States v. Miller25 on the question of “voluntary” parting with

          information and under the heading ‘Criticism of Miller’ had

          observed:
“48. ...(A) Criticism of Miller
(i) The majority in Miller laid down that a customer
                    who has conveyed his affairs to another had thereby
                    lost his privacy rights. Prof. Tribe states in his treatise
                    (see p. 1391) that this theory reveals “alarming
                    tendencies” because the Court has gone back to the
                    old theory that privacy is in relation to property while it
                    has laid down that the right is one attached to the
                    person rather than to property. If the right is to be held
                    to be not attached to the person, then “we would not
                    shield our account balances, income figures and
                    personal telephone and address books from the public
                    eye, but might instead go about with the information
                    written on our ‘foreheads or our bumper stickers’.” He
                    observes that the majority in Miller confused “privacy”
                    with “secrecy” and that “even their notion of secrecy is
                    a strange one, for a secret remains a secret even when
                    shared with those whom one selects for one's
                    confidence”. Our cheques are not merely negotiable
                    instruments but yet the world can learn a vast amount
                    about us by knowing how and with whom we have
                    spent our money. Same is the position when we use
                    the telephone or post a letter. To say that one assumes
                    great risks by opening a bank account appeared to be
                    a wrong conclusion. Prof. Tribe asks a very pertinent
                    question (p. 1392):
24   (2005) 1 SCC 496
25   425 US 435 (1976)
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 52 of 108
‘Yet one can hardly be said to have assumed a risk
                 of surveillance in a context where, as a practical
                 matter, one had no choice. Only the most committed —
                 and perhaps civilly committable — hermit can live
                 without a telephone, without a bank account, without
                 mail. To say that one must take a bitter pill with the
                 sweet when one licks a stamp is to exact a high
                 constitutional price indeed for living in contemporary
                 society.’

                 He concludes (p. 1400):
‘In our information-dense technological era, when
                 living inevitably entails leaving not just informational
                 footprints but parts of one's self in myriad directories,
                 files, records and computers, to hold that the
                 Fourteenth Amendment did not reserve to individuals
                 some power to say when and how and by whom that
                 information and those confidences were to be used,
                 would be to denigrate the central role that informational
                 autonomy must play in any developed concept of the
                 self.’
(ii) Prof. Yale Kamisar (again quoted by Prof. Tribe) (p.
                 1392) says:
‘It is beginning to look as if the only way someone
                 living in our society can avoid ‘assuming the risk’ that
                 various intermediate institutions will reveal information
                 to the police is by engaging in drastic discipline, the
                 kind of discipline of life under totalitarian regimes.’… ”

               Thereafter, it was noticed that with the enactment of the

       Right to Financial Privacy Act, 1978 the legal effect of ‘Miller’ was

       statutorily done away.
40.    The right to privacy though not expressly guaranteed in the

       Constitution of India is now recognized as a basic fundamental
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 53 of 108
right   vide   decision       of   the   Constitutional   Bench in
K.S.

          Puttaswamy and Another v. Union of India and Others26
holding that it is an intrinsic part of the right to life and liberty

          guaranteed under
Article 21
of the Constitution and recognised

          under several international treaties, chief among them being
Article 12
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948

          which states that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary

          interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor

          to attacks upon his honour and reputation. The judgment

          recognises that everyone has a right to the protection of laws

          against such interference or attack.
41.
In
K.S. Puttaswamy
(supra) the main judgment (authored by D.Y.

          Chandrachud, J.) has referred to provisions of
Section 8(1)(j)
of

          the RTI Act to highlight that the right to privacy is entrenched with

          constitutional status in Part III of the Constitution, thus providing a

          touchstone on which validity of executive decisions can be

          assessed and validity of laws can be determined vide judicial

          review exercised by the courts. This observation highlights the

          status and importance of the right to privacy as a constitutional

          right. The ratio as recorded in the two concurring judgments of



26   (2017) 10 SCC 1
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 54 of 108
the learned judges (R.F. Nariman and Sanjay Kishan Kaul, JJ.)

       are similar. It is observed that privacy involves a person’s right to

       his physical body; right to informational privacy which deals with a

       person’s mind; and the right to privacy of choice which protects an

       individual’s autonomy over personal choices. While physical

       privacy enjoys constitutional recognition in
Article 19(1)(d)
and (e)

       read with
Article 21
, personal informational privacy is relatable to
Article 21
and right to privacy of choice is enshrined in
Articles

       19(1)(a)
to (c), 20(3), 21 and 25 of the Constitution. In the

       concurring opinion, there is a reference to ‘The Right to Privacy’

       by Samuel Warren and Louis D. Brandeis on an individual’s right

       to control the dissemination of personal information and that an

       individual has a right to limit access to such information/shield

       such information from unwarranted access. Knowledge about a

       person gives another power over that person, as personal data

       collected is capable of effecting representations in his decision

       making process and shaping behaviour which can have a

       stultifying effect on the expression of dissent which is the

       cornerstone of democracy. In the said concurring judgment, it has

       been further held that the right to protection of reputation from

       being unfairly harmed needs to be zealously guarded not only

       against falsehood but also against certain truths by observing:
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 55 of 108
“623. An individual has a right to protect his reputation
                  from being unfairly harmed and such protection of
                  reputation needs to exist not only against falsehood but
                  also certain truths. It cannot be said that a more
                  accurate judgment about people can be facilitated by
                  knowing private details about their lives – people judge
                  us badly, they judge us in haste, they judge out of
                  context, they judge without hearing the whole story and
                  they judge with hypocrisy. Privacy lets people protect
                  themselves from these troublesome judgments.”27
42.    Privacy, it is uniformly observed in
K.S. Puttaswamy
(supra), is

       essential for liberty and dignity. Therefore, individuals have the

       need to preserve an intrusion-free zone for their personality and

       family. This facilitates individual freedom. On the question of

       invasion of personal liberty, the main judgment has referred to a

       three-fold requirement in the form of – (i) legality, which postulates

       the existence of law
(RTI Act
in the present case); (ii) need,

       defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii) proportionality,

       which ensures a rational nexus between the objects and the

       means to be adopted to achieve them. The third requirement, we

       would observe, is achieved in the present case by
Sections 8(1)(j)
and
11
of the RTI Act and the RTI Act cannot be faulted on this

       ground.
The RTI Act
also defines the legitimate aim, that is a

       public interest in the dissemination of information which can be

       confidential or private (or held in a fiduciary relationship) when


27Daniel Solove: “10 Reasons Why Privacy Matters” published on 20 th January 2014 and available at
 https://www.teachprivacy.com/10-reasons-privacy-matters/
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                              Page 56 of 108
larger public interest or public interest in disclosure outweighs the

          protection or any possible harm or injury to the interest of the third

          party.
43.       Privacy and confidentiality encompass a bundle of rights including

          the right to protect identity and anonymity. Anonymity is where an

          individual seeks freedom from identification, even when and

          despite being in a public space.
In
K.S. Puttaswamy
(supra)

          reference is made to Spencer v. R.28 which had set out three key

          elements of informational privacy: privacy as secrecy, privacy as

          control, and privacy as anonymity, to observe:
“214. […] anonymity may, depending on the totality of
                   the circumstances, be the foundation of a privacy
                   interest that engages constitutional protection against
                   unreasonable search and seizure.
xx          xx             xx

                   […] The disclosure of this information will often amount
                   to the identification of a user with intimate or sensitive
                   activities being carried out online, usually on the
                   understanding that these activities would be
                   anonymous. A request by a police officer that an ISP
                   voluntarily disclose such information amounts to a
                   search.”

          Privacy and confidentiality, therefore, include information about

          one’s identity.
28   2014 SCC Online Can SC 34: (2014) 2 SCR 212: 2014 SCC 43
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 57 of 108
44.
In
K.S. Puttaswamy
(supra), it is observed that the Canadian

       Supreme Court in Spencer (supra) had stopped short of

       recognising an absolute right of anonymity, but had used the

       provisions of Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms of 1982

       to expand the scope of the right to privacy, used traditionally to

       protect individuals from an invasion of their property rights, to an

       individual’s “reasonable expectation of privacy”. Yet the Court has

       observed that there has to be a careful balancing of the

       requirements of privacy with legitimate concerns of the State after

       referring to an article29 wherein it was observed that:
“Privacy is the terrorist’s best friend, and      the terrorist’s
                 privacy has been enhanced by the same             technological
                 developments that have both made                  data mining
                 feasible and elicited vast quantities              of personal
                 information from innocents …”
45.    Referring to an article titled ‘Reasonable Expectations of

       Anonymity’30 authored by Jeffrey M. Skopek, it is observed that

       distinction has been drawn between anonymity on one hand and

       privacy on the other as privacy involves hiding information

       whereas anonymity involves hiding what makes it personal by

       giving an example that furnishing of medical records of a patient

       would amount to an invasion of privacy, whereas a State may


29 Richard A. Posner, “Privacy, Surveillance, and Law”, The University of Chicago Law Review
  (2008), Vol. 75, 251.
30 Virginia Law Review (2015), Vol. 101, at pp. 691-762.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                         Page 58 of 108
have legitimate interest in analysing data borne from hospital

       records to understand and deal with a public health epidemic and

       to obviate serious impact on the population. If the anonymity of the

       individual/patient is preserved, it would legitimately assert a valid

       State interest in the preservation of public health.
46.    For the purpose of the present case, we are not concerned with

       the specific connotations of the right to anonymity and the

       restrictions/limitations appended to it. In the context of the
RTI Act
,

       suffice would be to say that the right to protect identity and

       anonymity would be identically subjected to the public interest

       test.
47.    Clause (j) to sub-section (1) of
Section 8
of the RTI Act specifically

       refers to invasion of the right to privacy of an individual and

       excludes       from     disclosure   information   that   would   cause

       unwarranted invasion of privacy of such individual, unless the

       disclosure would satisfy the larger public interest test. This clause

       also draws a distinction in its treatment of personal information,

       whereby disclosure of such information is exempted if such

       information has no relation to public activity or interest. We would

       like to, however, clarify that in their treatment of this exemption,

       this Court has treated the word ‘information’ which if disclosed
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                               Page 59 of 108
would lead to invasion of privacy to mean personal information, as

       distinct from public information. This aspect has been dealt with in

       the succeeding paragraphs.
48.    As per Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th Edition, the word ‘personal’

       means ‘of or affecting a person or of or constituting personal

       property’. In Collins Dictionary of the English Language, the word

       ‘personal’ has been defined as under:
“1. Of or relating to the private aspects of a person’s
                 life.
2. Of or relating to a person’s body, its care or its
                 appearance.
3. Belonging to or intended for a particular person and
                 no one else.
4. Undertaken by an individual himself.
5. Referring to, concerning, or involving a person’s
                 individual personality, intimate affairs, etc., esp. in an
                 offensive way.
6. Having the attributes of an individual conscious
                 being.
7. Of or arising from the personality.
8. Of or relating to, or denoting grammatical person.
9. Of or relating to movable property (Law).
10. An item of movable property (Law).”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 60 of 108
49.       In Peck v. United Kingdom31, the European Court of Human

          Rights had held that private life is a broad term not susceptible to

          exhaustive definition but includes the right to establish and

          develop relationships with other human beings such that there is a

          zone of interaction of a person with others, even in a public

          context, which may fall within the scope of private life.

          Recognised facets of an individual’s private life include a person’s

          health, ethnicity, personal relationships, sexual conduct; religious

          or philosophical convictions and personal image. These facets

          resemble what has been categorised as sensitive personal data

          within the meaning of the Data Protection Act, 2018 as applicable

          in the United Kingdom.
50.       Gleeson CJ in Australian Broadcasting Corporation v. Lenah

          Game Meats Pty Ltd32 had distinguished between what is public

          and private information in the following manner:
“An activity is not private simply because it is not done
                    in public. It does not suffice to make an act private
                    that, because it occurs on private proper property, it
                    has such measure of protection from the public gaze
                    as the characteristics of the property, the property
                    owner combine to afford. Certain kinds of information
                    about a person, such as information relating to health,
                    personal relationships, or finances, may be easy to
                    identify as private, as may certain kinds of activity
                    which a reasonable person, applying contemporary

31   (2003) EMLR 15
32   (2001) 185 ALR 1
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 61 of 108
standards of morals and behaviour, would understand
                      to be meant to be unobserved. The requirement that
                      disclosure or observation of information or conduct
                      would be highly offensive to a reasonable person of
                      ordinary sensibilities is in many circumstances a useful
                      practical test of what is private.”
51.       This test had been adopted in several English decisions including

          decision of the House of Lords in Campbell v. Mirror Group

          Newspapers Limited33 wherein Lord Hope of Craighead had

          further elucidated that the definition is taken from the definition of

          ‘privacy’ in the United States, where the right to privacy is invaded

          if the matter which is publicised is of a kind that – (a) would be

          highly offensive to a reasonable person and (b) not of legitimate

          concern to the public. Law of privacy in Campbell (supra), it was

          observed, was not intended for the protection of the unduly

          sensitive and would cover matters which are offensive and

          objectionable to a reasonable man of ordinary sensibilities who

          must expect some reporting of his daily activities. The mind that

          has to be examined is not that of a reader in general, but that of

          the person who is affected by the publicising/dissemination of his

          information. The question is what a reasonable person of ordinary

          sensibilities would feel if he/she is subjected to such publicity.

          Only when publicity is such that a reasonable person would feel


33   (2004) UKHL 22
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 62 of 108
justified in feeling seriously aggrieved that there would be an

       invasion in the right to privacy which gives rise to a cause of

       action.
52.    In Douglas (supra), it was also held that there are different

       degrees of privacy which would be equally true for information

       given in confidentiality, and the potential for disclosure of the

       information to cause harm is an important factor to be taken into

       account in the assessment of the extent of the restriction to

       protect the right to privacy.
53.    While clause (j) exempts disclosure of two kinds of information, as

       noted in paragraph 47 above, that is “personal information” with

       no relation to public activity or interest and “information” that is

       exempt from disclosure to prevent unwarranted invasion of

       privacy, this Court has not underscored, as will be seen below,

       such distinctiveness and treated personal information to be

       exempt from disclosure if such disclosure invades on balance the

       privacy rights, thereby linking the former kind of information with

       the latter kind. This means that information, which if disclosed

       could lead to an unwarranted invasion of privacy rights, would

       mean personal information, that is, which is not having co-relation

       with public information.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 63 of 108
54.
In
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central Information

          Commissioner and Others34
, the applicant had sought copies of

          all memos, show-cause notices and censure/punishment awarded

          to a Government employee from his employer and also details of

          his movable/immovable properties, details of investment, loan and

          borrowings from financial institutions, details of gifts accepted by

          the employee from his family members and relatives at the time of

          the marriage of his son. In this context, it was observed:
“12. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts
                   below that the details called for by the petitioner i.e.
                   copies of all memos issued to the third respondent,
                   show-cause notices and orders of censure/punishment,
                   etc. are qualified to be personal information as defined
                   in clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act. The
                   performance of an employee/officer in an organisation
                   is primarily a matter between the employee and the
                   employer and normally those aspects are governed by
                   the service rules which fall under the expression
                   “personal information”, the disclosure of which has no
                   relationship to any public activity or public interest. On
                   the other hand, the disclosure of which would cause
                   unwarranted invasion of privacy of that individual. Of
                   course, in a given case, if the Central Public
                   Information Officer or the State Public Information
                   Officer or the appellate authority is satisfied that the
                   larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such
                   information, appropriate orders could be passed but
                   the petitioner cannot claim those details as a matter of
                   right.
13. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax
                   returns are “personal information” which stand


34   (2013) 1 SCC 212
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 64 of 108
exempted from disclosure under clause (j) of
Section
                   8(1)
of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger public
                   interest and the Central Public Information Officer or
                   the State Public Information Officer or the appellate
                   authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
                   justifies the disclosure of such information.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
55.
In
Canara Bank v. C.S. Shyam and Another35
, the applicant had

          sought information on parameters with regard to transfer of

          clerical staff with details of individual employees, such as date of

          their joining, promotion earned, date of their joining the branch,

          the authorities who had posted the transfer letters, etc. The

          information sought was declared to be personal in nature, which

          was conditionally exempted from disclosure under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act.
56.
In
Subhash Chandra Agarwal v. Registrar
, Supreme Court of

          India and Others36, the applicant (who is also the respondent in

          the present appeals) had sought information relating to details of

          medical facilities availed by individual judges of the Supreme

          Court and their family members, including information relating to

          private treatment in India and abroad in last three years. This

          Court had held that the information sought by the applicant was



35   (2018) 11 SCC 426
36   (2018) 11 SCC 634
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 65 of 108
‘personal’ information and was protected under
Section 8(1)(j)
of

          the RTI Act, for disclosure would cause unwarranted invasion of

          privacy which prohibition would not apply where larger public

          interest justifies disclosure of such information.
57.
In
R.K. Jain v. Union of India and Another37
, the applicant had

          sought inspection of documents relating to Annual Confidential

          Reports (ACRs) of a Member of Customs Excise and Service Tax

          Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) and follow up action taken by the

          authorities based on the ACRs. The information sought was

          treated as personal information, which, except in cases involving

          overriding public interest, could not be disclosed. It was observed

          that the procedure under
Section 11
of the RTI Act in such cases

          has to be followed. The matter was remitted to examine the

          aspect of larger public interest and to follow the procedure

          prescribed under
Section 11
of the RTI Act which, it was held, was

          mandatory.
58.       Reference can also be made to
Aditya Bandopadhyay
(supra),

          as discussed earlier in paragraph 32, where this Court has held

          that while a fiduciary could not withhold information from the

          beneficiary in whose benefit he holds such information, he/she


37   (2013) 14 SCC 794
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 66 of 108
owed a duty to the beneficiary to not disclose the same to anyone

       else. This exposition of the Court equally reconciles the right to

       know with the rights to privacy under clause (j) to
Section 8(1)
of

       the RTI Act.
59.    Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would

       indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical,

       mental and psychological status, marks obtained, grades and

       answer sheets, are all treated as personal information. Similarly,

       professional        records,     including   qualification,   performance,

       evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all

       personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of

       medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded,

       including that of the family members, information relating to

       assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of investments,

       lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such

       personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted

       invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when

       stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative

       and not exhaustive.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 67 of 108
60.
In
Arvind Kejriwal v. Central Public Information Officer and

          Another38
, the Delhi High Court had examined and interpreted
Section 11
of the RTI Act in the following manner:
“12.
Section 11(1)
, (2), (3) and (4) are the procedural
                    provisions which have to be complied with by the
                    PIO/appellant authority, when they are required to
                    apply the said test and give a finding whether
                    information should be disclosed or not disclosed. If the
                    said aspect is kept in mind, we feel there would be no
                    difficulty in interpreting
Section 11(1)
and the so called
                    difficulties or impartibility as pointed out by the
                    appellant will evaporate and lose significance. This will
                    be also in consonance with the primary rule of
                    interpretation that the legislative intent is to be
                    gathered from language employed in a statute which is
                    normally the determining factor. The presumption is
                    that the legislature has stated what it intended to state
                    and has made no mistake. (See
Prakash Nath Khanna
                    vs. CIT
, (2004) 9 SCC 686; and several judgments of
                    Supreme Court cited in
B. Premanand and Ors. vs.
                    Mohan Koikal and Ors..
13. Read in this manner, what is stipulated by
Section
                    11(1)
is that when an information seeker files an
                    application which relates to or has been supplied by
                    third party, the PIO has to examine whether the said
                    information is treated as confidential or can be treated
                    as confidential by the third party. If the answer is in the
                    possible sphere of affirmative or "maybe yes", then the
                    procedure prescribed in
Section 11
has to be followed
                    for determining whether the larger public interest
                    requires such disclosure. When information per se or
                    ex facie cannot be regarded as confidential, then the
                    procedure under
section 11
is not to be followed. All
                    information relating to or furnished by a third party
                    need not be confidential for various reasons including
                    the factum that it is already in public domain or in
                    circulation, right of third party is not affected or by law


38   AIR 2012 Delhi 29
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 68 of 108
is required to be disclosed etc. The aforesaid
                 interpretation takes care of the difficulties visualised by
                 the appellant like marks obtained in an examination, list
                 of BPL families, etc. In such cases, normally plea of
                 privacy or confidentiality does not arise as the said list
                 has either been made public, available in the public
                 domain or has been already circulated to various third
                 parties. On the other hand, in case the word “or” is
                 read as “and”, it may lead to difficulties and problems,
                 including invasion of right of privacy/confidentiality of a
                 third party. For example, a public authority may have in
                 its records, medical reports or prescriptions relating to
                 third person but which have not been supplied by the
                 third person. If the interpretation given by the appellant
                 is accepted then such information can be disclosed to
                 the information seeker without following the procedure
                 prescribed in
Section 11(1)
as the information was not
                 furnished or supplied by the third person. Such
                 examples can be multiplied. Furthermore, the
                 difficulties and anomalies pointed out can even arise
                 when the word “or” is read as “and” in cases where the
                 information is furnished by the third party. For example,
                 for being enrolled as a BPL family, information may
                 have been furnished by the third party who is in the list
                 of BPL families. Therefore, the reasonable and proper
                 manner of interpreting
Section 11(1)
is to keep in mind
                 the test stipulated by the proviso. It has to be examined
                 whether information can be treated and regarded as
                 being of confidential nature, if it relates to a third party
                 or has been furnished by a third party. Read in this
                 manner, when information relates to a third party and
                 can be prima facie regarded and treated as
                 confidential, the procedure under
Section 11(1)
must
                 be followed. Similarly, in case information has been
                 provided by the third party and has been prima facie
                 treated by the said third party as confidential, again the
                 procedure prescribed under
Section 11(1)
has to be
                 followed.
xx      xx            xx
16. Thus,
Section 11(1)
postulates two circumstances
                 when the procedure has to be followed. Firstly when
                 the information relates to a third party and can be
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 69 of 108
prima facie regarded as confidential as it affects the
                 right of privacy of the third party. The second situation
                 is when information is provided and given by a third
                 party to a public authority and prima facie the third
                 party who has provided information has treated and
                 regarded the said information as confidential. The
                 procedure given in
Section 11(1)
applies to both
                 cases.”
61.    We would clarify that
Section 11
is not merely procedural but also

       a substantive provision which applies when the PIO intends to

       disclose information that relates to or has been supplied by a third

       party and has been treated as confidential by that third party. It

       requires the PIO to issue notice to the third party who may make

       submission in writing or orally, which submission has to be kept in

       view while taking a decision. Proviso to
Section 11(1)
applies in all

       cases except trade or commercial secrets protected by law.

       Pertinently,      information including trade secrets,         intellectual

       property rights, etc. are governed by clause (d) to sub-section (1)

       of
Section 8
and
Section 9
of the RTI Act. In all other cases where

       the information relates to or has been supplied by the third party

       and treated as confidential by that third party, disclosure in terms

       of the proviso may be allowed where the public interest in

       disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to

       the interest of the third party. Confidentiality is protected and

       preserved in law because the public interest requires such
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 70 of 108
protection. It helps and promotes free communication without fear

       of retaliation. However, public interest in protecting confidentiality

       is subject to three well-known exceptions. The first exception

       being a public interest in the disclosure of iniquity for there cannot

       be any loss of confidentiality involving a wrongdoing. Secondly,

       there cannot be any public interest when the public has been

       misled. Thirdly, the principle of confidentiality does not apply when

       the disclosure relates to matters of public concern, which

       expression is vastly different from news value or news to satiate

       public curiosity. Public concern relates to matters which are an

       integral part of free speech and expression and entitlement of

       everyone to truth and fair comment about it. There are certain

       circumstances         where      the   public   interest   in   maintaining

       confidentiality may be outweighed by the public interest in

       disclosure and, thus, in common law, it may not be treated by the

       courts as confidential information. These aspects would be

       relevant under the proviso to
Section 11(1)
of the RTI Act.
62.    Proviso to
Section 11(1)
of the RTI Act is a statutory recognition of

       three exceptions and more when it incorporates public interest

       test. It states that information, otherwise treated confidential, can

       be disclosed if the public interest in disclosure outweighs the

       possible harm and injury to the interest of such a third party. The
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 71 of 108
expression ‘third party’ has been defined in clause (n) to
Section 2
to mean a person other than the citizen making a request for

       information and includes a public authority. Thus, the scope of

       ‘information’ under
Section 11
is much broader than that of clause
(j) to
Section 8 (1)
, as it could include information that is personal

       as well as information that concerns the government and its

       working, among others, which relates to or is supplied by a third

       party and treated as confidential. Third-party could include any

       individual, natural or juristic entity including the public authority.
63.    Confidentiality in case of personal information and its co-relation

       with the right to privacy and disclosure of the same on the anvil of

       the public interest test has been discussed above. We now

       proceed to look at confidentiality of information concerning the

       government and information relating to its inner-workings and the

       difference in approach in applying the public interest test in

       disclosing such information, as opposed to the approach adopted

       for other confidential/personal information. The reason for such

       jurisprudential distinction with regard to government information is

       best expressed in Attorney General (UK) v. Heinemann
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                               Page 72 of 108
Publishers Pty Ltd.39 wherein the High Court of Australia had

          observed:
“[…] the relationship between the modern State and its
                    citizens is so different in kind from that which exists
                    between private citizens that rules worked out to
                    govern contractual, property, commercial and private
                    confidences are not fully applicable where the plaintiff
                    is a government or one of its agencies. Private citizens
                    are entitled to protect or further own interests…
                    [whereas] governments act, or at all events are
                    constitutionally required to act, in the public interest.
                    Information is held, received and imparted by
                    governments, their departments and agencies to
                    further the public interest. Public and not private
                    interest, therefore, must be the criterion by which
                    equity determines whether it will protect information
                    which a government or governmental body claims is
                    confidential.”

                 The High Court of Australia had earlier in Commonwealth

          v. John Fairfax and Sons Ltd.40 observed:
“The question, then when the executive government
                    seeks the protection given by equity, is: What detriment
                    does it need to show?
The equitable principle has been fashioned to protect
                    the personal, private and proprietary interests of the
                    citizen, not to protect the very different interests of the
                    executive government. It acts, or is supposed to act,
                    not according to standards of private interest, but in the
                    public interest. This is not to say that equity will not
                    protect information in the hands of the government, but
                    it is to say that when equity protects government
                    information it will look at the matter through different
                    spectacles.
39   (1987) 10 NSWLR 86 at 191.
40   (1980) 147 CLR 39 at 51.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 73 of 108
It may be a sufficient detriment to the citizen that
                 disclosure of information relating to his affairs will
                 expose his actions to public discussion and criticism.
                 But it can scarcely be a relevant detriment to the
                 government that publication of material concerning its
                 actions will merely expose it to public discussion and
                 criticism. It is unacceptable in our democratic society
                 that there should be a restraint on the publication of
                 information relating to government when the only vice
                 of that information is that it enables the public to
                 discuss, review and criticize government action.

                 Accordingly, the court will determine the government's
                 claim to confidentiality by reference to the public
                 interest. Unless disclosure is likely to injure the public
                 interest, it will not be protected.
The court will not prevent the publication of information
                 which merely throws light on the past workings of
                 government, even if it be not public property, so long
                 as it does not prejudice the community in other
                 respects. Then disclosure will itself serve the public
                 interest in keeping the community informed and in
                 promoting discussion of public affairs. If, however, it
                 appears that disclosure will be inimical to the public
                 interest because national security, relations with
                 foreign countries or the ordinary business of
                 government will be prejudiced, disclosure will be
                 restrained. There will be cases in which the conflicting
                 considerations will be finely balanced, where it is
                 difficult to decide whether the public's interest in
                 knowing and in expressing its opinion, outweighs the
                 need to protect confidentiality.”

               The above principles have also been reiterated and relied

       upon by the courts in the United Kingdom [See Coco (supra),
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 74 of 108
Attorney General v. Jonathan Cape Ltd.41]. In Guardian

          Newspapers (supra), Lord Keith of Kinkel had observed:
“The position of the Crown, as representing the
                   continuing government of the country may, however,
                   be regarded as being special. In some instances
                   disclosure of confidential information entrusted to a
                   servant of the Crown may result in a financial loss to
                   the public. In other instances such disclosure may tend
                   to harm the public interest by impeding the efficient
                   attainment of proper governmental ends, and the
                   revelation of defence or intelligence secrets certainly
                   falls into that category. The Crown, however, as
                   representing the nation as a whole, has no private life
                   or personal feelings capable of being hurt by the
                   disclosure of confidential information. In so far as the
                   Crown acts to prevent such disclosure or to seek
                   redress for it on confidentiality grounds, it must
                   necessarily, in my opinion, be in a position to show that
                   the disclosure is likely to damage or has damaged the
                   public interest. How far the Crown has to go in order to
                   show this must depend on the circumstances of each
                   case. In a question with a Crown servant himself, or
                   others acting as his agents, the general public interest
                   in the preservation of confidentiality, and in
                   encouraging other Crown servants to preserve it, may
                   suffice.”
64.
In
R.K. Jain v. Union of India42
, this Court, while examining
Section 123
of the Evidence Act, 1872, had paraphrased the

          earlier judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court penned

          down by Fazal Ali, J. in
S.P. Gupta
(supra) (the first Judge’s case)

          in which the question of privilege against disclosure of

          correspondence between the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court,

41   [1976] QB 752
42   (1993) 4 SCC 119
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 75 of 108
Chief Justice of India and the Law Minister of the Union had

       arisen, in the following words:
“41. [...] in a democracy, citizens are to know what their
                 Govt. is doing. No democratic Govt. can survive
                 without accountability and the basic postulate of
                 accountability is that the people should have
                 information about the functioning of the Govt. It is only
                 if the people know how the Govt. is functioning and that
                 they can fulfill their own democratic rights given to
                 them and make the democracy a really effective
                 participatory democracy. There can be little doubt that
                 exposure to public scrutiny is one of the surest means
                 of running a clean and healthy administration. By
                 disclosure of information in regard to the functioning of
                 the Govt. must be the rule and secrecy can be
                 exceptionally justified only where strict requirement of
                 public information was assumed. The approach of the
                 court must be to alleviate the area of secrecy as much
                 as possible constantly with the requirement of public
                 interest bearing in mind all the time that the disclosure
                 also serves an important aspect of public interest.”
65.
In
R.K. Jain
(1993) (supra), reference was also made to
Articles

       74(2)
and
75(3)
of the Constitution, to observe:
“21...
Article 74(2)
precludes this Court from enquiring
                 into the nature of the advice tendered to the President
                 and the documents are, therefore, immuned from
                 disclosure. The disclosure would cause public injury
                 preventing candid and frank discussion and expression
                 of views by the bureaucrats at higher level and by the
                 Minister/Cabinet Sub-committee causing serious injury
                 to public service. Therefore, Cabinet papers, minutes
                 of discussion by heads of departments; high level
                 documents relating to the inner working of the
                 government machine and all papers concerned with
                 the government policies belong to a class documents
                 which in the public interest they or contents thereof
                 must be protected against disclosure.
xx      xx          xx
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 76 of 108
30. Collective responsibility under
Article 75(3)
of the
                 Constitution inheres maintenance of confidentiality as
                 enjoined in oaths of office and of secrecy set forth in
                 Schedule III of the Constitution that the Minister will not
                 directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any
                 person or persons any matter which shall be brought
                 under his/her consideration or shall become known to
                 him/her as Minister except as may be required for the
                 "due discharge of his/her duty as Minister". The base
                 and basic postulate of its significance is
                 unexceptionable. But the need for and effect of
                 confidentiality has to be nurtured not merely from
                 political imperatives of collective responsibility
                 envisaged by
Article 75(3)
but also from its
                 pragmatism.
xx        xx            xx
34. Equally every member is entitled to insist that
                 whatever his own contribution was to the making of the
                 decision, whether favourable or unfavourable, every
                 other member will keep it secret. Maintenance of
                 secrecy by an individual's contribution to discussion, or
                 vote in the Cabinet guarantees most favourable and
                 conducive atmosphere to express view formally…”

               It was held that the Ministers and the government servants

       were required to maintain secrecy and confidentiality in the

       performance of the duties of the office entrusted by the

       Constitution and the laws.            Elucidating on the importance of

       confidentiality, it was observed:
“34. [...] Confidentiality and collective responsibility in that
                 scenario are twins to effectuate the object of frank and open
                 debate to augment efficiency of public service or effectivity
                 of collective decision to elongate public interest. To hamper
                 and impair them without any compelling or at least strong
                 reasons, would be detrimental to the efficacy of public
                 administration. It would tantamount to wanton rejection of
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                       Page 77 of 108
the fruits of democratic governance, and abdication of an
                    office of responsibility and dependability. Maintaining of top
                    secrecy of new taxation policies is a must but leaking
                    budget proposals a day before presentation of the budget
                    may be an exceptional occurrence as an instance.”
66.       Thereafter, reference was made to the decision of the House of

          Lords in Burmah Oil Ltd v. Governor And Company Of The

          Bank Of England And Another43 wherein the Lords had rejected

          the notion that “any competent and conscientious public servant

          would be inhibited at all in the candour of his writings by

          consideration of the off chance that they might have to be

          produced in a litigation as grotesque” to hold that this contention

          would be utterly insubstantial ground to deny access to the

          relevant document. In Burma Oil Ltd. (supra), it was held that the

          candour doctrine stands in a different category from that aspect of

          public interest, which, in appropriate circumstances, may require

          that the ‘sources and nature of information confidentially tendered’

          should be withheld from disclosure. Several other cases were

          also referred expressing the same ratio [See – Butters Gas and

          Oil Co. v. Hammer44; Air Canada v. Secretary of State for
43   [1980] AC 1090
44   1982 AC 888 (H.L.)
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                        Page 78 of 108
Trade45; and Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the

          Civil Service46].
67.       Having held so, the Bench in
R.K. Jain
(1993) (supra) had

          proceeded to observe:
“48. In a democracy it is inherently difficult to function
                    at high governmental level without some degree of
                    secrecy. No Minister, nor a Senior Officer would
                    effectively discharge his official responsibilities if every
                    document prepared to formulate sensitive policy
                    decisions or to make assessment of character rolls of
                    co-ordinate officers at that level if they were to be
                    made public. Generally assessment of honesty and
                    integrity is a high responsibility. At high co-ordinate
                    level it would be a delicate one which would further get
                    compounded when it is not backed up with material.
                    Seldom material will be available in sensitive areas.
                    Reputation gathered by an officer around him would
                    form the base. If the reports are made known, or if the
                    disclosure is routine, public interest grievously would
                    suffer. On the other hand, confidentiality would
                    augment honest assessment to improve efficiency and
                    integrity in the officers.
49. The business of the Govt., when transacted by
                    bureaucrats, even in personal, it would be difficult to
                    have equanimity if the inner working of the Govt.
machinery is needlessly exposed to the public. On
                    such sensitive issues it would hamper to express frank
                    and forthright views or opinions. therefore, it may be
                    that at that level the deliberations and in exceptional
                    cases that class or category or documents get
                    protection, in particular, on policy matters. Therefore,
                    the court would be willing to respond to the executive
                    public interest immunity to disclose certain documents
                    where national security or high policy, high sensitivity is
                    involved.
45   1983 2 AC 394 (H.L.)
46   1985 AC 374 (H.L.)
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                      Page 79 of 108
xx        xx          xx
54. […] In President Nixon's case, the Supreme Court
                 of the United States held that it is the court's duty to
                 construe and delineate claims arising under express
                 powers, to interpret claims with respect to powers
                 alleged to derive from enumerated powers of the
                 Constitution, In deciding whether the matter has in any
                 measure been committed by the Constitution to
                 another branch of government, or whether the action of
                 that branch exceeds whatever authority has been
                 committed, is itself a delicate exercise in constitutional
                 interpretation, and is the responsibility of the court as
                 ultimate interpreter of the Constitution…”
68.    At the same time, it was held:
“55. [...]
Article 74(2)
is not a total bar for production of
                 the records. Only the actual advice tendered by the
                 Minister or Council of Ministers to the President and
                 the question whether any and if so, what advice was
                 tendered by the Minister or Council of Ministers to the
                 President, shall not be enquired into by the court. In
                 other words the bar of Judicial review is confined to the
                 factum of advice, its extent, ambit and scope but not
                 the record i.e. the material on which the advice is
                 founded.
In
S.P. Gupta
's case this Court held that only
                 the actual advice tendered to the President is immuned
                 from enquiry and the immunity does not extend to other
                 documents or records which form part of the advice
                 tendered to the President.
56. There is discernible modern trends towards more
                 open government than was prevalent in the past. In its
                 judicial review the court would adopt in camera
                 procedure to inspect the record and evaluate the
                 balancing act between the competing public interest
                 and administration of justice. It is equally the
                 paramount consideration that justice should not only be
                 done but also would be publicly recognised as having
                 been done. Under modern conditions of responsible
                 government, Parliament should not always be relied on
                 as a check on excess of power by the Council of
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 80 of 108
Ministers or Minister. Though the court would not
                 substitute its views to that of the executive on matters
                 of policy, it is its undoubted power and duty to see that
                 the executive exercises its power only for the purpose
                 for which it is granted. Secrecy of the advice or opinion
                 is by no means conclusive. Candour, frankness and
                 confidentiality though are integral facets of the common
                 genus i.e., efficient governmental functioning, per se by
                 means conclusive but be kept in view in weighing the
                 balancing act. Decided cases show that power often
                 was exercised in excess thereof or for an ulterior
                 purpose etc. Sometimes the public service reasons will
                 be decisive of the issue, but they should never prevent
                 the court from weighing them against the injury which
                 would be suffered in the administration of justice if the
                 document was not to be disclosed, and the likely injury
                 to the cause of justice must also be assessed and
                 weighed. Its weight will vary according to the nature of
                 the proceedings in which disclosure is sought, level at
                 which the matter was considered; the subject matter of
                 consideration; the relevance of the documents and that
                 degree of likelihood that the document will be of
                 importance in the litigation. In striking the balance, the
                 court may always, if it thinks it necessary, itself inspect
                 the documents. It is, therefore the constitutional,
                 legitimate and lawful power and duty of this Court to
                 ensure that powers, constitutional, statutory or
                 executive are exercised in accordance with the
                 Constitution and the law. This may demand, though no
                 doubt only in limited number of cases, yet the inner
                 workings of government may be exposed to public
                 gaze. The contentions of Attorney General and
                 Solicitor General that the inner workings of the
                 government would be exposed to public gaze, and that
                 some one who would regard this as an occasion
                 without sufficient material to ill-informed criticism is no
                 longer relevant. Criticism calculated to improve the
                 nature of that working as affecting the individual citizen
                 is welcome.”
69.    The aforesaid passages highlight the relevance of confidentiality

       in the government and its functioning. However, this is not to state
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 81 of 108
that plea of confidentiality is an absolute bar, for in terms of

       proviso to
Section 11(1)
of the RTI Act, the PIO has to undertake

       the balancing exercise and weigh the advantages and benefits of

       disclosing the information with the possible harm or injury to the

       third party on the information being disclosed. We have already

       referred to the general approach on the right of access to

       government records under the heading “
Section 8(1)(j)
and
Section 11
of the RTI Act” with reference to the decisions of the

       High Court of Australia in Heinemann Publishers Pty Ltd.

       (supra) and John Fairfax and Sons Ltd. (supra).
70.    Most jurists would accept that absolute transparency in all facets

       of government is neither feasible nor desirable,47 for there are

       several limitations on complete disclosure of governmental

       information, especially in matters relating to national security,

       diplomatic relations, internal security or sensitive diplomatic

       correspondence. There is also a need to accept and trust the

       government’s decision-makers, which they have to also earn,

       when they plead that confidentiality in their meetings and


47 Michael Schudson, ‘The Right to Know vs the Need for Secrecy: The US Experience’ The
 Conversation (May 2015) <https://theconversation.com/the-right-to-know-vs-the-need-for-secrecy-
 the-us-experience-40948>; Eric R. Boot, ‘The Feasibility of a Public Interest Defense for
 Whistleblowing’, Law and Philosophy (2019). See generally Michael Schudson, The Rise of the
 Right to Know: Politics and the Culture of Transparency, 1945–1975 (Cambridge (MA): Harvard
 University Press 2015).
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                            Page 82 of 108
exchange of views is needed to have a free flow of views on

          sensitive, vexatious and pestilent issues in which there can be

          divergent views. This is, however, not to state that there are no

          dangers in maintaining secrecy even on aspects that relate to

          national security, diplomatic relations, internal security or sensitive

          diplomatic correspondence. Confidentiality may have some

          bearing and importance in ensuring honest and fair appraisals,

          though it could work the other way around also and, therefore,

          what should be disclosed would depend on authentic enquiry

          relating to the public interest, that is, whether the right to access

          and the right to know outweighs the possible public interest in

          protecting privacy or outweighs the harm and injury to third parties

          when the information relates to such third parties or the

          information is confidential in nature.
POINT NO. 4:            MEANING OF THE TERM ‘PUBLIC INTEREST’
71.
In
Union of India v. Association
for Democratic Reforms and

          Another48 recognising the voters’ right to know the antecedents of

          the candidates and the right to information which stems from
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution, it was held that directions could




48   (2002) 5 SCC 294
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                Page 83 of 108
be issued by the Court to subserve public interest in creating an

       informed citizenry, observing:
“46. […] The right to get information in democracy is
                 recognised all throughout and it is natural right flowing
                 from the concept of democracy. At this stage, we would
                 refer to
Article 19(1)
and
(2)
of the International
                 Covenant of Civil and Political Rights which is as
                 under:
(1) Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions
                 without interference.
(2) Everyone shall have the right to freedom of
                 expression; this right shall include freedom to seek,
                 receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds,
                 regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in
                 print, in the form of art, or through any other media of
                 his choice.
6. Cumulative reading of plethora of decisions of this
                 Court as referred to, it is clear that if the field meant for
                 legislature and executive is left unoccupied detrimental
                 to the public interest, this Court would have ample
                 jurisdiction under
Article 32
read with
Article 141
and
142
of the Constitution to issue necessary directions to
                 the Executive to subserve public interest.”

               Clearly, the larger public interest in having an informed

       electorate, fair elections and creating a dialectical democracy had

       outweighed and compelled this Court to issue the directions

       notwithstanding disclosure of information relating to the personal

       assets, educational qualifications and antecedents including

       previous involvement in a criminal case of the contesting

       candidate.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 84 of 108
72.      Public interest, sometimes criticised as inherently amorphous and

         incapable of a precise definition, is a time tested and historical

         conflict of rights test which is often applied in the right to

         information legislation to balance right to access and protection of

         the conflicting right to deny access. In Mosley v. News Group

         Papers Ltd.49 it has been observed:
“130… It is not simply a matter of personal privacy
                  versus the public interest. The modern perception is
                  that there is a public interest in respecting personal
                  privacy. It is thus a question of taking account of
                  conflicting public interest considerations and evaluating
                  them according to increasingly well recognized
                  criteria.”
The RTI Act
is no exception.
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act

         prescribes the requirement of satisfaction of ‘larger public interest’

         for access to information when the information relates to personal

         information having no relationship with any public activity or

         interest, or would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the

         individual. Proviso to
Section 11(1)
states that except in case of

         trade or commercial secrets protected by law, disclosure may be

         allowed if the public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance

         any possible harm or injury to the interest of the third party. The

         words ‘possible harm or injury’ to the interest of the third party is

         preceded by the word ‘importance’ for the purpose of comparison.
49   2008 EWHC 1777 (QB)
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 85 of 108
‘Possible’ in the context of the proviso does not mean something

          remote, far-fetched or hypothetical, but a calculable, foreseeable

          and substantial possibility of harm and injury to the third party.
73.       Comparison or balancing exercise of competing public interests

          has to be undertaken in both sections, albeit under
Section 8(1)(j)
the comparison is between public interest behind the exemption,

          that is personal information or invasion of privacy of the individual

          and public interest behind access to information, whereas the test

          prescribed by the proviso to
Section 11(1)
is somewhat broader

          and wider as it requires comparison between disclosure of

          information relating to a third person or information supplied and

          treated as confidential by the third party and possible harm or

          injury to the third party on disclosure, which would include all kinds

          of ‘possible’ harm and injury to the third party on disclosure.
74.       This Court in
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed

          Hussain Abbas Rizwi and Another50
has held that the phrase

          ‘public interest’ in
Section 8(1)(j)
has to be understood in its true

          connotation to give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of

          the
RTI Act
. However, the RTI Act does not specifically identify

          factors to be taken into account in determining where the public


50   (2012) 13 SCC 61
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                Page 86 of 108
interest lies. Therefore, it is important to understand the meaning

       of the expression ‘public interest’ in the context of the
RTI Act
.

       This Court held ‘public interest’ to mean the general welfare of the

       public warranting the disclosure and the protection applicable, in

       which the public as a whole has a stake, and observed:
“23. The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the
                 authorities objectively and the consequences of such
                 disclosure have to be weighed with regard to the
                 circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be
                 based on objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring
                 that larger public interest outweighs unwarranted
                 invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
                 provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to
                 appointment, are required to be dealt with great
                 confidentiality. The information may come to
                 knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by
                 others who give that information in confidence and with
                 complete faith, integrity and fidelity. Secrecy of such
                 information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it within
                 the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be
                 cases where the disclosure has no relationship to any
                 public activity or interest or it may even cause
                 unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual. All
                 these protections have to be given their due
                 implementation as they spring from statutory
                 exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
                 private interest and public interest. It is a matter where
                 a constitutional protection is available to a person with
                 regard to the right to privacy. Thus, the public interest
                 has to be construed while keeping in mind the balance
                 factor between right to privacy and right to information
                 with the purpose sought to be achieved and the
                 purpose that would be served in the larger public
                 interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
                 from the constitutional values under the Constitution of
                 India.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 87 of 108
75.    Public interest in access to information refers to something that is

       in the interest of the public welfare to know. Public welfare is

       widely different from what is of interest to the public. “Something

       which is of interest to the public” and “something which is in the

       public interest” are two separate and different parameters. For

       example, the public may be interested in private matters with

       which the public may have no concern and pressing need to

       know. However, such interest of the public in private matters

       would repudiate and directly traverse the protection of privacy.
The object and purpose behind the specific exemption vide clause
(j) to
Section 8(1)
is to protect and shield oneself from

       unwarranted access to personal information and to protect facets

       like reputation, honour, etc. associated with the right to privacy.

       Similarly, there is a public interest in the maintenance of

       confidentiality in the case of private individuals and even

       government, an aspect we have already discussed.
76.    The public interest test in the context of the
RTI Act
would mean

       reflecting upon the object and purpose behind the right to

       information, the right to privacy and consequences of invasion,

       and breach of confidentiality and possible harm and injury that

       would be caused to the third party, with reference to a particular

       information and the person. In an article ‘Freedom of Information
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 88 of 108
and the Public Interest: the Commonwealth experience’ published

          in the Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal,51 the factors

          identified as favouring disclosure, those against disclosure and

          lastly those irrelevant for consideration of public interest have

          been elucidated as under:
“it is generally accepted that the public interest is not
                     synonymous with what is of interest to the public, in the
                     sense of satisfying public curiosity about some matter.
                     For example, the UK Information Tribunal has drawn a
                     distinction between ‘matters which were in the interests
                     of the public to know and matters which were merely
                     interesting to the public (i.e. which the public would like
                     to know about, and which sell newspapers, but... are
                     not relevant).
Factors identified as favouring disclosure include
                     the public interest in: contributing to a debate on a
                     matter of public importance; accountability of officials;
                     openness in the expenditure of public funds, the
                     performance by a public authority of its regulatory
                     functions, the handling of complaints by public
                     authorities; exposure of wrongdoing, inefficiency or
                     unfairness; individuals being able to refute allegations
                     made against them; enhancement of scrutiny of
                     decision-making; and protecting against danger to
                     public health or safety.
Factors that have been found to weigh against
                     disclosure include: the likelihood of damage to security
                     or international relations; the likelihood of damage to
                     the integrity or viability of decision-making processes:
the public interest in public bodies being able to
                     perform their functions effectively; the public interest in
                     preserving the privacy of individuals and the public
                     interest in the preservation of confidences.
51   Published online on 28th August, 2017
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                      Page 89 of 108
Factors irrelevant to the consideration of the public
                 interest have also been identified. These include: that
                 the information might be misunderstood; that the
                 requested information in overly technical in nature; and
                 that disclosure would result in embarrassment to the
                 government or to officials.”
77.    In Campbell (supra), reference was made to the Press

       Complaints Commission Code of Practice to further elucidate on

       the test of public interest which stands at the intersection of

       freedom of expression and the privacy rights of an individual to

       hold that:
“1. Public interest includes:
(i) Detecting or       exposing   crime     or   a   serious
                 misdemeanour.

                 (ii) Protecting public health and safety.
(iii) Preventing the public from being misled by some
                 statement or action of an individual or organisation....”
78.    Public interest has no relationship and is not connected with the

       number of individuals adversely affected by the disclosure which

       may be small and insignificant in comparison to the substantial

       number of individuals wanting disclosure. It will vary according to

       the information sought and all circumstances of the case that bear

       upon the public interest in maintaining the exemptions and those

       in disclosing the information must be accounted for to judge the

       right balance. Public interest is not immutable and even time-gap
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                    Page 90 of 108
may make a significant difference. The type and likelihood of harm

       to the public interest behind the exemption and public interest in

       disclosure       would      matter.   The   delicate   balance      requires

       identification of public interest behind each exemption and then

       cumulatively weighing the public interest in accepting or

       maintaining the exemption(s) to deny information in a particular

       case against the public interest in disclosure in that particular

       case. Further, under
Section 11(1)
, reference is made to the

       ‘possible’ harm and injury to the third party which will also have to

       be factored in when determining disclosure of confidential

       information relating to the third parties.
79.    The last aspect in the context of public interest test would be in

       the form of clarification as to the effect of sub-section (2) to
Section 6
of the RTI Act which does not require the information

       seeker to give any reason for making a request for the

       information. Clearly, ‘motive’ and ‘purpose’ for making the request

       for information is irrelevant, and being extraneous cannot be a

       ground for refusing the information. However, this is not to state

       that ‘motive’ and ‘purpose’ may not be relevant factor while

       applying the public interest test in case of qualified exemptions

       governed by the public interest test. It is in this context that this

       Court in
Aditya Bandopadhyay
(supra) has held that beneficiary
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 91 of 108
cannot be denied personal information relating to him. Similarly, in

       other cases, public interest may weigh in favour of the disclosure

       when the information sought may be of special interest or special

       significance to the applicant. It could equally be a negative factor

       when the ‘motive’ and ‘purpose’ is vexatious or it is a case of clear

       abuse of law.
80.
In the RTI Act
, in the absence of any positive indication as to the

       considerations which the PIO has to bear in mind while making a

       decision, the legislature had intended to vest a general discretion

       in the PIO to weigh the competing interests, which is to be limited

       only by the object, scope and purpose of the protection and the

       right to access information and in
Section 11(1)
, the ‘possible’

       harm and injury to the third party. It imports a discretionary value

       judgment on the part of the PIO and the appellate forums as it

       mandates that any conclusion arrived at must be fair and just by

       protecting each right which is required to be upheld in public

       interest. There is no requirement to take a fortiori view that one

       trumps the other.
POINT NO. 5:          JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE
81.    Having dealt with the doctrine of the public interest under the
RTI

       Act
, we would now turn to examining its co-relation with
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 92 of 108
transparency in the functioning of the judiciary in matters of

       judicial     appointments/selection           and      importance        of    judicial

       independence.
82.    Four major arguments are generally invoked to deny third-party or

       public access to information on appointments/selection of judges,

       namely, (i) confidentiality concerns; (ii) data protection; (ii)

       reputation of those being considered in the selection process,

       especially those whose candidature/eligibility stands negated; and
(iv) potential chilling effect on future candidates given the degree

       of exposure and public scrutiny involved.52 These arguments have

       become subject matter of considerable debate, if not outright

       criticism at the hands of jurists and authors.53 Yet there are those

       who have expressed cynicism about the                         ‘interview’ process

       undertaken by the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) in

       recommending judges for appointment in South Africa, by pointing

       out the precariousness and the chilling effect it has on prospective

       candidates and consequently the best candidates often do not

       apply.54 Recently, the majority judgment of the Constitutional Court


52 See: How Transparent is Transparent Enough?: Balancing Access to Information Against Privacy
  in European Judicial Selections by Alberto Alemanno in Michal Bobek (ed.), Selecting Europe’s
  Judges, 2015 Edition.
53 Kate Malleson, ‘Parliamentary Scrutiny of Supreme Court Nominees: A View from the United

  Kingdom’ Osgoode Hall Law Journal (2007) 44, 557.
54 WH Gravett, ‘Towards an algorithmic model of judicial appointment: The necessity for radical

  revision of the Judicial Service Commission’s interview procedures’ 2017 (80) THRHR.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                            Page 93 of 108
of South Africa in Helen Suzman Foundation v. Judicial Service

        Commission55 by relying upon Rule 53(1)(b) of the Uniform Rules

        of Court, South Africa,56 had directed the JSC to furnish the record

        of its deliberations, rejecting the contrary argument of candour and

        robustness as that of ‘timorous fainthearts’. Debating with

        candour, the Court observed, is not equivalent to expression of

        impropriety. The candidates, it was noticed, had undergone

        gruelling scrutiny in the public interviews, and therefore disclosure

        of deliberation would not act as a dampener for future candidates.

        More importantly, the Constitutional Court had distinguished the

        authority and power with the Courts under Rule 53 to access the

        deliberation record, with the different right to access information

        under the Promotion to Access to Information Act, 2000 (PAIA),

        which was the basis of the minority judgment for rejection of

        production of the JSC’s deliberation record. The majority held that

        PAIA and Rule 53 serve different purposes, there being a


55 Case 289/16 decided on 24th April 2018
56 Rule 53(1)(b) of the Uniform Rules of Court, South Africa states:
“(1) Save where any law otherwise provides, all proceedings to bring under review the decision or
  proceedings of any inferior court and of any tribunal, board or officer performing judicial, quasi-
  judicial or administrative functions shall be by way of notice of motion directed and delivered by
  the party seeking to review such decision or proceedings to the magistrate, presiding officer or
  chairman of the court, tribunal or board or to the officer, as the case may be, and to all other
  parties affected-
(a) […]
(b) calling upon the magistrate, presiding officer, chairman or officer, as the case may be, to
       despatch, within fifteen days after receipt of the notice of motion, to the registrar the record
       of such proceedings sought to be corrected or set aside, together with such reasons as he
       is by law required or desires to give or make, and to notify the applicant that he has done
       so.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                      Page 94 of 108
difference in the nature of, and purposes, and therefore it would

       be inapt to transpose PAIA proscriptions on access under Rule
53. The PAIA grants any person or busybody a right to access any

       information without explaining whatsoever as to why she or he

       requires the information. This had to be balanced, with the need to

       incentivise people to furnish private information, where such

       information is required for facilitating the government machinery,

       and therefore, considerations of confidentiality are applied as the

       person furnishing information must be made aware that the

       information would not be unhesitatingly divulged to others,

       including busybodies, for no particular reason. This facilitates the

       exercise of power and performance of functions of the state

       functionaries.        In court matters under Rule 53, concerns of

       confidentiality could be addressed by imposing stringent and

       restrictive conditions on the right to access information, including

       furnishing of confidentiality undertakings for restraining the

       divulgence of details to third parties.
83.    The United Kingdom’s Data Protection Act, 2018 grants class

       exemption to all personal data processed for the purpose of

       assessing a person’s suitability for judicial office, from certain

       rights including the right of the data subject to be informed,

       guaranteed under the European Union General Data Protection
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 95 of 108
Regulation being given effect to by the Data Protection Act.57

        Similarly, in the context of the European Union, opinions of ‘the
Article 255
Panel’58 and ‘the Advisory Panel’59, entrusted with the

        task of advising on the suitability of candidates as judges to the

        Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of

        Human Rights are inaccessible to the public and their opinions

        have limited circulation, as they are exclusively forwarded to the

        representatives of governments of the member states in the case

        of European Union60 and the individual governments in the case of

        Council of Europe61, respectively. The Council of the European

        Union,62 for instance, in consultation with ‘Article 255’ Panel, has

        denied requests for public access to opinions issued by the

        Panel,63 in light of the applicable exceptions provided for in

        Regulation No 1049/200164. Such opinions, the Council has


57 Schedule 2, Part-2, Paragraph 14.
58
Article 255
, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states:
“A panel shall be set up in order to give an opinion on candidates' suitability to perform the duties of
  Judge and Advocate-General of the Court of Justice and the General Court before the governments
  of the Member States make the appointments referred to in
Articles 253
and 254…”
59 Set up under Resolution ‘Establishment of an Advisory Panel of Experts on Candidates for Election

  as Judge to the European Court of Human Rights’, CM/Res (2010) 26 adopted by the Committee of
  Ministers on 10 November 2010.
60 CJEU is the judicial branch of the European Union, administering justice in the 28 member states

  of the international organisation.
61 Comprising of 47 member European states, Council of Europe adopted the European Convention

  on Human Rights, which established ECtHR.
62 One of the seven constituent bodies of the European Union comprising of the ministers from the

  member states of the European Union.
63 Reply Adopted by the Council on 12 July 2016 to Confirmatory Application 13/c/01/16 pursuant to
Article 7(2)
of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 for public access to all the opinions issued by the
  Panel provided for by
Article 255
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
64 Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001

  regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                                     Page 96 of 108
observed, largely include personal data of the candidates, viz.
factual     elements         concerning        the   candidates’   professional

        experience and qualifications and the Panel’s assessment of the

        candidate’s competences and, therefore, access to relevant

        documents is denied in order to protect the privacy and integrity of

        the individual.65 However, a part of these opinions which do not

        contain personal data and provide a description of the procedure

        adopted and criteria applied by the Panel have been released as

        “Activity Reports” in the framework of partial access to such

        information. Opinions that are unfavourable to the appointment of

        the candidates will be exempt from disclosure as they can hamper

        commercial interests of the candidates in their capacity as legal

        practitioners,66 whereas positive opinions are exempted from

        disclosure as such opinions can lead to comparison and public

        scrutiny of the most and least favoured qualities of the successful

        candidates, potentially interfering with the proceedings of the

        Court of Justice.67 Lastly, disclosure of opinions, the Council has

        observed, will be exempted if such disclosure could “seriously




65
Article 4(1)(b)
, Regulation No 1049/2001
66 First indent of
Article 4(2)
, Regulation No 1049/2001
67 Second indent of
Article 4(2)
, Regulation No 1049/2001
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                       Page 97 of 108
undermine the institution's decision-making process, unless there

          is an overriding public interest in disclosure.”68
84.       More direct and relevant in the Indian context would be the

          decision of this Court in Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record

          Association v. Union of India69
, where a Constitutional Bench of

          five judges had dealt with the constitutional validity of the National

          Judicial Appointments Commission. A concurring judgment had

          dealt with the aspect of transparency in appointment and transfer

          of judges and the privacy concerns of the judges who divulge their

          personal information in confidence, to opine as under:
“949. In the context of confidentiality requirements, the
                     submission of the learned Attorney General was that
                     the functioning of NJAC would be completely
                     transparent. Justifying the need for transparency it was
                     submitted that so far the process of appointment of
                     Judges in the Collegium System has been extremely
                     secret in the sense that no one outside the Collegium
                     or the Department of Justice is aware of the
                     recommendations made by the Chief Justice of India
                     for appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court or
                     the     High     Courts.    Reference       was    made
                     to
Renu v. District & Sessions Judge
, (2014) 14 SCC
                     50 to contend that in the matter of appointment in all
                     judicial institutions “complete darkness in the
                     lighthouse has to be removed”.
950. In addition to the issue of transparency a
                     submission was made that in the matter of appointment
                     of Judges, civil society has the right to know who is
                     being considered for appointment.
In this regard, it was

68
Article 4(3)
, Regulation No 1049/2001
69   (2016) 5 SCC 1
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                     Page 98 of 108
held in
Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P)
                 Ltd. v. Union of India
(1985) 1 SCC 641 that the people
                 have a right to know.
Reliance was placed on Attorney
                 General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. 1974 AC 273: (1973)
                 3 WLR 298: (1973) 3 All ER 54 (HL) where the right to
                 know was recognised as a fundamental principle of the
                 freedom of expression and the freedom of discussion.
951.
In
State of U.P. v. Raj Narain
(1975) 4 SCC 428 the
                 right to know was recognised as having been derived
                 from the concept of freedom of speech.
952. Finally, in
Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd. v. Indian
                 Express Newspapers Bombay (P) Ltd.
, (1988) 4 SCC
                 592 it was held that the right to know is a basic right
                 which citizens of a free country aspire in the broader
                 horizon of the right to live in this age in our land under
Article 21
of our Constitution.
953. The      balance     between      transparency    and
                 confidentiality is very delicate and if some sensitive
                 information about a particular person is made public, it
                 can have a far-reaching impact on his/her reputation and
                 dignity. The 99th Constitution Amendment Act and the
                 NJAC Act have not taken note of the privacy concerns of
                 an individual. This is important because it was submitted
                 by the learned Attorney General that the proceedings of
                 NJAC will be completely transparent and any one can
                 have access to information that is available with NJAC.
This is a rather sweeping generalisation which obviously
                 does not take into account the privacy of a person who
                 has been recommended for appointment, particularly as
                 a Judge of the High Court or in the first instance as a
                 Judge of the Supreme Court. The right to know is not a
                 fundamental right but at best it is an implicit fundamental
                 right and it is hedged in with the implicit fundamental
                 right to privacy that all people enjoy. The balance
                 between the two implied fundamental rights is difficult to
                 maintain, but the 99th Constitution Amendment Act and
                 the NJAC Act do not even attempt to consider, let alone
                 achieve that balance.
954. It is possible to argue that information voluntarily
                 supplied by a person who is recommended for
                 appointment as a Judge might not have a right to
                 privacy, but at the same time, since the information is
                 supplied in confidence, it is possible to argue that it
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 99 of 108
ought not to be disclosed to third party unconcerned
                   persons. Also, if the recommendation is not accepted
                   by the President, does the recommended person have
                   a right to non-disclosure of the adverse information
                   supplied by the President? These are difficult questions
                   to which adequate thought has not been given and
                   merely on the basis of a right to know, the reputation of
                   a person cannot be whitewashed in a dhobi-ghat.”
85.       Earlier, the Constitution Bench of nine judges had in Second

          Judges’ Case, that is Supreme Court Advocates on
Record

          Association and Others v. Union of India70
overruled the

          majority opinion in
S.P. Gupta
(supra) (the first Judge’s case) and

          had provided for primacy to the role of the Chief Justice of India

          and the collegium in the matters of appointment and transfer of

          judges. Speaking on behalf of the majority, J.S. Verma, J., had

          with regard to the justiciability of transfers, summarised the legal

          position as under:
“480. The primacy of the judiciary in the matter of
                   appointments and its determinative nature in transfers
                   introduces the judicial element in the process, and is
                   itself a sufficient justification for the absence of the
                   need for further judiciary review of those decisions,
                   which is ordinarily needed as a check against possible
                   executive excess or arbitrariness. Plurality of judges in
                   the formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice of
                   India, as indicated, is another inbuilt check against the
                   likelihood of arbitrariness or bias, even subconsciously,
                   of any individual. The judicial element being
                   predominant in the case of appointments, and decisive
                   in transfers, as indicated, the need for further judicial
                   review, as in other executive actions, is eliminated.
70   (1993) 4 SCC 441
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                  Page 100 of 108
The reduction of the area of discretion to the minimum,
                 the element of plurality of judges in formation of the
                 opinion of the Chief Justice of India, effective
                 consultation in writing, and prevailing norms to regulate
                 the area of discretion are sufficient checks against
                 arbitrariness.
481. These guidelines in the form of norms are not to
                 be construed as conferring any justiciable right in the
                 transferred Judge. Apart from the constitutional
                 requirement of a transfer being made only on the
                 recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, the issue
                 of transfer is not justiciable on any other ground,
                 including the reasons for the transfer or their
                 sufficiency. The opinion of the Chief Justice of India
                 formed in the manner indicated is sufficient safeguard
                 and protection against any arbitrariness or bias, as well
                 as any erosion of the independence of the judiciary.
482. This is also in accord with the public interest of
                 excluding these appointments and transfers from
                 litigative debate, to avoid any erosion in the credibility
                 of the decisions, and to ensure a free and frank
                 expression of honest opinion by all the constitutional
                 functionaries, which is essential for effective
                 consultation and for taking the right decision. The
                 growing tendency of needless intrusion by strangers
                 and busy-bodies in the functioning of the judiciary
                 under the garb of public interest litigation, in spite of the
                 caution in S.P. Gupta which expanding the concept of
                 locus standi, was adverted to recently by a Constitution
                 Bench in
Krishna Swami v. Union of India
(1992) 4
                 SCC 605. It is therefore, necessary to spell out clearly
                 the limited scope of judicial review in such matters, t
                 avoid similar situations in future. Except on the ground
                 of want of consultation with the named constitutional
                 functionaries or lack of any condition of eligibility in the
                 cases of an appointment, or of a transfer being made
                 without the recommendation of the Chief Justice of
                 India, these matters are not justiciable on any other
                 ground, including that of bias, which in any case is
                 excluded by the element of plurality in the process of
                 decision-making.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 101 of 108
86.    That the independence of the judiciary forms part of our basic

       structure is now well established.
S. P. Gupta
(supra) (the first

       Judge’s case) had observed that this independence is one

       amongst the many other principles that run through the entire

       fabric of the Constitution and is a part of the rule of law under the

       Constitution. The judiciary is entrusted with the task of keeping the

       other two organs within the limits of law and to make the rule of

       law meaningful and effective. Further, the independence of

       judiciary is not limited to judicial appointments to the Supreme

       Court and the High Courts, as it is a much wider concept which

       takes within its sweep independence from many other pressures

       and prejudices. It consists of many dimensions including

       fearlessness from other power centres, social, economic and

       political, freedom from prejudices acquired and nurtured by the

       class to which the judges belong and the like.
This wider concept

       of independence of judiciary finds mention in
C. Ravichandran

       Iyer v. Justice A.M. Bhattacharjee and Others71
, High Court of

       Judicature at
Bombay v. Shashikant S. Patil72
and
Jasbir

       Singh v. State of Punjab73
.
71 (1995) 5 SCC 457
72 (1997) 6 SCC 339
73 (2006) 8 SCC 294
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 102 of 108
87.
In Supreme Court Advocates’ on
Record Association
(2016)

       (supra) on the aspect of the independence of the judiciary, it has

       been observed:
“713. What are the attributes of an independent
                 judiciary? It is impossible to define them, except
                 illustratively. At this stage, it is worth recalling the
                 words of Sir Ninian Stephen, a former Judge of the
                 High Court of Australia who memorably said:
“[An] independent judiciary, although a formidable
                 protector of individual liberty, is at the same time a very
                 vulnerable institution, a fragile bastion indeed.”

                 It is this fragile bastion that needs protection to maintain
                 its independence and if this fragile bastion is subject to a
                 challenge, constitutional protection is necessary.
714. The independence of the judiciary takes within its
                 fold two broad concepts: (1) Independence of an
                 individual Judge, that is, decisional independence; and
                 (2) Independence of the judiciary as an institution or an
                 organ of the State, that is, functional independence. In a
                 lecture on Judicial Independence, Lord Phillips said:
“In order to be impartial a Judge must be
                    independent; personally independent, that is free
                    of personal pressures and institutionally
                    independent, that is free of pressure from the
                    State.”

                                   xx          xx            xx
726. Generally speaking, therefore, the independence
                 of the judiciary is manifested in the ability of a Judge to
                 take a decision independent of any external (or
                 internal) pressure or fear of any external (or internal)
                 pressure and that is “decisional independence”. It is
                 also manifested in the ability of the institution to have
                 “functional independence”. A comprehensive and
                 composite definition of “independence of the judiciary”
                 is elusive but it is easy to perceive.”
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                 Page 103 of 108
It is clear from the aforesaid quoted passages that the

        independence of the judiciary refers to both decisional and

        functional independence. There is reference to a report titled

        ‘Judicial Independence: Law and Practice of Appointments to the

        European Court of Human Rights’74 which had observed that

        judges are not elected by the people (relevant in the context of

        India and the United Kingdom) and, therefore, derive their

        authority and legitimacy from their independence from political or

        other interference.
88.     We have referred to the decisions and viewpoints to highlight the

        contentious nature of the issue of transparency, accountability and

        judicial independence with various arguments and counter-

        arguments on both sides, each of which commands merit and

        cannot be ignored. Therefore, it is necessary that the question of

        judicial independence is accounted for in the balancing exercise. It

        cannot be doubted and debated that the independence of the

        judiciary is a matter of ennobled public concern and directly

        relates to public welfare and would be one of the factors to be



74Contributors: Professor Dr. Jutta Limbach, Professor Dr. Pedro Villalon, Roger Errera, The Rt Hon
Lord Lester of Herne Hill QC, Professor Dr. Tamara Morschakova, The Rt Hon Lord Justice Sedley,
Professor Dr. Andrzej Zoll. <http://www.interights.org/document/142/index.html>
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                               Page 104 of 108
taken into account in weighing and applying the public interest

       test. Thus, when the public interest demands the disclosure of

       information, judicial independence has to be kept in mind while

       deciding the question of exercise of discretion. However, we

       should not be understood to mean that the independence of the

       judiciary can be achieved only by denial of access to information.

       Independence in a given case may well demand openness and

       transparency by furnishing the information. Reference to the

       principle of judicial independence is not to undermine and avoid

       accountability which is an aspect we perceive and believe has to

       be taken into account while examining the public interest in favour

       of disclosure of information.         Judicial independence and

       accountability go hand in hand as accountability ensures, and is a

       facet of judicial independence.        Further, while applying the

       proportionality test, the type and nature of the information is a

       relevant factor. Distinction must be drawn between the final

       opinion or resolutions passed by the collegium with regard to

       appointment/elevation and transfer of judges with observations

       and indicative reasons and the inputs/data or details which the

       collegium had examined. The rigour of public interest in divulging

       the input details, data and particulars of the candidate would be

       different from that of divulging and furnishing details of the output,
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                           Page 105 of 108
that is the decision. In the former, public interest test would have

       to be applied keeping in mind the fiduciary relationship (if it

       arises), and also the invasion of the right to privacy and breach of

       the duty of confidentiality owed to the candidate or the information

       provider, resulting from the furnishing of such details and

       particulars. The position represents a principled conflict between

       various factors in favour of disclosure and those in favour of

       withholding of information. Transparency and openness in judicial

       appointments juxtaposed with confidentiality of deliberations

       remain one of the most delicate and complex areas. Clearly, the

       position is progressive as well as evolving as steps have been

       taken to make the selection and appointment process more

       transparent and open. Notably, there has been a change after

       concerns were expressed on disclosure of the names and the

       reasons for those who had not been approved. The position will

       keep forging new paths by taking into consideration the

       experiences of the past and the aspirations of the future.
Questions referred to the Constitution Bench are accordingly

       answered, observing that it is not possible to answer these

       questions in absolute terms, and that in each case, the public

       interest test would be applied to weigh the scales and on balance

       determine whether information should be furnished or would be
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                          Page 106 of 108
exempt. Therefore, a universal affirmative or negative answer is

       not possible. However, independence of judiciary is a matter of

       public interest.
CONCLUSIONS
89.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, we dismiss Civil Appeal

       No.2683 of 2010 and uphold the judgment dated 12th January,

       2010 of the Delhi High Court in LPA No. 501 of 2009 which had

       upheld the order passed by the CIC directing the CPIO, Supreme

       Court of India to furnish information on the judges of the Supreme

       Court who had declared their assets. Such disclosure would not,

       in any way, impinge upon the personal information and right to

       privacy of the judges. The fiduciary relationship rule in terms of

       clause (e) to
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act is inapplicable. It would

       not affect the right to confidentiality of the judges and their right to

       protect personal information and privacy, which would be the case

       where details and contents of personal assets in the declaration

       are called for and sought, in which event the public interest test as

       applicable vide
Section 8(1)(j)
and proviso to
Section 11 (1)
of the

       RTI Act would come into operation.
90.    As far as Civil Appeal Nos. 10045 of 2010 and 10044 of 2010 are

       concerned, they are to be partly allowed with an order of remit to
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                             Page 107 of 108
the CPIO, Supreme Court of India to re-examine the matter after

       following the procedure under
Section 11(1)
of the RTI Act as the

       information relates to third parties. Before a final order is passed,

       the concerned third parties are required to be issued notice and

       heard as they are not a party before us. While deciding the

       question of disclosure on remit, the CPIO, Supreme Court of India

       would follow the observations made in the present judgment by

       keeping in view the objections raised, if any, by the third parties.

       We have refrained from making specific findings in the absence of

       third parties, who have rights under
Section 11(1)
and their views

       and opinions are unknown.
The reference and the appeals are accordingly disposed of.
......................................CJI
                                                            (RANJAN GOGOI)

                                                ........................................J.
                                                                 (N.V. RAMANA)

                                               ........................................J.
                                             (DR. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD)

                                                ........................................J.
                                                            (DEEPAK GUPTA)

                                                ........................................J.
                                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 13, 2019.
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors.                                   Page 108 of 108
REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10044 OF 2010

CENTRAL PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER,                        … APPELLANT
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             VERSUS
SUBHASH CHANDRA AGRAWAL                                  … RESPONDENT

                                 WITH

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10045 OF 2010
                                AND
                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2683 OF    2010



                           JUDGMENT

N.V. RAMANA, J.
“In the domain of human rights, right to privacy
         and right to information have to be treated as co-
equals and none can take precedence over the
            other, rather a balance needs to be struck”
1.   I have had the opportunity to peruse the erudite judgments of my

     learned   brothers,   who   have   reflected   extensively   on   the

     importance of this case, concerning the aspect of privacy and right

     to information in detail. However, while concurring with the view

     of the majority, I feel the need to provide independent reasons with

     respect to certain aspects for coming to the aforesaid conclusion,
1
as this case has large ramification on the rights of an individual

     in comparison to the rights of the society. The aspect of

     transparency and accountability which are required to be

     balanced with right to privacy, has not been expounded by this

     Court anytime before, thereby mandating a separate opinion.
2.   This case concerns the balance which is required between two

     important fundamental rights i.e. right to information and right

     to privacy. Often these two rights are seen as conflicting, however,

     we need to reiterate that both rights are two faces of the same

     coin. There is no requirement to see the two facets of the right in

     a manner to further the conflict, what is herein required is to

     provide balancing formula which can be easily made applicable to

     individual cases. Moreover, due to the fact of infancy in privacy

     jurisprudence has also contributed to the meticulous task we are

     burdened herein.
3.   In this view, this case is before us to adjudicate whether the

     application dated 06.07.2009 (hereinafter referred to as “first

     application”) seeking information by the respondent, separate
2
applications dated 23.01.2009 (hereinafter referred to as “second

     application”) and 10.11.2007 (hereinafter referred to as “third

     application”) are maintainable or not. The first application

     concerns the information relating to complete correspondence

     between the Chief Justice of India and Mr. Justice R. Reghupati.

     The second application concerns the collegium file notings

     relating to the appointment of Justice H. L. Dattu, Justice A. K.

     Ganguly and Justice R. M. Lodha. The third application relates to

     information concerning declaration of assets made by the puisne

     judges of the Supreme Court to the Chief Justice of India and the

     judges of the High Courts to the Chief Justices of the respective

     High Courts.
4.   The respondent/applicant submitted that the aforesaid three

     applications before the Central Public Information Officer of the

     Supreme Court of India (hereinafter “CPIO, Supreme Court of

     India”) came to be dismissed vide orders dated 04.08.2009,

     25.02.2009 and 30.11.2007 respectively.
5.   Aggrieved by rejection of the first application the respondent

     approached the first appellate authority in appeal which was also
3
dismissed vide order dated 05.09.2009. Being aggrieved, the

     respondent further preferred a second appeal to the Central

     Information Commission [for short “CIC”]. The CIC allowed this

     appeal vide order dated 25.11.2009 and directed the disclosure of

     information sought. Aggrieved by the same, the CPIO, Supreme

     Court of India has preferred Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010.
6.   Concerning the second application, the CPIO, Supreme Court of

     India, by order dated 25.02.2009 had denied the information

     sought therein. Being aggrieved, the respondent preferred the first

     appeal which came to be dismissed vide order dated 25.03.2009

     by the first appellate authority. The second appeal filed before the

     CIC was allowed vide order dated 24.11.2009. Aggrieved the CPIO,

     Supreme Court of India has preferred Civil Appeal No. 10044 of

     2010.
7.   The third application was dismissed by the CPIO, Supreme Court

     of India vide order dated 30.11.2007 on the ground that the

     information was not held by the Registry of the Supreme Court of

     India. The first appeal was disposed of with an order directing the

     CPIO, Supreme Court of India to consider the question of
4
applicability of
Section 6(3)
of the Right to Information Act, 2005

     (hereinafter “the
RTI Act
”). The CPIO vide order 07.02.2009

     required the respondent/applicant to approach the concerned

     public   authority    of   the       High   Courts.   Aggrieved   the

     respondent/applicant directly approached the CIC in appeal

     which was allowed by order dated 06.01.2009. Aggrieved by the

     same the appellant filed Writ Petition (C) No. 288 of 2009 before

     the Delhi High Court. The Ld. Single Judge by order dated

     02.09.2009 directed the CPIO, Supreme Court of India to release

     the information sought by the respondent. Being aggrieved, the

     CPIO, Supreme Court of India filed Letter Patent Appeal No. 501

     of 2009 which was subsequently referred to a full Bench of the

     High Court. The full Bench by order dated 12.01.2010 dismissed

     the letter patent appeal. Aggrieved, CPIO, Supreme Court of India

     has filed Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 before this Court.
8.   In this context, all the three appeals were tagged by an order dated

     26.11.2010, a reference was made for constituting a larger Bench

     and accordingly it is before us.
5
9.   Before we dwell into any other aspect a preliminary objections

     were taken by the appellants that this Bench could not have dealt

     with   this   matter   considering   the   fact   that   this   Court’s

     functionality had a direct impact on the same. We do not

     subscribe to the aforesaid opinion for the reason that this Court

     while hearing this matter is sitting as a Court of necessity.
In the

     case of
Election Commission of India v. Dr Subramaniam

     Swamy
, (1996) 4 SCC 104, it was held as under:
16. We must have a clear conception of the
             doctrine. It is well settled that the law permits
             certain things to be done as a matter of
             necessity which it would otherwise not
             countenance on the touchstone of judicial
             propriety. Stated differently, the doctrine of
             necessity makes it imperative for the authority
             to decide and considerations of judicial
             propriety must yield. It is often invoked in
             cases of bias where there is no other authority
             or Judge to decide the issue. If the doctrine of
             necessity is not allowed full play in certain
             unavoidable situations, it would impede the
             course of justice itself and the defaulting party
             would benefit there from. Take the case of a
             certain taxing statute which taxes certain
             perquisites allowed to Judges. If the validity of
             such a provision is challenged who but the
             members of the judiciary must decide it. If all
             the Judges are disqualified on the plea that
             striking down of such a legislation would
             benefit them, a stalemate situation may
             develop. In such cases the doctrine of necessity
             comes into play. If the choice is between
6
allowing a biased person to act or to stifle the
             action altogether, the choice must fall in favour
             of the former as it is the only way to promote
             decision-making. In the present case also if the
             two Election Commissioners are able to reach
             a unanimous decision, there is no need for the
             Chief Election Commissioner to participate, if
             not the doctrine of necessity may have to be
             invoked.
10. In this light, appellants have to accept the decision of this Court

     which is the final arbiter of any disputes in India and also the

     highest court of constitutional matters. In this light, such

     objections cannot be sustained.
11. Before we proceed any further we need to have a brief reference to

     the scheme of
RTI Act
. The statement of objects and reasons

     envisage a noble goal of creating a democracy which is consisting

     of informed citizens and a transparent government. It also

     provides for a balance between effective government, efficient

     operations, expenditure of such transparent systems and

     requirements of confidentiality for certain sensitive information.

     It recognises that these principles are inevitable to create

     friction inter se and there needs to be harmonisation of such

     conflicting interests and there is further requirement to preserve
7
the supremacy of democratic ideal. The recognition of this

      normative democratic ideal requires us to further expound upon

      the optimum levels of accountability and transparency of efficient

      operations of the government. Under
Section 2(f)
, information is

      defined as ‘any material in any form including records, documents,

      memos, e-mails, opinions, advises, press releases, circulars,

      orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data

      material held in any electronic form and information relating to any

      private body which can be accessed by a public authority under

      any other law for the time being in force.’
12.   The purport of this section was to cover all types of information

      contained in any format to be available under the ambit of the
RTI

      Act
. The aforesaid definition is further broadened by the definition

      of ‘record’ provided under
Section 2(i)
of the RTI Act. Right to

      Information as defined under
Section 2(j)
of the RTI Act means the

      right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or

      under the control of any public authority.
13.
Chapter II of the RTI Act
begins with a statement under
Section 3
by proclaiming that all citizens shall have right to information
8
subject to the provisions of the
RTI Act
.
Section 4
creates an

      obligation on public authorities to maintain a minimum standard

      of data which would be freely available for the citizens. Further

      this section also mandates proactive dissemination of data for

      informing the citizens by utilizing various modes and means of

      communications.
Section 5
requires every public authority to

      designate concerned CPIO or SPIO, as the case may be for

      providing information to those who seeks the same.
14.
Section 6
of the RTI Act provides for procedure required to be

      followed by a person who desires to obtain information under the
RTI Act
.
Section 7
further provides the time frame within such

      designated officers are to decide the applications filed by the

      information seeker. For our purposes
Section 8
deems relevant

      and is accordingly extracted hereunder –


           “8. Exemption from disclosure of
           information.—

           (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
           Act, there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,

           …
(d) information including commercial confidence,
           trade secrets or intellectual property, the
           disclosure of which would harm the competitive
9
position of a third party, unless the competent
            authority is satisfied that larger public interest
            warrants the disclosure of such information;
(e) information available to a person in his
            fiduciary relationship, unless the competent
            authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
            warrants the disclosure of such information;
(j) information    which     relates  to    personal
            information the disclosure of which has not
            relationship to any public activity or interest, or
            which would cause unwarranted invasion of the
            privacy of the individual unless the Central Public
            Information Officer or the State Public Information
            Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may
            be, is satisfied that the larger public interest
            justifies the disclosure of such information:
Provided that the information which cannot
            be denied to the Parliament or a State Legislature
            shall not be denied to any person.”
15. It may be relevant to note
Section 10
of the RTI Act which deals

     with severability of the exempted information. The mandate of the

     section is that where a request for access to information contains

     both exempted as well as non-exempted parts, if the non-

     exempted parts could be revealed, such parts which could be

     reasonably severed and can be provided as information under the

     Act.
16.
Section 11
which is material for the discussion involved herein

     states as under -
10
“11. Third party information.—

(1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or the
State Public Information Officer, as the case may
be, intends to disclose any information or record, or
part thereof on a request made under this Act,
which relates to or has been supplied by a third
party and has been treated as confidential by that
third party, the Central Public Information Officer or
State Public Information Officer, as the case may
be, shall, within five days from the receipt of the
request, give a written notice to such third party of
the request and of the fact that the Central Public
Information Officer or State Public Information
Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose the
information or record, or part thereof, and invite the
third party to make a submission in writing or
orally, regarding whether the information should be
disclosed, and such submission of the third party
shall be kept in view while taking a decision about
disclosure of information:
Provided that except in the case of trade or
commercial secrets protected by law, disclosure
may be allowed if the public interest in disclosure
outweighs in importance any possible harm or
injury to the interests of such third party.
(2) Where a notice is served by the Central Public
Information Officer or State Public Information
Officer, as the case may be, under sub-section (1)
to a third party in respect of any information or
record or part thereof, the third party shall, within
ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, be
given the opportunity to make representation
against the proposed disclosure.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section
7
, the Central Public Information Officer or State
Public Information Officer, as the case may be,
shall, within forty days after receipt of the request
under
section 6
, if the third party has been given an
11
opportunity to make representation under
          sub-section (2), make a decision as to whether or
          not to disclose the information or record or part
          thereof and give in writing the notice of his decision
          to the third party.
(4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall include
          a statement that the third party to whom the notice
          is given is entitled to prefer an appeal under
section
          19
against the decision.”
17. The mandate under
Section 11
of the RTI Act enshrines the

     principles of natural justice, wherein, the third party is provided

     with an opportunity to be heard and the authority needs to

     consider whether the disclosure in public interest outweighs the

     possible harm in disclosure to the third party. It must be noted

     that the use of term ‘confidential’ as occurring under
Section 11
,

     subsumes commercial confidential information, other types of

     confidential information and private information.
18. We may not concentrate on other procedural section provided

     under the
RTI Act
as they do not have any bearing on the case

     concerned.
19. Having observed the scheme of the
RTI Act
we need to understand

     that right to information stems from
Article 19(1)(a)
of the
12
Constitution   which    guarantees    freedom    of   expression.
Accordingly, this Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain
,

     (
1975) 4 SCC 428 and S.P. Gupta v. Union of India
, (1981)

     Supp. (1) SCC 87, held that a citizen cannot effectively exercise

     his freedom of speech and expression unless he/she is informed

     of the governmental activities. Our country being democratic, the

     right to criticise the government can only be effectively

     undertaken if accountability and transparency are maintained at

     appropriate levels. In view of the same, right to information can

     squarely said to be a corollary to the right to speech and

     expression.
20. Firstly, the appellants have contended that the information are

     not held with the Registry of the Supreme Court, rather the Chief

     Justice of India is holding the aforesaid information concerning

     the exchanges between Mr. Justice R. Reghupati and the then

     Chief Justice of India. In this context, the term ‘held’ acquires

     important position. The term ‘held’ usually connotes the power,

     custody, or possession with the person. However, the mandate of

     the Act requires this term to be interpreted wherein the

     association between held and the authority needs to be taken into
13
consideration while providing a meaning for the aforesaid term.

At this juncture, we need to observe the case of University of New

Castle upon Tyne v. Information Commissioner and British

Union for Abolition of Vivisection, [2011] UKUT 185 AAC,

wherein the upper tribunal has held as under –


          “‘Hold’ is an ordinary English word. In
          our judgment it is not used in some
          technical sense in the Act. We do not
          consider that it is appropriate to define
          its meaning by reference to concepts
          such as legal possession or bailment, or
          by using phrases taken from court rules
          concerning the obligation to give
          disclosure of documents in litigation.
Sophisticated legal analysis of its
          meaning is not required or appropriate.
However, it is necessary to observe that
          ‘holding’ is not a purely physical
          concept, and it has to be understood
          with the purpose of the Act in mind.
Section 3(2)(b)
illustrates this: an
          authority      cannot     evade       the
          requirements of the Act by having its
          information held on its behalf by some
          other person who is not a public
          authority. Conversely, we consider that
          s.1 would not apply merely because
          information is contained in a document
          that happens to be physically on the
          authority’s premises: there must be an
          appropriate connection between the
          information and the authority, so that it
          can be properly said that the
          information is held by the authority. For
          example, an employee of the authority
14
may have his own personal information
                         on a document in his pocket while at
                         work, or in the drawer of his office desk;
that does not mean that the information
                         is held by the authority.”
21. From the aforesaid it can be concluded that a similar

          interpretation can be provided for term ‘held’ as occurring under
Section 2(j)
of the Act. Therefore, in view of the same the term

          ‘held’ does not include following information –
1. That is, without request or arrangement, sent to or
                    deposited with a public authority which does not hold itself
                    out as willing to receive it and which does not
                    subsequently use it;
2. That is accidentally left with a public authority;
3. That just passes through a public authority;
4. That ‘belongs’ to an employee or officer of a public
                    authority but which is brought by that employee or officer
                    onto the public authority’s premises.1

          Having clarified the aforesaid aspect we are of the opinion that the

          nature of information in relation to the authority concerned

          requires to be seen. The fact that the information sought in the

          instant matter is in custody with the Chief Justice of India as he

          is the administrative head of the Supreme Court, squarely require
1
Phillip Coppel, Information Rights Law and Practice (4 th Edn. (2014)), Pg. 362.
15
us to hold that the concerned authority is holding the information

      and accordingly the contention of the appellants does not have

      any merit.
22. The appellants have argued that the information with respect to

      the assets declared with the Chief Justice of India or Chief

      Justices of respective High Courts are held in confidence,

      fiduciary capacity; moreover, the aforesaid information is private

      information of the judges which cannot be revealed under the
RTI

      Act
.
23.   The exemptions to right to information as noted above are

      contained under
Section 8
of the RTI Act. Before we analyse the

      aforesaid provision, we need to observe basic principles,

      concerning interpretation of exemption clauses. There is no doubt

      it is now well settled that exemption clauses need to be construed

      strictly. They need to be given appropriate meaning in terms of

      the intention of the legislature [see
Commissioner of Customs

      (Import)     v. Dilip   Kumar      &    Ors.
, (2018)    9    SCC

      40; Rechnungshof v. Österreichischer Rundfunk and Ors., C-

      465/00].
16
24. At the cost of repetition we note that the exemption of right to

     information for confidential information is covered under
Section

     8(1)(d)
, exemption from right to information under a fiduciary

     relationship is covered under
Section 8(1)(e)
and the exemption

     from private information is contained under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the

     RTI Act.
25. The first contention raised by the appellants is that the aforesaid

     information is confidential, therefore the same is covered under

     the exemption as provided under
Section 8(1)(d)
of the RTI Act.

     The aforesaid exemption originates from a long time of judge made

     law concerning breach of confidence (which are recently termed

     as misuse of private information).
26. Under the classic breach of confidence action, three requirements

     were necessary for bringing an action under this head. These

     conditions are clearly mentioned in the opinion of Megarry, J.,

     in Coco vs. Clark, [1968] FSR 415; wherein, the conditions

     are first, the information itself, i.e. ‘information is required to have

     necessary quality about confidence of the same’; second, ‘the

     information must have been imparted in circumstances importing
17
an obligation of confidence’; third, ‘there must be unauthorized

    use of information which will be detriment to the party

    communicating’.
27. Breach of confidence was not an absolute right and public

    interest, incorporated from long time under the common law

    jurisprudence. This defence of public interest can be traced to

    initial case of Gartside v. Outram, (1856) 26 LJ Ch (NS) 113,

    wherein it was held that there is no confidence as to disclosure in

    iniquity. This iniquity was later expanded by Lord Denning

    in Fraser v. Evans, [1969] 1 QB 349, wherein the iniquity was

    referred as merely as an example of ‘justice cause or excuse’ for a

    breach of confidence. This iniquity was widened further in Initial

    Service v. Putterill, [1968] 1 QB 396, wherein it was held that

    iniquity covers any misconduct of nature that it ought to be

    disclosed to others in the public interest. In this line of precedents

    Thomas Ungoed, J., in Beloff v. Pressdram, [1973] 1 All ER 24,

    noted that iniquity would cover ‘any matter, carried out or

    contemplated, in breach of country’s security or in breach of law

    including statutory duty, fraud or otherwise destructive of the
18
country or its people and doubtless other misdeeds of similar

     gravity.’
28. Eventually the language of iniquity was shaken and discourse on

     public interest took over as a defence for breach of confidence [See

     Lion Laboratories v. Evans, [1985] QB 526]. It would be

     necessary to quote Lord Goff in Her Majesty’s Attorney General

     v. The Observer Ltd. & Ors., [1991] AC 109, wherein he noted

     that “it is now clear that the principle [of iniquity] extends to

     matters of which disclosure is required in public interest”.
29. The aforesaid expansion from the rule of iniquity to public interest

     defence has not caught the attention of Australian courts wherein,

     Justice Gummow, in Corrs Pavey Whiting and Byrne v.

     Collector of Customs, (1987) 14 FCR 434 and Smith Kline and

     French Laboratories [Australia] Ltd. v. Department of

     Community Services and Health, (1990) 22 FCR 73, reasoned

     that public interest was “picturesque if somewhat imprecise” and

     “not so much a rule of law as an invitation to judicial idiosyncrasy

     by deciding each case on ad-hoc basis as to whether, on the facts
19
overall, it is better to respect or to override the obligation of

     confidence”.
30. Even in England there has been a shift of reasoning from an

     absolute public interest defence to balancing of public interest. At

     this   point   we   may   observe   the   case   of Woodward      v.
Hutchins,[1977] 1 WLR 760, wherein it was observed “It is a

     question of balancing the public interest in maintaining the

     confidence against the public interest in knowing the truth”.
31.
Section 8(1)(d)
of the RTI Act has limited the action of defence of

     confidentiality to only commercial information, intellectual

     property rights and those which are concerned with maintaining

     the competitive superiority. Therefore, aforesaid section is only

     relatable to breach of confidence of commercial information as

     classically developed. Although there are examples wherein

     commercial confidentiality are also expanded to other types of

     breach of confidential information, however, under
Section 8(1)(d)
does not take into its fold such breach of confidential information

     actions.
20
32. Coming to other types of confidentiality, we need to note that the

     confidentiality   cannot   be    only   restricted   to   commercial

     confidentiality, rather needs to extend to other types of

     confidentialities as well. [Duchess of Argyll v. Duke of Argyll,

     1967 Ch 302] Under the RTI Scheme such other confidential

     information are taken care under
Section 11
of the RTI Act. The

     language and purport under
Section 11
extends to all types of

     confidentialities, inclusive of both commercial and other types of

     confidentialities. The purport of this Section is that an

     opportunity should be provided to third party, who treats the

     information as confidential. The ‘test of balancing public interest’

     needs to be applied in cases of confidential information other than

     commercial information as well, under
Section 11
of the RTI Act,

     as discussed. In this light, the concerned third parties need to be

     heard and thereafter the authorities are required to pass order as

     indicated herein.
33. Further, the appellants have contended that the information

     sought herein relating to the third party are covered under

     exemptions as provided in
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act i.e. private

     information.
21
34. The development from breach of confidence to misuse of private

     information/privacy claim was gradual. There was shift from the

     focus on relationship to whether the information itself had a

     requisite confidential quality [refer to Her Majesty’s Attorney

     General case (supra)]. This shift in focus resulted in the evolution

     of misuse of private information or privacy claim, from its

     predecessor of confidentiality.
In the case of
Campbell v. M.G.N.
,

     [2004] UKHL 22, wherein the breach of misuse of private

     information evolved as cause of action. The modification which

     happened in the new cause of action is that the initial confidential

     relationship was not material, which was earlier required under

     the breach of confidence action. The use of term confidential

     information was replaced with more natural descriptive term

     information in private. The change from breach of confidence

     which was an action of equity, to misuse of private information,

     which was a tort provided more structural definitiveness and

     reduced the discretionary aspect.
35. The purport of the
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act is to balance

     privacy with public interest. Under the provision a two steps test
22
could be identified wherein the first step was: (i) whether there is

    a reasonable expectation of privacy, and (ii) whether on an

    ultimate balancing analysis, does privacy give way to freedom of

    expression? We should acknowledge that these two tests are very

    difficult to be kept separate analytically.
FIRST STEP
36. The first step for the adjudicating authority is to ascertain

    whether the information is private and whether the information

    relating the concerned party has a reasonable expectation of

    privacy. In Murray v. Express Newspaper plc, [2009] Ch 481, it

    was held as under
“As we see it, the question whether there is a
             reasonable expectation of privacy is a broad one,
             which takes account of all the circumstances of the
             case. They include the attributes of the claimant,
             the nature of the activity in which the claimant was
             engaged, the place at which it was happening, the
             nature and purpose of the intrusion, the absence
             of consent and whether it was known or could be
             inferred, the effect on the claimant and the
             circumstances in which and the purposes for which
             the information came into the hands of the
             publisher.”
23
37. From the aforesaid discussion we can note that there are certain

     factors which needs to be considered before concluding whether

     there was a reasonable expectation of privacy of the person

     concerned. These non-exhaustive factors are;
1. The nature of information.
2. Impact on private life.
3. Improper conduct.
4. Criminality
5. Place where the activity occurred or the information
             was found.
6. Attributes of claimants such as being a public figure, a
             minor etc and their reputation.
7. Absence of consent.
8. Circumstances and purposes for which the information
             came into the hands of the publishers.
9. Effect on the claimant.
10. Intrusion’s nature and purpose.
These non-exhaustive factors are to be considered in order to

     come to a conclusion whether the information sought is private or

     does the persons has a reasonable expectations of privacy. In

     certain cases we may conclude that there could be certain

     information which are inherently private and are presumptively
24
protected under the privacy rights. These informations include

      gender, age and sexual preferences etc. These instances need to

      be kept in mind while assessing the first requirement under the

      aforesaid test.
38.   If the information is strictly covered under the aforesaid

      formulation, then the person is exempted from the right to

      information unless ‘the public interest test’ requires to trump the

      same.
SECOND STEP
39.   Having ascertained whether the information is private or not, a

      judge is required to adopt a balancing test to note whether the

      public interest justifies discloser of such information under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act. The term ‘larger public interest’

      needs to be understood in light of the above discussion which

      points that a ‘balancing test’ needs to be incorporated to see the

      appropriateness of discloser. There are certain basic principles

      which we need to keep in mind while balancing the rights which

      are relevant herein.
25
40.   That the right to information and right to privacy are at an equal

      footing. There is no requirement to take an a priori view that one

      right trumps other. Although there are American cases, which

      have taken the view that the freedom of speech and expression

      trumps all other rights in every case. However, in India we cannot

      accord any such priority to the rights.
41. The contextual balancing involves ‘proportionality test’. [See
K

      S Puttaswamy v. Union of India
, (2017) 10 SCC 1]. The test is

      to see whether the release of information would be necessary,

      depends on the information seeker showing the ‘pressing social

      need’ or ‘compelling requirement for upholding the democratic

      values’. We can easily conclude that the exemption of public

      interest as occurring under
Section 8(1)(j)
requires a balancing

      test to be adopted. We need to distinguish two separate concepts

      i.e. “interest of the public” and “something in the public interest.”

      Therefore, the material distinction between the aforesaid concepts

      concern those matters which affect political, moral and material

      welfare of the public need to be distinguished from those for

      public entertainment, curiosity or amusement. Under
Section

      8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act requires us to hold that only the former is an
26
exception to the exemption.
Although we must note that the

      majority opinion in
K S Puttaswamy
(supra) has held that the

      data privacy is part of the right to privacy, however, we need to

      note that the concept of data protection is still developing

      [refer Google   Spain     v.        AEPD,    C/131/12;      Bavarian

      Lager v Commission, [2007] ECR II-4523]. As we are not

      concerned with the aforesaid aspects, we need not indulge any

      more than to state that there is an urgent requirement for

      integrating the principles of data protection into the right to

      information jurisprudence.
42.   Coming to the aspect of transparency, judicial independence and

      the
RTI Act
, we need to note that there needs to be a balance

      between the three equally important concepts. The whole bulwark

      of preserving our Constitution, is trusted upon judiciary, when

      other branches have not been able to do so. As a shield, the

      judicial independence is the basis with which judiciary has

      maintained its trust reposed by the citizens. In light of the same,

      the judiciary needs to be protected from attempts to breach its

      independence.    Such    interference       requires   calibration   of
27
appropriate amount of transparency in consonance with judicial

      independence.
43.   It must be kept in the mind that the transparency cannot be

      allowed to run to its absolute, considering the fact that efficiency

      is equally important principle to be taken into fold. We may note

      that right to information should not be allowed to be used as a

      tool of surveillance to scuttle effective functioning of judiciary.

      While applying the second step the concerned authority needs to

      balance these considerations as well.
44. In line with the aforesaid discussion, we need to note that

      following non-exhaustive considerations needs to be considered

      while assessing the ‘public interest’ under
Section 8
of the RTI

      Act-
a. Nature and content of the information

              b. Consequences of non-disclosure; dangers and benefits
              to public

              c. Type of confidential obligation.
d. Beliefs of the confidant; reasonable suspicion

              e. Party to whom information is disclosed
28
f. Manner in which information acquired

             g. Public and private interests

             h. Freedom of expression and proportionality.
45. Having ascertained the test which is required to be applied while

     considering the exemption under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act, I

     may note that there is no requirement to elaborate on the factual

     nuances of the cases presented before us. Accordingly, I concur

     with the conclusions reached by the majority.
..........................J.

                                               (N.V. Ramana)

NEW DELHI;
November 13, 2019.
29
REPORTABLE




                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010
Central Public Information Officer,                     …Appellant
Supreme Court of India


                                      Versus

Subhash Chandra Agarwal                                 …Respondent




                                      WITH
Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010
AND WITH
Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
1
JUDGMENT




Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



                                     INDEX

A    Introduction

B    Reference to the Constitution Bench

C    Submissions of Counsel

D    Relevant statutory provisions

E    S P Gupta, candour and class immunity

F    Judicial independence

     F.1   Judicial accountability

G    Fiduciary relationship

H    The right to privacy and the right to know

I    Conclusion

J    Directions
2
PART A


A       Introduction


The backdrop
1.      This batch of three civil appeals1 raises questions of constitutional

importance bearing on the right to know, the right to privacy and the

transparency, accountability and independence of the judiciary.
2.      In the first of the appeals2 (―the appointments case‖), the Central Public

Information Officer3 of the Supreme Court of India challenges an order dated 24

November 2009 of the Central Information Commission4. The order directs the

CPIO to provide information sought by the respondent in application under the
Right to Information Act
20055. The respondent, in an application dated 23

January 2009 sought copies of the correspondence exchanged between

constitutional authorities together with file notings, relating to the appointment of

Justice H L Dattu, Justice A K Ganguly and Justice R M Lodha (superseding the

seniority of Justice A P Shah, Justice A K Patnaik and Justice V K Gupta). The

appellant declined to provide the information sought in the application on the

ground that the Registry of the Supreme Court does not deal with matters

pertaining to the appointment of judges, and appointments of judges to the higher

judiciary are made by the President of India, according to procedure prescribed

by law. The first appellate authority rejected the appeal on the ground that the

information sought by the respondent was not covered within the ambit of
1
Civil Appeal no 10044/2010, Civil Appeal no 10045/2010 and Civil Appeal no 2683/2010
2
Civil Appeal no 10044 of 2010
3
―CPIO‖
4
―CIC‖
5
―
RTI Act
‖
3
PART A
Section 2 (f)
6
and (j)7 of the
RTI Act
. The respondent preferred a second appeal

before the CIC. On 24 November 2009, the CIC directed the appellant to provide

the information sought by the respondent. The appellant has moved this Court

under
Article 136
of the Constitution challenging the decision of the CIC ordering

disclosure.
3.       In the second of the three appeals8 (―the assets case‖), the appellant

challenges a judgment dated 12 January, 2010 of a Full Bench of the Delhi High

Court upholding the orders of the Single Judge9 dated 2 September 2009 and the

CIC dated 6 January 200910 directing the disclosure of information. On 10

November 2007, the respondent filed an application seeking a copy of the

resolution dated 7 May 1997 of the judges of the Supreme Court requiring every

sitting judge, and all future judges upon assuming office, to make a declaration of

assets in the form of real estate or investments held in their names or the names

of their spouses or any person dependant on them to the Chief Justice of the

Court within a reasonable time. The respondent also requested ―information on

any such declaration of assets etc to respective Chief Justices in State‖. While

the appellant provided a copy of the resolution dated 7 May 1997, the CPIO

declined (by an order dated 30 November 2007) to provide information

concerning the declaration of assets by judges of the Supreme Court and the
6
Section 2(f)
– ―Information‖ means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-mails,
opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data
material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by a
public authority under any other law for the time being in force.
7
Section 2(j)
– ―Right to Information‖ means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or
under the control of any public authority and includes the right to— (i) inspection of work, documents, records; (ii)
taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records; (iii) taking certified samples of material; (iv)
obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or
through printouts where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device.
8
Civil Appeal no 2683 of 2010
9
The CPIO, Supreme Court of
India v Subhash Chandra Agarwal & Anr
, Writ Petition (C) 288/2009
10
Appeal no CIC/WB/A/2008/00426
4
PART A


High Court on the ground that the Registry of the Supreme Court did not hold it.

The information pertaining to the declaration of assets by High Court judges, the

appellant stated, were in the possession of the Chief Justices of the High Courts.

The first appellate authority remanded the matter back to the appellant for

transfer of the RTI application to the High Courts under
Section 6(3)
11
. The

appellant declined to transfer the RTI application to the CPIOs of the High Courts

on the ground that when the respondent filed the RTI application, he was aware

that the information with respect to the declaration of assets by the judges of the

High Court was available with the High Courts which formed distinct public

authorities. On 6 January 2009, the CIC held in the second appeal that the

information concerning the judges of the Supreme Court was available with its

Registry and that the appellant represented the Supreme Court as a public

authority. Therefore, the appellant was held to be obliged to provide the

information under the
RTI Act
unless, the disclosure of information was

exempted by law. The CIC held that the information sought by the respondent

was not covered under the exemptions in clauses (e) or (j) of
Section 8(1)
12
and

directed the appellant to provide the information sought by the respondent. The
11
Section 6 (3)
- Where an application is made to a public authority requesting for an
information,—
(i) which is held by another public authority; or
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with the
functions of another public authority,
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall transfer the application
or such part of it as may be appropriate to that other public authority and inform the
applicant immediately about such transfer:
Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub-section shall be made as soon as practicable but
in no case later than five days from the date of receipt of the application.
12
Section 8
- Exemption from disclosure of information.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,—
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship, unless the competent authority is satisfied that
the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;
(j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public
activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central
Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is
satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information.
5
PART A


appellant instituted a writ petition13 before the Delhi High Court. On 2 September

2009, a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the petition holding, inter alia,

that the declaration of assets furnished by the judges of the Supreme Court to

the Chief Justice of India and its contents constituted ―information‖, subject to the

provisions of the
RTI Act
. The Single Judge held that: (i) judges of the Supreme

Court hold an independent office; (ii) there exist no hierarchies in judicial

functions; (iii) the Chief Justice of India does not hold such ―information‖ in a

fiduciary capacity; and (iv) the information sought by the respondent was not

exempt under
Section 8 (1)(e)
. In a Letters Patent Appeal, the Full Bench of the

Delhi High Court upheld the decision of the Single Judge. The appellant has

challenged the decision of the Full Bench.
4.        In the third civil appeal (―the undue influence case‖), the appellant has

challenged the order of the CIC dated 24 November 2009 14, by which the

appellant was directed to provide information sought by the respondent in his RTI

application. On 6 July, 2009, the respondent filed an RTI application on the basis

of a newspaper report seeking the complete correspondence exchanged with the

Chief Justice of India in regards to a Union Minister having allegedly approached

Justice R Raghupati of the Madras High Court, through a lawyer to influence a

judicial decision. The application sought a disclosure of the name of the Union

Minister and the lawyer, and of the steps taken against them for approaching the

judge of the Madras High Court for influencing the judicial decision. On 4 August

2009, the appellant rejected the request on the ground that no such information

was available with the Registry of the Supreme Court. The first appellate
13
Writ Petition (C) 288/2009
14
Appeal no CICWB/A/2009/000859
6
PART B


authority rejected the appeal. The second appeal before the CIC led to a

direction on 24 November 2009, to provide the information sought, except

information sought in questions 7 and 8 on recourse taken to the in-house

procedure. The appellant approached this Court challenging the decision of the

CIC.
B      Reference to the Constitution Bench
5.     On 26 November 2010, a two judge Bench of this Court directed the

Registry to place the present batch of appeals before the Chief Justice of India

for constituting a Bench of appropriate strength and framed the following

substantial questions of law:
―1. Whether the concept of independence of judiciary requires
             and demands the prohibition of furnishing of the information
             sought? Whether the information sought for amounts to
             interference in the functioning of the judiciary?
2. Whether the information sought for cannot be furnished to
             avoid any erosion in the credibility of the decisions and to
             ensure a free and frank expression of honest opinion by all
             the constitutional functionaries, which is essential for effective
             consultation and for taking the right decision?
3. Whether the information sought for is exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Right to Information Act?‖
6.     On 17 August 2016, a three judge Bench referred these civil appeals to a

Constitution Bench for adjudication.
7
PART C



C         Submissions of Counsel
7.        Mr K K Venugopal, Attorney General for India appearing on behalf of the

appellant made the following submissions:
(i
)
The present case
is not covered by the decision of this Court in
S P Gupta

          v President of India15
, which is based on distinguishable facts. The

          decision in S P Gupta does not consider the relationship between the

          restrictions on the right to know and the restrictions existing under
Article

          19 (2)
of the Constitution. Once
Article 19(1)(a)
is attracted, the restrictions

          under
Article 19 (2)
become applicable.
The RTI Act
came into force in

          2005 and lists out the rights and restrictions on the right to information.
The provisions of the
RTI Act
must be construed in a manner which makes

          it consistent with constitutional values including the independence of the

          judiciary;
(ii)      Information of which disclosure is sought under
Section 2 (f)
of the RTI

          Act, includes only that information which is in a physical form and which is

          already in existence and accessible to a public authority under law. The

          judge can decide to disclose assets voluntarily and place relevant

          information in the public domain. A third party cannot seek information on

          the disclosure of assets of a judge which does not exist in the public

          domain;
(iii)     The decision of this court in S P Gupta is based on a factually distinct

          situation where disclosure of correspondence regarding the non-
15
1981 Supp SCC 87
8
PART C


          appointment of an additional judge was ordered on the ground that the

          judge was a party to the proceeding before the Court. Further, the decision

          established a restriction on the disclosure of information to third parties;
(iv)      The correspondence and file notings with respect to recommendations for

          appointments of judges to the higher judiciary falls under a ―class of

          information‖ that is highly confidential. Disclosure will result in damage to

          the institution and adversely affect the independence of the judiciary;
(v)       The process of concurrence by the members of the Collegium requires

          free and frank discussion on the character, integrity and competence of

          prospective appointee judges in order to ensure that the most suitable

          judges are appointed. It is in the public interest to uphold candour in

          matters of appointment and transfer of judges and to avoid unnecessary

          litigative debate by third parties. Disclosure of such information would

          undermine the independence of the judiciary and adversely impact the

          candour       or   uninhibited   expression   of   views   by   the   Collegium.

          Independence of judiciary is not limited to independence from executive

          influence. It is multi-dimensional and also independence from other

          pressure and prejudices including fearlessness from power centres,

          economic or political, and freedom from prejudices acquired and nourished

          by the class to which judges belong (
C Ravichandran Iyer v Justice A M

          Bhattacharjee16
);
16
(1995) 5 SCC 457
9
PART C
(vi)     Information sought regarding the assets and liabilities of judges and

         correspondence and file notings relating to character, conduct, integrity

         and competence of a judge includes certain ―personal information‖ and is

         hence, exempt under
Section 8 (1)(j)
of the RTI Act;
(vii)    The correspondence and file notings that form the basis of the decision

         under
Article 124 (2)
of the Constitution includes information received from

         third parties in a fiduciary capacity. The information is held by the Chief

         Justice of India as a result of disclosure by third parties who give the

         information in confidence, complete good faith, integrity and fidelity.

         Therefore, disclosure of such information is exempt under
Section 8 (1)(e)
;
(viii)   The disclosure of correspondence relating to conduct, character, integrity

         and competence of a judge may cause irreparable loss to their reputation,

         violate their right to privacy and adversely affect their functioning. There is

         also no remedy available to a judge for the comments made in the

         appointment process as the Chief Justice of India along with other judges

         are protected from civil/criminal proceedings under
Section 3(1)
of the

         Judges (Protection) Act 1985. While regulating the disclosure of

         information, the Supreme Court is required to balance the right of an

         individual to reputation and privacy under
Article 21
and the right to

         information of third-party parties under
Article 19(1)(a).
The doctrine of

         proportionality has to be applied to resolve the conflict between the two

         rights and the right to reputation and privacy of a judge should prevail over

         the right to information of third parties; and
10
PART C
(ix)      Legislation and rules with respect to disclosure of assets and liabilities of

          public servants do not provide for placing such information in the public

          domain or granting third party access to such information. The judiciary is

          seeking self-regulation by providing a voluntary disclosure of assets and

          liabilities and it is up to the Supreme Court to disclose such information.

          No third party can seek information which is not in the public domain.
8.        On the contrary, Mr Prashant Bhushan, learned Counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondent made the following submissions:
(i)       The observations made by the seven judge Bench of this Court in S P

          Gupta are binding on the present Bench. Even though certain aspects of

          the judgment have been overruled in Supreme Court Advocates-on-
Record Assn v Union of India17
, the decision of this Court vis-à-vis the

          disclosure of correspondence in respect of the appointment process

          remains unaffected. If S P Gupta has to be overruled, this could be only

          done by a Bench comprising of more than seven judges;
(ii)      This Court has interpreted
Article 19(1)(a)
to include the right to

          information under the ambit of free speech and expression even before the
RTI Act
was enacted by the Parliament. Disclosure of the information

          sought in the present batch of cases is an essential part of the freedom of

          speech and expression guaranteed in
Article 19(1)(a)
and involves a

          significant public interest;
(iii)     Free flow of information to citizens is necessary, particularly in matters

          which form part of public administration for ensuring good governance and
17
(1993) 4 SCC 441
11
PART C


         transparency. The fundamental right of free speech and expression

         includes every citizen‘s right to know about assets, criminal antecedents

         and educational backgrounds of candidates contesting for public office. To

         cover public acts with a veil of secrecy is not in the interest of the public

         and may lead to oppression and abuse by, and distrust of, public

         functionaries. The lack of transparency, accountability and objectivity in

         the collegium system does not enhance the credibility of the institution.

         Disclosure of the information sought, on the other hand, would promote

         transparency and prevent undue influence over the judiciary;
(iv)     The claim of class privilege or class immunity to the correspondence

         between the Chief Justice of India and the Law Minister was rejected in S

         P Gupta. After the enactment of the
RTI Act
, information otherwise held by

         a public authority cannot be excluded from disclosure unless it falls under

         the exemptions
laid down in
Section 8
or relates to an institution excluded

         under
Section 2418
of the RTI Act. When information regarding a judge is
18
Section 24
- Act not to apply to certain organisations
(1)Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence and security organisations specified in the Second
Schedule, being organisations established by the Central Government or any information furnished by such
organisations to that Government: Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and
human rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section: Provided further that in the case of
information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of human rights, the information shall only be
provided after the approval of the Central Information Commission, and notwithstanding anything contained in
section 7
, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from the date of the receipt of request.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein
any other intelligence or security organisation established by that Government or omitting therefrom any
organisation already specified therein and on the publication of such notification, such organisation shall be
deemed to be included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the Schedule.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security organisation being organisations
established by the State Government, as that Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify: Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights
violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of human rights,
the information shall only be provided after the approval of the State Information Commission and,
notwithstanding anything contained in
section 7
, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from the
date of the receipt of request. (5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before the State
Legislature.
12
PART C


        provided to the Chief Justice of India, it constitutes information held by a

        public authority and thus, would be amenable to the provisions of the
RTI

        Act
;
(v)     In S P Gupta, the argument that disclosure of correspondence between

        constitutional functionaries in relation to the appointment process of judges

        would preclude the free and frank expression of opinions was rejected.
During the drafting of the Right to Information Bill, the argument that

        disclosure will deter consultees from expressing themselves freely and

        fairly and that the dignity and reputation of people would be tarnished was

        rejected. The argument of candour does not fall under any of the

        exemptions under the
RTI Act
and therefore, this disclosure of information

        cannot be excluded from the purview of the
RTI Act
;
(vi)    The disclosure of assets of judges is warranted in the larger public

        interest. It cannot be argued that information regarding the assets of

        judges, who are public functionaries, is personal information having no

        relationship with any public activity or interest. Hence, the information

        sought is not exempt under
Section 8 (1)(j)
;
(vii)   There exists no fiduciary relationship between those who are vested with

        the responsibility of determining whether an appointee is suitable for

        elevation as a judge and the appointee herself. The duty of a public

        servant is to act in the interest of the public and not in the interest of

        another public servant. The entire process of consultation and making

        information available to the members of the collegium regarding

        credentials and the suitability of the appointee is a matter of public interest.
13
PART D


         Further, when judges act in their official capacity in compliance with the

         1997 resolution and disclose their assets, it cannot be said that the Chief

         Justice of India acts in a fiduciary capacity for the judges. The Chief

         Justice of India and other members of the collegium discharge official

         duties vested in them by the law and the information sought is not exempt

         under
Section 8(1)(e)
. Even if some part of the information is personal,

         that part can be severed after due examination on a case to case basis

         under Section 10; and
(viii)   The argument that the independence of the judiciary will be affected

         prejudicially due to the disclosure of information is misconceived. The

         independence of the judiciary means independence from the legislature

         and the executive and not from the public. It is a constitutional and legal

         right of the respondent to access information and identify the persons who

         have attempted to compromise the functioning of the judiciary. Disclosure

         of such information is essential for the citizenry to maintain their faith in the

         independence of the judiciary.
9.       The rival submissions fall for our consideration.
D        Relevant statutory provisions
10.      For the purpose of the present dispute it is necessary to analyse the

relevant provisions contained in the statutory framework of the
RTI Act
.
Sections

2
and
3
read:
―2. Definitions. – In this Act, unless the context otherwise
                requires, -
14
PART D


…
(e) ―competent authority‖ means –
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of People or the
     Legislative Assembly of a State or a Union territory having
     such Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the
     Council of States of a Legislative Council of States;
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme
     Court;
(iii) the Chief Justices of the High Court in the case of a
     High Court;
(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in
     the case of other authorities established or constituted by
     or under the Constitution;
(v) the administrator appointed under
article 239
of the
     Constitution;
(f) ―information‖ means any material in any form, including
records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices,
press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports,
papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic
form and information relating to any private body which can
be accessed by a public authority under any law for the time
being in force.
…
(h) ―public authority‖ means any authority or body or
institution of self-government established or constituted,-
(a) by or under the Constitution;
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate
     Government, and includes any-
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
(ii) non-Government Organisation substantially
          financed,
Directly or indirectly by finds provided by the appropriate
Government;
…
(j) ―right to information‖ means the right to information
accessible under the Act which is held by or under the control
of any public authority and includes the rights to –
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;
(ii) taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of
         documents or records;
(iii) taking certified samples of material;
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes,
         floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other
         electronic mode or through printouts where such
         information is stored in a computer or in any other
         device;
…
3. Right to information. – Subject to the provisions of this Act,
all citizens shall have the right to information.
15
PART D
11.   Both the terms ―public authority‖ and ―information‖ have been broadly

defined.
Section 2(j)
which defines the ―right to information‖ stipulates that the

information accessible under the
RTI Act
is held by or under the control of any

―public authority‖, which is defined in
Section 2(h)
of the RTI Act.
Section 3
of the

Act confers on all citizens the substantive right to seek information covered within

the ambit of the Act, subject to its provisions. The remaining scheme of the
RTI

Act
operationalises the substantive right conferred by
Section 3
.
Section 4
imposes a statutory duty on public authorities to create and maintain a record of

the activities stipulated therein to ensure that these records are available to

applicants.
Section 6
empowers an individual to file a request with the relevant

Central Public Information Officer (―CPIO‖) or State Public Information Officer

(―SPIO‖) or their corresponding Assistant Officers (collectively hereafter

―Information Officer‖).
Section 7
empowers the Information Officer to either

provide the information sought or reject the application for reasons set out in
Section 8
and
9
.
12.   For an authority to be covered under the
RTI Act
, it must be a ―public

authority‖ as defined under
Section 2(h)
of the Act. ―Public authority‖ is defined

as any authority or body or institution or self-government which falls within the

ambit of any of the enumerated provisions in that sub-section. The Supreme

Court of India is established by virtue of
Article 124(1)
of the Constitution of India.

Similarly,
Article 214
of the Constitution stipulates that there shall be a High

Court for each state. In terms of
Section 2(h)(a)
, a body or an institution which is

established or constituted by or under the Constitution would be a public

authority. But virtue of being established by the Constitution, the Supreme Court
16
PART D


and the High Courts would fall within the ambit of ―public authority‖ in
Section

2(h)
of the Act.
13.
Section 2(e)(ii)
expressly stipulates that the competent authority means

the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court and
Section 2(e)(iii)
stipulates that the competent authority in the case of a high Court is the Chief

Justice of that Court. Significantly,
Article 124
of the Constitution of India

stipulates that there shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief

Justice of India and other judges. The office of the Chief Justice of India is not

distinct from the Supreme Court of India. The Supreme Court is constituted by

virtue of the Constitution and consists of judges, of which the Chief Justice is the

head. This however, does not mean that the Supreme Court and the Chief

Justice are two separate ‗public authorities‘ within the
RTI Act
.
14.    The term information under
Section 2(f)
has been defined broadly to

include ―any material in any form‖. The word ‗including‘ denotes the intention of

the Parliament to provide a non-exhaustive list of materials that fall within the

ambit of the sub-clause. The sub-clause includes information relating to any

private body ―which can be accessed by a public authority under any law for the

time being in force‖. The import of this phrase is that information relating to a

third party is included only where the requisite pre-conditions of any law in force

to access such information is satisfied. The right sought to be exercised and

information asked for should fall within the scope of ‗information‘ and ‗right to

information‘ as defined under the Act. The information sought must be in

existence and must be held or under the control of the public authority.
17
PART D
15.
Section 8(1)
begins with a non-obstante phrase ―Notwithstanding anything

contained in this Act‖. The import of this phrase is that clause (1) of
Section 8
carves out an exception to the general obligation to disclose under the
RTI Act
.

Where the conditions set out in any of the sub-clauses to clause (1) of
Section 8
are satisfied, the Information Officer is under no obligation to provide information

to the applicant. The scope of the exception and its applicability to the present

dispute shall be discussed in the course of the judgment.
16.     Section 2219 contains a non-obstance clause and stipulates that the
RTI

Act
has an overriding effect over laws. The import of this provision is to impart

priority to the salient objectives of the Act and ensure that where information is

held by or is under the control of a public authority, such information must be

furnished to the applicant notwithstanding any prohibition in any other law in

force at that time. It is pertinent to state that
Section 22
does not obviate legal

restrictions that apply to a public authority to the access to any information which

is clarified by the use of the phrase ―which can be accessed by a public authority

under any law for the time being in force‖ in
Section 2(f)
.
19
22. Act to have overriding effect. – The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in the
Official Secrets Act, 1923
(19 of 1923), and any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
18
PART E




E         S P Gupta, candour and class immunity
17.       Relevant to the present controversy, is the question whether the decision

of this Court in
S P Gupta v Union of India20
is a binding precedent on the

issues raised. Mr Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent contended that the points for determination that arise in the present

case have been answered by the seven judge Bench in S P Gupta where this

Court ordered the disclosure of the correspondence between the Chief Justice of

India, the Chief Justice of Delhi and the Law Minister which concerned the non-

appointment of an additional judge for a full term of two years. Counsel

contended that this Court held that the public interest in disclosure outweighed

the potential harm resulting from disclosure and that a free and open democratic

society mandated the disclosure of correspondences concerning the appointment

process of judges.
18.       Opposing the submission, Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General for

India appearing on behalf of the appellant, urged that the decision of this Court in

S P Gupta was based on a factually distinguishable situation. The Court
in that

case
was concerned with the disclosure of the correspondence concerning the

appointment process for the purpose of adjudicating the case before it. Moreover

the judge whose appointment was in issue was a party to the case. The court did

not address the potential harm to public interest by the disclosure of

correspondence in all circumstances. The Attorney General contended that the
20
(1982) 2 SCR 365
19
PART E


decision assessed the right to know in a passing observation and contrary to the

submission of the respondent, it established a restriction on the disclosure of

personal information.
19.    In S P Gupta, this Court was concerned with two issues: (i) the initial

appointment of additional judges and their reappointment on the expiry of their

terms; and (ii) the transfer of High Court judges and the Chief Justices of the High

Courts. Among the issues involved in the proceedings, one concerned the

disclosure of the correspondence exchanged between the Chief Justice of India,

the Chief Justice of Delhi and the Law Minister concerning the decision to grant

an extension in the tenure to Justice O N Vohra and Justice S N Kumar as

additional judges of the Delhi High Court by a period of three months. It was

contended that Justice O N Vohra should have been appointed as a permanent

judge and that Justice S N Kumar should have been reappointed as an additional

judge for the complete tenure of two years upon the expiry of their initial tenure.

During the course of the proceedings, their terms expired and a decision was

communicated by the Central Government to not renew their terms. An

application was filed to contend that the withholding of the re-appointment was

mala fide and unconstitutional. Both former judges were impleaded as

respondents. While Justice O N Vohra did not appear in the proceedings, Justice

S N Kumar appeared through counsel and contended that the decision of the

Central Government to not reappoint him for a complete term of two years was

vitiated since it was reached without full and effective consultation with the Chief

Justice of India.
20
PART E
20.      The government resisted the disclosure of the correspondence and urged

that as it formed a part of the advice tendered by the Council of Ministers to the

President of India, the court was precluded from ordering disclosure by virtue of
Article 74(2)21
of the Constitution. It was also contended that the correspondence

related to the ‗affairs of the state‘ and its disclosure was precluded by virtue of
Section 12322
of the Indian Evidence Act 1872.
21.      An interim order dated 16 October 1981 ordered the disclosure of the

correspondence to the Court. In its final judgment dated 30 December 1981, the

Court, by a majority, rejected the contention of the Central Government and

upheld the disclosure of the correspondence exchanged between the Chief

Justice of India, the Chief Justice of Delhi and the Law Minister concerning the

decision to not continue Justice S N Kumar as an additional Judge of the Delhi

High Court for another full term.
22.      Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General for the Union of India sought

to distinguish the decision in S P Gupta by contending that the order of

disclosure was made in the specific context of
Sections 123
and
16223
of the

Indian Evidence Act and in respect of judicial proceedings to which Justice S N

Kumar was a party. Hence he urged that the decision does not establish the duty

to disclose the correspondence in all circumstances. Justice S N Kumar had
21
―The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be
inquired into in any court.‖
22
―123. Evidence as to affairs of State.—No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head of
the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.‖
23
―162. Production of documents.—A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his possession
or power, bring it to court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its
admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the court.
The court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take other evidence to
enable it to determine on its admissibility….‖
21
PART E


actively participated in the proceedings before the Court and information

regarding his non-appointment was sought during the course of the proceedings

to adjudicate upon the contention that there was no effective consultation

between the Central Government and the Chief Justice of India. The balancing of

interests
in that case
was between the public harm resulting from disclosure and

the public interest in the administration of justice (by securing complete justice for

the litigant before the court) which, it is urged, is materially different from the

present case.
23.   In S P Gupta, this Court, by an interim order directed the disclosure of the

file notings only in respect of the non-renewal of the term of Justice S N Kumar.

Justice O N Vohra had chosen to not appear in or participate in the proceedings

before the court. As no relief was sought by the latter before the Court, the Court

held that the correspondence pertaining to him was not relevant to the

controversy. Consequently, the Union of India was not required to disclose it.

Justice PN Bhagwati (as he then was) noted the comparably distinct role of

Justice S N Kumar in the proceedings in the following terms:
―58. That takes us to the case of S.N. Kumar which stands on
             a totally different footing, because S.N. Kumar has appeared
             in the writ petition, filed an affidavit supporting the writ petition
             and contested, bitterly and vehemently, the decision of the
             Central Government not to continue him as an Additional
             Judge for a further term. Since S.N. Kumar has claimed relief
             from the Court in regard to his continuance as an Additional
             Judge, an issue is squarely joined between the petitioners
             and S.N. Kumar on the one hand and the Union of India on
             the other which requires to be determined for the purpose of
             deciding whether relief as claimed in the writ petition can be
             granted to S.N. Kumar.‖
22
PART E
24.   In its final judgment, the Court first rejected the contention that the

correspondence formed part of the advice tendered to the President by the

Council of Ministers. The Court noted that while the advice tendered by the

Council of Ministers to the President is information protected under
Article 74(2)
,

the principal question was whether the correspondence between the Chief

Justice of India, Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court and the Law Minister

formed part of the advice tendered by the Council of Ministers to the President so

as to preclude its disclosure by virtue of
Article 74(2).
The Court rejected this

contention and held that any advice tendered by the Council of Ministers would

be based on the views expressed by the two Chief Justices and their views would

not form part of the advice tendered. In this view, the material on the basis of

which the Council of Ministers formed a view and subsequently tendered the

same to the President would not constitute advice protected under
Article 74(2).
Justice Bhagwati held:
―61…The       advice    is given      by the       Council    of
             Ministers after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
             Court and the Chief Justice of India. The two Chief Justices
             are consulted on ―full and identical facts‖ and their views are
             obtained and it is after considering those views that the
             Council of Ministers arrives at its decision and tenders its
             advice to the President. The views expressed by the two
             Chief Justices precede the formation of the advice and merely
             because they are referred to in the advice which is ultimately
             tendered by the Council of Ministers, they do not necessarily
             become part of the advice. What is protected against
             disclosure under clause (2) or
Article 74
is only the advice
             tendered by the Council of Ministers…But the material on
             which the reasoning of the Council of Ministers is based and
             the advice is given cannot be said to form part of the advice.‖
25.   The Court then proceeded to the claim against disclosure under
Section

123
of the Indian Evidence Act. It held that where protection from disclosure is
23
PART E


sought under Section 123 on the ground that the correspondence relates to the

affairs of the state, the court, by virtue of Section 162, is called upon to carry out

a balancing task between ―the detriment to the public interest on the

administrative or executive side which would result from the disclosure of the

document against the detriment to the public interest on the judicial side which

would result from non-disclosure of the document though relevant to the

proceeding‖. It held that the court balances the competing aspects of public

interest and decides which should prevail in the particular case before it. A claim

for non-disclosure, in this view, would be sustainable where the disclosure of the

document would be injurious to the public interest to a greater degree than the

harm caused to the administration of justice by non-disclosure. Analysing the

claim in the context of Section 123, Justice Bhagwati noted:
―73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection
             to the disclosure of a document under Section 123 is raised,
             two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely,
             whether the document relates to affairs of State and whether
             its disclosure would, in the particular case before the court, be
             injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its
             decision on these two questions has to balance two
             competing aspects of public interest, because the
             document being one relating to affairs of State, its
             disclosure would cause some injury to the interest of the
             State or the proper functioning of the public service and
             on the other hand if it is not disclosed, the nondisclosure
             would thwart the administration of justice by keeping
             back from the court a material document…The court has
             to decide which aspect of the public interest predominates or
             in other words, whether the public interest which requires that
             the document should not be produced, outweighs the public
             interest that a court of justice in performing its function should
             not be denied access to relevant evidence.‖
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
24
PART E
26.    The Court held that the nature of the proceeding in which the disclosure is

sought, the relevance of the document and the degree of importance that the

document holds in the litigation are relevant factors in the balancing process. If

the correspondence alone would furnish evidence relevant to adjudicating the

dispute before the court, it would be inappropriate to ‗exclude these documents

which constitute the only evidence, if at all, for establishing this charge, by saying

that the disclosure of these documents would impair the efficient functioning of

the judicial institution.‘ The Court held thus:
―82. …Apart from these documents, there would be no
              other documentary evidence available to the petitioner to
              establish that there was no full and effective consultation
              or that the decision of the Central Government was
              based on irrelevant considerations … It is only through
              these documents that the petitioner can, if at all, hope to
              show that there was no full and effective consultation by the
              Central Government with the Chief Justice of the High Court,
              the State Government and the Chief Justice of India or that
              the decision of the Central Government was mala fide or
              based on irrelevant grounds and therefore, to accord
              immunity against disclosure to these documents would be
              tantamount to summarily throwing out the challenge against
              the discontinuance of the Additional Judge…The harm that
              would be caused to the public interest in justice by the
              non-disclosure of these documents would in the
              circumstances far outweigh the injury which may
              possibly be caused by their disclosure, because the non-
              disclosure would almost inevitably result in the dismissal
              of the writ petition and consequent denial of justice even
              though the claim of the petitioner may be true and just.‖
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)

The Court held that the potential injury caused by disclosure is outweighed by the

public interest in justice as the non-disclosure of documents relevant to decide

the controversy would inevitably lead to the dismissal of the writ petition. On a

balancing of the above two competing public interests, the Court upheld the
25
PART E


interim order requiring the disclosure of the correspondence concerning the

reappointment in respect of Justice S N Kumar.
27.     The Court in S P Gupta was required to adjudicate claims resisting

disclosure of documents in a judicial proceeding based on
Sections 123
and
162
of the Indian Evidence Act. The balancing exercise was between the public harm

resulting from a disclosure of documents relating to the affairs of the state and

the public interest in the administration of justice. The public interest in the

administration of justice pertained to the disposal of the case instituted before the

court in which the judge was a party. The decision in S P Gupta did not lay down

a     general   proposition      that   the    correspondence         between      constitutional

functionaries in regard to the appointment process must be disclosed to a

member of the public in all circumstances. The view that the disclosure was

ordered in the specific context of a judicial proceeding was also affirmed in the

separate opinion of Justice E S Venkataramiah (as he then was):
―1194. It may be necessary to deal with the question of official
                secrecy in greater detail in a case where the constitutionality
                of the claim for official secrecy, independently of the power
                of the Court to order discovery of official documents in
                judicial proceedings, arises for consideration. We are
                concerned in this case with the power of the Court to
                direct the disclosure of official documents in judicial
                proceedings.
1203… we felt that a decision not to direct disclosure of the
                documents would result in graver public prejudice than the
                decision to direct such disclosure and that the public interest
                involved in the administration of justice should prevail over
                the public interest of the public service in the peculiar
                circumstances of the case.‖
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
26
PART E
28.   Though, the decision in S P Gupta is not a precedent in support of a

proposition for general disclosure in all circumstances, it is, however, relevant to

the present dispute for it rejected the contention that: (i) disclosure and candour

are incompatible; and (ii) such correspondence is entitled to class immunity.
Candour
29.   The Court addressed the contention that the reason for protecting a certain

class of documents is that they concern decision making at the highest level of

government and only complete freedom from public gaze will enable freedom of

expression and candour amongst government functionaries. In this view, public

scrutiny was contended to adversely affect the ability of the participants in the

decision-making process to express their opinion in a free and frank manner. The

Court, however, rejected the contention that candour and frankness justify the

grant of complete immunity against disclosures. Justice PN Bhagwati (as he then

was) addressed the argument founded on candour in the following terms:
―71…The candour argument has also not prevailed with
             judges.
The candour argument has also not prevailed with Judges
             and jurists in the United States and it is interesting to note
             what Raoul Berger while speaking about the immunity
             claimed by President Nixon against the demand for disclosure
             of the Watergate Tapes, says in his book Executive
             Privilege”: A Constitutional Myth at page 264:
―Candid interchange‖ is yet another pretext for
                    doubtful secrecy. It will not explain Mr. Nixon's
                    claim of blanket immunity for members of his
                    White House staff on the basis of mere
                    membership without more; it will not justify
                    Kleindienst's assertion of immunity from
                    congressional inquiry for two and one-half
                    million federal employees. It is merely
                    another testimonial to the greedy
                    expansiveness of power, the costs of
27
PART E


        which patently outweigh its benefits. As
        the latest branch in a line of illegitimate
        succession, it illustrates the excess bred
        by the claim of executive privilege.
We agree with these learned Judges that the need for
candour and frankness cannot justify granting of
complete immunity against disclosure of documents of
this class, but as pointed out by Gibbs, ACJ in Sankey v.
Whitlam, it would not be altogether unreal to suppose
―that in some matters at least communications between
ministers and servants of the Crown may be more frank
and candid if those concerned believe that they are
protected from disclosure‖ because not all Crown
servants can be expected to be made of ―sterner stuff‖.
The need for candour and frankness must therefore
certainly be regarded as a factor to be taken into account
in determining whether, on balance, the public interest
lies in favour of disclosure or against it (vide: the
observations of Lord Denning in Neilson v, Lougharre (1981)
1 All ER at P. 835.
…
81. It is undoubtedly true that appointment or non-
appointment of a High Court Judge or a Supreme Court
Judge and transfer of a High Court Judge are extremely
important matters affecting the quality and efficiency of the
judicial institution and it is therefore absolutely essential that
the various constitutional functionaries concerned with these
matters should be able to freely and frankly express their
views in regard to these matters…We have no doubt that
high level constitutional functionaries like the Chief
Justice of a High Court and the Chief Justice of India
would not be deterred from performing their
constitutional duty of expressing their views boldly and
fearlessly even if they were told that the correspondence
containing their views might subsequently be
disclosed…We have already dealt with the argument
based on the need for candour and frankness and we
must reject it in its application to the case of holders of
high constitutional offices like the Chief Justice of a High
Court and the Chief Justice of India. Be it noted — and of
this we have no doubt — that our Chief Justices and
Judges are made of sterner stuff; they have inherited a
long and ancient tradition of independence and
impartiality…‖
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
28
PART E


The Court held that though candour may be a factor in determining what set of

communications require protection, the measure of protection depends whether,

on a balance of all competing interests, public interest favours disclosure or

secrecy. While the Court noted that candour may be a relevant factor to prevent

disclosure in some circumstances, it expressly rejects its weight as a relevant

factor when it comes to constitutional functionaries such as the Chief Justice of

India and the Chief Justices of the High Courts. Constitutional functionaries are

bound to the oath of their office to discharge their duties in a fair manner in

accordance with the principles enshrined in the Constitution. It cannot be

countenanced that public gaze or subsequent disclosure will detract an individual

from discharging their duty in an effective manner true to the dignity and ethic

associated with their office. Candour and frankness cannot be the reason to

preclude disclosures of correspondence between constitutional functionaries

which concern the appointment process of judges.
Class immunity
30.   The second argument rejected in S P Gupta and relevant to the present

case is the contention that the correspondence between ―the Law Minister or

other high level functionary of the Central Government, the Chief Justice of the

High Court, the Chief Minister or the Law Minister of the State Government and

the Chief Justice of India in regard to appointment or non-appointment of a High

Court Judge or a Supreme Court Judge or transfer of a High Court Judge and the

notings made by these constitutional functionaries in that behalf‖, belong to a

protected class of documents. It was contended that the disclosure of these
29
PART E


documents would be prejudicial to national interest and the dignity of the

judiciary. In this view, the court is not required to assess the effects of the

disclosure of correspondence in a particular case, as all correspondence of such

nature belongs to a special class which is exempt from disclosure. In this view,

disclosure is not precluded because of the specific contents of the documents,

but because of its membership of a certain class of documents that require non-

disclosure.
31.   Justice Bhagwati, with whom five other judges agreed, held that a claim for

class immunity is an ‗extraordinary claim‘ which is granted as a ‗highly

exceptional measure‘ as such broad claims are contradictory to and destructive

of the concept of an open government. He cautioned against blanket immunity

and lay emphasis on the commitment to an open and transparent government in

the following terms:
―80…It is only under the severest compulsion of the
              requirement of public interest that the court may extend
              the immunity to any other class or classes of documents
              and in the context of our commitment to an open
              Government with the concomitant right of the citizen to
              know what is happening in the Government, the court
              should be reluctant to expand the classes of documents
              to which immunity may be granted. The court must on the
              contrary move in the direction of attenuating the protected
              class or classes of documents, because by and large secrecy
              is the badge of an authoritarian Government…‖

                                                     (Emphasis supplied)



The Court adopted a high standard for the conferral of class immunity which

would be accorded ―only under the severest compulsion of the requirement of

public interest‖. With these observations, the Court rejected the contention that
30
PART E


correspondence between constitutional functionaries constitutes a class of

documents exempt from public disclosure:
―81. …it will be clear that the class of documents consisting of
             the correspondence exchanged between the Law Minister or
             other high level functionary of the Central Government, the
             Chief Justice of the High Court, the State Government and
             the Chief Justice of India in regard to appointment or non-
             appointment of a High Court Judge or Supreme Court Judge
             or the transfer of a High Court Judge and the notes made by
             these constitutional functionaries in that behalf cannot be
             regarded as a protected class entitled to immunity against
             disclosure…Confidentiality is not a head of privilege and the
             need for confidentiality of high level communications without
             more cannot sustain a claim for immunity against
             disclosure…‖



Thus, the disclosure of correspondence between constitutional functionaries was

held not to fall within a protected category exempt from disclosure. Disclosure is

precluded only where it is injurious to public interest. Justice Bhagwati clarified

that the principal consideration before the Court when assessing a claim for the

non-disclosure of any document is that of public interest:
―80…Every claim for immunity in respect of a document,
             whatever be the ground on which the immunity is
             claimed and whatever be the nature of the document,
             must stand scrutiny of the court with reference to one and
             only one test, namely, what does public interest require —
             disclosure or non-disclosure…this exercise has to be
             performed in the context of the democratic ideal of an
             open Government.‖
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
32.   A claim of immunity from disclosure for any document is subject to the

controlling factor of public interest – a determination informed by the commitment

to an open and transparent government:
―67…The concept of an open Government is the direct
             emanation from the right to know which seems to be
             implicit in the right of free speech and expression
             guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(a).
Therefore, disclosure of
31
PART E


             information in regard to the functioning of Government must
             be the rule and secrecy an exception justified only where
             the strictest requirement of public interest so demands.
             The approach of the court must be to attenuate the area of
             secrecy as much as possible consistently with the
             requirement of public interest, bearing in mind all the time that
             disclosure also serves an important aspect of public interest.‖
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)



Justice Bhagwati expanded on the socio-political background that must inform

any approach in a ―democratic society wedded to the basic values enshrined in

the Constitution‖. He drew an interconnection between democracy, transparency

and accountability to hold that a basic postulate of accountability, which is

fundamental to a democratic government, is that information about the

government is accessible to the people. He held that participatory democracy is

premised on the availability of information about the functioning of the

government. The right to know as a ―pillar of a democratic state‖ imputes positive

content to democracy and ensures that democracy does not remain static but

becomes a ―continuous process‖. Thus, a limitation on transparency must be

supported by more than a claim to confidentiality – it must demonstrate the public

harm arising from disclosure is greater than the public interest in transparency.
Justice Bhagwati emphasized transparency in the judicial apparatus in the

following terms:
―85…We believe in an open Government and openness in
             Government does not mean openness merely in the
             functioning of the executive arm of the State. The same
             openness must characterise the functioning of the
             judicial apparatus including judicial appointments and
             transfers. Today the process of judicial appointments and
             transfers is shrouded in mystery. The public does not know
             how Judges are selected and appointed or transferred and
             whether any and if so what, principles and norms govern this
             process. The exercise of the power of appointment and
             transfer remains a sacred ritual whose mystery is confined
32
PART E


             only to a handful of high priests, namely, the Chief Justice of
             the High Court, the Chief Minister of the State, the Law
             Minister of the Central Government and the Chief Justice of
             India in case of appointment or non-appointment of a High
             Court Judge and the Law Minister of the Central Government
             and the Chief Justice of India in case of appointment of a
             Supreme Court Judge or transfer of a High Court Judge. The
             mystique of this process is kept secret and confidential
             between just a few individuals, not more than two or four as
             the case may be, and the possibility cannot therefore be ruled
             out that howsoever highly placed may be these individuals,
             the process may on occasions result in making of wrong
             appointments and transfers and may also at times, though
             fortunately very rare, lend itself to nepotism, political as well
             as personal and even trade-off. We do not see any reason
             why this process of appointment and transfer of Judges
             should be regarded as so sacrosanct that no one should
             be able to pry into it and it should not be protected
             against disclosure at all events and in all circumstances.‖
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)



The Court extended its observations on the indispensable nature of openness

and transparency to the judiciary and held that there is no basis to conclude that

information concerning appointments must be protected against disclosure ―at all

events and in all circumstances.‖ The circumstances which justify disclosure on

one hand and non-disclosure on the other calls into consideration a variety of

factors which shall be adverted to in the course of the judgment. At this juncture,

it is sufficient to note the observations of this Court that transparency in the

functioning of the government serves a cleansing purpose:
―66….Now, if secrecy were to be observed in the functioning
             of Government and the processes of Government were to be
             kept hidden from public scrutiny, it would tend to promote and
             encourage oppression, corruption and misuse or abuse of
             authority, for it would all be shrouded in the veil of secrecy
             without any public accountability. But if there is an open
             Government with means of information available to the public,
             there would be greater exposure of the functioning of
             Government and it would help to assure the people a better
             and more efficient administration. There can be little doubt
             that exposure to public gaze and scrutiny is one of the surest
33
PART F


             means of achieving a clean and healthy administration. It has
             been truly said that an open Government is clean
             Government and a powerful safeguard against political and
             administrative aberration and inefficiency.‖
33.   The approach adopted by Justice Bhagwati in S P Gupta, with which we

are in agreement provides a bright line standard for the Court on the approach

that must be adopted when answering questions of disclosure in regards to the

appointment process. The principal consideration will always be that of public

interest. Any balancing must be carried out in the context of our commitment to

the transparency and accountability of our institutions. The specific content of

public interest and its role in the balancing process will be explored in the course

of the judgment.
It was contended by the respondents that the decision of this Court in S P Gupta

did not deal with the trade-off between disclosure and judicial independence. It is

necessary to turn to this issue.
F     Judicial independence
34.   Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India appearing on behalf

of the appellant, contended that the disclosure of file notings between

constitutional functionaries which concern the appointment process will erode the

independence of the judiciary, which is part of the basic structure of the

Constitution. It was further contended that disclosures will result in damage to the

institution and adversely impact the independence of the judiciary. It is necessary

to briefly analyse the contours of this concept in assessing the contention urged.
34
PART F
35.     At the outset, it must be noted that while the term ‗independence of the

judiciary‘ is not new, its meaning is still imprecise.24 There may be a debate over

various facets of judicial independence: for instance, from whom and to do what

is independence engrafted. Broadly speaking, judicial independence entails the

ability of judges to adjudicate and decide cases without the fear of retribution.

Judicial independence and the ability of judges to apply the law freely is crucial to

the rule of law.
In his seminal work ―Cornerstone of a Nation‖, Granville Austin states:
―The [Constituent] Assembly went to great lengths to ensure
                that the courts would be independent, devoting more hours of
                debate to this subject than to almost any other aspect.‖25


However, it was the independence of the judiciary, and not its absolute insulation

that appeared to be the prevailing view of members of the Constituent

Assembly.26 This, they believed was necessary for the preservation of inter-
institutional equilibrium. The starting point of the independence of the judiciary is

constitutional design through the provisions of the Constitution.
36.
Article 124(2)
guarantees a security of tenure for judges.
Article 124(4)
stipulates that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from their

office except on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. The proviso to

clause (2) of
Article 125
guarantees that a judges‘ privileges, allowances and

rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall not be varied to their
24
MP Jain, Securing the Independence of the Judiciary – The Indian Experience, Indian International and
Comparative Law Review, p. 246
25
Granville Austin, Cornerstone of a Nation (1999), p. 164
26
Arghya Sengupta, Independence and Accountability of the Indian Higher Judiciary (2019), p. 17
35
PART F


disadvantage after their appointment.
Article 129
empowers the Supreme Court

to punish for the contempt of itself.
Article 145
empowers the Supreme Court to

make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court.

Clauses (1) and (2) of
Article 146
stipulate that the Chief Justice of India or such

other Judge or officer of the Court, as may direct, shall be responsible for the

appointments and prescription of rules governing the conditions of service of the

officers and servants of the Supreme Court. Clauses (1) and (2) of
Article 229
assign responsibility to the Chief Justice of a High Court or such other judge or

officer of the court, as they may direct, in respect of matters of appointment and

prescription of rules governing the conditions of service of the officers and

servants of a High Court.
37.
Article 215
empowers the High Court to punish for contempt of itself.
Article 217
provides security of tenure. The proviso to clause (2) of
Article 221
stipulates that the allowances of a Judge of a High Court as well as the rights in

respect of leave of absence or pension shall not be varied to their disadvantage

after their appointment.
Article 227(2)
stipulates that each High Court may, by

virtue of its power of superintendence under
Article 227(1): (i)
call for returns

from certain courts and tribunals, (ii) make and issue general rules and prescribe

forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such courts; and (iii)

prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers

of any such courts.
38.   These    provisions   reflect   constitutional   safeguards   to   ensure   the

independence of the judiciary and guarantee to it the freedom to function
36
PART F


independent of the will of the legislature and executive. Supriya Routh discusses

these provisions in the following words:
―[T]he Constitution provides for adequate safeguards in
                furtherance of the independence of the judiciary in a
                democratic republic. It separates the judiciary from the
                executive and prohibits the Parliament and the state
                legislatures from questioning the conduct of judges of the
                higher judiciary in furtherance of their judicial duties...It also
                provides for an arduous and elaborate process for the
                impeachment of judges...‖27



The constitutional safeguards for judicial independence were noticed by this

Court in
L Chandra Kumar v Union of India28
. Chief Justice AM Ahmadi,

speaking for a seven judge Bench of this Court held:
―78…While the Constitution confers the power to strike down
                laws upon the High Courts and the Supreme Court, it also
                contains elaborate provisions dealing with the tenure, salaries,
                allowances, retirement age of Judges as well as the
                mechanism for selecting Judges to the superior courts. The
                inclusion of such elaborate provisions appears to have been
                occasioned by the belief that, armed with such provisions, the
                superior courts would be insulated from any executive or
                legislative attempts to interfere with the making of their
                decisions.‖


Justice Ruma Pal discussed the position in the following words:
―To ensure freedom from Executive and Legislative control,
                the pay and pension due to judges in the superior courts are
                charged on the Consolidated Funds of the States in the case
                of High Court judges and the Consolidated Fund of India in
                the case of Supreme Court judges and are not subject to the
                vote of the Legislative Assembly in the case of the former or
                Parliament in the latter case. Salaries are specified in the
                Second Schedule to the Constitution and cannot be varied
                without an amendment of the Constitution.‖29
27
Supriya Routh, Independence Sans Accountability: A Case for Right to Information against the Indian
Judiciary, 13 Washington University Global Studies Law Review 321 (2014)
28
(1997) 3 SCC 261
29                                                                               th
   ―An Independent Judiciary‖ – speech delivered by Ms. Justice Ruma Pal at the 5 V.M. Tarkunde Memorial
Lecture, November 10, 2011.
37
PART F
39.     The above provisions are indicative of the intention of the founders of the

Constitution to create a strong foundation to secure the independence of the

judiciary. This also marked a strong departure from the ‗pleasure doctrine‘ under

the pre-constitutional colonial framework.
Under the Government of India Act,

1935
the judges of the High Court held office during the pleasure of the Crown.

Through
Article 217(1)
of the Constitution of India, tenure at the pleasure of the

Crown was substituted with a fixed tenure subject to limited exceptions. Justice

Srikrishna (speaking in non-judicial capacity) elucidates upon the importance of

this tradition in the following words:
―A judge of the High Court or Supreme Court is thus not
                 removable from office except for proved misbehaviour or
                 incapacity during his tenure of office. The very obviation of
                 the pleasure doctrine as controlling the tenure of office of a
                 judge of the High Court or the Supreme Court is explicit of the
                 intention of the founding fathers to insulate the judges of the
                 superior courts from the pleasure of the executive. The
                 several Articles embedded in the Constitution ensure that a
                 judge is fully independent and capable of rendering justice not
                 only between citizens and citizens but also between citizens
                 and the State, without let, hindrance, or interference by
                 anyone in the State polity. This kind of insulation or immunity
                 from the pleasure of the executive is essential in view of the
                 fact that the Constitution has guaranteed several fundamental
                 rights to the citizens and persons and also empowered the
                 High Courts and Supreme Court under
Article 226
and
32
to
                 render justice against acts of the State.‖30



It becomes evident that judicial independence is secured through security over

judicial tenure. The edifice of judicial independence is built on the constitutional

safeguards to guard against interference by the legislature and the executive.
Judicial independence is not secured by the secrecy of cloistered halls. It cannot

be said that increasing transparency would threaten judicial independence.
30
Justice BN Srikrishna, Judicial Independence, The Oxford Handbook of the Indian Constitution (2016) at p.
350.
38
PART F
40.       The need for transparency and accountability has been emphasised in

decisions of this Court.
In Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Association

v Union of India31 (‗NJAC‘
), a Constitution Bench of this Court struck down the

99th Constitutional Amendment Act setting up the National Judicial Appointments

Commission as ultra vires the Constitution by a four-to-one majority. Significantly,

Justice Kurian Joseph, in his separate concurring opinion and Justice

Chelameswar, in his dissenting opinion, pointed to the lack of transparency and

accountability in the manner of making appointments to the judiciary. Justice

Kurian Joseph observed:
―990. All told, all was and is not well. To that extent, I agree
                  with Chelameswar, J. that the present Collegium system lacks
                  transparency, accountability and objectivity. The trust deficit
                  has affected the credibility of the Collegium system, as
                  sometimes observed by the civic society. Quite often, very
                  serious allegations and many a time not unfounded too, have
                  been raised that its approach has been highly subjective.
                  Deserving persons have been ignored wholly for subjective
                  reasons, social and other national realities were overlooked,
                  certain appointments were purposely delayed so as either to
                  benefit vested choices or to deny such benefits to the less
                  patronised, selection of patronised or favoured persons were
                  made in blatant violation of the guidelines resulting in
                  unmerited, if not, bad appointments, the dictatorial attitude of
                  the Collegium seriously affecting the self-respect and dignity,
                  if not, independence of Judges, the court, particularly the
                  Supreme Court, often being styled as the Court of the
                  Collegium, the looking forward syndrome affecting impartial
                  assessment, etc., have been some of the other allegations in
                  the air for quite some time. These allegations certainly call for
                  a deep introspection as to whether the institutional trusteeship
                  has kept up the expectations of the framers of the
                  Constitution… To me, it is a curable situation yet.‖



The need for greater transparency and accountability in the appointment

procedure or the lack of the same, has also been highlighted by other eminent
31
(2016) 5 SCC 1
39
PART F


retired judges such as Justice JS Verma and Justice Ruma Pal. In an article

quoted in Justice Lokur‘s separate concurring opinion in the NJAC decision,

Justice Verma while speaking about the collegium system observed:
―546…Have any system you like, its worth and efficacy will
                 depend on the worth of the people who work it! It is, therefore,
                 the working of the system that must be monitored to ensure
                 transparency and accountability.‖



Furthermore, Justice Chelameswar, in his dissenting opinion, references a

speech made by Justice Ruma Pal,32 where she stated thus:
―… [T]he process by which a judge is appointed to a superior
                 court is one of the best kept secrets in this country. The very
                 secrecy of the process leads to an inadequate input of
                 information as to the abilities and suitability of a possible
                 candidate for appointment as a judge. A chance remark, a
                 rumour or even third-hand information may be sufficient to
                 damn a judge‘s prospects. Contrariwise a personal friendship
                 or unspoken obligation may colour a recommendation.
                 Consensus within the collegium is sometimes resolved
                 through a trade-off resulting in dubious appointments with
                 disastrous consequences for the litigants and the credibility of
                 the judicial system. Besides, institutional independence has
                 also been compromised by growing sycophancy and
                 ‗lobbying‘ within the system.‖
41.     The collegium system has come under immense criticism for its lack of

transparency. As early as in S P Gupta, this Court acknowledged that disclosure

would lead to bona fide consideration and deliberation and proper application of

mind on the part of the judges.33 Even in NJAC, the need for transparency and

accountability has not been denied in any of the separate opinions. The 99th

Constitutional Amendment was struck down on the ground that it would

adversely affect the independence of the judiciary by giving the executive a

32                                                                             th
   ―An Independent Judiciary‖ – speech delivered by Ms. Justice Ruma Pal at the 5 V.M. Tarkunde
Memorial Lecture, November 10, 2011.
33
S.P. Gupta v. Union of India
, 1981 Supp SCC 87, 85 (per Bhagwati J.)
40
PART F


definitive say in the appointment of judges. The dilution of the judiciary‘s

autonomy in the context of making judicial appointments was deemed to be

unconstitutional. However, the need to reduce the opacity and usher in a regime

of transparency in judicial appointments has not been denied and has in fact

been specifically acknowledged by some of the learned Judges.
42.     Scholars caution that while judicial independence is important, one should

not lose sight of the larger goals and purposes which judicial independence is

intended to serve. Charles Gardner Geyh considers such ends to include

upholding of the rule of law, preserving the separation of governmental powers,

and promotion of due process, amongst many others. Therefore, he believes that

if judges are free to disregard such ends in their decision making, judicial

independence serves no purpose. He notes thus:
―Most     thoughtful    scholars     recognize   that   judicial
                independence is an instrumental value-a means to achieve
                other ends. As an instrumental value, judicial independence
                has limits, defined by the purposes it serves…[Hence,] judges
                who are so independent that they can disregard the law
                altogether without fear of reprisal likewise undermine the rule
                of law values that judicial independence is supposed to
                further. Judicial accountability is yin to the judicial
                independence yang.‖34

Burt Neuborne in his incisive article on the Supreme Court of India observes: ―We

care about constitutional courts not for the aesthetic value of their structures, but

because where certain prerequisites are assembled, constitutional courts are

capable of preserving the values of open, democratic governance.‖ 35
34
Charles Gardner Geyh, ‗Rescuing Judicial Accountability from the Realm of Political Rhetoric‘, 56 Case
Western Reserve Law Review 911 (2006)
35
International Journal of Constitutional Law, Volume 1, Issue 3, July 2003, Pages 476–510
41
PART F
43.      Lorne Sossin argues that transparency is necessary to ensure the public

perception of the judiciary as independent. In the context of judicial

appointments, he believes that appointments may happen on a proper, well-

justified, substantive understanding of judicial ‗merit‘. However, in order for the

same to be truly independent, they must include within themselves the

transparency of the criteria and openness of the process. He notes that:
―What matters most in a democracy, I would suggest, is not
                  the precise criteria for merit but the transparency of the
                  criteria, and the authenticity of the reasons for choosing one
                  individual over another. Merit, in other words, is as much
                  about process as substance.‖ 36


He then goes on to address how the transparency of criteria and the process is a

logical extension of the judicial appointment being ‗meritorious‘, and that doing so

would remove the ‗arbitrariness‘ of the process, leading to upholding of rule of

law:
―We often frame our concern with the rule of law as one
                  designed to prevent "arbitrary" decisions. Arbitrary decisions
                  are not, however, decisions taken for no reason. They are,
                  rather, decisions taken for undisclosed reason. In a
                  democracy, some reasons for judicial selection will and
                  should be seen as more legitimate than others. Increasingly,
                  however, it is the demand for justification itself that is
                  coming to define our democratic aspirations. This
                  demand, in my view, not only arises as a logical extension to
                  the requirement of merit, but is also justified as a necessary
                  condition of judicial independence.‖
                                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
44.      The fault that was identified with the purported framework under
Article

124A
of the Constitution of India for ensuring transparency was the lack of
36
Lorne Sossin, ‗Judicial Appointment, Democratic Aspirations, and the Culture of Accountability‘, 58 University
of New Brunswick Law Journal 11 (2008)
42
PART F


adequate safeguards for protecting the right to privacy of the appointees.37 This

was in the context of the deliberations of the NJAC falling within the purview of

the
RTI Act
. Justice Madan B Lokur in his separate concurring opinion noted that

the right to know was circumscribed by the right to privacy of individuals:38

                  ―555. The balance between transparency and confidentiality
                  is very delicate and if some sensitive information about a
                  particular person is made public, it can have a far-reaching
                  impact on his/her reputation and dignity. The 99th
                  Constitution Amendment Act and the NJAC Act have not
                  taken note of the privacy concerns of an individual. This is
                  important because it was submitted by the learned Attorney
                  General that the proceedings of NJAC will be completely
                  transparent and any one can have access to information that
                  is available with NJAC. This is a rather sweeping
                  generalisation which obviously does not take into account the
                  privacy of a person who has been recommended for
                  appointment, particularly as a Judge of the High Court or in
                  the first instance as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The right
                  to know is not a fundamental right but at best it is an implicit
                  fundamental right and it is hedged in with the implicit
                  fundamental right to privacy that all people enjoy. The
                  balance between the two implied fundamental rights is difficult
                  to maintain, but the 99th Constitution Amendment Act and the
                  NJAC Act do not even attempt to consider, let alone achieve
                  that balance.‖



None of these failings of the specific framework envisaged by the 99th

Constitutional Amendment Act however can be interpreted as a denial of the

importance of disclosure, transparency and accountability in the context of

judicial appointments or of its constitutionality. They only point to the need for a

balance between the right to know and the right to privacy, the specific contours

of which will be explored shortly.
37
NJAC., 953
38
Id
43
PART F
45.     Judicial independence cannot be used as a byword for avoiding the

accountability and criticism that accompanies transparency:
―[T]hrough judicial activism, the Supreme Court of India has
                completely insulated the judiciary from any democratic
                deliberation,   thereby     sacrificing  accountability    and
                transparency in the functioning of the judges…Accountability
                and transparency are not only necessary for upholding the
                democratic underpinnings of the Constitution, but are also
                necessary for the independence of the judiciary itself,
                because if public trust and confidence in the judiciary cannot
                be maintained, the judiciary is destined to lose its
                independence.‖39


The judiciary is an important organ of the Indian state, and it has a vital role in the

proper functioning of the state as a democracy based on the rule of law. The

integrity, independence, and impartiality of the judiciary are preconditions for fair

and effective access to justice and for the protection of rights. The judiciary has a

vital role to play as a bulwark of the integrity infrastructure in the country.
Failure to bring about accountability reforms would erode trust in the courts‘

impartiality, harming core judicial functions. Further, it also harms the broader

accountability function that the judiciary is entrusted with in democratic systems

including upholding citizens‘ rights and sanctioning representatives of other

branches when they act in contravention of the law. Transparency and the right to

information are crucially linked to the rule of law itself.
F.1     Judicial accountability
46.     Questions of judicial accountability raise three interconnected questions:
39
Supriya Routh, Independence Sans Accountability: A Case for Right to Information against the Indian
Judiciary, 13 Washington University Global Studies Law Review 321 (2014)
44
PART F
(i)        What is the source of accountability?;
(ii)       To whom is the accountability owed?; and

      (iii)      What does accountability entail?
Judicial independence and judicial accountability are often seen as conflicting

values. It is believed that judicial independence, which mandates that

adjudication take place free from interference by the legislature and the

executive, is compromised by the questions of responsibility which judicial

accountability entails. In this view, accountability compromises the ability of

judges to decide free from external pressure and is undesirable. There is a fallacy

about the postulate that independence and accountability are conflicting values.
47.           Judicial independence is defined by the existence of conditions which

enable a judge to decide objectively, without succumbing to pressures and

influences which detract from the course of justice. To be independent a judge

must have the ability to decide ‗without fear or favour, affection or ill will‘. The

Constitution creates conditions to secure the independence of judges by setting

out provisions to govern appointments, tenure and conditions of service. These

are provisions through which the conditions necessary to secure judicial

independence are engrafted as mandatory institutional requirements. These are

intrinsic elements of our constitutional design. But constitutional design must be

realised through the actual working of its functionaries. Mechanisms which

facilitate independence are hence a crucial link in ensuring that constitutional

design translates into the realisation of judicial independence. Facilitative

mechanisms include those which promote transparency. For true judicial
45
PART F


independence is not a shield to protect wrong doing but an instrument to secure

the fulfilment of those constitutional values which an independent judiciary is

tasked to achieve. Judicial independence is hence not a carte blanche to

arbitrary behaviour. Where the provisions of the Constitution secure a standard

of judicial independence for free and impartial adjudication, the independence

guaranteed by the Constitution must be employed in a manner that furthers the

objective for which it was secured. In the quest for a balance between the

freedom guaranteed and the responsibility that attaches to the freedom, judicial

independence and judicial accountability converge.
48.     Accountability, defined narrowly, is ―a relationship between an actor and a

forum, in which the actor has an obligation to explain and to justify his or her

conduct, the forum can pose questions and pass judgment, and the actor may

face consequences‖40. The narrow conception of accountability however suffers

from a straight-jacket view devoid of general guiding principles. Professor

Stephen Burbank stipulates:
―…the concept of accountability, defined inclusively
                    …includes a broader complex of values which public
                    organisations must adopt based in the fundamental values
                    of democratic regimes. Accountability is conceived in such
                    a way as to enable the democratic process of establishing
                    respect for those values, whether of efficiency or
                    independence, efficacy in achieving objectives, or
                    impartiality in the treatment of citizens.‖41



In this view, accountability is the search for normative values informed by

democratic values that guide the exercise of power and freedom granted by the
40
M Bovens, Analysing and Assessing Accountability: A Conceptual Framework, European Law Journal (2007),
p. 450.
41
Contini, F and Mohr, R, Reconciling independence and accountability in judicial systems, Utrecht Law Review
(2007), p. 31
46
PART F


Constitution. The judiciary, like other institutions envisaged by the Constitution, is

essentially a human institution. The independence of the judiciary was not

envisaged to mean its insulation from the checks and balances that are inherent

in the exercise of constitution power. The independence of the judiciary, is a

constitutional guarantee of freedom. Notions of accountability however, concern

the manner and ends for which the freedom guaranteed is employed. Where

judicial independence focuses on freedom, judicial accountability is concerned

with the manner in which that freedom is exercised by the adjudicator.
49.
Article 124(6)
and
Article 219
of the Constitution of India prescribe that

every person who is appointed to be a judge of the Supreme Court or the High

Court respectively, shall, prior to entering office, make and subscribe to an Oath

or affirmation set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution. The Oath for the

office reads:
―I, (name), having been appointed Chief Justice (or a
                Judge) of the Supreme Court of India, do swear in the
                name of God (or affirm) that I will bear true faith and
                allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
                established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity
                of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my
                ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my
                office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that
                I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.‖

                                                         (Emphasis supplied)




Prior to the advent of the Constitution, the oath or affirmation for a person

appointed to the Federal Court was prescribed in
Schedule IV to the Government

of India Act, 1935
. Significantly, the words ―without fear or favour, affection or ill-
will‖, contained in the present Constitution in Form VIII did not find place in the
47
PART F


oath prescribed42 in
Schedule IV to the Government of India Act, 1935
. Added to

the present Constitution, these are words with significance. The framers of the

Constitution were alive to the need for the exercise of judicial power in

accordance with the ethics of judicial office. The express inclusion of these words

indicates that persons entering judicial office bind themselves to the principles

inherent in the effective discharge of the judicial function, in conformity with the

rule of law and the values of the Constitution.
50.      The oath of office postulates that the judge shall discharge the duties of

the office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. Any action that abridges the

discharge of judicial duty in conformity with the principles enunciated in the oath

negates the fundamental precept underlying the conferment of judicial power.

Commenting on the significance of the inclusion of the term in its application to

judges of the High Courts in
Union of India v Sankalchand Himatlal43, Justice

PN Bhagwati
(as he then was) held:
―These words, of course, do not add anything to the nature of
                  the judicial function to be discharged by the High Court Judge
                  because, even without them, the High Court Judge would, by
                  the very nature of the judicial function, have to perform the
                  duties of his office without fear or favour, but they serve to
                  highlight two basic characteristics of the judicial
                  function, namely, independence and impartiality…‖
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)



As constitutional functionaries tasked with adjudication, judges of the High Courts

and Supreme Court are bound to discharge their duties in a fair and impartial
42
―I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice [or a judge] of the Court do solemnly swear [or affirm] that saving
the faith and allegiance which I owe to C.D., his heirs and successors, I will be faithful and bear true allegiance in
my judicial capacity to His Majesty the King, Emperor of India, His heirs and successors, and that I will faithfully
perform the duties of my office to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment.‖
43
(1977) 4 SCC 193
48
PART F


manner in accordance with law and the principles enshrined in the Constitution.
But this indeed is only a restatement of a principle which attaches to all judicial

office. The principles embodied in the oath furnish a non-derogable obligation

upon the person affirming it to abide by its mandate.
51.   On 21 November 1993, the then Chief Justice of India constituted a

Committee to draft and circulate a statement on the values that must be reflected

in judicial life. In December 1999, the Conference of Chief Justices of all High

Courts resolved and adopted the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life. The

statement serves as a guiding light of the values that must be followed in

conformity with the dignity and ethic required of judicial life. The statement, apart

from mentioning 16 values of judicial life concludes that the values enumerated

are not exhaustive but illustrative of what is expected of a judge. The Bangalore

Principles of Judicial Conduct 2002 which were adopted at the Round Table

Meeting of Chief Justices held at the Peace Palace, The Hague in 2002 defined

six main values as an inherent element of the judicial system: independence,

impartiality, integrity, propriety, equality and competence, and diligence.
52.   Judicial accountability also stems from the principle that the entrustment

and exercise of power in a constitutional democracy is not unfettered. The

Constitution confers upon judges with the power to dispense justice, which is a

foundational value in the Preamble to the Constitution. Judicial power, conferred

in public interest as a necessary element in the administration of justice cannot

be used to achieve extraneous ends. The private interests of an individual have
49
PART F


no nexus to the discharge of the official duties of a judge. Professor TRS Allen

stipulates:
―Powers may be conferred on public officials and agencies for
                 the attainment of appropriate ends, consistent with a plausible
                 account of the public good; but such powers must not be
                 abused for extraneous ends, serving only private interests,
                 nor wielded in a manner that undermines the ideal of freedom
                 as independence. No one should be at the mercy of
                 unfettered official discretion; and the enforcement of legal
                 constraints on such discretion is a necessary part of the idea
                 of government according to law.‖44



The rule of law commands compliance with the law, without exception. It requires

the protection of individuals against the unfettered discretion by officials on one

hand and the protection of individuals from depredations by other private

individuals.
53.     Adjudicators in robes are human and may be pre-disposed to the failings

that are inherently human. But the law demands that they must aspire to a

standard of behaviour that does not condone those failings of a human persona

in the discharge of judicial duties. Recognition of the fallibility of individuals who

work constitutional institutions and of the need for safeguards to prevent the

abuse of power found articulation in the Constitutional Assembly Debates. Dr B R

Ambedkar, K T Shah, H V Kamath, S Nagappa, Hussain Imam, Pandit Lakshmi

Kanta Maitra, Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, B Pocker Sahib Bahadur, Z H Lari, A K

Ghosh, and R K Sidhva all emphasized the possibility of human error in the

inherently human institutions that the Constitution envisaged. This idea was

given its clearest articulation in by Dr B R Ambedkar when he reminded us that:
44
TRS Allen, Accountability to Law, in Accountability in the Contemporary Constitution (Nicholas Bamforth and
Peter Leyland eds.) (2013), Oxford Scholarship Online, p. 84
50
PART F


―however good a Constitution may be, it is sure to turn out bad because those

who are called to work it, happen to be a bad lot.‘
54.   To equate the actions of an individual which have no nexus with the

discharge of official duties as a judge with the institution may have dangerous

portents. The shield of the institution cannot be entitled to protect those actions

from scrutiny. The institution cannot be called upon to insulate and protect a

judge from actions which have no bearing on the discharge of official duty. It is

for this reason that judicial accountability is an inherent component of the justice

delivery system. Accountability is expected to animate the day to day functioning

of the courts. Judges are required to issue reasoned orders after affording an

opportunity to both sides of a dispute to present their case. Judicial ethic requires

that a judge ought to recuse herself from hearing a case where there is a

potential conflict of interest. These illustration norms serve to further the

democratic ideal that no constitutional functionary is above the rule of law.
55.   In the view explored above, judicial accountability traces itself from both

the oath of office and the nature of the judicial power itself. In a broader sense

however, there is a significant public interest in ensuring the smooth and efficient

functioning of the justice delivery system, consistent with the requirements of

justice in individual cases. The legitimacy of the institution which depends on

public trust is a function of an assurance that the judiciary and the people that

work it are free from bias and partiality. Mark Tushnet explores the idea of judicial

accountability in the following terms:
―Under prevailing understandings in liberal democracies, law
             is a human artefact, so accountability ‗to law‘ must involve
51
PART F


                  accountability to someone. Roughly, ‗political accountability‘
                  refers to accountability to contemporaneous power-holders as
                  representatives of today‘s people, whereas ‗accountability
                  to law‘ refers to accountability to the people and their
                  representatives in the more distant past. Accountability
                  to law is a form of indirect accountability to the people in
                  the past, taking its route through their enactments of
                  law.45

                                                                     (Emphasis supplied)


In this view, accountability is not confined to elected posts. The creation of the

legal system founded on constitutional precept marked a break from its colonial

past. An independent judiciary is the guardian and final arbiter of the text and

spirit of the Constitution. To ensure this, the Constitution envisages a system of

checks and balances.
Article 124(4)46
of the Constitution stipulates that a judge of

the Supreme Court may be removed by an order of the President on the ground

of proven misbehavior or incapacity. Article 21847 of the Constitution makes the

substantive provisions in
Article 124(4)
and
Article 124(5)
applicable to judges of

the High Courts.
The Judges (Enquiry) Act
1986 was enacted in furtherance of
Article 124(5)
which empowered the Parliament to regulate the presentation of an

address and investigation of judges. A notice of motion to present an address to

the President of India for the removal of judge is given in the Lok Sabha on

receiving the signatures of not less than one hundred members or in the Rajya

Sabha on receiving the signature of not less than fifty members. The Speaker of

the Lok Sabha or the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha constitutes a Committee as
45
Mark Tushnet, Judicial Accountability in Comparative Perspective, in Accountability in the Contemporary
Constitution (Nicholas Bamforth and Peter Leyland eds.) (2013), Oxford Scholarship Online at Tushnet, p. 69
46
124(4) - A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the
President passed after as address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership
of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting has
been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity.
47
218 – The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of
article 124
shall apply in relation to a High Court as they apply in
relation to the Supreme Court with the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme
Court.
52
PART F


stipulated in the Act to enquire into the alleged misbehavior of incapacity. If the

report of the Committee finds that a judge is guilty of misbehavior or suffers from

any incapacity, each house of the Parliament votes on the motion in accordance

with
Article 124(4)
of the Constitution. The Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha must

both pass a motion to impeach the judge with a majority of not less than two-

thirds of the members of the house present and voting. The stringent procedure

adopted by the Parliament for the impeachment of a judge draws a balance

between ensuring the independence of judges from political will and ensuring the

accountability of judges for their actions.
56.        Judicial independence does not mean the insulation of judges from the

rule of law. In a constitutional democracy committed to the rule of law and to the

equality of its citizens, it cannot be countenanced that judges are above the law.

The notion of a responsible judiciary furthers the ideal for which an independent

judiciary was envisaged. It is the exercise of the decision making authority

guaranteed by judicial independence in a just and responsible manner, true to

the ethos of judicial office that sub-serves the founding vision of the judiciary.

Professor Stephen Burbank has characterized judicial independence and

accountability as "different sides of the same coin‖.48Professor Charles Gardner

has stated that:
―Judicial accountability is yin to the judicial independence
                    yang. Although some trumpet judicial accountability as if it
                    were an end in itself, accountability-like independence-is
                    better characterized as an instrumental value that promotes
                    three discrete ends: the rule of law, public confidence in the
                    courts, and institutional responsibility.‖49
48
Stephen Burbank, The Past and Present of Judicial Independence, California Law Review (1999).
49
Charles Gardner, Rescuing Judicial Accountability from the Realm of Political Rhetoric (2006), p .916
53
PART F


Hence, independence and accountability are mutually reinforcing concepts. The

specific form of accountability which this Court has been called to address is in

regard to the appointment process and disclosure of assets owned by judges.
This form of accountability involves competing interests between the need for

transparency and accountability and the privacy interests of judges. The nature

and balancing of the competing interests involved in such a determination shall

be explored in the course of the judgment.
57.   The executive in a cabinet form of government in accountable to the

legislature. Ministers of the government are elected members of the legislature.

Collectively, the government is accountable to the legislature as an institution

and through the legislature to the people. Unlike the elected representatives of

the people, judges of the district and higher judiciary are not elected. The

accountability which the political process exacts from members of the legislature

is hence distinct from the accountability of judges who are accountable to the

trust which is vested in them as independent decision makers. Making them

accountable in the discharge of that trust does not dilute their independence. The

independence of judges is designed to protect them from the pressures of the

executive and the legislature and of the organised interests in society which may

detract judges from discharging the trust as dispassionate adjudicators. Scrutiny

and transparency, properly understood are not placed in an antithesis to

independence. They create conditions where judges are protected against

unwholesome     influences.   Scrutiny and    transparency are     allies   of   the

conscientious because they are powerful instruments to guard against influences

which threaten to suborn the judicial conscience. To use judicial independence
54
PART G


 as a plea to refuse accountability is fallacious. Independence is secured by

accountability.         Transparency          and      scrutiny   are   instruments   to   secure

accountability.
G          Fiduciary relationship
58.        The appellant argued that the information about the assets of judges is

exempt from disclosure, by virtue of
Section 8(1)(e)
of the RTI Act which casts a

fiduciary duty on the Chief Justice of India to hold the asset declarations in

confidence. It is argued by the respondent that judges, while declaring their

assets, do so in their official capacity in accordance with the 1997 resolution and

not as private individuals. It is urged that the process of information gathering

about the assets of the judges by the Chief Justice of India, is in his official

capacity and therefore, no fiduciary relationship exists between them.
59.        In order to determine whether the Chief Justice of India holds information

with respect to asset declarations of judges of the Supreme Court in a fiduciary

capacity, it is necessary to assess the nature of the relationship and the power

dynamics between the parties. Justice Frankfurter of the United States Supreme

Court in
SEC v Chenery Corp50
, while determining the question whether officers

and directors who manage a holding company in the process of reorganisation

occupy positions of trust, stated:
― But to say that a man is a fiduciary only begins analysis; it
                   gives direction to further inquiry. To whom is he a fiduciary?
                   What obligations does he owe as a fiduciary?
In what respect
50
SEC v. Chenery Corp.
, 318 U.S. 80, 85–86 (1942)
55
PART G


                has he failed to discharge these obligations? And what are
                the consequences of his deviation from duty?‖51
60.     Black‘s Law Dictionary52, defines ―fiduciary relationship‖ thus:
―A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for
                the benefit of the other on matters within the scope of the
                relationship. Fiduciary relationships – such as trustee-
                beneficiary, guardian-ward, principal-agent, and attorney-
                client – require an unusually high degree of care. Fiduciary
                relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when
                one person places trust in the faithful integrity of another,
                who as a result gains superiority or influence over the
                first, (2) when one person assumes control and
                responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a
                duty to act for or give advice to another on matters falling
                within the scope of the relationship, or (4) when there is a
                specific relationship that has traditionally been recognized as
                involving fiduciary duties, as with a lawyer and a client or a
                stockbroker and a customer.‖
                                                            (Emphasis supplied)




In Words and Phrases53 the term ―fiduciary‖ is defined:
―Generally, the term ‗fiduciary‘ applies to any person who
                occupies a position of peculiar confidence towards another...
                It refers to integrity and fidelity... It contemplates fair dealing
                and good faith, rather than legal obligation, as the basis of the
                transaction… The term includes those informal relations
                which exist whenever one party trusts and relies upon
                another, as well as technical fiduciary relations.‖
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)



In Corpus Juris Secundum54 ―fiduciary‖ is defined thus:
―A general definition of the word which is sufficiently
                comprehensive to embrace all cases cannot well be given.
                The term is derived from the civil, or Roman law. It connotes
                the idea of trust or confidence, contemplates good faith,
                rather than legal obligation, as the basis of the transaction,
52
Black‘s Law Dictionary, Tenth Edition, p. 744
53
Words and Phrases, Volume 16-A, St. Paul: West Pub. Co, 1940
54
Corpus Juris Secundum: A Complete Restatement of the Entire American Law As Developed by All Reported
Cases, Volume 36-A, p. 38
56
PART G


                  refers to the integrity, the fidelity, of the party trusted, rather
                  than his credit or ability, and has been held to apply to all
                  persons who occupy a position of peculiar confidence toward
                  others, and to include those informal relations which exist
                  whenever one party trusts and relies on another, as well as
                  technical fiduciary relations.
The word ‗fiduciary‘, as a noun, means one who holds a thing
                  in trust for another, a trustee, a person holding the character
                  of a trustee, or a character analogous to that of a trustee, with
                  respect to the trust and confidence involved in it and the
                  scrupulous good faith and candor which it requires; a person
                  having the duty, created by his undertaking, to act primarily
                  for another's benefit in matters connected with such
                  undertaking. Also more specifically, in a statute, a guardian,
                  trustee, executor, administrator, receiver, conservator or any
                  person acting in any fiduciary capacity for any person, trust or
                  estate. Some examples of what, in particular connections, the
                  term has been held to include and not to include are set out in
                  the note.‖
61.
In
CBSE v Aditya Bandopadhyay55
, a two judge Bench of this Court

while discussing the nature of fiduciary relationships relied upon several

decisions and explained the terms ―fiduciary‖ and ―fiduciary relationship‖ thus:
―39. The term ―fiduciary‖ refers to a person having a duty to
                  act for the benefit of another, showing good faith and
                  candour, where such other person reposes trust and special
                  confidence in the person owing or discharging the duty. The
                  term ―fiduciary relationship‖ is used to describe a
                  situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary)
                  places complete confidence in another person (fiduciary)
                  in regard to his affairs, business or transaction(s). The
                  term also refers to a person who holds a thing in trust for
                  another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
                  confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the
                  beneficiary, and use good faith and fairness in dealing with
                  the beneficiary or the things belonging to the beneficiary. If
                  the beneficiary has entrusted anything to the fiduciary, to hold
                  the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard to or with
                  reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
                  confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or
                  information to any third party.‖
                                                              (Emphasis supplied)
55
(2011) 8 SCC 497
57
PART G
62.
In RBI v Jayantilal N Mistry56, a two judge Bench of this Court reiterated

the observations made in
CBSE v Aditya Bandopadhyay
and held that RBI did

not place itself in a fiduciary relationship with other financial institutions by virtue

of collecting their reports of inspections, statements of the banks and information

related to the business. It was held that the information collected by the RBI was

required under law and not under the pretext of confidence or trust:
―64. The exemption contained in
Section 8(1)(e)
applies to
                   exceptional cases and only with regard to certain pieces of
                   information, for which disclosure is unwarranted or
                   undesirable. If information is available with a regulatory
                   agency not in fiduciary relationship, there is no reason to
                   withhold the disclosure of the same. However, where
                   information is required by mandate of law to be provided
                   to an authority, it cannot be said that such information is
                   being provided in a fiduciary relationship. As in the instant
                   case, the financial institutions have an obligation to provide all
                   the information to RBI and such information shared under an
                   obligation/duty cannot be considered to come under the
                   purview of being shared in fiduciary relationship.‖
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
63.        The Canadian Supreme Court in the case of Hodgkinson v Simms57,

discussed the term ‗fiduciary‘ thus:
―A party becomes a fiduciary where it, acting pursuant to
                   statute, agreement or unilateral undertaking, has an
                   obligation to act for the benefit of another and that obligation
                   carries with it a discretionary power. Several indicia are of
                   assistance in recognizing the existence of fiduciary
                   relationships: (1) scope for the exercise of some discretion or
                   power; (2) that power or discretion can be exercised
                   unilaterally so as to effect the beneficiary's legal or practical
                   interests; and, (3) a peculiar vulnerability to the exercise of
                   that discretion or power.
The term fiduciary is properly used in two ways. The first
                   describes certain relationships having as their essence
56
(2016) 3 SCC 525
57
[1994] 3 SCR. 377
58
PART G


                 discretion, influence over interests, and an inherent
                 vulnerability. A rebuttable presumption arises out of the
                 inherent purpose of the relationship that one party has a duty
                 to act in the best interests of the other party. The second,
                 slightly different use of fiduciary exists where fiduciary
                 obligations, though not innate to a given relationship, arise as
                 a matter of fact out of the specific circumstances of that
                 particular relationship. In such a case the question to ask is
                 whether, given all the surrounding circumstances, one party
                 could reasonably have expected that the other party would
                 act in the former's best interests with respect to the subject
                 matter at issue. Discretion, influence, vulnerability and trust
                 are non-exhaustive examples of evidentiary factors to be
                 considered in making this determination. Outside the
                 established categories of fiduciary relationships, what is
                 required is evidence of a mutual understanding that one party
                 has relinquished its own self-interest and agreed to act solely
                 on behalf of the other party. In relation to the advisory
                 context, then, there must be something more than a simple
                 undertaking by one party to provide information and execute
                 orders for the other for a relationship to be enforced as
                 fiduciary.‖
64.     Dr Paul Finn in his comprehensive work on ―Fiduciary Obligations‖58,

describes a fiduciary as someone who has an obligation to act ―in the interests

of‖ or ―for the benefit of‖ their beneficiaries in some particular matter. For a

person to act as a fiduciary they must first have bound themselves in some way

to protect and further the interests of another.59 Where such a position has been

assumed by one party then that party's position is potentially of a fiduciary.60 The

Federal Court of Australia in the case of Australian Sec & Inv Comm‘n v

Citigroup Global Markets Australia Pty Ltd61 has held:
―The question of whether a fiduciary relationship exists, and
                 the scope of any duty, will depend upon the factual
                 circumstances and an examination of the contractual terms
                 between the parties... Apart from the established categories,
                 perhaps the most that can be said is that a fiduciary
58
P.D. Finn ―Fiduciary Obligations‖, Carswell 1977 at p. 15
59
P.D. Finn ―Fiduciary Obligations‖, Carswell 1977 at p. 9
60
P.D. Finn ―Fiduciary Obligations‖, Carswell 1977 at p.9
61
Australian Sec. & Inv. Comm‘n v Citigroup Global Markets Australia Pty. Ltd., [2007] FCA 963 (Citing P.D.
Finn, The Fiduciary Principle, in Equity, Fiduciaries and Trusts (T. Youden ed., 1989))
59
PART G


                 relationship exists where a person has undertaken to act
                 in the interests of another and not in his or her own
                 interests but all of the facts and circumstances must be
                 carefully examined to see whether the relationship is, in
                 substance, fiduciary… The critical matter in the end is
                 the role that the alleged fiduciary has, or should be taken
                 to have, in the relationship. It must so implicate that party in
                 the other‘s affairs or so align him with the protection or
                 advancement of that other‘s interests that foundation exists
                 for the fiduciary expectation.‖       (Emphasis supplied)
65.     A fiduciary must be entrusted with a degree of discretion (power) and must

have freedom to act without resorting to prior approval of the beneficiary.62 The

greater the independent authority to be exercised by the fiduciary, the greater the

scope of fiduciary duty.63 The person so entrusted with power is required to

determine how to exercise that power.64 Fiduciaries are identified by ascendancy,

power and control on the part of the stronger party and therefore, a fiduciary

relationship implies a condition of superiority of one of the parties over the

other.65 It is not necessary that the relationship has to be defined as per law, it

may exist under various circumstances, and exists in cases where there has

been a special confidence placed in someone who is bound to act in good faith

and with due regard to the interests of the one reposing the confidence. Such is

normally the case with, inter alia, attorney-client, agent-principal, doctor-patient,

parent-child,        trustees-beneficiaries66,            legal      guardian-ward67,            personal

representatives, court appointed receivers and between the directors of company

and its shareholders. In Needle Industries (India) Ltd v Needle Industries
62
Tamar Frankel, ―Fiduciary Law‖ Oxford University Press, 2011
63
Scott, Austin W. "The Fiduciary Principle." California Law Review 37, no. 4 (1949): 539-55.
64
Tamar Frankel, ―Fiduciary Law‖ Oxford University Press, 2011
65
Ken Coghill, Charles Sampford and Tim Smith ―Fiduciary Duty and the Atmospheric Trust‖, Ashgate (2012)
66
Section 88
, Indian Trusts Act 1882
67
Section 20
, Guardians and Wards Act 1890
60
PART G


Newey (India) Holding Ltd68 and Dale & Carrington Invt (P) Lt v P K

Prathaphan69, this Court held that the directors of the company owe a fiduciary

duty to its shareholders.
In
P V Sankara Kurup v Leelavathy Nambier70
, this

Court held that an agent and power of attorney can be said to owe a fiduciary

relationship to the principal.
66.      Other structural properties of the fiduciary relationship are dependence

and vulnerability, where the beneficiary is dependent upon the fiduciary to

exercise power and impact the practical interests.71 Once a fiduciary relationship

is established, fiduciary duties include the duty of loyalty and duty of care

towards the interests of the beneficiaries.72
67.      From the discussion above, it can be seen that a fiduciary is someone who

acts for and on behalf of another in a particular matter giving rise to a relationship

of trust and confidence. A fiduciary relationship implies a condition of superiority

of one of the parties over the other, where special confidence has been reposed

in an individual to act in the best interests of another.
68.      The dispute before us is whether the Chief Justice of India while exercising

its official function and holding asset declaration information of the judges acts in

a fiduciary capacity. The Full Bench of the Delhi High Court agreed with the

learned single judge and held:
68
(1981) 3 SCC 333
69
(2005) 1 SCC 212
70
(1994) 6 SCC 68
71
Gold, Andrew S.; Miller, Paul B. ―Philosophical foundations of fiduciary law‖ Oxford University Press, 2016.
72
Tamar Frankel, ―Fiduciary Law‖ Oxford University Press, 2011
61
PART G


             ―The CJI cannot be a fiduciary vis-à-vis Judges of the
             Supreme Court. The Judges of the Supreme Court hold
             independent office, and there is no hierarchy, in their judicial
             functions, which places them at a different plane than the CJI.
             The declarations are not furnished to the CJI in a private
             relationship or as a trust but in discharge of the constitutional
             obligation to maintain higher standards and probity of judicial
             life and are in the larger public interest. In these
             circumstances, it cannot be held that the asset information
             shared with the CJI, by the Judges of the Supreme Court, are
             held by him in the capacity of fiduciary, which if directed to be
             revealed, would result in breach of such duty.‖



We are in agreement with the above observation. The words ―held by‖ or ―under

the control of‖ under
Section 2(j)
of the RTI Act will include not only information

under the legal control of the public authority but also all such information which

is otherwise received or used or consciously retained by the public authority while

exercising functions in its official capacity. The 1997 resolution on declaration of

judge‘s assets as adopted on 7 May 1997 states:
―RESOLVED FURTHER THAT every Judge should make a
             declaration of all his/her assets in the form of real estate or
             investments (held by him/her in his/her own name or in the
             name of his/her spouse or any person dependent on him/her)
             within a reasonable time of assuming office and in the case of
             sitting Judges within a reasonable time of adoption of this
             Resolution and thereafter whenever any acquisition of a
             substantial nature is made, it shall be disclosed within a
             reasonable time. The declaration so made should be to the
             Chief Justice of the Court. The Chief Justice should make a
             similar declaration for the purpose of the record. The
             declaration made by the Judges or the Chief Justice, as the
             case may be, shall be confidential.‖
69.   The Chief Justice of India in exercising his official functions in accordance

with the 1997 resolution while holding asset information of other judges does not

act for and on behalf of other judges of the Supreme Court. There exists no

fiduciary relationship between them. The Chief Justice of India is not entrusted
62
PART G


with the power to protect and further the interests of individual judges who

disclose their assets. The information is required by the mandate of the

resolution dated 7 May 1997 passed by all the then sitting judges of the Supreme

Court and it cannot be said that such information is being provided in any

personal capacity. The Chief Justice of India merely holds the information in

accordance with the official functions and not in any fiduciary capacity. The

judges of the Supreme Court, including the Chief Justice of India occupy a

constitutional office. There exists no set hierarchies between the judges and they

enjoy the same judicial powers and immunities. The judges who disclose their

assets cannot be said to be vulnerable to and dependent on the Chief Justice of

India. In these circumstances, it cannot be held that asset information shared

with the Chief Justice of India, by the judges of the Supreme Court, are held by

him in a fiduciary capacity, which if revealed, would result in breach of fiduciary

duty. Therefore, the argument that the information sought is held in a fiduciary

capacity is inapplicable and cannot be used to prevent the information from being

made public.
70.     While we have not accepted the argument of the appellant regarding the

existence of the fiduciary relationship between the Chief Justice of India and the

judges, it is relevant to point out the application of the fiduciary principle to public

institutions where judges hold citizens‘ interests in public trust, guided by

fiduciary standards.73 A Judge‘s public fiduciary obligation towards the citizen

includes a duty of loyalty, duty of care and the cluster comprising the duties of
73
Robert G. Natelson, ―Judicial Review of Special Interest Spending: The General Welfare Clause and the
Fiduciary Law of the Founders‖, 11 Tex. Rev. L. & PoL 239, 245
63
PART H


 candour, disclosure and accounting.74 The duty of loyalty for a judge entails

them being loyal to the citizenry by remaining impartial towards the litigants

before them.75 The duty of care for judges includes the expectation from judges

to fulfil their responsibilities with reasonable diligence and to engage in reason

based decision making.76 The duties of candour, disclosure and accounting are

based on the premise of judicial transparency and judicial honesty.
H       The right to privacy and the right to know
71.     The third referral question to be answered by this Court is: ―Whether the

information sought for is exempt under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the RTI Act77.‖ The

question requires this Court to determine whether and under what circumstances

the information sought by the applicant should be disclosed under the provisions

of the
RTI Act
. This Court is cognisant that in interpreting the statutory scheme of

the
RTI Act
, the constitutional right to know and the constitutional right to privacy

of citizens are also implicated. In answering the question, it is necessary to

analyse the scheme of the
RTI Act
, the role of the exemptions under
Section 8
,

the interface between the statutory rights and duties under
Section 8(1)(j)
and the

constitutional rights under Part III of the Constitution.
74
Leib, Ethan J., David L. Ponet, and Michael Serota. "A Fiduciary Theory of Judging." California Law
Review 101, no. 3 (2013): 699-753.
75
Matthew Conaglen, Public-Private Intersection: Comparing Fiduciary Conflict Doctrine and Bias, 2008 PUB. L.
58 (2008)
76
Leib, Ethan J., David L. Ponet, and Michael Serota. "A Fiduciary Theory of Judging." California Law
Review 101, no. 3 (2013): 699-753. See also Alon Harel & Tsvi Kahana, The Easy Core Case for Judicial
Review, 2 J. LEGAL analysis 227, 249 n.23 (2010).
77
―
RTI Act
‖
64
PART H
72.        In order to facilitate effective governance, the government or ‗public

authority‘ must be empowered to efficiently coordinate diverse activities and at

the same time be constrained to ensure that it does not override the freedoms of

those it serves. In explaining the system of checks and balances in the American

Constitution, James Madison noted:
―If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If
                   angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal
                   controls on government would be necessary. In framing a
                   government which is to be administered by men over
                   men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable
                   the government to control the governed; and in the next
                   place oblige it to control itself. A dependence on the
                   people is, no doubt, the primary control on the government;
                   but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary
                   precautions.‖78
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)


Our Constitution institutes and operationalises the functions of government. It is

necessary to empower the government to operationalise the public functions of

the state and ensure the governance of the public lives of citizens. However, the

framers of our Constitution recognised that this act of empowerment also carried

certain associated risks, that no government of people is infallible and that in

addition to democratic controls, certain additional checks and balances on

governmental power are necessary. Part III of the Constitution represents a

crucial aspect of the constitutional scheme by which governmental power is

restricted, and the government is obligated to respect the rights and freedoms of

citizens.
78
James Madison, Federalist No 51 (1788)
65
PART H



Scheme of
Sections 8
and
11
73.
The RTI Act
was enacted in furtherance of the principles found in Part III of

the Constitution.
The RTI Act
operationalises the disclosure of information held

by ‗public authorities‘ in order to reduce the asymmetry of information between

individual citizens and the state apparatus.
The RTI Act
facilities transparency in

the decisions of public authorities, the accountability of public officials for any

misconduct or illegality and empowers individuals to bring to light matters of

public interest.
The RTI Act
has provided a powerful instrument to citizens: to

individuals engaged in advocacy and journalism. It facilitates a culture of

assertion to the citizen – activist, to the whistle-blower, but above all to each

citizen who has a general interest in the affairs of the state. The preamble of the
RTI Act
notes:
―
An Act
to provide for setting out the practical regime of right
             to information for citizens to secure access to information
             under the control of public authorities, in order to
             promote transparency and accountability in the working
             of every public authority, the constitution of a Central
             Information Commission and State Information Commissions
             and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
             …
             AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry
             and transparency of information which are vital to its
             functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold
             Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the
             governed;‖
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)

As observed earlier in the judgement, the provisions of the
RTI Act
are dedicated

to operationalising access to information held by public authorities. The scheme

of the
RTI Act
and its applicability to the judiciary has already been examined in

detail. In answering the third referral question, this Court can confine itself to the
66
PART H


statutory exemptions carved out from the general obligation of disclosure. When

enacting the
RTI Act
, Parliament was cognisant that the unrestricted disclosure of

information could be fiscally inefficient, result in real world harms and infringe on

the rights of others. In addition to the extracts above, the preamble to the
RTI Act
also states:
―AND WHEREAS revelation of information in actual
               practice is likely to conflict with other public interests
               including efficient operations of the Governments, optimum
               use of limited fiscal resources and the preservation of
               confidentiality of sensitive information;‖
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
74.   To address the harms that may result from an unrestricted disclosure of

information, the legislature included certain qualified and unqualified exemptions

to the general obligation to disclose under
Sections 3
,
4
and
7
of the RTI Act.
Section 8(1)
sets out certain classes of information, the disclosure of which, the

legislature foresaw may result in harm to the nation or the rights and interests of

other citizens.
Section 8
reads as under:
―8. Exemption from disclosure of information –
               (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall
               be no obligation to give any citizen, -
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially
               affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security,
               strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State, relation
               with foreign State or lead to incitement of an offence;
(b) information which has been expressly forbidden to
               be published by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure
               of which may constitute contempt of court;
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a
               breach of privilege of Parliament or the State Legislature;
(d) information including commercial confidence,
               trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which
               would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless
               the competent authority is satisfied that larger public interest
               warrants the disclosure of such information;
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary
               relationship, unless the competent authority is satisfied that
67
PART H


             the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such
             information;
(f) information received in confidence from foreign
             Government;
(g) information, the disclosure of which would
             endanger the life or physical safety of any person or identify
             the source of information or assistance given in confidence
             for law enforcement or security purposes;
(h) information which would impede the process of
             investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders;
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of
             the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other officers:
Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministers,
             the reasons thereof, and the material on the basis of which
             the decisions were taken shall be made public after the
             decision has been taken, and the matter is complete, or over:
Provided further that those matters which come under
             the exemptions specified in this section shall not be
             disclosed;
(j) information which relates to personal information
             the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public
             activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted
             invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central
             Public Information Officer or the State Public Information
             Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is
             satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure
             of such information:
Provided that the information which cannot be denied
             to the Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be denied to
             any person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the
Official Secrets
             Act, 1923
(19 of 1923) nor any of the exemptions permissible
             in accordance with sub-section (1), a public authority may
             allow access to information, if public interest in disclosure
             outweighs the harm to the protected interests….‖
Section 8(1)
begins with a non-obstante phrase ―Notwithstanding anything

contained in this Act‖. The import of this phrase is that clause (1) of
Section 8
carves out an exception to the general obligation to disclose under the
RTI Act
.
Where the conditions set out in any of the sub-clauses to clause (1) of
Section 8
are satisfied, the Information Officer is under no obligation to provide information

to the applicant. By expressly enumerating the circumstances in which the
68
PART H


disclosure of information may be restricted on the grounds of certain identified

harms, the
RTI Act
negates the notion that information may be withheld on the

grounds of confidentiality simpliciter. A harm under clause (1) of
Section 8
must

be identified and invoked to justify the non-disclosure of a document requested

for under the
RTI Act
.
75.   It is also pertinent to note that clauses (a), (b), (c), (f), (g) and (h) to clause

(1) of
Section 8
provide an absolute exemption from the obligation of disclosure

under the
RTI Act
. However, clauses (d), (e), (i) and (j) to clause (1) of
Section 8
provide a qualified exemption from disclosure. For example, clause (a) to sub

section (1) of
Section 8
provides an unconditional exemption where it is

determined that disclosure of the information sought ―would prejudicially affect

the sovereignty and integrity of India‖. On the other hand, while clause (d) to
Section 8(1)
similarly provides that information is exempt from disclosure where

such disclosure ―would harm the competitive position of a third party‖ the

exemption is further qualified by the phrase, ―unless the competent authority is

satisfied that larger public interest warrants the disclosure‖. Thus, the exemption

under clause (d) is not absolute but is qualified and cannot be invoked where

there exists a ―larger public interest‖. Where the Information Officer determines

that the ―larger public interest‖ warrants a disclosure, the exemption in clause (d)

cannot be invoked and the information must be disclosed.
76.   Clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
provides a qualified exemption from disclosure

where the information sought relates to ―personal information the disclosure of

which has no relationship to any public activity or interest‖ or the disclosure of the
69
PART H


information would cause an ―unwarranted invasion of the privacy‖. However, the

exemption may be overridden where the Information Officer is ―satisfied that the

larger public interest justifies the disclosure‖. Clause (j) is not an absolute

exemption from the disclosure of information on the ground of privacy but states

that disclosure is exempted in cases where ―personal information‖ is sought and

there exists no ―larger public interest‖. Where the Information Officer is satisfied

that the existence of the ―larger public interest‖ justifies the disclosure of the

―personal information‖, the information must be disclosed. The exact contours of

the phrases ―personal information‖ and ―larger public interest‖ with respect to

members of the judiciary, and the exact manner in which they relate to each

other form the subject matter of the third referral question and shall be analysed

during the course of this judgement.
77.
Sections 2(n)
and
11
of the RTI Act read as under:
―2(n) ―third party‖ means a person other than the citizen
             making a request for information and includes a public
             authority‖

             ―11. Third party information.—(1) Where a Central Public
             Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as
             the case may be, intends to disclose any information or
             record, or part thereof on a request made under this Act,
             which relates to or has been supplied by a third party and
             has been treated as confidential by that third party, the
             Central Public Information Officer or State Public
             Information Officer, as the case may be, shall, within five
             days from the receipt of the request, give a written notice to
             such third party of the request and of the fact that the Central
             Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer,
             as the case may be, intends to disclose the information or
             record, or part thereof, and invite the third party to make a
             submission in writing or orally, regarding whether the
             information should be disclosed, and such submission of the
             third party shall be kept in view while taking a decision about
             disclosure of information:
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial
             secrets protected by law, disclosure may be allowed if the
70
PART H


             public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance any
             possible harm or injury to the interests of such third
             party.
(2) Where a notice is served by the Central Public Information
             Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may
             be, under sub-section (1) to a third party in respect of any
             information or record or part thereof, the third party shall,
             within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, be
             given the opportunity to make representation against the
             proposed disclosure.
(Emphasis supplied)

The definition of a ―third party‖ includes a public authority. ‗Third party

information‘ is information which ―relates to or has been supplied by any other

person (including a public authority) other than the information applicant and has

been treated as confidential by such third party. Where disclosure of ‗third party

information‘ is sought, and such information has been prima facie treated as

confidential by the third party in question, the procedure under
Section 11
of the

RTI Act is mandatory. The Information Officer shall, within five days of receiving

the request for ‗third party information‘ notify the relevant third party to whom the

information relates or which had supplied it. The notice shall invite the third party

to submit reasons (in writing or orally) as to whether or not the information sought

should be disclosed.
Section 11(2)
provides the third party with a right to make a

representation against the proposed disclosure within ten days of receiving the

notice. The provision expressly mandates the Information Officer to take into

consideration the objections of the third party when making a decision with

respect to disclosure or non-disclosure of the information. It encapsulates the

fundamental idea that a party whose personal information is sought to be

disclosed is afforded the opportunity to contest disclosure. The proviso to sub

section (1) of
Section 11
permits disclosure where the ―public interest‖ in
71
PART H


disclosure ―outweighs‖ any possible harms in disclosure highlighted by the third

party.
78.
Sections 8
and
11
must be read together. Other than in a case where the

information applicant seeks the disclosure of information which relates to the

information applicant herself, information sought that falls under the category of

―personal information‖ within the meaning of clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
is also

―third party information‖ within the ambit of
Section 11
. Therefore, in every case

where the information requested is ―personal information‖ within the operation of

clause (j) of sub
section 1
of
Section 8
, the procedure of notice and objections

under
Section 11
must be complied with. The two provisions create a substantive

system of checks and balances which seek to balance the right of the information

applicant to receive information with the right of the third party to prevent the

disclosure of personal information by permitting the latter to contest the proposed

disclosure.
79.
In
Arvind Kejriwal v Central Public Information Officer79
it was

contended that the procedure for notifying the third party and inviting objections

under
Section 11
only applied to situations where the information sought was

directly supplied by the third party, and not to situations where the information

‗related to‘ the third party but was not supplied by it. Rejecting this contention,

Justice Sanjeev Khanna, (as our learned Brother then was) speaking for a

Division Bench of the Delhi High Court held:
79
AIR 2012 Del 29
72
PART H


             ―13… On the other hand, in case the word ‗or‘ is read as
             ‗and‘, it may lead to difficulties and problems, including the
             invasion of right of privacy/confidentiality of a third party. For
             example, a public authority may have in its records,
             medical reports or prescriptions relating to third person
             but which have not been supplied by the third person. If
             the interpretation given by the appellant is accepted then
             such information can be disclosed to the information
             seeker without following the procedure prescribed in
Section 11(1)
as the information was not furnished or
             supplied by the third person. … when information relates to
             a third party and can be prima facie regarded and treated as
             confidential, the procedure under
Section 11(1)
must be
             followed. Similarly, in case information has been provided by
             the third party and has been prima facie treated by the said
             third party as confidential, again the procedure under
Section
             11(1)
has to be followed.
…
15.
Section 11
also ensures that the principles of natural
             justice are complied with. Information which is confidential
             relating to a third party or furnished by a third party, is not
             furnished to the information seeker without notice or without
             hearing the third party‘s point of view. A third party may
             have reasons, grounds and explanations as to why the
             information should not be furnished, which may not be in
             the knowledge of the PIO/appellate authorities or
             available in the records. The information seeker is not
             required to give any reason why he has made an application
             for information. There may be facts, causes or reasons
             unknown to the PIO or the appellant authority which may
             justify and require denial of information. Fair and just
             decision is the essence of natural justice. Issuance of
             notice and giving an opportunity to the third party serves
             a salutary purpose and ensures that there is a fair and
             just decision. In fact issue of notice to a third party may in
             cases curtail litigation and complications that may arise if
             information is furnished without hearing the third party
             concerned.
Section 11
prescribes a fairly strict time schedule
             to ensure that the proceedings are not delayed.
(Emphasis supplied)


The procedure under
Section 11
must be complied with not only in cases where

information has been supplied to the public authority by a third party, but equally

when the information which is held by the public authority ―relates to‖ a third

party.
Section 11
is not merely a procedural provision, but a substantive
73
PART H


protection to third parties against the disclosure of their personal information held

by public authorities, without their knowledge or consent. The mere fact that the

public authority holds information relating to a third party does not render it freely

disclosable under the
RTI Act
. A third party may have good reason to object to

the disclosure of the information, including on the ground that the disclosure

would constitute a breach of the right to privacy. By including the requirement of

inviting objections and providing a hearing on the proposed disclosure of third

party information to the very party who may be adversely impacted by the

disclosure,
Section 11
embodies the principles of natural justice.
80.   In the present case, the information sought pertains to the declaration of

assets of members of the judiciary and official file notings and correspondence

with respect to the elevation of judges to the Supreme Court. The information

sought with respect to the assets of judges is not generated by the Supreme

Court itself, but is provided by individual judges to the Supreme Court. The file

notings with respect to the elevation of judges do not merely contain information

regarding the operation of the Supreme Court, but also relate to the individual

judges being considered for elevation. Thus, the information sought both ―relates

to‖ and ―has been supplied by‖ a third party and has been treated as confidential

by that third party‖. The procedure under
Section 11
is applicable in regard to the

information sought by the respondent and must be complied with.


Constitutional rights implicated
81.
The RTI Act
, although a statutory enactment, engages the rights contained

in Part III of the Constitution of India.
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution contains
74
PART H


the right to freedom of expression which grants all citizens not merely the right to

free speech, but also the right to freely disseminate speech. The freedom of the

press to disseminate speech has long been recognised under our Constitution.80

An inherent component of the right to disseminate speech freely is the

corresponding right of the audience to receive speech freely. The right to receive

information disseminated has also been recognised as a facet of the freedom of

expression protected by
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution. 81 In addition to the

right to receive information already being disseminated in the public domain,
Article 19(1)(a)
includes a positive right to information. Contrasted with the

negative content of the right to receive information, which prohibits the State from

restricting a citizen‘s access to information already in the public domain, the right

to information, as a facet of
Article 19(1)(a)
, casts a positive duty on the State to

make available certain information not already in the public domain.
82.     In State of Uttar Pradesh v Raj Narain82, Chief Justice A N Ray,

speaking for a Constitution Bench of this Court observed:
―74. In a Government of responsibility like ours, where all the
                agents of the public must be responsible for their conduct,
                there can be but few secrets. The people of this country
                have a right to know every public act, everything that is
                done in a public way, by their public functionaries. They
                are entitled to know the particulars of every public
                transaction in all its bearing. The right to know, which is
                derived from the concept of freedom of speech, though
                not absolute, is a factor which should make one wary,
                when secrecy is claimed for transactions which can, at
                any rate, have no repercussion on public security. [ See
                New York Times Co. v. United States, 29 L Ed 822: 403 US
                713] To cover with veil of secrecy, the common routine
                business, is not in the interest of the public. Such secrecy can
                seldom be legitimately desired.
It is generally desired for the
80
Express Newspaper v Union of India
1959
SCR 12
81
Bennet Coleman v Union of India
(1972) 2 SCC 788
82
(1975) 4 SCC 428
75
PART H


                purpose of parties and politics or personal self-interest or
                bureaucratic routine…‖
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)

These observations were reiterated by the seven judge Bench of this Court in

case of
S P Gupta v Union of India83
. Justice P N Bhagwati (as he then was)

noted:
―64. Now it is obvious from the Constitution that we have
                adopted a democratic form of Government. Where a society
                has chosen to accept democracy as its credal faith, it is
                elementary that the citizens ought to know what their
                Government is doing. The citizens have a right to decide
                by whom and by what rules they shall be governed and
                they are entitled to call on those who govern on their
                behalf to account for their conduct. No democratic
                Government can survive without accountability and the
                basic postulate of accountability is that the people
                should have information about the functioning of the
                Government. It is only if people know how Government is
                functioning that they can fulfil the role which democracy
                assigns to them and make democracy a really effective
                participatory democracy. ―Knowledge‖ said James Madison,
                ―will for ever govern ignorance and a people who mean to be
                their own governors must arm themselves with the power
                knowledge gives.
A popular Government without popular
                information or the means of obtaining it, is but a
                prologue to a force or tragedy or perhaps both‖. The
                citizens' right to know the facts, the true facts, about the
                administration of the country is thus one of the pillars of a
                democratic State…‖
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)


The above-mentioned extract accurately and succinctly summarises the position

of law and has been consistently followed by this Court.84 The right to freedom of

expression under
Article 19(1)(a)
casts both positive and negative obligations on

the State. It restricts the State from interfering with the right of citizens to receive

information and its freely disseminated. It also imposes an obligation on the State
83
(1981) Supp SCC 87
84
People's Union for
Civil Liberties v Union of India
(2003) 4 SCC 399;
Thalappalam Service Cooperative
Bank Limited v State of Kerala
(
2013) 16 SCC 82 and Reserve Bank of India v Jayantilal Mistry
(2016) 3
SCC 525.
76
PART H


to provide citizens with information about the public functioning of government to

ensure accountability and create an informed electorate.
83.       Parliament enacted the
RTI Act
in pursuance of the State‘s positive

obligation to provide citizens with information about the functioning of

government. It is a statute to operationalise the right of citizens to access

information, otherwise only held by the government, under the ‗right to know‘ or

‗right to information‘ as protected by
Article 19(1)(a).
In requesting for information

under the provisions of the
RTI Act
, a citizen engages certain statutory rights and

duties under its provisions, but simultaneously also engages the ‗right to know‘

under the
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution. The ‗right to know‘ is not absolute.
The RTI Act
envisages certain restrictions on the ‗right to know‘ in the form of

exemptions enumerated in clause (1) to
Section 8
. Crucially, restrictions on the

disclosure of information under the
RTI Act
also constitute restrictions on the

information applicant‘s ‗right to know‘ which is protected under
Article 19(1)(a)
of

the Constitution. The constitutional permissibility of the statutory restrictions on

disclosure contained within the
RTI Act
is not in challenge before this Court. But

it is trite to state that any restrictions on the disclosure of information would

necessarily need to comport with the existing law on the protection of the ‗right to

know‘ as a facet of the freedom of expression. In the decision in Thalappalam

Service Cooperative Bank Limited v State of Kerala85 Justice Radhakrishnan,

speaking for a two judge Bench of this Court, noted:
―56.
The Right to Information Act, 2005
is an Act which
                  provides for setting up the practical regime of right to
                  information for citizens to secure access to information under
                  the control of public authorities in order to promote
85
(2013) 16 SCC 82
77
PART H


                  transparency and accountability in the working of every public
                  authority. The Preamble of the Act also states that the
                  democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency
                  of information which are vital to its functioning and also to
                  contain corruption and to hold Governments and their
                  instrumentalities accountable to the governed. Citizens have,
                  however, the right to secure access to information of only
                  those matters which are ―under the control of public
                  authorities‖, the purpose is to hold ―the Government and its
                  instrumentalities‖    accountable      to    the    governed.
Consequently, though right to get information is a
                  fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the
                  Constitution, limits are being prescribed under the Act
                  itself, which are reasonable restrictions within the
                  meaning of
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution of India.‖

                                                            (Emphasis supplied)


The court expressly acknowledged that the
RTI Act
was enacted to fulfil the

positive content of the right to know that existed under
Article 19(1)(a).
Further,

restrictions on the disclosure of information under the
RTI Act
constitute

restrictions on the ‗right to know‘ as a facet of
Article 19(1)(a).
84.        Clause (j) of sub section (1) of
Section 8
uses the phrases ―personal

information‖ and ―unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual‖. In

interpreting the harm to be caused in disclosing personal information, this Court

must be cognisant that the privacy of the individual is the subject of constitutional

protection.
In
K S Puttaswamy v Union of India86
a nine judge bench of this

Court unanimously held that there exists a constitutional right to privacy located

within Part III of the Constitution. Justice D Y Chandrachud, speaking for a

plurality of four judges, held:
―250. … The nine primary types of privacy are, according to
                  the above depiction:
(i) bodily privacy which reflects the privacy of the physical
                  body. Implicit in this is the negative freedom of being able to
86
(2017) 10 SCC 1
78
PART H


prevent others from violating one's body or from restraining
the freedom of bodily movement;
(ii) spatial privacy which is reflected in the privacy of a private
space through which access of others can be restricted to the
space; intimate relations and family life are an apt illustration
of spatial privacy;
…
(ix) informational privacy which reflects an interest in
preventing information about the self from being
disseminated and controlling the extent of access to
information.
…
320. Privacy is a constitutionally protected right which
emerges primarily from the guarantee of life and personal
liberty in
Article 21
of the Constitution. Elements of privacy
also arise in varying contexts from the other facets of freedom
and dignity recognised and guaranteed by the fundamental
rights contained in Part III.
…
323. Privacy includes at its core the preservation of
personal intimacies, the sanctity of family life, marriage,
procreation, the home and sexual orientation. Privacy
also connotes a right to be left alone. Privacy safeguards
individual autonomy and recognises the ability of the
individual to control vital aspects of his or her life.
Personal choices governing a way of life are intrinsic to
privacy. Privacy protects heterogeneity and recognises
the plurality and diversity of our culture. While the
legitimate expectation of privacy may vary from the intimate
zone to the private zone and from the private to the public
arenas, it is important to underscore that privacy is not lost or
surrendered merely because the individual is in a public
place. Privacy attaches to the person since it is an essential
facet of the dignity of the human being.
…
325. Like other rights which form part of the fundamental
freedoms protected by Part III, including the right to life
and personal liberty under
Article 21
, privacy is not an
absolute right. A law which encroaches upon privacy will
have to withstand the touchstone of permissible
restrictions on fundamental rights. In the context of
Article
21
an invasion of privacy must be justified on the basis of a
law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, just and
reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference to the
encroachment on life and personal liberty under
Article 21.
An invasion of life or personal liberty must meet the
threefold requirement of (i) legality, which postulates the
existence of law; (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate
State aim; and (iii) proportionality which ensures a
79
PART H


            rational nexus between the objects and the means
            adopted to achieve them.
326. Privacy has both positive and negative content. The
            negative content restrains the State from committing an
            intrusion upon the life and personal liberty of a citizen. Its
            positive content imposes an obligation on the State to take all
            necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.
327. Decisions rendered by this Court subsequent to
            Kharak Singh upholding the right to privacy would be
            read subject to the above principles.‖
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

Justice R F Nariman in his separate concurring opinion made the following

observations:
―521. In the Indian context, a fundamental right to privacy
            would cover at least the following three aspects:
• Privacy that involves the person i.e. when there is some
            invasion by the State of a person's rights relatable to his
            physical body, such as the right to move freely;
            • Informational privacy which does not deal with a
            person's body but deals with a person's mind, and
            therefore recognises that an individual may have control
            over the dissemination of material that is personal to
            him. Unauthorised use of such information may,
            therefore lead to infringement of this right; and
            • The privacy of choice, which protects an individual's
            autonomy over fundamental personal choices….
            …
536. This reference is answered by stating that the
            inalienable fundamental right to privacy resides in
Article
            21
and other fundamental freedoms contained in Part III
            of the Constitution of India. M.P. Sharma [M.P. Sharma v.
Satish Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 300 : 1954 Cri LJ 865 : 1954
            SCR 1077] and the majority in
Kharak Singh [Kharak Singh v.
            State of U.P.
, AIR 1963 SC 1295 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 329 :
(1964) 1 SCR 332] , to the extent that they indicate to the
            contrary, stand overruled. The later judgments of this Court
            recognising privacy as a fundamental right do not need to be
            revisited.
(Emphasis supplied)
85.   The right to privacy is a constitutional right emanating from the right to life

and personal liberty in
Article 21
of the Constitution and from the facets of
80
PART H


freedom and dignity embodied in Part III of the Constitution. Any restriction on

the right to privacy by the State must be provided for by law, pursue a legitimate

aim of the State and satisfy the test of proportionality. The requirement of

proportionality is satisfied when the nature and extent of the abridgement of the

right is proportionate to the legitimate aim being pursued by the State. The

constitutional protection of privacy encompasses not merely personal intimacies

but also extends to decisional and informational autonomy. An individual has a

constitutionally protected right to control the dissemination of personal

information. The unauthorised use of information abridges a citizen‘s right to

privacy.
86.   The information disclosed under the
RTI Act
may include personal

information relating to individuals.
The RTI Act
does not contain any restrictions

on the end-use of the information disclosed under its provisions. The information

disclosed by an Information Officer of the State pursuant to a right to information

application may subsequently be widely disseminated. Clause (j) of sub section

(1) of
Section 8
provides that, in certain situations, even personal information of

an individual may be disclosed under the
RTI Act
.
Where the RTI Act
contemplates the disclosure of ―personal information‖, the right to privacy of the

individual is engaged.
The Act
recognise that the absolute or unwarranted

disclosure of an individual‘s personal information under the
RTI Act
would

constitute an ―unwarranted invasion of the right to privacy‖ under the statutory

provisions of the
RTI Act
and also abridge the individual‘s constitutional right to

privacy. However, the RTI Act has various checks and balances to guard against

the unadulterated disclosure of personal information under the
RTI Act
.
81
PART H
87.    The constitutional validity of the
RTI Act
as a measure abridging the right

to privacy is not in question before this Court. But it is trite to say that the
RTI Act
satisfies the test of legality (by virtue of being a legislation) and also pursues a

legitimate state aim of ensuring, transparency and accountability of government

and an informed electorate. By requiring the Information Officer to balance the

public interest in disclosure against the privacy harm caused, clause (j) creates a

legislatively mandated measure of proportionality to ensure that the harm to the

individual‘s right to privacy is not disproportionate to the aim of securing

transparency and accountability.
A balancing of interests
88.
The RTI Act
is a legislative enactment which contains a finely tuned

balancing of interests between the privacy right of individuals whose information

may be disclosed and the broader public interest in ensuring transparency,

accountability and an informed electorate. Both these interests have significant

implications as they engage constitutional rights under Part III. The overarching

scheme of the
RTI Act
, and in particular
Sections 3
,
4
and
7
constitutes a

mandate to fulfil the positive content of the ‗right to information‘ as a facet of
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution. The privacy interest protected by clause (j) to

sub section (1) of
Section 8
engages the principle of informational privacy as a

facet of the constitutional privacy as recognised by this Court in K S

Puttaswamy. Neither the ‗right to information‘ as a facet of
Article 19(1)(a)
nor

the right to informational privacy as a facet to the right to privacy are absolute.

The rights under
Article 19(1)(a)
may be restricted on the grounds enumerated in
82
PART H


clause (2) of
Article 19.
The right to privacy and its numerous facets may be

permissibly restricted where the abridgement is provided by law, pursues a

legitimate State objective and complies with the principle of proportionality.
89.   Clause (j) of sub section (1) of
Section 8
requires the Information Officer to

first determine whether the information sought falls within the meaning of

―personal information‖. Where the information sought falls within the scope of

―personal information‖ and has ―no relationship to any public activity or interest‖

the information is exempt from disclosure under the
RTI Act
. However, where

there exists a ‗public interest‘ in the disclosure of the information sought, the test

to be applied by the Information Officer is different. The Information Officer must

evaluate whether the ―larger public interest‖ justifies the disclosure of the

information notwithstanding the fact that the information is ―personal information‖.

In doing so, the Information Officer must balance the privacy interest of the

individual whose personal information will be disclosed with the right to

information of the public to know the information sought. The substantive content

of the terms ―personal information‖ and ―public interest‖ must be informed by the

constitutional standards applicable to the ‗right to know‘ and the ‗right to privacy‘

as disclosure and non-disclosure under the
RTI Act
directly implicate these

constitutional rights. In striking a balance within the framework of the
RTI Act
, the

Information Officer must be cognisant of the substantive contents of these rights

and the extent to which they can be restricted within our constitutional scheme. It

is also crucial for the standard of proportionality to be applied to ensure that

neither right is restricted to a greater extent than necessary to fulfil the legitimate
83
PART H


interest of the countervailing interest in question. It is now necessary to examine

the content of ―personal information‖ and ―public interest‖.

Defining Personal Information
90.   To understand the scope of information which is protected from disclosure

under the
RTI Act
, it is of relevance to identify the nature of information which

may be regarded as ―personal information‖.
The RTI Act
does not put forth a

definition of the term ―personal information‖. However, ―personal information‖ has

been defined under other statutory frameworks. These definitions obviously do

not bind the interpretation of the
RTI Act
but are useful sources of guidance in

understanding the amplitude of the expression. We must of course read them

with a caveat because the context of usage is not the same.
Section 2(i)
of the Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices

And Procedures And Sensitive Personal Data Or Information) Rules, 2011

defines the term ―personal information‖ in the following terms:
―Personal information means any information that relates to a
             natural person, which, either directly or indirectly, in
             combination with other information available or likely to be
             available with a body corporate, is capable of identifying such
             person.‖


Thus, any information which is capable of identifying a natural person is

classified as personal information.
91.
Article 4(1)
of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)

defines personal data in similar terms:
―Personal data‘ means any information relating to an
             identified or identifiable natural person (‗data subject‘); an
84
PART H


                   identifiable natural person is one who can be identified,
                   directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier
                   such as a name, an identification number, location data, an
                   online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the
                   physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or
                   social identity of that natural person.‖


The data protection regime in the European Union regards information such as

the name and surname, home address, location data, data held by a hospital or

doctor and identification card number of an individual as personal data.87 Courts

from the jurisdiction have interpreted the term ―personal data‖ broadly to even

include information relating to the professional life of an individual.
In Worten v Autoridade para as Condições de Trabalho88, the European Court

of Justice held the work timings of an employee constitute personal data:
―19. In that respect, it suffices to note that, as maintained by
                   all of the interested parties who submitted written
                   observations, the data contained in a record of working time
                   such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which concern,
                   in relation to each worker, the daily work periods and rest
                   periods, constitute personal data within the meaning of
Article 2(a)
of Directive 95/46, because they represent
                   ‗information relating to an identified or identifiable natural
                   person‖
                                                               (Emphasis supplied)



In Rechnungshof v Österreichischer Rundfunk,89 the European Court of

Justice held that details of professional income received by employees from an

organisation subject to regulation by the Austrian Court of Audit amounts to

―personal data‖. It was held:
―It should be noted, to begin with, that the data at issue in the
                   main proceedings, which relate both to the monies paid by
87
What is personal data?, Official Website of the European Union https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-
protection/reform/what-personal-data_en
88
C-342/12 dated 30 May 2013
89
Joined cases (C-465/00), (C-138/01) and (C-139/01) dated 20 May 2003
85
PART H


             certain bodies and the recipients, constitute personal data
             within the meaning of
Article 2(a)
of Directive 95/46, being
             information relating to an identified or identifiable natural
             person. Their recording and use by the body concerned,
             and their transmission to the Rechnungshof and
             inclusion by the latter in a report intended to be
             communicated to various political institutions and widely
             diffused, constitute processing of personal data within
             the meaning of
Article 2(b)
of the directive.‖
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
92.   The Protection of Personal Information Act, 2013 of South Africa

contains an illustrative and comprehensive definition of personal information:
‗‗personal information‘‘ means information relating to an
             identifiable, living, natural person, and where it is applicable,
             an identifiable, existing juristic person, including, but not
             limited to—
(a) information relating to the race, gender, sex, pregnancy,
             marital status, national, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual
             orientation, age, physical or mental health, well-being,
             disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and
             birth of the person;
(b) information relating to the education or the medical,
             financial, criminal or employment history of the person;
(c) any identifying number, symbol, e-mail address, physical
             address, telephone number, location information, online
             identifier or other particular assignment to the person;
(d) the biometric information of the person;
(e) the personal opinions, views or preferences of the person;
(f) correspondence sent by the person that is implicitly or
             explicitly of a private or confidential nature or further
             correspondence that would reveal the contents of the original
             correspondence;
(g) the views or opinions of another individual about the
             person; and
(h) the name of the person if it appears with other personal
             information relating to the person or if the disclosure of the
             name itself would reveal information about the person.‖



Protection from disclosure of personal information has been recognised as a

facet of the right to privacy in South Africa.
In
National Media Limited v
86
PART H


Jooste90
, it was alleged by the respondent that intimate details of her personal

life had been published by the appellant publishers without her consent. The

information published included details of her child as well as her relationship with

the father of the child. Justice Harms elucidated the right to privacy in the

following terms:
―A right to privacy encompasses the competence to
                   determine the destiny of private facts. The individual
                   concerned is entitled to dictate the ambit of disclosure e g to a
                   circle of friends, a professional adviser or the public. He may
                   prescribe the purpose and method the disclosure. Similarly, I
                   am of the view that a person is entitled to decide when and
                   under what conditions private facts may be made public…‖

                                                               (Emphasis supplied)


In NM v Smith91, the names of three women who were HIV positive were

disclosed in a biography. It was alleged by the women that their names had been

disclosed without any prior consent and their rights to privacy, dignity and

psychological integrity had been violated by the disclosure. The opinion of four

judges in Puttaswamy noted the two conceptions of privacy that emerged from

the judgement of the Constitutional Court of South Africa which recognised the

value of privacy in medical information:
―According to the decision in Smith case , there are two
                   interrelated reasons for the constitutional protection of
                   privacy—one flows from the ―constitutional conception of what
                   it means to be a human being‖ and the second from the
                   ―constitutional conception of the State‖:
                   ―An implicit part of [the first] aspect of privacy is the right to
                   choose what personal information of ours is released into the
                   public space. The more intimate that information, the more
                   important it is in fostering privacy, dignity and autonomy
                   that an individual makes the primary decision whether to
                   release the information. That decision should not be
90
1996 (3) SA 262 (SCA)
91
[2007] ZACC 6
87
PART H


                     made by others. This aspect of the right to privacy must
                     be respected by all of us, not only the state.
… Secondly, we value privacy as a necessary part of a
                     democratic society and as a constraint on the power of the
                     State… In authoritarian societies, the state generally does not
                     afford such protection. People and homes are often routinely
                     searched and the possibility of a private space from which the
                     state can be excluded is often denied. The consequence is a
                     denial of liberty and human dignity. In democratic societies,
                     this is impermissible.‖
                     ….
On the interrelationship between the right to privacy, liberty
                     and dignity, the Court observed that:
―The right to privacy recognises the importance of protecting
                     the sphere of our personal daily lives from the public. In so
                     doing, it highlights the interrelationship between privacy,
                     liberty and dignity as the key constitutional rights which
                     construct our understanding of what it means to be a
                     human being. All these rights are therefore
                     interdependent and mutually reinforcing. We value privacy
                     for this reason at least—that the constitutional conception of
                     being a human being asserts and seeks to foster the
                     possibility of human beings choosing how to live their lives
                     within the overall framework of a broader community.‖

                                                              (Emphasis supplied)
93.       In Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats92, the

Australian High Court heard an appeal with regard to an application for an

interlocutory injunction to restrain the broadcasting of a film depicting the

activities of the Respondent. The Respondent was a processor and supplier of

game meat and sold possum meat for export. Unknown persons had entered the

respondent's premises and installed hidden cameras. The possum-killing

operations were filmed without the knowledge or consent of the respondent. It

was claimed that the film was made surreptitiously and unlawfully and supplied to
92
[2001] HCA 63
88
PART H


the appellant with the intention that the appellant would broadcast the film. In

determining the Respondent Corporation‘s claim to privacy, Chief Justice

Gleeson made the following observations:
―42. There is no bright line which can be drawn between what
                    is private and what is not. Use of the term "public" is often a
                    convenient method of contrast, but there is a large area in
                    between what is necessarily public and what is necessarily
                    private. An activity is not private simply because it is not done
                    in public. It does not suffice to make an act private that,
                    because it occurs on private property, it has such measure of
                    protection from the public gaze as the characteristics of the
                    property, the nature of the activity, the locality, and the
                    disposition of the property owner combine to afford. Certain
                    kinds of information about a person, such as information
                    relating to health, personal relationships, or finances,
                    may be easy to identify as private; as may certain kinds
                    of activity, which a reasonable person, applying
                    contemporary standards of morals and behaviour, would
                    understand to be meant to be unobserved. The
                    requirement that disclosure or observation of information
                    or conduct would be highly offensive to a reasonable
                    person of ordinary sensibilities is in many circumstances
                    a useful practical test of what is private.‖

                                                               (Emphasis supplied)
94.        In Campbell v MGN Limited93, the claimant was a supermodel who had

instituted proceedings against a publication called the ‗Mirror‘ for publishing

details of her efforts to overcome her drug addiction along with pictures of her

attending meetings of the ‗Narcotics Anonymous‘. The appeal was before the

House of Lords. In her opinion, Baroness Hale noted:
―145. It has always been accepted that information about a
                    person's health and treatment for ill-health is both private and
                    confidential. This stems not only from the confidentiality of the
93
[2003] 1 All ER 224
89
PART H


                  doctor-patient relationship but from the nature of the
                  information itself…‖
                  ….
147. I start, therefore, from the fact - indeed, it is common
                  ground - that all of the information about Miss Campbell's
                  addiction and attendance at NA which was revealed in
                  the Daily Mirror article was both private and confidential,
                  because it related to an important aspect of Miss
                  Campbell's physical and mental health and the treatment
                  she was receiving for it. It had also been received from
                  an insider in breach of confidence. That simple fact has
                  been obscured by the concession properly made on her
                  behalf that the newspaper's countervailing freedom of
                  expression did serve to justify the publication of some of
                  this information. But the starting point must be that it was all
                  private and its publication required specific justification.
(Emphasis supplied)
95.       Courts in India have interpreted the scope of information which constitutes

―personal information‖ under the
RTI Act
.
In
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v

Central Information Commissioner94
, the petitioner sought copies of memos,

show-cause notices and punishments awarded to the third respondent by his

employer along with details of movable and immovable properties, investments,

lending and borrowing from banks and other financial institutions. The petitioner

also sought the details of gifts stated to have been accepted by the third

respondent. A large portion of the information sought was located in the income

tax returns of the third respondent. A two judge bench of the Court classified the

information sought as ―personal information‖ and held:
―12. … The performance of an employee/officer in an
                  organisation is primarily a matter between the employee and
                  the employer and normally those aspects are governed by the
                  service rules which fall under the expression ―personal
                  information‖, the disclosure of which has no relationship to
                  any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
                  disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of
94
(2013) 1 SCC 212
90
PART H


                  privacy of that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the
                  Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
                  Information Officer or the appellate authority is satisfied that
                  the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such
                  information, appropriate orders could be passed but the
                  petitioner cannot claim those details as a matter of right.
13. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax
                  returns are ―personal information‖ which stand exempted from
                  disclosure under clause (j) of
Section 8(1)
of the RTI Act,
                  unless involves a larger public interest and the Central Public
                  Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or
                  the appellate authority is satisfied that the larger public
                  interest justifies the disclosure of such information.‖


Thus, even in cases where information may be classified as ―personal

information‖, the CPIO is required to undertake an enquiry on a case to case

basis to determine if the disclosure of information is justified.
96.
In
R K Jain v Union of India95
, the appellant‘s application to the Chief

Information Commissioner seeking copies of note-sheets and files relating to a

member of CESTAT, was rejected. The two-judge bench of this Court placed

reliance on the holding in Girish Deshpande and rejected the appellant‘s claim

for inspection of documents relating to the Annual Confidential Reports of the

member of CESTAT, including documents relating to adverse entries in the

Annual Confidential Reports and the ―follow-up action‖ taken.
In
Canara Bank v

C S Shyam96
, the respondent was employed by the appellant bank as clerical

staff and had asked for information relating to the transfer and posting of other

clerical staff employed by the bank. This information sought included personal

details such as the date of joining, designation of employee, details of promotion
95
(2013) 14 SCC 794
96
(2018) 11 SCC 426
91
PART H


earned, date of joining to the branch. Speaking for a two-judge Bench of this

Court, Justice A M Sapre considered the holding in Girish Deshpande and held


                  ―14. In our considered opinion, the aforementioned principle
                  of law applies to the facts of this case on all force.
It is for the
                  reasons that, firstly, the information sought by Respondent 1
                  of individual employees working in the Bank was personal in
                  nature; secondly, it was exempted from being disclosed under
Section 8(1)(j)
of the Act and lastly, neither Respondent 1
                  disclosed any public interest much less larger public interest
                  involved in seeking such information of the individual
                  employee nor was any finding recorded by the
Central
                  Information Commission [C.S. Shyam v. Canara Bank
, 2007
                  SCC OnLine CIC 626] and the High Court [Canara
                  Bank v. CIC, 2007 SCC OnLine Ker 659] as to the
                  involvement of any larger public interest in supplying such
                  information to Respondent 1.‖
97.
In
Subhash Chandra Agarwal v Registrar
, Supreme Court of India97,

the appellant had filed an application under the
RTI Act
seeking information

relating to the details of the medical facilities availed by the Judges of the

Supreme Court and their family members in the preceding three years, including

information relating to expenses on private treatment in India or abroad. The

Court held that disclosure of information regarding medical facilities availed by

judges amounts to an invasion of privacy:
―11. The information sought by the appellant includes the
                  details of the medical facilities availed by the individual
                  Judges. The same being personal information, we are of the
                  view that providing such information would undoubtedly
                  amount to invasion of the privacy. We have also taken note of
                  the fact that it was conceded before the learned Single Judge
                  by the learned counsel for the appellant herein that no larger
                  public interest is involved in seeking the details of the medical
                  facilities availed by the individual Judges. It may also be
                  mentioned that the total expenditure incurred for the medical
                  treatment of the Judges for the period in question was already
                  furnished by the CPIO by his letter dated 30-8-2011 and it is
97
(2018) 11 SCC 634
92
PART H


             not the case of the appellant that the said expenditure is
             excessive or exorbitant. That being so, we are unable to
             understand how the public interest requires disclosure of the
             details of the medical facilities availed by the individual
             Judges. In the absence of any such larger public interest, no
             direction whatsoever can be issued under
Section 19(8)(a)(iv)
of the Act by the appellate authorities. Therefore on that
             ground also the order passed by the CIC dated 1-2-2012 is
             unsustainable and the same has rightly been set aside by the
             learned Single Judge.‖



Thus, it emerges from the discussion that certain category of information such as

medical information, details of personal relations, employee records and

professional income can be classified as personal information. The question of

whether such information must be disclosed has to be determined by the CPIO

on a case to case basis, depending on the public interest demonstrated in favour

of disclosure.
Public Interest
98.   The right to information and the need for transparency in the case of

elected officials is grounded in the democratic need to facilitate better decision

making by the public. Transparency and the right to information directly

contribute to the ability of citizens to monitor and make more informed decisions

with respect to the conduct of elected officials. Where the misconduct of an

elected representative is exposed to the public, citizens can choose not to vote

for the person at the next poll. In this manner, the democratic process coupled

with the right to information facilitates better administration and provides powerful

incentives for good public decision making. In the case of judges, citizens do not

possess a direct agency relationship. Therefore, the ‗public interest‘ in disclosing
93
PART H


information in regard to a judge cannot be sourced on the need for ensuring

democratic accountability through better public decision making but must be

located elsewhere.
99.       In common law countries, public interest has always been understood to

operate as an interest independent to that of the State. Public interest operates

equally against the State as it does against non-State actors. This is of

significance in the context of the
RTI Act
as the right to information seeks to bring

about disclosure of information previously held exclusively by the State. Public

interest therefore operates as a standalone viewpoint independent of whether the

interest of the State favours disclosure or non-disclosure. At its core, the

objective test for ‗public interest‘ is far broader than democratic decision making

and takes into consideration both shared conceptions of the common good in

society at any given point and yet recognises that such conceptions are always

the product of contestation and disagreement, necessitating a robust set of

viewpoints to facilitate the self-fulfilment of the individual and the search for truth.
100. In Secy., Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Govt. of India v

Cricket Assn. of Bengal98 Justice P B Sawant speaking for a three judge bench

of this Court observed:
―43. We may now summarise the law on the freedom of
                  speech and expression under
Article 19(1)(a)
as restricted by
Article 19(2).
The freedom of speech and expression includes
                  right to acquire information and to disseminate it. Freedom of
                  speech and expression is necessary, for self-expression
                  which is an important means of free conscience and self-
                  fulfilment. It enables people to contribute to debates on social
                  and moral issues. It is the best way to find a truest model of
                  anything, since it is only through it that the widest possible
98
(1995) 2 SCC 161
94
PART H


             range of ideas can circulate. It is the only vehicle of political
             discourse so essential to democracy. Equally important is the
             role it plays in facilitating artistic and scholarly endeavours of
             all sorts. The right to communicate, therefore, includes right
             to communicate through any media that is available whether
             print or electronic or audio-visual such as advertisement,
             movie, article, speech etc. That is why freedom of speech
             and expression includes freedom of the press. The freedom
             of the press in terms includes right to circulate and also to
             determine the volume of such circulation. This freedom
             includes the freedom to communicate or circulate one's
             opinion without interference to as large a population in the
             country, as well as abroad, as is possible to reach.‖



The right to information is not solely premised on improving the quality of

democratic decision making but also finds its roots in other bases of freedom of

expression, including the self-fulfilment of the individual, the introduction of

competing views into the ‗marketplace of ideas‘ and the autonomy and dignity of

the individual. Limiting the term ‗public interest‘ to information that allows

individuals to make better public choices with respect to public officials fails to

take into consideration the powerful benefits that the dissemination of information

held by public authorities may have on the development of discourse, private

decision making and the nourishment of the individual.
101. We have already observed that the accountability of the judiciary to the

citizenry is inherent in the office of the judge. The administration of justice in our

country is a vast, crucial and expensive endeavour that impacts millions of

citizens on a daily basis. The contention that merely because a judge cannot be

elected out of office, the conduct of judges and their general administration is not

a matter of great public interest cannot be countenanced. The disclosure of

information about the conduct of judges and their administration is necessary to

ensure that the broader societal goals in the administration of justice are
95
PART H


achieved. The disclosure of information can highlight areas where robust

mechanisms of oversight and accountability are required. Lastly, the disclosure

of information with respect to the judiciary also facilitates the self-fulfilment of the

freedom of expression of individuals engaged in reporting, critiquing and

discussing the activities of the court. The freedom of the press in exercising its

role as a ‗public watchdog‘ is also facilitated by the disclosure of information.
102. The factors that weigh in favour of disclosure in the ‗public interest‘ are

specific to each unique case. However, over the years several authorities have

given shape to the concept of public interest and provided indicative factors that

weigh in favour of the disclosure of information. In an article titled ―Freedom of

information and the public interest: the Commonwealth experience‖99 the

authors lay down several factors that, when found to exist in any given case,

would weigh in favour of disclosure. The authors state:
―It is generally accepted that the public interest is not
                synonymous with what is of interest to the public, in the sense
                of satisfying public curiosity about some matter. For example,
                the UK Information Tribunal has drawn a distinction between
                ‗matters which were in the interest of the public to know and
                matters which were merely interesting to the public (ie which
                the public would like to know about, and which sell
                newspapers, but … are not relevant)‘
                Factors identified as favouring disclosure include the public
                interest in: contributing to a debate on a matter of public
                importance; accountability of officials; openness in the
                expenditure of public funds, the performance by a public
                authority of its regulatory functions, the handling of
                complaints by public authorities; exposure of wrongdoing,
                inefficiency or unfairness; individuals being able to refute
                allegations made against them; enhancements of scrutiny of
                decision-making; and protecting against danger to public
                health or safety.‖
99
Moira Paterson and Maeve McDonagh, Freedom of information and the public interest: the Commonwealth
experience, Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal, 17:2, 189-210 pp. 201.
96
PART H


The factors identified fulfil a significantly broader gamut of goals than merely

holding democratically elected officials accountable. The contribution made by

the disclosure of information to debate on matters of public importance is in itself

a factor in favour of disclosure. Where the disclosure of documents casts a light

on the adequate performance of public authorities and any mala fide actions or

wrongdoings by public figures, facilitating the broader goal of accountability, there

exists a public interest in favour of disclosure.
103. In Campbell v MGN Limited100 the House of Lords was called upon to

balance the freedom of expression with the right to privacy. The claimant was a

model who had been photographed leaving a drug rehabilitation meeting. The

photographs were published, and the claimant claimed compensation for a

breach of confidentiality. While the claimant admitted that there existed a public

interest in the photographs of her attending the drug rehabilitation therapy, in

evaluating the right of the defendant to publish the information Baroness Hale

made the following observations:
―148. What was the nature of the freedom of expression
                  which was being asserted on the other side? There are
                  undoubtedly different types of speech, just as there are
                  different types of private information, some of which are more
                  deserving of protection in a democratic society than others.
                  Top of the list is political speech. The free exchange of
                  information and ideas on matters relevant to the
                  organisation of the economic, social and political life of
                  the country is crucial to any democracy. Without this, it
                  can scarcely be called a democracy at all. This includes
                  revealing information about public figures, especially those in
                  elective office, which would otherwise be private but is
                  relevant to their participation in public life. Intellectual and
                  educational speech and expression are also important in
                  a democracy, not least because they enable the
                  development of individuals' potential to play a full part in
100
[2004] UKHL 22
97
PART H


                   society and in our democratic life. Artistic speech and
                   expression is important for similar reasons, in fostering
                   both individual originality and creativity and the free-
                   thinking and dynamic society we so much value. No
                   doubt there are other kinds of speech and expression for
                   which similar claims can be made.‖
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)

As a facet of the freedom of expression, the ‗public interest‘ element of the right

to information has several jurisprudential bases. The public interest in disclosure

extends to information which informs political debate and the organisation of

―economic, social and political life‖. There also exists public interest in information

which is ―intellectual or educational‖ and furthers the development of the

individual. Lastly, public interest would also cover information which is of artistic

relevance or fosters and nourishes the individual.
104. The opinion of Baroness Hale indicates a priority of interests in the

determination of whether speech is in the ‗public interest‘ and is deserving of

protection. However, this Court should caution against such an approach. The

freedom of expression protects a broad range of ideas, including those that

‗offend, shock and disturb‘. In deciding whether information should be disclosed

in the public interest, it is not for the Court to sit in judgement of society and

make a determination on whether society would be ‗better off‘ or ‗worse off‘ if the

information is disclosed. In the prescient words of Justice Tugendhat: ―It is not for

the judge to express personal views on such matters, still less to impose

whatever personal views he might have.‖ 101 It is well established that ‗public

interest‘ does not amount to what the public may find interesting. However,

where the information sought to be disclosed falls within the various fields
101
Terry (previously ‗LNS‘) v Persons Unknown [2010] EWHC 119
98
PART H


discussed above, including the promotion of public debate, intellectual or

educational information or artistic information, the information possesses a

‗public interest‘ connotation in favour of disclosure.
105. Section 11B of the Australian Freedom of Information Act 1982 provides a

list of indicative factors that may be used by courts to determine whether a

document should be disclosed in the ―public interest‖. Section 11B is as under:
―11B Public interest exemptions – factors
             (1) This section applies for the purpose of working out
             whether access to a conditionally exempt document would,
             on balance, be contrary to the public interest under
             subsection 11A(5).
(2) This section does not limit subsection 11A(5).
             Factors favouring access
             (3) Factors favouring access to the document in the public
             interest include whether access to the document would do
             any of the following:
(a) promote the objects of this Act (including all the matters
             set out in
sections 3
and 3A);
(b) inform public debate on a matter of public importance;
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure;
(d) allow a person to access his or her own personal
             information.‖

The Australian statute notes that ―public interest‖ must be interpreted as the

factors and circumstances that promote the objectives of the legislation. In

addition to these objectives, crucial factors weighing in favour of public interest

are the promotion of public debate and matters relating to public expenditure.
106. The understanding that, in interpreting the phrase ‗public interest‘ courts

should pay heed to the objects of the legislation has been adopted in our country

as well. In Bihar Public Service Commission v Saiyed Hussain Abbas
99
PART H


Rizwi102, Justice Swatanter Kumar speaking for a two judge bench of this Court

made the following observations:
―22. The expression ―public interest‖ has to be
                   understood in its true connotation so as to give complete
                   meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act. The
                   expression ―public interest‖ must be viewed in its strict sense
                   with all its exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory
                   exemption in terms of the Act. In its common parlance, the
                   expression ―public interest‖, like ―public purpose‖, is not
                   capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid
                   meaning, is elastic and takes its colour from the statute
                   in which it occurs, the concept varying with time and
                   state of society and its needs (
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar
                   Singh
[AIR 1952 SC 252]). It also means the general welfare
                   of the public that warrants recognition and protection;
                   something in which the public as a whole has a stake [Black's
                   Law Dictionary (8th Edn.)].‖
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)

The Court noted that the phrase ‗public interest‘ must be understood within the

context of the enactment the phrase is used in. In the present case, the use of

the phrase ‗public interest‘ must be understood in light of the object and purpose

of the
RTI Act
. The Court in Bihar Public Service Commission observed that

the existence of certain exemptions from disclosure under clause (1) of
Section 8
would lead to a narrow reading of the phrase ―public interest‖. This is not the

correct approach. As noted previously in this judgement, the overarching principle

of the
RTI Act
is to operationalise the disclosure of information held by public

authorities in furtherance of the right to information under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the

Constitution. Merely because the provisions of the
RTI Act
contain certain

restrictions on the disclosure of information cannot lead to a conclusion that the

phrase ―public interest‖ under the
RTI Act
must be construed narrowly. Rather,

under the scheme of clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
, ―public interest‖ is the
102
(2012) 13 SCC 61
100
PART H


measure of factors favouring the disclosure of information, which is subsequently

weighed against the factors of privacy which weight in favour of non-disclosure.
The existence of the balancing test creates a restriction on disclosure under the
RTI Act
but does not affect the wide meaning independently accorded to ―public

interest‖ understood as emanating from the freedom of speech and expression.
107. Clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
requires the Information Officer to

weigh the ―public interest‖ in disclosure against the privacy harm. The disclosure

of different documents in different circumstances will give rise to unique ―public

interest‖ factors in favour of disclosure. However, a few broad principles may be

laid out as to how the phrase ―public interest‖ is to be understood. Where factors

fall within this interpretation ―public interest‖ so interpreted, they are factors that

weigh in favour of disclosure. The principles are as follows:
(i)     Public interest is not limited to information which directly promotes

              the democratic accountability of elected officials;
(ii)    There exists public interest in the disclosure of information where

              the information sought informs political debate, is educational or

              intellectual or serves artistic purposes;
(iii)   Where the information sought will promote public debate on political,

              economic or social issues, there exists a public interest in

              disclosure;
(iv)    Judges and Information Officers should not pass a value judgement

              on whether the speech in question furthers their own conception of

              societal good or interest for it to satisfy the test of public interest;
101
PART H
(v)     As an indicative list, information concerning the accountability of

              officials, public expenditure, the performance of public duties, the

              handling of complaints, the existence of any wrongdoing by a public

              official, inefficiency in public administration and unfairness in public

              administration all possess public interest value, their relative

              strength to be determined on a case by case basis;
(vi)    Where the disclosure of information would promote the aims and

              objectives of the RTI Act, there exists a ―public interest‖ in disclosing

              such information; and
(vii)   The object and purpose of the
RTI Act
is the fulfilment of the positive

              obligation on the State to provide access to information under
Article

              19(1)(a)
of the Constitution and the existence of the restrictions on

              the disclosure of information does not restrict the meaning of ―public

              interest‖ under the Act.
Balancing interests in disclosure with privacy interests
108. We have adverted to the substantive content of ―personal information‖ and

―public interest‖ as distinct factors to be considered by the Information Officer

when arriving at a determination under clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
. In the

present case, the information sought by the respondent raises both

considerations of ―public interest‖ and ―personal information‖. The text of clause
(j) requires the Information Officer to make a determination whether the ―larger

public interest justifies the disclosure‖ of personal information sought. The
102
PART H


Information Officer must conduct balancing or weighing of interests in making a

determination in favour of disclosure or non-disclosure. The Information Officer

must be cognisant that any determination under clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section

8
implicates the right to information and the right to privacy as constitutional

rights. Reason forms the heart of the law and the decision of the Information

Officer must provide cogent and articulate reasons for the factors considered and

conclusions arrived at in balancing the two interests. In answering the third

referral question in its entirety, this Court would be remiss in not setting out the

analytical approach to be applied by the Information Officer in balancing the

interests in disclosure with the countervailing privacy interests. Justice S C

Agrawal speaking for a Constitution Bench of this Court in
S N Mukherjee v

Union of India103
observed:
―9. The object underlying the rules of natural justice ―is to
                   prevent miscarriage of justice‖ and secure ―fair play in action‖.
                   As pointed out earlier the requirement about recording of
                   reasons for its decision by an administrative authority
                   exercising quasi-judicial functions achieves this object
                   by excluding chances of arbitrariness and ensuring a
                   degree of fairness in the process of decision-making.
                   Keeping in view the expanding horizon of the principles of
                   natural justice, we are of the opinion, that the requirement to
                   record reason can be regarded as one of the principles of
                   natural justice which govern exercise of power by
                   administrative authorities. The rules of natural justice are
                   not embodied rules.
(Emphasis supplied)


The requirement to record reasons is a principle of natural justice and a check

against the arbitrary exercise of power by judicial and quasi-judicial bodies. In

making a determination under clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
in a given

case, it would not be satisfactory if an Information Officer were merely to record
103
(1990) 4 SCC 495
103
PART H


that the privacy interest outweighed the public interest. Something more is

required. By providing an analytical framework to address the two interests to be

weighed and requiring the Information Officer record detailed reasons within this

framework, the arbitrary exercise or discretion of the Information Officer is

guarded against.
109. In the prescient words of Lord Denning:
―…each man should be free to develop his own personality to
                   the full: and the only duties which should restrict this freedom
                   are those which are necessary to enable everyone else to do
                   the same."104



Neither the right to information nor the right to privacy are absolute rights under

the framework of the
RTI Act
. Where the right to information of an information

applicant in requesting information touches upon the right to privacy of the person

whose information is sought, the
RTI Act
calls upon the Information Officer to

weigh the two interests and determine which is stronger. In Thalappalam

Service Coop. Bank Ltd. v State of Kerala105 Justice K S P Radhakrishnan,

speaking for a two judge bench of this Court, noted:
―61. The right to information and right to privacy are,
                   therefore, not absolute rights, both the rights, one of which
                   falls under
Article 19(1)(a)
and the other under
Article 21
of
                   the Constitution of India, can obviously be regulated,
                   restricted and curtailed in the larger public interest. Absolute
                   or uncontrolled individual rights do not and cannot exist
                   in any modern State. Citizens' right to get information is
                   statutorily recognised by the
RTI Act
, but at the same
                   time limitations are also provided in the Act itself, which
                   is discernible from the Preamble and other provisions of
                   the Act…. The citizens, in that event, can always claim a
104
Lord Denning, Freedom Under the Law (Hamlyn Lectures) 1968 (Sweet & Maxwell).
105
(2013) 16 SCC 82
104
PART H


                  right to privacy, the right of a citizen to access information
                  should be respected, so also a citizen's right to privacy.‖

                                                              (Emphasis supplied)
110. In setting out the precise approach to be adopted by the Information

Officer in making a determination under clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
it is

worth adverting to the decision of Campbell v MGM Limited106 the facts of which

have already been discussed above. In that case, the House of Lords was called

upon to balance the privacy rights of the claimant, being photographed leaving a

‗Narcotics Anonymous‘ meeting, under
Article 8
of the European Convention of

Human Rights107 and the right of the defendant to publish the information under
Article 10
of the ECHR which provides for the freedom of expression. Although

not a case with respect to the disclosure of documents, the House of Lords

makes several notable observations about balancing privacy and free speech

interests. Lord Nicholls observed:
―20. I should take this a little further on one point.
Article 8(1)
recognises the need to respect private and family life.
Article 8(2)
recognises there are occasions when intrusion
                  into private and family life may be justified. One of these is
                  where the intrusion is necessary for the protection of the
                  rights and freedoms of others.
Article 10(1)
recognises the
                  importance of freedom of expression. But
article 10(2)
, like
article 8(2)
, recognises there are occasions when protection
                  of the rights of others may make it necessary for freedom of
                  expression to give way. When both these articles are
                  engaged a difficult question of proportionality may arise.
                  This question is distinct from the initial question of
                  whether the published information engaged
article 8
at all
                  by being within the sphere of the complainant's private
                  or family life.‖
                                                                (Emphasis supplied)
106
[2004] UKHL 22
107
―ECHR‖
105
PART H


The first question of significance is whether the right to privacy of the person

whose information is sought is engaged. This approach was subsequently

applied by the Court of Appeal in HRH Prince of Wales v Associated

Newspapers Ltd108. The text of clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
also

articulates this threshold. For clause (j) to be engaged at the first instance, the

information sought must constitute ―personal information‖. This is an inquiry

independent to the question of how the privacy interest should be balanced with

the free speech interest.
111. Where the information sought is ―personal information‖ the court must next

balance the interest in disclosure or dissemination with the privacy interest at

stake. Baroness Hale in her opinion in Campbell stated:
―137. It should be emphasised that the ‗reasonable
                  expectation of privacy‘ is a threshold test which brings the
                  balancing exercise into play. It is not the end of the story.
                  Once the information is identified as ‗private‘ in this way, the
                  court must balance the claimant‘s interest in keeping the
                  information private against the countervailing interest of the
                  recipient in publishing it. Very often, it can be expected that
                  the countervailing rights of the recipient will prevail.
                  …
140. The application of the proportionality test is more
                  straightforward when only one Convention right is in play: the
                  question then is whether the private right claimed offers
                  sufficient justification for the degree of interference with the
                  fundamental right. It is much less straightforward when
                  two Convention rights are in play, and the proportionality
                  of interfering with one has to be balanced against the
                  proportionality of restricting the other. As each is a
                  fundamental right, there is evidently a ―pressing social
                  need‖ to protect it.
141. Both parties accepted the basic approach of the Court of
                  Appeal in In re S [2003] 3 WLR 1425, 1451-1452, at paras 54
                  to 60. This involves looking first at the comparative
                  importance of the actual rights being claimed in the
                  individual case; then at the justifications for interfering
108
[2006] EWHA Civ 1776
106
PART H


             with or restricting each of those rights; and applying the
             proportionality test to each. The parties in this case differed
             about whether the trial judge or the Court of Appeal had done
             this, the appellant arguing that the Court of Appeal had
             assumed primacy for the
Article 10
right while the respondent
             argued that the trial judge had assumed primacy for the
Article 8
right.
(Emphasis supplied)
112. Once the information sought has been identified as ―personal information‖

the Information Officer must identify the actual rights being claimed in the

individual case. In setting out the substantive content of ‗public interest‘ and

‗privacy‘ various facets of these concepts have been set out. In any given case,

the Information Officer must identify the precise interests weighing in favour of

‗public interest‘ disclosure, and those interests weighing in favour of ‗privacy‘ and

non-disclosure. The Information Officer must then examine the justifications for

restricting each right and whether they are countenanced under the scheme of
RTI Act
and in law generally. The ground of confidentiality simpliciter is not a

ground to restrict the right to information under the
RTI Act
or
Article 19(1)(a)
of

the Constitution. Lastly, the Information Officer must employ the principle of

proportionality. As observed by Baroness Hale, both the right to privacy and the

right to information are legitimate aims. In applying the principle of proportionality,

the Information Officer must ensure that the abridgement of a right is not

disproportionate to the legitimate aim sought to be achieved by enforcing the

countervailing right.
113. Take the example of where an information applicant sought the disclosure

of how many leaves were taken by a public employee and the reasons for such

leave. The need to ensure accountability of public employees is of clear public
107
PART H


interest in favour of disclosure. The reasons for the leave may also include

medical information with respect to the public employee, creating a clear privacy

interest in favour of non-disclosure. It is insufficient to state that the privacy

interest in medical records is extremely high and therefore the outcome should

be blanket non-disclosure. The principle of proportionality may necessitate that

the number of and reasons for the leaves be disclosed and the medical reasons

for the leave be omitted. This would ensure that the interest in accountability is

only abridged to the extent necessary to protect the legitimate aim of the privacy

of the public employee.
114. Having adverted to the analytical test to be applied by the Information

Officers in balancing the two interests, it is also worth setting out certain factors

that should not be considered in such a balancing. Section 11B of the Australian

Freedom of Information Act 1982 lays down certain ‗Irrelevant factors‘ that

should not be considered in determining whether to disclose information. Section

11B is as under:
―…Irrelevant factors
             (4) The following factors must not be taken into account in
             deciding whether access to the document would, on balance,
             be contrary to the public interest:
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to
             the Commonwealth Government, or cause a loss of
             confidence in the Commonwealth Government;
(b) access to the document could result in any person
             misinterpreting or misunderstanding the document;
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in
             the agency to which the request for access to the document
             was made;
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or
             unnecessary debate.‖
108
PART I


The factors set out above are not relevant or permissible restrictions on the right

to information and should not be considered in determining whether or not to

disclose information under the
RTI Act
. Clause (2) of
Section 6
of the RTI Act

provides that an information applicant need not provide any reason as to why the

information is sought. It would not be open for an Information Officer to deny the

disclosure of information on the ground that the information would lead to

confusion, embarrassment or unnecessary debate in the public sphere. By

enumerating the grounds on which information may be exempted from the

general obligation to disclose, clause (1) of
Section 8
negates the notion that

information may be withheld on the sole ground of confidentiality.
I     Conclusion


115. The     information   sought   by the    respondent    pertains to (1)     the
correspondence and file notings relating to the elevation of three judges to the

Supreme Court, (2) information relating to the declaration of assets made by

judges pursuant to the 1997 resolution, and (3) the identity and nature of

disciplinary proceedings instituted against the lawyer and judge named in the

newspaper report. The third referral question requires this Court to determine

whether the disclosure of the information sought is exempt under clause (j) of

clause (1) of
Section 8
. In arriving at a determination on whether the information

sought is exempt under clause (j), it is necessary to (i) determine whether the

information sought is ―personal information‖ and engages the right to privacy, (ii)

identify, in the facts of the present case, the specific heads of public interest in

favour of disclosure and the specific privacy interests claimed, (iii) determine the
109
PART J


justifications for restricting such interests and (iv) apply the principle of

proportionality to ensure that no right is abridged more than required to fulfil the

legitimate aim of the countervailing right. The process under
Section 11
of the

RTI must be complied with where the information sought is ‗third party

information‘. The substantive content of the terms ‗personal information‘ and

‗public interest‘ have also been set out in the present judgement.
J     Directions
116. The information sought in Civil Appeal No 2683 with respect to which

judges of the Supreme Court have declared their assets does not constitute the

―personal information‖ of the judges and does not engage the right to privacy.
The contents of the declaration of assets would fall within the meaning of

―personal information‖ and the test set out under clause (j) of clause (1) of
Section 8
would be applicable along with the procedure under
Section 11
of the

RTI Act. In view of the above observations, Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 is

dismissed and the judgement of the Delhi High Court dated 12 January 2010 in

LPA No 501 of 2009 is upheld.
117. Civil Appeals Nos 10044 and 1045 of 2010 are remanded to the CPIO,

Supreme Court of India to be examined and a determination arrived at, after

applying the principles set out in the present judgement. The information sought

in these appeals falls within the meaning of ‗third party information‘ and the

procedure under
Section 11
must be complied with in arriving at a determination.
110
PART J



Brother Justice Sanjiv Khanna has observed that:
―Transparency and openness in judicial appointments
              juxtaposed with confidentiality of deliberations remain one
              of the most delicate and complex areas. Clearly, the
              position is progressive as well as evolving as steps have
              been taken to make the selection and appointment
              process more transparent and open. Notably, there has
              been a change after concerns were expressed on
              disclosure of the names and the reasons for those who
              had not been approved. The position will keep forging
              new paths by taking into consideration the experiences of
              the past and the aspirations of the future‖



I wish to add a few thoughts of my own on the subject. The collegium owes its

birth to judicial interpretation. In significant respects, the collegium is a victim of

its own birth – pangs.        Bereft of information pertaining to both the criteria

governing the selection and appointment of judges to the higher judiciary and the

application of those criteria in individual cases, citizens have engaged the

constitutional right to information, facilitated by the
RTI Act
.
If the content of the right and the enforcement of the statute are to possess a

meaningful dimension in their application to the judiciary – as it must, certain

steps are necessary. Foremost among them is that the basis for the selection and

appointment of judges to the higher judiciary must be defined and placed in the

public realm. This is the procedure which is followed in making appointments but

also in terms of the substantive norms which are adopted while making judicial

appointments. There can be no denying the fact that there is a vital element of

public interest in knowing about the norms which are taken into consideration in

selecting candidates for higher judicial officer and making judicial appointments.
Knowledge is a powerful instrument which secures consistency in application and
111
PART J


generates the confidence that is essential to the sanctity of the process of judicial

appointments. This is essentially because the collegium system postulates that

proposals for appointment of judges are initiated by the judges themselves.
Essential substantial norms in regard to judicial appointments include:
(i)     The basis on which performance of a member of the Bar is evaluated

           for the purpose of higher judicial office;
(ii)    The criteria which are applied in determining whether a member of the

           Bar fulfils requirements in terms of:
a)     Experience as reflected in the quantum and nature of the

                  practice;
b)     Domain specialization in areas which are geared to the evolving

                  nature of litigation and the requirements of each court;
c)     Income requirements, if any, having regard to the nature of the

                  practice and the circumstances prevailing in the court or region

                  concerned;
d)     The    commitment      demonstrated     by   a   candidate   under

                  consideration to the development of the law in terms of written

                  work, research and academic qualifications; and
e)     The social orientation of the candidate, defined in terms of the

                  extent of pro bono or legal aid work;
(iii)   The need for promoting the role of the judiciary as an inclusive

           institution and its diversity in terms of gender, representation to

           minorities and the marginalised, orientation and other relevant factors.
112
PART J


  The present judgment does not seek to define what the standards for judicial

  appointments should be. However, what needs to be emphasised is that the

  substantive standards which are borne in mind must be formulated and placed

  in the public realm as a measure that would promote confidence in the

  appointments process. Due publicity to the norms which have been

  formulated and are applied would foster a degree of transparency and

  promote accountability in decision making at all levels within the judiciary and

  the government. The norms may also spell out the criteria followed for

  assessing the judges of the district judiciary for higher judicial office. There is

  a vital public interest in disclosing the basis on which those with judicial

  experience are evaluated for elevation to higher judicial office particularly

  having regard to merit, integrity and judicial performance. Placing the criteria

  followed in making judicial appointments in the public domain will fulfil the

  purpose and mandate of
Section 4
of the RTI Act, engender public confidence

  in the process and provides a safeguard against extraneous considerations

  entering into the process.
.……......................................................J
                                      [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]


New Delhi;
November 13, 2019.
113