[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Bansidhar Sharma (Since Deceased) ... vs The State Of Rajasthan on 5 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 5643, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1365, (2019) 14 SCALE 658, (2019) 204 ALLINDCAS 1, (2019) 4 CIVILCOURTC 824, (2019) 4 CURCC 141, (2020) 138 ALL LR 214, (2020) 1 ALL RENTCAS 241, (2020) 1 ICC 102, (2020) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 30
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
NON­REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 8400 OF 2019
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) No(s). 23679 OF 2019)

          BANSIDHAR SHARMA(SINCE DECEASED)
          REP BY HIS LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE                         …...APPELLANT(S)


                                          VERSUS


          THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                          …..RESPONDENT(S)



                                             JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             This appeal arises from the order dated 21 st August, 2019

          passed by the High Court of Rajasthan Bench at Jaipur.
3.
Signature Not Verified
The seminal facts relevant for the purpose are that late Shri
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Bansidhar Sharma(predecessor of the appellant) filed a suit on 15 th
Date: 2019.11.05
14:20:40 IST
Reason:
July, 1961 for possession, rendition of accounts and permanent
1
injunction before the Additional District and Session Judge, No. 1,

Jaipur City in which following issues were framed:­
1. Whether the suit temples were founded by the plaintiffs
        ancestors and his ancestors were Shebeit and Mahant of
        the temples entitled to manage the same?
2. Whether the said temples and 24 shops attached to them
        were founded, built and maintained by the former Jaipur
        State and managed through their servants?
3. Whether the plaintiff is in possession and management of
        the suit temples in his own rights and not on behalf of the
        state as their Pujari or servant?
4. Whether Pandit Mahadev Ji was the Mahant or Shebait of
        the suit temples and he handed over management of the
        temples and shock attached to them to the Dharmarth
        Vibhag of the former Jaipur estate in the year 1925 for
        safety and security and proper management as he was
        going on long pilgrimage?
5. Whether the plaintiff is the descendant of Pandit Mahadev
        Ji and entitled to claim the possession of the temple and
        shops and the account of the income thereof for the period
        since 1925 from the defendants?
6. Whether the notice under
Section 80
of C.P.C. is defective?
7. Whether the suit is within time?
8. Relief?
4.   After the matter being heard, trial Court vide its judgment

dated 26th November, 1977 holding that there was no substance in

the suit dismissed it with costs. The judgment of the trial Court
2
dated 26th November, 1977 came to be assailed in S.B. Civil First

Appeal No. 86/1979.          During pendency of the appeal, the High

Court of Rajasthan passed an ad­interim order on 11 th January,

1978:­

             “Issue notice to the G.A. and the respondents.
          Meanwhile the appellant shall not be dispossessed
          from the premises where he resides. The rest of the
          relief claimed by the appellant will be considered after
          the notices are served.”
5.   In furtherance of the ad­interim order dated 11 th January,

1978, S.B. Civil second stay application no. 163/96 came to be filed

at the instance of the appellant­plaintiff on 9th October, 1996 and

the Single Judge of the High Court passed a further interim order

on second stay application on 10 th October, 1996 which is as

under:­

            “I have heard learned counsel for the parties on the
          second stay application.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the
          appellant has placed at large upon the copy of the Order
          dated 11.1.78 whereby the learned Division Bench of this
          Court had directed that “in the meanwhile the party will not
          be dispossessed.”
             This fact has also not been controverted by the
          respondents in their reply to the application, since the same
          has been reproduced in the reply.
3
Shri Mathur, learned counsel for the respondents has
       placed on record some documents along with his affidavit.
         The copies of the said document have already been
       supplied to the learned counsel for the appellant.
         Let reply to the said affidavit be filed by the learned
       counsel for the appellant within one week from today.
         In the meanwhile the status quo which existed as on the
       date of passing of the order dated 11.1.78 in respect of the
       premises in question shall continue pending the hearing
       and disposal of this appeal.
Let this appeal be listed on 20th October, 1996.”
6.   In sequel thereof, further interim order came to be passed on

22nd November, 1996. The operative part of the Order dated 22 nd

November, 1996 is referred hereunder:­

          “Consequently the second stay application is allowed.
       The respondents are directed not to interfere with the rights
       of the applicants to perform sewa Pooja of the idols in the
       said temple and also not to dispossess the applicants from
       the premises of the temple in which they are residing.
       Respondents are further directed to restore the possession
       of the temple of Lord Laxminarainji, i.e., the temple in
       question to the applicants/appellants forthwith or in any
       case not later than 3rd of December, 1996 and the
       compliance report be submitted by the respondents in this
       regard immediately since the possession of the aforesaid
       temple was taken by the respondents in 1988 from late
       Bansidhar forcibly and without due process of law and
       without obtaining any decree of possession or an order of
       eviction   against   late   Bansidhar    or    the   present
       applicant/appellants from a competent court. The interim
       order, dated 10.10.1996 passed by this Court clarifying the
       earlier order dated 11.1.1978 passed by learned Division
       bench of this Court is confirmed pending hearing and final
       disposal of the appeal. Let the appeal be listed for hearing
       and final disposal on 17.12.1996.”
4
7.   Later, the S.B. Civil First Appeal no. 86/1979 after finally

being heard, came to be dismissed vide judgment dated 20 th April,

2018 and the learned Single Judge was conscious of the fact that

certain interim orders had been passed pending first appeal and

noticing the order dated 10th October, 1996 and 22nd November,

1996, while dismissing the appeal, passed the following operative

order:­

          “ In compliance of the said order, appellant had been given
          the possession of the suit property. Through the instant
          application, it is prayed that the position as existed prior to
          10.10.1996 be restored or the order dated 10.10.1996 be
          recalled or modified. In the opinion of this Court, when the
          appeal has been dismissed and the appellant has been
          found to have no rights whatsoever over the disputed
          temple and properties appurtenant to it, the application
          deserves to be allowed and the position as existed before
          10.10.1996 deserves to be restored. Application is allowed
          accordingly.
Resultantly, this appeal is dismissed with a cost of
          Rupees One Lakh and the plaintiff is directed to hand over
          the possession of the disputed property to the defendants­
          respondents within a period of two months from today,
          failing which, the defendants­respondents will be entitled to
          get the possession through the Court.          Further, the
          defendant­respondents are also entitled to get the cost of
          litigation from the plaintiff­appellant.”
5
8.   The judgment dated 20th April, 2018 was further challenged in

SLP(C ) No. 13439 of 2018 before this Court and that came to be

dismissed on 17th May, 2018. After dismissal of the special leave

petition by this Court, the respondents sent an intimation to the

appellant­plaintiff to hand over the possession in compliance of the

order of the Single Judge of the High Court dated 20 th April, 2018,

but when no action was taken by the appellant, interlocutory

application was filed under
Section 151
read with
Section 144
of

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(hereinafter being referred to as
CPC
)

before the Single Judge of the High Court.
9.   After hearing the parties, the Single Judge of the High Court

noticing the rival contention of the parties allowed the application

vide its order dated 21st August, 2019, with a liberty to the

respondent­State to take possession of the suit property and to take

police or other aid, if necessary, in taking possession of the subject

property in question which is under challenge in appeal before us.
6
10.   Basic bone of contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant is that the execution application under
Section 144
CPC

would lie only before the Court of first instance which, in the

instant case, is the Court of Additional District and Session Judge,

No. 1, Jaipur City and not the High Court and according to the

learned counsel, the impugned order passed by the High Court

dated 21st August, 2019 is without jurisdiction.
11.   Learned counsel further submits that appellant has lost a

valuable right of appeal in view of exercise of jurisdiction by the

High Court and submits that the order being not sustainable in law

deserves to be set aside and the respondents may be permitted to

adopt and avail the remedy prescribed under the law.
12.   Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, while

supporting the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge

submits that there was no decree or order of the trial Court by

virtue of which the appellant was given possession of the subject

property as the suit came to be dismissed in the first instance by

the trial Court which came to be affirmed in first appeal and also by
7
this Court. In the present circumstances, the provisions of
Section

144
CPC are not attracted as there being no variation or reversal of

a decree or order as contemplated by
Section 144
CPC.
13.   Learned counsel further submits that since the possession

was handed over to the appellant under the interim order passed by

the Single Judge of the High Court pending first appeal, which

finally came to be dismissed and thus, in the given circumstances,

it was imperative upon the appellant to restore possession of the

subject property and mere mentioning of
Section 144
would not

denude the rights of the parties in adopting an appropriate

admissible mechanism under the law and this what has been

considered by the High Court under the impugned order dated 21 st

August, 2019 and that needs no interference by this Court.
14.   Before   evaluating    the   rival   submissions,      it   would   be

appropriate to advert to
Section 144
CPC:­

         “144. Application for restitution – (1) Where and in so far
        as a decree or an order is varied or reversed in any appeal,
8
revision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in
          any suit instituted for the purpose, the Court which passed
          the decree or order shall, on the application of any party
          entitled in any benefit by way of restitution or otherwise,
          cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be,
          place the parties in the position which they would have
          occupied but for such decree or order or such part thereof
          as has been varied, reversed, set aside or modified; and, for
          this purpose, the Court may make any orders, including
          orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of
          interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, which
          are properly consequential on such variation, reversal,
          setting aside or modification of the decree or order.”
15.    The scope of post 1976 amended
Section 144
CPC has been

considered by this Court in
Neelathupara Kummi Seethi Koya

Phangal(Dead) by LRs Vs. Montharapalla Padippua Attakoya &

Ors.1
in paragraph 3 as under:­


          “3. In the 1976 Amendment Act suitable amendment was
          made and Explanations (a) to (c) were added but they have
          no relevance for the purpose of the case. The question
          therefore, is whether the transferee executing court is a
          “court of first instance” within the meaning of
Section
          144(1)
CPC. A bare reading of sub­section (1) does indicate
          that the application for restitution would lie when the
          decree executed is reversed or varied or modified. The
          doctrine of restitution is based upon the high cardinal
          principle that the acts of the court should not be allowed to
          work in injury or injustice to the suitors.
Section 144
,
          therefore, contemplates restitution in a case where property
          has been received by the decree­holder under the decree,
          which was subsequently either reversed or varied wholly or
          partly in those proceedings or other proceedings. In those
          set of circumstances law raised an obligation on the party
          that received the benefit of such reversed judgment to

1   1995 Supp(3) SCC 760
9
restitute the property to the person who had lost it. In that
           behalf in sub­section (2) a right of suit was taken out and
           an application under sub­section (1) was contemplated for
           execution of the decree by way of restitution. Sub­section
           (1) clearly indicates that it is a “court of first instance” in
           which the proceedings in the suit had been initiated and a
           decree was passed or the suit was dismissed, but
           subsequently on appeal decreed or vice versa. The court of
           first instance would, therefore, mean the court which
           passed the decree or order. The transferee executing court
           is not the court that passed the decree or order, but the
           decree was transmitted to facilitate execution of that decree
           or order since the property sought to be executed or the
           person who is liable for execution is situated or residing
           within the jurisdiction of that executing court. Therefore,
           the court which is competent to entertain the application
           for restitution is the court of first instance i.e.
           Administrator's Court (Subordinate Judge) that decreed the
           suit, and not the court to which the decree was transmitted
           for execution. The court of first instance of the
           administrator is now designated as Court of Subordinate
           Judge, but application for restitution was filed in executing
           court, namely, the Court of District Munsif at Androth.
           Thus in the face of the language of
Section 144
, the District
           Munsif at Androth, by no stretch of imagination be
           considered to be court of first instance. Its order of
           restitution is without jurisdiction and, therefore, it is a
           nullity. The High Court is accordingly right in its conclusion
           that the order for restitution is clearly vitiated by error of
           law and lack of jurisdiction. We do not find any ground
           warranting interference. The appeal is dismissed, but in the
           circumstances without costs.”
16.    It has been further considered by other coordinate Bench of

this Court in the recent past in Murti Bhawani Mata Mandir Rep.

Through Pujari Ganeshi Lal(D ) Through LR Kailash Vs. Rajesh

& Ors.2 as under:­
2   2019(3) SCC 707
10
“
Section 144
applies to a situation where a decree or an
        order is varied or reversed in appeal, revision or any other
        proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted
        for the purpose. In that situation, the Court which has
        passed the decree may cause restitution to be made, on an
        application of any party entitled, so as to place the parties
        in the position which they would have occupied but for the
        decree or order or such part thereof as has been varied,
        reversed, set aside or modified. The court is empowered to
        pass orders which are consequential in nature to the decree
        or order being varied or reversed.”
17.   It clearly transpires that
Section 144
applies to a situation

where a decree or order is varied or reversed in appeal, revision or

any other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit

instituted for the purpose. The principle of doctrine of restitution is

that on the reversal of a decree, the law imposes an obligation on

the party to the suit who received the benefit of the decree to make

restitution to the other party for what he has lost. This obligation

arises automatically on the reversal or modification of the decree

and necessarily carries with it the right to restitution of all that has

been done under the decree which has been set aside or an order is

varied or reversed and the Court in making restitution is bound to

restore the parties, so far as they can be restored, to the same
11
position as they were in at the time when the Court by its action

had displaced them.
18.   Indisputedly, in the instant case, there was no decree or order

of the trial Court by virtue of which the appellant was given

possession of the subject property. On the contrary, the suit filed

at the instance of the appellant­plaintiff came to be dismissed with

costs and that came to be confirmed on dismissal of the first appeal

by the Single Judge of the High Court and special leave petition

filed before this Court also came to be dismissed. The possession

was handed over to the appellant of the subject property under the

interim order passed by the High Court pending first appeal of

which a reference has been made and after the appeal came to be

dismissed, its logical consequence was noticed by the High Court in

its judgment dated 20th April, 2018 directing the appellant to hand

over possession of the subject property to the respondents­

defendants obviously for the reason that on dismissal of the first

appeal preferred by the appellant, he was under an obligation to
12
restore back peaceful possession to the respondents on vacation of

the interim orders .
19.   In the present facts and circumstances, the respondents have

not committed any error in taking decision to call upon the

appellant for handing over possession of the subject property at

least after the special leave petition filed at the instance of the

appellant came to be dismissed under order dated 17 th May, 2018

and in sequel thereto, there was no other remedy left with the

respondents than to file an application under
Section 151
CPC

before the High Court for restoration of possession of the subject

property.
20.   After we have heard the parties, find no error being committed

by the High Court in passing of the order dated 21 st August, 2019

directing the appellant to hand over possession of the subject

property in question which was handed over to the appellant under

the interim orders passed by the High Court pending S.B. Civil First
13
Appeal No. 86/1979 which finally came to be dismissed vide

judgment dated 20th April, 2018.
21.   The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that

execution application under
Section 144
CPC would lie only before

the Court of first instance, which in the instant case is Additional

District and Session Judge, No. 1, Jaipur City and not the High

Court and the impugned judgment is without jurisdiction, is

without substance for the reason that there was no decree or order

of the trial Court which is varied or reversed in appeal, revision or

any other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit

instituted for the purpose.     Indisputedly, the possession was

handed over to the appellant­plaintiff pursuant to the interim order

passed by the High Court, pending first appeal which finally came

to be dismissed, its logical consequence was to restore back the

peaceful possession of the subject property to respondents­

defendants.   In the given circumstances, the provisions of
Section

144
CPC, in our view, are not attracted as there being no variation
14
or reversal of a decree or order as contemplated by
Section 144
CPC.
22.    Before parting with the order, taking note of the fact that the

proceedings were initiated at the instance of the appellant­plaintiff

way back in the year 1961 and almost 59 years have rolled by now,

to give a quietus to the litigation and also the fact that the appellant

had failed at all the stages, having no authority to hold possession

of the subject property, we, therefore, consider it appropriate to

direct the appellant to hand over peaceful possession of the subject

property to the respondents­defendants in compliance of the

judgment of the High Court dated 20th April, 2018 followed with

order dated 21st August, 2019 positively within a period of eight

weeks from today failing which this Court will take serious note of

the matter and proceedings may be instituted against the appellant­

plaintiff for deliberate defiance of the order of this Court.
15
23.   The appeal is without substance and accordingly dismissed

with the observations as indicated above. No costs.
24.   Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……………………………………………J.
                                 (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)


                                 ..………………………………………….J.
                                 (AJAY RASTOGI)
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 05, 2019
16