[Cites
10
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Shiv Sena vs Union Of India on 26 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1535, 2019 (10) SCC 809 (2019) 16 SCALE 610, (2019) 16 SCALE 610
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Ashok Bhushan
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1393               OF   2019


            SHIV SENA AND ORS.                                                     …PETITIONERS

                                                        VERSUS

            UNION OF INDIA        AND   ORS.                                       …RESPONDENTS

                                                     ORDER
1. There is no gainsaying that the boundaries between the

            jurisdiction of Courts and Parliamentary independence have been

            contested for a long time.1 However, there is a need and

            requirement for recognizing institutional comity and separation of

            powers so as to tailor judicial interference in the democratic

            processes only as a last resort. This case pertains to one such

            situation, wherein this Court is called upon to adjudicate and

            maintain democratic values and facilitate the fostering of the

            citizens’ right of good governance.
2.          Before we pass any orders, we need to make a brief reference to

            the factual aspects giving rise to the petition herein. It was well

            known that there existed a pre­poll alliance between the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2019.11.26
10:58:17 IST
Reason:
1 Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 25th edition, 321 (2019).
1
Bharatiya Janata Party [for short ‘BJP’] and the Shiv Sena, who

     contested the Fourteenth Maharashtra Legislative Assembly

     elections jointly. On 24.10.2019, the results for the aforesaid

     elections were declared and no single party had the requisite

     majority in the House. On 09.11.2019, the Governor called upon

     the BJP to indicate its willingness to form the Government, being

     the single largest party with 105 seats. However, the BJP declined

     to form the Government on 10.11.2019, as the alliance with the

     Shiv Sena allegedly broke down.
3.   Subsequently, the Governor invited the Shiv Sena to form the

     Government. In this regard, the Shiv Sena is said to have shown

     its willingness to stake a claim to form the Government, claiming

     to have support of the majority. However, the aforesaid endeavor

     was not fruitful either. Thereafter, the Governor’s effort to seek

     the Nationalist Congress Party’s [for short ‘NCP’] willingness to

     stake a claim to form the Government was also not successful.

     Ultimately, the Governor recommended President’s Rule on

     12.11.2019, which was imposed by a Presidential Proclamation on

     the same day.
4.   It is brought to our attention that the Petitioners, i.e., Shiv Sena,

     NCP and the Indian National Congress [for short ‘INC’] were in
2
discussion to form a coalition government during this period, and

     accordingly, a press conference is supposed to have been held on

     22.11.2019 regarding the same.
5.   It has been canvassed before us that at 5:47 a.m., on 23.11.2019,

     the President’s Rule was revoked in exercise of powers conferred

     by clause (2) of
Article 356
of the Constitution. Thereafter, the

     Governor, by letter dated 23.11.2019 invited Respondent No. 3 to

     form the Government. The oath of office and secrecy was

     administered accordingly to Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 at around

   8.00 a.m. on 23.11.2019 at Raj Bhavan, Mumbai.
6. Aggrieved by the Governor’s action in calling upon Respondent

     No. 3 to form the Government, the Petitioners have approached

     this Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution on 23.11.2019

     with the following prayers:
“a. Pass an appropriate writ/order/direction
                declaring that action/order of the Hon’ble
                Governor dated 23.11.2019 inviting Shri
                Devendra Fadnavis to form the Government
                on 23.11.2019 as unconstitutional, arbitrary,
                illegal, void­ab­initio, and violative of
Article
                14
of Constitution of India; and accordingly
                quash the same;
b.   Pass an appropriate writ/order/direction to
                the Hon’ble Governor to invite the alliance of
                Maha Vikas Aghadi comprising of the Shiv
                Sena, Indian National Congress and the
                Nationalist Congress Party which has the
                support of more than 144 MLAs to form the
3
Government under the leadership of Shri.
                Uddhav Thackeray;
…”
7.   At this juncture, it is necessary to extract some of the prayers for

     interim directions sought by the Petitioners in the present

     petition:
“a. Issue appropriate directions in terms of
                 summoning a special session of the
                 Fourteenth        Maharashtra      Legislative
                 Assembly      with the    only   agenda     of
                 administering oath to the MLAs, immediately
                 followed by the holding of a floor test on
                 24.11.2019;
…
             d. Issue appropriate directions in terms of the
                 order dated 24.02.1998 passed by this
                 Hon’ble Court in Jagadambika Pal (supra)
                 as well as Harish Chandra Singh Rawat
                 (supra) directing that the proceedings of the
                 House be video recorded and a copy of the
                 video recording be placed on record of this
                 Hon’ble Court;
e. Issue appropriate directions appointing a pro­
                tem Speaker to preside over the conduct of
                the floor test;”
8.   Further, the Petitioners have filed an affidavit indicating the

     urgency and requirement for hearing the matter on 23.11.2019

     itself. Accordingly, the Hon’ble Chief Justice was pleased to place

     the matter before this Bench and the matter was heard on

     24.11.2019 (Sunday) at 11:30 a.m. After hearing the parties, this

     Court passed the following order:
“Issue notice.
4
It was brought to our notice by the learned
             Senior counsels appearing for the petitioners
             that they have served the respondents
             through e.mail. However, there is no
             representation for Respondent Nos.2, 3 and
4.
Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General
             appearing for the Union of India is willing to
             produce the relevant record, if necessary,
             from the Governor also.
Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior counsel
             who is appearing for some BJP MLAs and
             two independent MLAs, who are not parties
             to    this   Writ   Petition,   opposed     the
             entertaining of the Writ Petition as well as
             passing of any order.
We have taken note of all the arguments,
             particularly   the     argument     that    the
             Governor’s    decision    dated    23­11­2019
             inviting the Respondent No.3 to form a
             Government         on      23­11­2019         is
             unconstitutional. With regard to the second
             prayer as at `b’, we are not going to consider
             the same at present. As adjudication of the
             issues and also the interim prayers sought
             by the petitioners to conduct floor test within
             24 hours has to be considered after perusing
             the order of the Governor as well as the
             letters submitted by Mr. Devendra Fadnavis
             – Respondent No.3, even though none
             appeared for the State Government, we
             request Mr. Tushar Mehta to produce those
             two letters by tomorrow morning at 10.30
             a.m. when the matter will be taken up, so
             that appropriate order will be passed.”
9.   When the matter was taken up for hearing on 25.11.2019, the

     Solicitor General of India, produced the letters in compliance of

     the order of this Court dated 24.11.2019.
5
10.   Heard the learned counsel appearing for both sides.
11.   The learned Senior Counsel for Petitioner No. 1, Mr. Kapil Sibal

      submitted that prima facie, the action of the Governor revoking

      President’s Rule at 5:47 a.m. and administering the oath of office

      at around 8:00 a.m. reeks of mala fide. The learned Senior

      Counsel further submitted that Respondent No. 4 was never

      authorized to form the alliance with Respondent No. 3. Therefore,

      Respondent No. 3 must prove his majority on the floor of the

      House. For this purpose, as per established norms, the senior

      most member must be called for assuming the role of pro­tem

      Speaker, after which there must be an open ballot and the same

      should be captured in a video recording so as to ensure

    transparency.
12. Agreeing with the aforementioned submissions, learned Senior

      Counsel Dr. A.M Singhvi appearing for Petitioner Nos. 2 and 3

      submitted that the Governor turned a blind eye by accepting the

      proposal of formation of the Government put forth by Respondent

      No. 3. The letter presented to the Governor, although allegedly

      signed by 54 elected members of the NCP, was unaddressed and

      did not have a covering letter or any other statement promising

      their alliance to the BJP. In the aforesaid context, the sole
6
reliance on the aforesaid letter to prove majority was not prudent.

   Moreover, when both sides are agreeable to the conduction of a

   floor test, and an order directing the conduction of the same is not

    prejudicial to anyone, then there is no reason to defer the same.
13. On the other hand, learned Solicitor General submitted that the

   satisfaction of the Governor was based on the material placed

   before him, wherein it was indicated that Respondent No. 3

   enjoyed the support of 105 elected members of the BJP, 54

   elected members of the NCP and 11 independent elected members

   (170 in total). The Governor had, in his own wisdom, relied upon

   the letters of the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 and he had no reason

   to disbelieve the same. The Governor is not obligated to conduct a

   roving enquiry into the same. The learned Solicitor General also

   contended that this Court cannot monitor the proceedings of the

    House as per the provision of
Article 212
of the Constitution.
14. Adding to the aforesaid submissions, learned Senior Counsel Mr.

   Mukul Rohatgi appearing for Respondent No. 3 submitted that

   although a floor test is imperative, this Court cannot sit in appeal

   over the Governor’s order to set the dates for the floor test. It must

   be kept in mind that conducting a floor test is the discretion of
7
the Speaker. In light of the above, no interim order can be passed

    in the aforesaid matter.
15. Lastly, learned Senior Counsel Mr. Maninder Singh appearing for

   Respondent No. 4 vehemently contended that the jurisdiction

   under
Article 32
of the Constitution cannot be invoked in the

   present matter and the Governor’s independence should be

    respected.
16. We may note that, while the learned Solicitor General and learned

   Senior Counsel Mr. Mukul Rohatgi sought additional time to file

   affidavits in response, however we are of the opinion that the

    same might not be necessary at this stage.
17. Having heard the submissions of the learned counsel on the

   issues of maintainability, extent of judicial review and validity of

   the Governor’s satisfaction, we are of the opinion that they can be

   adjudicated at an appropriate time. There is no doubt that the

   contentions have to be answered, as the petitioners have raised

   questions concerning important constitutional issues touching

   upon the democratic bulwark of our nation. However, at this

   interim stage, we may note that it is imperative for this Court to

   be cognizant of the need to take into consideration the competing

   claims of the parties, uphold the democratic values and foster

   constitutional morality.
8
18.   At the outset, we need to emphasize that recently, in the case of

      Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil v. Hon’ble Speaker, Karnataka

      Legislative Assembly, Writ Petition (C) No. 992 of 2019, this

      Court had emphasized the requirement of imbibing constitutional

      morality by the constitutional functionaries. Undemocratic and

    illegal practices within the political arena should be curtailed.
19.
In this context, this Court in
Union of India v. Shri Harish


      Chandra Singh Rawat
, (2016) SCC OnLine SC 618, held as

      follows:
“8. … This Court, being the sentinel on the
              qui vive of the Constitution is under the
              obligation to see that the democracy prevails
              and not gets hollowed by individuals. The
              directions which have been given on the last
              occasion, was singularly for the purpose of
              strengthening the democratic values and the
              constitutional norms. The collective trust in
              the legislature is founded on the bedrock of
              the constitutional trust…”
20. In a situation wherein, if the floor test is delayed, there is a

      possibility of horse trading, it becomes incumbent upon the Court

      to act to protect democratic values. An immediate floor test, in

      such a case, might be the most effective mechanism to do so. A

      similar view was expounded by B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J., in the

      celebrated nine­Judge Bench decision of this Court in
S.R.
9
Bommai v. Union of India
, (1994) 3 SCC 1, wherein he held as

   follows:
“395. The High Court, in our opinion, erred
              in holding that the floor test is not
              obligatory. If only one keeps in mind the
              democratic principle underlying the
              Constitution and the fact that it is the
              Legislative Assembly that represents the
              will of the people — and not the Governor
              — the position would be clear beyond any
              doubt….There could be no question of the
              Governor making an assessment of his own.
              The loss of confidence of the House was an
              objective fact, which could have been
              demonstrated, one way or the other, on the
              floor of the House. In our opinion,
              wherever a doubt arises whether the
              Council of Ministers has lost the
              confidence of the House, the only way of
              testing it is on the floor of the House
              except in an extraordinary situation where
              because of all­pervasive violence, the
              Governor comes to the conclusion — and
              records the same in his report — that for the
              reasons mentioned by him, a free vote is not
              possible in the House.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
21. This was also the opinion expressed by the Sarkaria Commission,

   Rajmannar Committee and the unanimous opinion expressed by

   the Committee of five Governors constituted by the President of

   India. In the aforementioned judgment, B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J.,

   quoted the observations of the Committee of Five Governors with

   approval, as below:
10
“393.…The five Governors unanimously
              recommended that “the test of confidence in
              the Ministry should normally be left to a vote
              in the assembly … Where the Governor is
              satisfied, by whatever process or means, that
              the Ministry no longer enjoys majority
              support, he should ask the Chief Minister to
              face the Assembly and prove his majority
              within the shortest possible time… A Chief
              Minister’s refusal to test his strength on the
              floor of the Assembly can well be interpreted
              as prima facie proof of his no longer enjoying
              confidence of the legislature….”
22. Ex facie,
Article 212
of the Constitution, relied on by the

   Respondents, would have no application as it relates to validity of

   proceedings in the Legislature of a State that cannot be called in

   question in any court on the ground of any alleged irregularity of

   procedure. Clause (2) states that no officer or member of the

   legislature of a State, in whom powers are vested by or under the

   Constitution for regulating the procedure, conduct of business or

   for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the

   jurisdiction of any court in respect of exercise of those powers by

   him. Sub­Article (2) has no application because no act of any

   officer or member of the Legislature of the State has been made

   the subject matter of the present Petition before this Court. This

   Court, nearly two decades back, in
Jagdambika Pal v. Union of

   India
, (1999) 9 SCC 95, had passed an order, after hearing
11
counsel for the petitioner and the caveators, directing that a

special session of the Uttar Pradesh Assembly will be summoned/

convened after two days on 26.02.1998 with the following

directions:
“1. …
(ii) The only agenda in the Assembly would be
         to have a composite floor test between the
         contending parties in order to see which out
         of the two contesting claimants of Chief
         Ministership has a majority in the House.
(iii) It is pertinently emphasised that the
         proceedings in the Assembly shall be totally
         peaceful and disturbance, if any, caused
         therein would be viewed seriously.
(iv) The result of the composite floor test
         would be announced by the Speaker faithfully
         and truthfully.
2. The result is expected to be laid before us
         on 27­2­1998 at 10.30 a.m. when this Bench
         assembles again.
3. Ancillary directions are that this order
         shall be treated to be a notice to all the MLAs,
         leaving      apart      the      notices     the
         Governor/Secretariat is supposed to issue. In
         the interregnum, no major decisions would be
         made by the functioning Government except
         attending to routine matters, not much of any
         consequence.”
12
23.   Six years later, in
Anil Kumar Jha v. Union of India
, (2005) 3

      SCC 150, similar directions were passed by this Court after

      recording and taking notice of events that had taken place and

      few developments which were in the offing, as reported in the

      media, to observe and direct as follows:
“5. Though many a relief has been sought for
               in the writ petition, as also in the application
               for grant of ex parte stay, for the present, we
               are satisfied that a strong prima facie case on
               the averments made in the petition duly
               supported by affidavit, has been made out to
               issue the following interim directions and we
               order accordingly:
(1) The session of the Jharkhand State
                      Assembly has already been convened
                      for 10­3­2005 on which day the newly
                      elected Members of the Legislative
                      Assembly shall be administered oath.
We direct the session to continue and
                      on 11­3­2005 i.e. the next day and on
                      that day the vote of confidence to be
                      put to test.
(2) The only agenda in the Assembly on
                      11­3­2005 would be to have a floor
                      test between the contending political
                      alliances in order to see which of the
                      political parties or alliance has a
                      majority in the House and hence a
                      claim for Chief Ministership.
13
(3) It is emphasised that the proceedings
     in the Assembly shall be totally
     peaceful, and disturbance, if any,
     caused therein shall be viewed
     seriously.
(4) The result of the floor test would be
    announced by the pro tem Speaker
    faithfully and truthfully.
(5) This order by the Court shall constitute
     notice of the meeting of the Assembly
     for 11­3­2005 and no separate notice
     would be required.
(6) Till 11­3­2005 there shall be no
    nomination in view of
Article 333
of
    the Constitution and the floor test
    shall remain confined to the 81 elected
    members only.
(7) We direct the Chief Secretary and the
    Director General of Police, State of
    Jharkhand to see that all the elected
    Members of the Legislative Assembly
    freely, safely and securely attend the
    Assembly and no interference or
    hindrance is caused by anyone
    therein. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned
    Senior Counsel appearing for the State
    of Jharkhand through the Chief
    Secretary and the Director General of
    Police has very fairly assured the
    Court that even otherwise it is the
    duty of the State and its high officials
    to take care to do so and the direction
    made by the Court shall be complied
    with in letter and spirit.”
14
The aforesaid directions were interim in nature and were passed

      on the basis of averments made in the petition duly supported by

      an affidavit. Writ petitions were directed to be listed on the date of

      hearing fixed.
24.   Ten years later, in
Union of India v. Sh. Harish Chandra Singh

      Rawat
, (2016) SCC Online SC 442, again an interim order was

      passed after the special leave petitions were taken up for hearing,

      though after concession which was made by Mr. Mukul Rohatgi,

      the then Attorney General for India, that the Union of India has

      no objection, which the Court had appreciated, to observe that the

      floor   test   should   be   conducted   on   a   special   session   of

      Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly to be summoned/convened in

      which the only agenda would be the vote of confidence sought by

      the first respondent and apart from the said agenda nothing will

      be discussed. Directions were issued to the Chief Secretary and

      the Director General of Police, State of Uttarakhand, to see that

      all qualified Members of the Legislative Assembly, freely, safely

      and securely attend the Assembly and no hindrance is caused to

      them. The floor test was to commence at 11:00 a.m. and was

      directed to be completed by 1:00 p.m. There was another direction
15
that the Confidence Motion having been put, a division of the

   House shall take place and members inclined to vote in favour of

   the Motion shall sit on one side/wing and those voting against the

   Motion shall sit on the other side/wing. The entire proceedings

   were to be video­graphed and video recording was directed to be

   placed before the Court for being perused. The special leave

    petitions were directed to be listed thereafter.
25. In Chandrakant Kavlekar v. Union of India, (2017) 3 SCC


   758, the challenge raised was to a press note and communication

   from a leader of a party to the Governor of the State on the issue

   relating to whether a particular party had misrepresented the

   facts. Observing that the sensitive and contentious issue could be

   resolved by a simple direction requiring holding of the floor test at

   the earliest. This would remove all possible ambiguities and would

   result in giving the democratic process, the required credibility.

   By order dated 14.03.2017, the Governor of the State of Goa was

   requested to ensure that a floor test is held on 16.03.2017.

   Further, it would be the only agenda for the day so as to

   determine whether the Chief Minister administered the oath of

   office enjoys the support of the majority. The order further

   highlights that the floor test should be held as early as possible.
16
26.   Lastly, we would refer to
G. Parmeshwara v. Union of India
,

      (2018) 16 SCC 46, wherein identical directions were issued in

      respect of formation of Government in the State of Karnataka to

      test whether the Chief Minister so appointed enjoyed the majority

      support of the House. Noticing the fact that the elected members

      of the Legislative Assembly, as in the present case, were yet to

      take oath and the Speaker was also not elected, the following

      procedure was directed to be followed for conducting the floor

      test:
“8…
              (A) Pro­tem Speaker shall be appointed for the
              aforesaid purpose immediately.
              (B) All the elected members shall take oath tomorrow
              (19­5­2018) and this exercise shall be completed
              before 4.00 p.m.
              (C) The Pro­tem Speaker shall conduct the floor test
              on 19­5­2018 at 4.00 p.m. in order to ascertain the
              majority and it shall not be by secret ballot and these
              proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with
              law.
(D) Adequate and sufficient security arrangements
              shall be made and Director General of Police, State of
              Karnataka      will  himself   supervise     the   said
              arrangements so that there is no lapse on this count
              whatsoever.”

      It was directed that the floor test would be conducted immediately

      the next date, i.e., the date following the order.
17
27.   We may note that in the present case, oath has not been

      administered to the elected members even though a month has

      elapsed since the declaration of election results. In such emergent

      facts and circumstances, to curtail unlawful practices such as

      horse trading, to avoid uncertainty and to effectuate smooth

      running of democracy by ensuring a stable Government, we are of

      the considered opinion that it is necessary to pass certain interim

      directions in this case. In this context, it is necessary and

      expedient to conduct the floor test as soon as possible to

      determine whether the Chief Minister, who was administered the

      oath of office, has the support of the majority or not. Since the

      elected members of the Legislative Assembly are yet to take oath

      as specified in the III Schedule of the Constitution, and the

      Speaker is also yet to be elected, we request the Governor of the

      State of Maharashtra to ensure that a floor test be held on

      27.11.2019. The following procedure is to be followed for

      conducting the floor test:
a.   Pro­tem Speaker shall be solely appointed for
                    the aforesaid agenda immediately.
               b.   All the elected members shall take oath on
                    27.11.2019, which exercise should be
                    completed before 5:00 p.m.
               c.   Immediately thereafter, the Pro­tem Speaker
                    shall conduct the floor test in order to
18
ascertain whether the Respondent No. 3 has
                 the majority, and these proceedings shall be
                 conducted in accordance with law. The floor
                 test will not be conducted by secret ballot.
d.   The proceedings have to be live telecast, and
                 appropriate arrangements are to be made to
                 ensure the same.
28. Eight weeks time is granted to the learned counsel for the

   respondents to file their respective counter affidavits. Rejoinder

   affidavit, if any, is to be filed within four weeks thereafter. The

   matter to be listed after twelve weeks.
..............................................J.
                                                          (N.V. Ramana)


                                  ..............................................J.
                                                         (Ashok Bhushan)


                                  ..............................................J.
                                                           (Sanjiv Khanna)
   NEW DELHI;
November 26, 2019.
19