[Cites
15
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Hari Niwas Gupta vs The State Of Bihar on 8 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1689, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1421, (2019) 15 SCALE 515, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 433, (2019) 4 SCT 808, (2020) 1 ESC 28, (2020) 1 LAB LN 19, (2020) 1 SERVLJ 79, (2020) 1 SERVLR 198
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Indu Malhotra
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3105 OF 2017


                         HARI NIWAS GUPTA                                 …..     APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         STATE OF BIHAR AND ANOTHER                       ….. RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                WITH

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3106-3107 OF 2017

                         KOMAL RAM AND JITENDRA NATH SINGH                …..       APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

                         STATE OF BIHAR AND ANOTHER                       ….. RESPONDENT(S)


                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
This common judgment would dispose of the above-

                                captioned appeals preferred by three judicial officers namely, Hari

                                Niwas Gupta, Komal Ram and Jitendra Nath Singh, who were

                                working as Principal Judge, Family Court, Samastipur; Chief
Signature Not Verified          Judicial Magistrate, Araria; and ad-hoc Additional District and
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Sessions Judge, Araria, respectively.
Date: 2019.11.08
16:27:08 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                             Page 1 of 23
2.     On 29th January 2013, a news item was published in a local daily

       (Udghosh), that on 26th January 2013 the Nepal Police had

       apprehended three judicial officers belonging to the State of Bihar

       as they were allegedly found in a compromising position with three

       Nepali women in a guest house at Biratnagar, Nepal. Thereupon

       the judicial officers were brought to the district police station in

       Nepal, but were released on account of pressure from various

       circles. On learning about the incident, the High Court of

       Judicature at Patna (‘High Court’ for short) had addressed the

       letter dated 18th February 2013 to the District and Sessions Judge,

       Purnea to submit a report in the matter. The District and Sessions

       Judge vide report dated 24th February 2013 had informed that

       during the inquiry the three judicial officers had denied having left

       India for Nepal. Komal Ram had claimed that he was in Purnea,

       and in the process of vacating his quarters on transfer. The report

       had made reference to another news item published by the same

       daily on 22nd February 2013, expressing regret over erroneous

       reportage and that the Superintendent of Police, Araria appeared

       to have held a bias against the judicial officers. After receipt of the

       report, the High Court had addressed a letter to the Ministry of

       Home Affairs, Government of India to collect and ascertain

       information, details and records. By communication dated 20 th
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                Page 2 of 23
June 2013, the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs,

       Government of India, had informed the High Court that the mobile

       phones of the judicial officers were simultaneously switched off for

       a long time on 26th and 27th January 2013 and when the phones

       were active during that period, they were within the range of the

       tower at Forbesganj town, which indicated that the judicial officers

       were together in proximity to Nepal, and not at the place of their

       posting. The hotel bill submitted and relied upon by Komal Ram to

       support his claim that he was staying at a hotel in Purnea between

       26th and 27th January 2013 was considered to be fabricated based

       on the handwriting and Komal Ram’s signature on the bill. Further,

       the hotel was not of the standard where a judicial officer of Komal

       Ram’s rank would have stayed.
3.     The Standing Committee of the High Court in its meeting held on

       5th February, 2014 had resolved that the judicial officers should be

       placed under suspension and also that they should be dismissed

       from service without an inquiry in exercise of power under clause
(b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution of

       India, read-with Rules 14 and 20 of the Bihar Government

       Servants (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 2005. At the

       Full Court of the judges of the High Court held on 10 th February,

       2014, the recommendation of the Standing Committee was
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                             Page 3 of 23
accepted and Full Court resolution was passed for dismissal of the

       judicial officers from judicial service in the State Government of

       Bihar, dispensing with the disciplinary proceedings by invoking

       clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the

       Constitution of India. The recommendation of the Full Court was

       accepted by the State Government and vide common order dated

       12th February 2014 issued by the Governor of the State of Bihar

       the judicial officers were dismissed from service.
4.     The judicial officers had challenged the dismissal order by filing

       separate writ petitions, which were allowed by the Division Bench

       of the High Court (‘Division Bench’ for short), vide judgment dated

       19th May 2015, primarily on the ground that the Full Court had

       contravened clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of

       the Constitution by not recording reasons for dispensing with the

       disciplinary inquiry at the time of recommending dismissal of the

       judicial officers. The note relied upon by the Registry of the High

       Court as purportedly recording the reasons for dispensing with the

       inquiry, it was observed, did not contain any date or signatures

       and lacked authenticity. Thus, the High Court had not been able to

       place on record any material to show that any reasons were

       recorded for dispensing with the disciplinary proceedings.
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                Page 4 of 23
5.     While setting aside the order of dismissal, in the case of the

       judicial officers, dated 12th February 2014 for failure to record

       reasons for dispensing with the inquiry, the Division Bench had

       given the following liberty and discretion to the High Court:
“The writ petitions are, accordingly, allowed, and the
              common order dated 12.02.2014 is set aside. It is made
              clear that in case, the High Court intends to invoke its
              power under Sub-clause (b) of the 2nd proviso to
Article
              311 (2)
of the Constitution of India, it shall be under
              obligation to record reasons, at the appropriate stage and
              follow the prescribed procedure.
It is brought to our notice that two (sic- one) of the officers
              have attained the age of superannuation, during the
              pendency of the writ petitions. We direct that as a result of
              the judgment in these writ petitions, the petitioner, who is
              already in service, shall be deemed to be under
              suspension, and the other two would be deemed to be
              continuing in service for the limited purpose of enabling the
              departmental proceedings to continue. The High Court
              shall take a decision in this behalf, within a period of two
              months from today. If no decision is taken in this regard,
              the proceedings would lapse and the petitioners would be
              entitled for all the consequential benefits, as though the
              proceedings have been set aside in their entirety. If, on
              the other hand, the proceedings are initiated, the
              petitioners shall await the outcome thereof. While the one
              who is in service shall be paid subsistence allowance, the
              other two shall be paid provisional pension to the extent of
              25%, forthwith.
Interlocutory application, if any, shall stand disposed of.
              There shall be no order as to costs.”
6.     The judicial officers have challenged this afore-quoted portion and

       the liberty granted to the High Court to invoke the power under

       clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                     Page 5 of 23
Constitution at an appropriate stage with the requirement to record

       reasons and follow the prescribed procedure, on the ground that

       the liberty granted permits the High Court to record reasons post

       the earlier order of dismissal dated 12 th February 2014, which is

       contrary to law and the Constitution.
7.     The respondents, that is, the State of Bihar and the High Court,

       have not preferred any appeal and have accepted the decision.
8.     Clauses (1) and (2) of
Article 311
of the Constitution, read:
311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of
              persons employed in civil capacities under the Union
              or a State.—(1) No person who is a member of a civil
              service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service
              of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State
              shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate
              to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or
              removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in
              which he has been informed of the charges against him
              and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
              respect of those charges:
Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to
              impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be
              imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such
              inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person
              any opportunity of making representation on the penalty
              proposed:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply—
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                     Page 6 of 23
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or
                       reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which
                       has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or
                       remove a person or to reduce him in rank is
                       satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by
                       that authority in writing, it is not reasonably
                       practicable to hold such inquiry; or (c) where the
                       President or the Governor, as the case may be,
                       is satisfied that in the interest of the security of
                       the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.”

               Clause (1) states that persons employed in civil services or

       posts under the Union or the States or members of the all-India

       service shall not be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank by an

       authority subordinate to that by which he/she was appointed.
Clause (2) provides that such a person could be dismissed or

       removed or reduced in rank only after an inquiry in which he has

       been informed of the charges against him and after being afforded

       a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those

       charges. The second proviso incorporates exceptions when the

       need for holding an inquiry under clause (2) can be dispensed

       with. Clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
can be

       invoked to impose a punishment of dismissal, removal, or

       reduction in rank on the satisfaction, to be recorded in writing, that

       it is not reasonably practicable to conduct an inquiry before

       imposing the punishment. This Court in Jaswant Singh v. State
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                    Page 7 of 23
of Punjab,1 relying on an earlier decision in Union of India v.
Tulsiram Patel,2 has affirmatively held that the obligation of the

       competent authority to record reasons when passing an order

       under clause (b) to the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
is

       mandatory, and it was inter alia observed:
“5. …It was incumbent on the respondents to disclose to
              the court the material in existence at the date of the
              passing of the impugned order in support of the subjective
              satisfaction recorded by respondent 3 in the impugned
              order. Clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
can be invoked only when the authority is satisfied from
              the material placed before him that it is not reasonably
              practicable to hold a departmental enquiry. This is clear
              from the following observation at page 270 of Tulsiram
              case: (SCC p. 504, para 130)

                         “A disciplinary authority is not expected to
                         dispense with a disciplinary inquiry lightly or
                         arbitrarily or out of ulterior motives or merely in
                         order to avoid the holding of an inquiry or
                         because the department’s case against the
                         government servant is weak and must fail.”
9.     In the present matter, the Division Bench vide the impugned

       judgment has as a fact found that the High Court had failed to

       record satisfaction in writing for dispensing with an inquiry before

       arriving at its decision to dismiss the judicial officers. For this

       reason, the order of dismissal dated 12th February 2014 passed by

       the Governor of the State of Bihar under clause (b) of the second

       proviso      to
Article      311(2)
was     quashed       and      set   aside.

       Consequently, the judicial officers were to be reinstated in service.
1
(1991) 1 SCC 362
2
(1985) 3 SCC 398
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                             Page 8 of 23
This is what has been observed in the quoted portion of the final

       directions by the Division Bench, which refers to the fact that “two”

       (sic-one) judicial officers had attained the age of superannuation

       during the pendency of the writ petitions and, therefore, they

       would be deemed to be continuing in service for the limited

       purpose of enabling the disciplinary proceedings to continue. The

       other officer(s) would be deemed to be under suspension. The

       High Court was required to take a decision within two months and

       if no decision was taken, the proceedings would lapse and the

       judicial officers would be entitled to all consequential benefits as if

       the proceedings had been set aside in entirety. It was directed that

       the judicial officer(s) who continued to be in service, would be paid

       subsistence allowance, and the retired would be paid provisional

       pension to the extent of 25% forthwith.
10.    The directions and observations of the judgment quoted above do

       not confer a new and unconventional right or power on the High

       Court, instead clarifies what is an obvious and perspicuous

       consequence of quashing the order of dismissal in the present

       case. The direction requires the High Court to proceed in

       accordance with law and rightly did not put any fetters on the

       course of action the High Court as a disciplinary authority would

       like to follow. Therefore, it is observed, more out of abundant
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                Page 9 of 23
caution rather than as a typical direction, that the High Court was

       entitled, if it deemed it appropriate and proper, to invoke the power

       under clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the

       Constitution at an appropriate stage, after recording reasons and

       following the prescribed procedure.
11.    Striking down and setting aside the earlier order dated 12 th

       February, 2014 under clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article

       311(2)
for failure to record reasons for dispensing with the

       departmental inquiry annuls the earlier order, which ceases to

       exist and stands obliterated, but does not adjudicate on the merits

       of the allegations so as to attract the bar of res judicata.

       Conscious of the seriousness of the allegations and the reason for

       allowing the writ petition, the Division Bench was justified in not

       barring the High Court from fresh application of mind and from

       invoking clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
if

       required and justified in accordance with law. The expression ‘at

       appropriate stage’ used by the Division Bench is not a direction for

       initiation of a regular departmental inquiry nor does it prohibit

       recourse to clause (b) to the second proviso of
Article 311(2)
of

       the Constitution in accordance with law. We do not see such

       fetters and restrictions placed on the High Court by the Division

       Bench.
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                             Page 10 of 23
12.    The judicial officers had referred to
Mohinder Singh Gill and

       Another v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and

       Others3
and
East Coast Railway and Another v. Mahadev

       Appa Rao and Others4
to assert that this Court had rejected the

       contention that reasons under clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
could be subsequently recorded to support the

       order. The submission does not bolster the appellants’ case

       because in these decisions this Court had refused to accept

       affidavits providing reasons for dispensing with the inquiry,

       observing that these were post the dismissal order. The reasons

       were submitted in the Court proceedings, and were not recorded

       at the time of exercise of the power under clause (b) to the second

       proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution.
As per the dicta in

       Tulsiram Patel (supra) and
Jaswant Singh
(supra), the law in

       terms of clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
mandates that the reasons for dispensing with the inquiry must be

       recorded in writing before the order of dismissal.
13.    Similarly reference to Chief Security Officer and Others v.
Singasan Rabi Das,5 State of Orissa and Others v.
3
(1978) 1 SCC 405
4
(2010) 7 SCC 678
5
(1991) 1 SCC 729
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                            Page 11 of 23
Dinabandhu Beheta and Others,6 Sudesh Kumar v. State of

       Haryana and Others,7 Tarsem Singh v. State of Punjab and

       Others,8 Reena Rani v. State of Haryana and Others,9 and
Risal Singh v. State of Haryana and Others
, 10 do not support

       the contention raised by the judicial officers, but would support the

       contrary view. In these judgments, the orders under clause (b) to

       the second proviso of
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution were

       struck down for want of recorded reasons for dispensing with the

       departmental inquiry. Notwithstanding the quashing, this Court in

       several cases had expressly permitted the authorities to proceed

       further and take action in accordance with law.
For example, in

       Reena Rani (supra), it was held,

              “12. In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned
              judgment as also the order passed by the learned Single
              Judge are set aside and the writ petition filed by the
              appellant is allowed with the direction that she shall be
              reinstated in service and given all consequential benefits.
              However, it is made clear that this order shall not preclude
              the competent authority from taking action against the
              appellant in accordance with law.
At the same time, we
              deem it necessary to observe that liberty given by this
              Court shall not be construed as a mandate for initiation of
              disciplinary proceeding against the appellant and the
              competent authority shall take appropriate decision after
              objectively considering the entire record.”
6
(1997) 10 SCC 383
7
(2005) 11 SCC 525
8
(2006) 13 SCC 581
9
(2012) 10 SCC 215
10
(2014) 13 SCC 244
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                 Page 12 of 23
Similarly, in
Risal Singh
(supra), it was observed as under:
“10. Consequently, we allow the appeal and set aside the
              order passed by the High Court and that of the disciplinary
              authority. The appellant shall be deemed to be in service
              till the date of superannuation. As he has attained the age
              of superannuation in the meantime, he shall be entitled to
              all consequential benefits. The arrears shall be computed
              and paid to the appellant within a period of three months
              hence. Needless to say, the respondents are not
              precluded from initiating any disciplinary proceedings, if
              advised in law. As the lis has been pending before the
              Court, the period that has been spent in Court shall be
              excluded for the purpose of limitation for initiating the
              disciplinary proceedings as per rules. However, we may
              hasten to clarify that our observations herein should not be
              construed as a mandate to the authorities to initiate the
              proceeding against the appellant. We may further proceed
              to add that the State Government shall conduct itself as a
              model employer and act with the objectivity which is
              expected from it. There shall be no order as to costs.”
14.    The second contention raised by the judicial officers is with

       reference to the earlier observation of the Division Bench while

       dealing with the third issue or point (c) to the following effect:
“In the instant case, the High Court did undertake a
              preliminary enquiry and got possession of certain
              materials; be it in the form of the paper clippings, report of
              the District Judge, Purnea or letter from the Home Ministry,
              Government of India. When it was possible for the High
              Court to undertake such an enquiry, it would have been
              equally possible to frame charges, and then attempt to
              proceed with the departmental enquiry. It is only when
              conducting of departmental enquiry was turning out to be a
              difficult task, either at the inception or half way-through,
              that a decision could have been taken to dispense with the
              enquiry; by recording specific reasons. The judgments of
              the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Tarsem Singh (supra) and
              Tulsi Ram Patel (supra) throw light upon this. On applying
              the principles laid therein, it becomes clear that there is
              patent violation in the impugned proceedings. Therefore,
              we hold this point also in favour of the petitioners.”
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                   Page 13 of 23
Learned counsel, referring to the portion, submits that the Division

       Bench has held that the departmental inquiry was possible and

       could not have been dispensed with.
15.    The observations in our opinion are being misread as the afore-
quoted portion refers to the legal position that normally

       departmental inquiry should be held. It also refers to the scenario

       where a departmental inquiry cannot be conducted that is, “when

       conducting of departmental enquiry was turning out to be a difficult

       task”, in which case a “decision could have been taken to

       dispense with the enquiry; by recording specific reasons”. It is

       observed that the principles laid down in Tulsiram Patel (supra)

       and Tarsem Singh (supra) have to be kept in mind. Appropriate in

       this regard, would be a reference to the following observations in

       Tulsiram Patel (supra), which read:
“130. The condition precedent for the application of
                 clause (b) is the satisfaction of the disciplinary authority
                 that “it is not reasonably practicable to hold” the inquiry
                 contemplated by clause (2) of
Article 311.
What is
                 pertinent to note is that the words used are “not
                 reasonably practicable” and not “impracticable”.
                 According to the Oxford English Dictionary “practicable”
                 means “Capable of being put into practice, carried out in
                 action, effected, accomplished, or done; feasible”.
                 Webster’s Third New International Dictionary defines the
                 word “practicable” inter alia as meaning “possible to
                 practice or perform: capable of being put into practice,
                 done or accomplished: feasible”. Further, the words
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                    Page 14 of 23
used are not “not practicable” but “not reasonably
                 practicable”. Webster’s Third New International
                 Dictionary defines the word “reasonably” as “in a
                 reasonable manner: to a fairly sufficient extent”. Thus,
                 whether it was practicable to hold the inquiry or not must
                 be judged in the context of whether it was reasonably
                 practicable to do so. It is not a total or absolute
                 impracticability which is required by clause (b). What is
                 requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not
                 practicable in the opinion of a reasonable man taking a
                 reasonable view of the prevailing situation.”

               Thus, the authorities to invoke the power under clause (b) to

       the second proviso of
Article 311(2)
to dispense with a

       departmental inquiry must record a finding that such an inquiry

       cannot be conducted and record specific reasons for the same. In

       this case, the Division Bench had recorded the contention of the

       respondent- High Court as the disciplinary authority that it would

       be impossible to assimilate, collect and produce direct evidence

       and material as the acts and misdeeds were in another country.
The Division Bench having found that reasons had not been

       recorded for dispensing with the inquiry, has neither accepted nor

       rejected this contention of the High Court. It will not be appropriate

       and correct to interpret the decision of the Division Bench by

       reading one or more sentences of a paragraph in isolation. The

       entire judgment has to be read to understand the ratio and finding

       and the observations must be read in the context in which they

       have been made.
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                  Page 15 of 23
16.    Learned counsel appearing for Komal Ram and Jitendra Nath

       Singh had raised another contention relating to the power of the

       High Court to dispense with the inquiry under clause (b) of the

       second proviso to
Article 311
of the Constitution. The contention is

       that this power exclusively vests with the Governor alone who has

       to satisfy himself and record in writing the reasons why it is not

       reasonably practical to hold an inquiry.       Reliance was placed on

       the following observations in the Constitutional Bench judgment of

       this Court in
State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi,11
:
“...within the exercise of the control vested in the High
                 Court, the High Court can hold enquiries, impose
                 punishments other than dismissal or removal, subject
                 however to the conditions of service, to a right of
                 appeal if granted by the conditions of service, and to
                 the giving of an opportunity of showing cause as
                 required by clause (2) of
Article 311
unless such
                 opportunity is dispensed with by the Governor acting
                 under the provisos (b) and (c) to that clause.”
17.    The contention misreads the ratio in
Nripendra Nath Bagchi
(supra), which rather holds to the contrary.
Interpreting
Articles

       233
and
235
of the Constitution, and on the aspect of ‘control’ of

       the High Court in matters relating to the subordinate judiciary in
Nripendra Nath Bagchi
(supra), it was held:
“13. […] the history which lies behind the enactment of
                 these Articles indicate that “control” was vested in the
11
AIR 1966 SC 447
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                  Page 16 of 23
High Court to effectuate a purpose, namely, the
                 securing of the independence of the subordinate
                 judiciary and unless it included disciplinary control as
                 well the very object would be frustrated. This aid to
                 construction is admissible because to find out the
                 meaning of a law, recourse may legitimately be had to
                 the prior state of the law, the evil sought to be removed
                 and the process by which the law was evolved. The
                 word “control”, as we have seen, was used for the first
                 time in the Constitution and it is accompanied by the
                 word “vest” which is a strong word. It shows that the
                 High Court is made the sole custodian of the control
                 over the judiciary. Control, therefore, is not merely the
                 power to arrange the day to day working of the court
                 but contemplates disciplinary jurisdiction over the
                 presiding Judge.
Article 227
gives to the High Court
                 superintendence over these courts and enables the
                 High Court to call for returns etc. The word “control” in
Article 235
must have a different content. It includes
                 something in addition to mere superintendence. It is
                 control over the conduct and discipline of the judges.
                 This conclusion is further strengthened by two other
                 indications pointing clearly in the same direction. The
                 first is that the order of the High Court is made subject
                 to an appeal if so provided in the law regulating the
                 conditions of service and this necessarily indicates an
                 order passed in disciplinary jurisdiction. Secondly, the
                 words are that the High Court shall “deal” with the
                 judge in accordance with his rules of service and the
                 word “deal” also points to disciplinary and not mere
                 administrative jurisdiction.
14.
Articles 233
and
235
make a mention of two distinct
                 powers. The first is power of appointments of persons,
                 their postings and promotion and the other is power of
                 control. In the case of the District Judges,
                 appointments of persons to be and posting and
                 promotion are to be made by the Governor but the
                 control over the District Judge is of the High Court. We
                 are not impressed by the argument that the term used
                 is “District Court” because the rest of the Article clearly
                 indicates that the word “court” is used compendiously
                 to denote not only the court proper but also the
                 presiding Judge. The latter part of
Article 235
talks of
                 the man who holds the office. In the case of the judicial
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                    Page 17 of 23
service subordinate to the District judge the
                 appointment has to be made by the Governor in
                 accordance with the rules to be framed after
                 consultation with the State Public Service Commission
                 and the High Court but the power of posting, promotion
                 and grant of leave and the control of the courts are
                 vested in the High Court. What is vested includes
                 disciplinary jurisdiction. Control is useless if it is not
                 accompanied by disciplinary powers. It is not to be
                 expected that the High Court would run to the
                 Government or the Governor in every case of
                 indiscipline however small and which may not even
                 require the punishment of dismissal or removal. These
                 Articles go to show that by vesting “control” in the High
                 Court the independence of the subordinate judiciary
                 was in view. This was partly achieved in the
Government of India Act, 1935
but it was given effect
                 to fully by the drafters of the present Constitution. This
                 construction is also in accord with the Directive
                 Principles in
Article 50
of the Constitution which reads:
“50. The State shall take steps to separate
                       the judiciary from the executive in the public
                       services of the State”.
xx    xx        xx
17. […] That the Governor appoints District Judges and
                 the Governor alone can dismiss or remove them goes
                 without saying. That does not impinge upon the control
                 of the High Court. It only means that the High Court
                 cannot appoint or dismiss or remove District Judges. In
                 the same way the High Court cannot use the special
                 jurisdiction conferred by the two provisos. The High
                 Court cannot decide that it is not reasonably
                 practicable to give a District Judge an opportunity of
                 showing cause or that in the interest of the security of
                 the State it is not expedient to give such an
                 opportunity. This the Governor alone can decide. That
                 certain powers are to be exercised by the Governor
                 and not by the High Court does not necessarily take
                 away other powers from the High Courts. The provisos
                 can be given their full effect without giving rise to other
                 implications. It is obvious that if a case arose for the
                 exercise of the special powers under the two provisos,
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                    Page 18 of 23
the High Court must leave the matter to the Governor.
In this connection we may incidentally add that we
                 have no doubt that in exercising these special powers
                 in relation to inquiries against District Judges, the
                 Governor will always have regard to the opinion of the
                 High Court in the matter. This will be so whoever be
                 the inquiring authority in the State. But this does not
                 lead to the further conclusion that the High Court must
                 not hold the enquiry any more than that the Governor
                 should personally hold the enquiry.”
18.    The expression/words “within the exercise of the control vested in

       the High Court, the High Court can hold enquiries, impose

       punishments other than dismissal or removal, subject however to

       the conditions of service, to a right of appeal if granted by the

       conditions of service, and to the giving of an opportunity of

       showing cause as required by clause (2) of
Article 311
unless

       such opportunity is dispensed with by the Governor acting under

       the provisos (b) and (c) to that clause” is not to deny the High

       Court the authority to decide whether conditions for invoking

       clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
are satisfied, but

       recognises that the resolution and recommendation of dismissal,

       removal or reduction in rank or for dispensing with the inquiry in

       terms of clause (b) [also clause (c)] of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
would require an order of the Governor.               The

       observations do not hold that the Governor, and not the High

       Court, is vested with the jurisdiction and is the competent authority
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                 Page 19 of 23
to decide whether the inquiry should be dispensed with upon

       recording of satisfaction in terms of clause (b) of the second

       proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution. The decision refers to
Article 235
of the Constitution and states that the control vests

       with the High Court, albeit order of appointment, dismissal or

       removal is passed and made in the name of the Governor who

       passes the formal order be it a case of appointment, dismissal or

       removal. This is clear from the last portion of paragraph 17 in
Nirpendra Nath Bagchi
(supra) which records “that the Governor

       will always have regard to the opinion of the High Court in the

       matter. This will be the inquiring authority in the State.
But this

       does not lead to the further conclusion that the High Court must

       not hold the enquiry any more than that the Governor should

       personally hold the enquiry.”

               This legal position with reference to
Articles 233
to 236 and

       ‘control’ of the High Court is beyond doubt as was explained in
Ajit Kumar v. State of Jharkhand12
in the following words:
“15. The next contention raised by the appellant was
                 that the aforesaid power under
Article 311(2)(b)
of the
                 Constitution could not have been invoked by the High
                 Court. The aforesaid submission also cannot be
                 accepted in view of the fact that a Subordinate Judge is
                 also a Judge within the meaning of the provision of
Article 233
of the Constitution of India read with the
                 provisions of
Articles 235
and
236
of the Constitution of
                 India.
12
(2011) 11 SCC 458
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                  Page 20 of 23
16.
Article 233
clearly lays down that appointments and
                 promotions of District Judges in any State are to be
                 made by the Governor of the State in consultation with
                 the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such
                 State. The aforesaid provision, like
Articles 234
to 236,
                 has been incorporated in the Constitution of India inter
                 alia to secure the independence of the judiciary from
                 the executive and the same deals with the scope of
                 separation of power of the three wings of the State.
17. It cannot be disputed that the power under the
                 aforesaid articles [Articles 233-236] is to be exercised
                 by the Governor in consultation with the High Court.
Under the scheme of the Indian Constitution the High
                 Court is vested with the power to take decision for
                 appointment of the subordinate judiciary under
Articles
                 234
to 236 of the Constitution. The High Court is also
                 vested with the power to see that the high traditions
                 and standards of the judiciary are maintained by the
                 selection of proper persons to run the District Judiciary.
                 If a person is found not worthy to be a member of the
                 judicial service or it is found that he has committed a
                 misconduct he could be removed from the service by
                 following the procedure laid down. Power could also be
                 exercised for such dismissal or removal by following
                 the preconditions as laid down under
Article 311(2)(b)
of the Constitution of India. Even for imposing a
                 punishment of dismissal or removal or reduction in
                 rank, the High Court can hold disciplinary proceedings
                 and recommend such punishments. The Governor
                 alone is competent to impose such punishment upon
                 persons coming under Articles 233-235 read with
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution of India. Similarly,
                 such a power could be exercised by the High Court to
                 dispense with an enquiry for a reason to be recorded in
                 writing and such dispensation of an enquiry for valid
                 reasons when recommended to the Governor, it is
                 within the competence of the Governor to issue such
                 orders in terms of the recommendation of the High
                 Court in exercise of power under
Article 311(2)(b)
of
                 the Constitution of India.” (emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                   Page 21 of 23
19.    During the course of hearing before us, it was pointed out that the

       Full Court had subsequently again recommended dismissal of the

       judicial officers dispensing with the departmental inquiry in the

       exercise of power under clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article

       311(2)
of the Constitution vide recommendation dated 13 th August

       2015. However, the matter is pending with the State Government

       and we were informed that no final order has been passed in view

       of the stay order dated 11th September 2015 passed by this Court.

       It was also initially urged and argued that the order of dismissal

       under clause (b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
of the

       Constitution cannot be passed against the officer who has retired.

       We were informed that the other two officers had also retired

       during the pendency of the present appeals. Therefore, at best the

       pensionary and retirement benefits can be forfeited and denied,

       but an order of dismissal from service by invoking powers under

       clause(b) of the second proviso to
Article 311(2)
cannot be passed

       against the appellants - judicial officers.    Subsequently, the

       counsel for the appellants - judicial officers did not press this

       contention as the matter is still pending before the State

       authorities, and the final order is yet to be passed. A challenge

       cannot be made in anticipation. Further, this challenge was also

       not the subject matter of the writ petitions in which the impugned
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                            Page 22 of 23
order was passed and would constitute an entirely new cause of

       action. Counsels for the appellants - judicial officers have,

       accordingly, reserved their right to challenge the order if, and as

       and when it is passed. In view of the aforesaid position, we would

       not go into the merits of the said contention and leave the issue

       open. It is equally open to the respondents, that is, the State of

       Bihar and the High Court to examine this contention.
20.    Recording the aforesaid, the appeals are dismissed and the stay

       order is vacated, albeit we clarify that the respondents, in terms of

       the judgment passed by the Division Bench, would be required to

       proceed in accordance with law. We also clarify that we have

       expressed no opinion on the merits of the allegations made

       against the three judicial officers. There would be no order as to

       costs.
................................J.
                                                       (INDU MALHOTRA)


                                                    .................................J.
                                                        (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 08, 2019.
Civil Appeal No. 3105 of 2017 & Ors.                                   Page 23 of 23