[Cites
57
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Ram Krishan Grover vs Union Of India on 14 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3226, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1490, (2019) 16 SCALE 282, (2019) 2 RENCR 703, (2019) 2 RENTLR 643
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
L. Nageswara Rao
,
Ranjan Gogoi
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.             8597 OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26925 OF 2011)



                         RAM KRISHAN GROVER AND OTHERS                           …..      APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                               ….. RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                 WITH

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.             8598 OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 28107 OF 2011)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8599     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 28371 OF 2011)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8600     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 28593 OF 2011)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8601     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 31284 OF 2011)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8602     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2091 OF 2012)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8603     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34304 OF 2012)

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8604     OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 17458 OF 2013)

Signature Not Verified
                                                                  AND
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2019.11.14
16:27:12 IST

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.               8605     OF 2019
Reason:




                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 35980 OF 2013)

                         Civil Appeal arising out of
                         SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 1 of 46
                              JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.     The afore-captioned appeals are by tenants of different residential

       and non-residential buildings in the Union Territory of Chandigarh

       and urban areas in the State of Punjab, who have challenged the

       constitutional validity of
Section 13-B
of the East Punjab Urban

       Rent Restriction Act, 1949 (for short, the ‘
Rent Act
’) and its

       extension to the Union Territory of Chandigarh by the Central

       Government vide Notification dated 09.10.2009 in exercise of

       powers under
Section 87
of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966

       (for short, the ‘
Reorganisation Act
’).
3.
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act, reads as under:
“13-B. Right to recover immediate possession of
                 residential building or scheduled building and/or
                 non-residential building to accrue to Non-resident
                 Indian.— (1) Where an owner is a Non-Resident
                 Indian and returns to India and the residential building
                 or scheduled building and/or non-residential building,
                 as the case may be, let out by him or her, is required
                 for his or her use, or for the use of any one ordinarily
                 living with and dependent on him or her, he or she,
                 may apply to the Controller for immediate possession
                 of such building or buildings, as the case may be:
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 2 of 46
Provided that a right to apply in respect of such a
                 building under this Section, shall be available only after
                 a period of five years from the date of becoming the
                 owner of such a building and shall be available only
                 once during the life time of such an owner.
(2) Where the owner referred to in sub-section (1), has
                 let out more than one residential building or scheduled
                 building and/or non-residential building, it shall be open
                 to him or her to make an application under that sub-
section in respect of only one residential building or
                 one scheduled building and/or one non-residential
                 building, each chosen by him or her.
(3) Where an owner recovers possession of a building
                 under this Section, he or she shall not transfer it
                 through sale or any other means or let it out before the
                 expiry of a period of five years from the date of taking
                 possession of the said building, failing which, the
                 evicted tenant may apply to the Controller for an order
                 directing that he shall be restored the possession of the
                 said building and the Controller shall make an order
                 accordingly."
The expression ‘Non-Resident Indian’ has been defined in

       clause (dd) to
Section 2
of the Rent Act and reads:
“(dd) "Non-resident Indian" means a person of Indian
                 origin, who is either permanently or temporarily settled
                 outside India in either case –
(a) for or on taking up employment outside India; or
(b) for carrying on a business or vocation outside
                     India; or
(c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances,
                     as would indicate his intention to stay outside India
                     for an uncertain period;”



Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 3 of 46
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act gives a right to Non-Resident

       Indians     to   recover      immediate         possession     of   residential/

       scheduled/non-residential buildings situated in the Union Territory

       of Chandigarh and urban areas in the State of Punjab on the

       satisfaction of the conditions stated. We shall elaborate the

       provisions subsequently and would first refer to the legislative

       history and procedure adopted for enforcement of the challenged

       provisions in the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
4.      In 1956, the unified State of Punjab was created by merging the

       erstwhile States of Pepsu and Punjab. In 1966, a new State of

       Haryana was created and carved out of certain territories from the

       State of Punjab. Certain hill areas of Punjab were merged in the

       Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh. A new Union Territory of

       Chandigarh was created and became the joint capital of Punjab

       and Haryana.
The Reorganisation Act
, that is, the
Punjab

       Reorganisation Act, 1966
gave effect to the proposals vide

       provisions relating to the delimitation of territories. Another

       important aspect of the
Reorganisation Act
dealt with the

       applicability     of   laws     in       territories   that   had   undergone

       reorganisation. This was effected by
Part X of the Reorganisation

       Act
comprising of Sections 86 to 97. Sections 87, 88 and 89 of the


Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                                Page 4 of 46
Reorganisation Act
are relevant for the present decision and are

       reproduced below:
“87. Power to extend enactments to Chandigarh – The
              Central Government may, by notification in the Official
              Gazette, extend with such restrictions or modifications as
              it thinks fit, to the Union territory of Chandigarh any
              enactment which is in force in a State at the date of the
              notification.
88. Territorial extent of laws.—The provisions of Part II
              shall not be deemed to have effected any change in the
              territories to which any law in force immediately before
              the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial
              references in any such law to the State of Punjab shall,
              until otherwise provided by a competent legislature or
              other competent authority, be construed as meaning the
              territories within the State immediately before the
              appointed day.
89. Power to adapt laws.—For the purpose of facilitating
              the application in relation to the State of Punjab or
              Haryana or to the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh or
              Chandigarh of any law made before the appointed day,
              the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of
              two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations
              and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or
              amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and
              thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the
              adaptations and modifications so made until altered,
              repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other
              competent authority.”


              We shall subsequently elucidate on the sections, with

       specific reference to
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act.
5.     Territories originally comprised in the former province of East

       Punjab and later designated as the State of Punjab were

       governed by the
Rent Act
, which applied to all “urban areas”
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                        Page 5 of 46
defined in
Section 2(j)
as any area administered by a municipal

       committee, a cantonment board, a town committee or an area

       notified by the State Government as an “urban area” for the

       purposes of the
Rent Act
.
6.     Central Government in exercise of power under
Section 89
of the

       Reorganisation Act had issued the Punjab Reorganisation

       (Chandigarh) (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent

       Subjects) Order, 1968 with effect from 1.11.1966 whereby in all

       the “existing laws” in its application to the Union Territory of

       Chandigarh, any reference to the State of Punjab should be read

       as a reference to the Union Territory of Chandigarh. The

       expression “existing laws” was defined in para 2(1)(b) of the

       Order. It is an accepted position that the
Rent Act
was not a part of

       the “existing laws” as the area forming the Union Territory of

       Chandigarh was not an “urban area” within the
Rent Act
.
7.     The Central Government by Notification dated 13.10.1972 and

       published in the Official Gazette on 04.11.1972 had declared the

       area comprising of the Union Territory of Chandigarh to be an

       “urban area” for the
Rent Act
. This Notification was struck down by

       the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Harkishan Singh v. Union

       of India1
, on the short ground that no notification extending the
1 AIR 1975 Punj. & Har 160 (FB)
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                     Page 6 of 46
Rent Act
to the Union Territory of Chandigarh as an “urban area”

       under
Section 2(j)
of the Rent Act could have been issued post

       reorganisation on 1.11.1966.
The Rent Act
was not operative in

       Chandigarh in terms of
Section 88
of the Reorganisation Act nor

       any part would become operative by a notification under Section

       87 without necessary adaptation. Thus, neither the Order nor the

       Notification dated 13.10.1972 could have the effect of making the
Rent Act
applicable to the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
8.     The Parliament had thereupon to rectify the defect exercised its

       power under
Article 246(4)
of the Constitution by enacting the
East

       Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Extension to Chandigarh) Act,

       1974
(for short, the ‘Extension Act’) to extend the
Rent Act
, subject

       to modification specified in the Schedule, to the Union Territory of

       Chandigarh. This enactment had stipulated that the
Rent Act
would be deemed to be in force from 04.11.1972, that is the day

       on which the earlier Notification that was quashed in Harkishan

       Singh’s      case     (supra),    was    made   effective.   Thereby    all

       proceedings for eviction initiated in view of the Notification dated

       04.11.1972 were regularised. The Extension Act was in principle

       and substance a Parliamentary enactment to incorporate by

       reference and to avoid repetition all the provisions of the
Rent Act
to the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 7 of 46
9.     On 17.12.1976, when the Parliament was not in session, the

       President had promulgated Ordinance 14 of 1976 by which the
Rent Act
was amended by the introduction of an Explanation and

       addition of sub-section (4A) to
Section 13
and sub-section (2A) to
Section 19
. New sections 13A, 18A and 18B were inserted and in

       Schedule II the form of summons to be issued under Section 13A

       was added. This Ordinance was allowed to lapse and was not

       enacted as law thereafter.
10.    In 1982, the Parliament passed the East Punjab Rent Restriction

       (Chandigarh Amendment) Act replacing the words “East Punjab”

       with the word “Punjab” and by substituting the definition of “non-

       residential building” in the
Rent Act
as applicable to Chandigarh.

       Lapsed amendments to the
Rent Act
vide Ordinance 14 of 1976

       were not incorporated.
11.    In 1985, the provisions of the
Rent Act
as applicable to the State

       of Punjab were amended by the Legislature of the State of Punjab

       vide Punjab Act 2 of 1985 by inserting new Sections 13A, 18A and

       18B, a new Second Schedule and amendments in
Sections 13
and
19
substantially similar to those that had been effected by

       Ordinance 14 of 1976. A new definition of “specified landlord” was

       also added. These amendments came into force on 16.11.1985.
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                   Page 8 of 46
12.    Central     Government         thereafter   issued   Notification   dated

       15.12.1986 purportedly in exercise of the power under
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act extending the provisions of the Punjab

       Act 2 of 1985, subject to the modifications mentioned therein, to

       the
Rent Act
applicable to the Union Territory of Chandigarh, that

       is, the Extension Act.
13.    The extension whether permissible by means of a notification

       issued under
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act was

       challenged, but rejected by this Court in
Ramesh Birch v. Union

       of India2
. We shall subsequently refer to this judgment.
14.    The provision under challenge before us, namely Section 13-B

       was inserted in the
Rent Act
vide
East Punjab Urban Rent

       Restriction (Amendment) Act, 2001
(for short, the ‘Amendment

       Act’) as enacted by the State Legislature of Punjab. Section 13-B

       and other related sections in the Amendment Act were extended

       to the Union Territory of Chandigarh by the Central Government

       vide Notification dated 09.10.2009 in purported exercise of powers

       under
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act.
15.    To avoid prolixity, we do not propose to refer to the factual matrix

       as after hearing arguments we had declined to interfere on facts
2 1989 Supp (1) SCC 430
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 9 of 46
and had heard arguments on legal issues that can be summarised

       as under:
(i)    The Notification dated 09.10.2009 which extends the

              Amendment Act to Chandigarh by an executive action in

              exercise of powers under
Section 87
of the Reorganisation

              Act amounts to and suffers from the vice of excessive

              delegation as it amends the rent legislation in force in

              Chandigarh, that is, the Extension Act were enacted by the

              Parliament in exercise of powers under
Article 246(4)
of the

              Constitution.
(ii)   The State Legislature of Punjab was incompetent to enact

              the Amendment Act, for the subject matter and rights of Non-
Resident Indians fall under the field of ‘Citizenship,

              Naturalization and Aliens’ under Entry 17 of List I;

              ‘Extradition’ under Entry 18 of List I and ‘Admission into, and

              Emigration and Expulsion from India; Passports and Visas’

              under Entry 19 of List I of the Seventh Schedule. The

              subject matter of legislation is in direct conflict with and

              repugnant to various Central enactments concerning the

              rights of Non-Resident Indians including the
Citizenship Act,

              1955
and the
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
,

              etc.
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                     Page 10 of 46
(iii)   Section 13-B which gives a preferential right to claim

               eviction to Non-Residents, including foreigners, is arbitrary,

               unreasonable and discriminatory, and creates an artificial

               classification for benefit of Non-Residents vis-à-vis Indian

               Residents and thus, violates
Article 14
of the Constitution.


               For the sake of convenience and clarity, we shall deal with

       each of the respective submissions and give our reasons

       separately.
A.     Whether Notification dated 09.10.2009 issued under
Section
       87
of the Reorganisation Act extending
Section 13-B
of the
       Rent Act to Chandigarh by executive action is invalid?
16.
In
Ramesh Birch
(supra), earlier Constitutional Bench judgment

       of this Court in Re Delhi Laws Act 1912, Ajmer Merwara

       (Extension of Laws) Act, 1947 and Part C States (Laws) Act,

       19503 was examined and elucidated after considering seven

       different opinions of Kania, CJ., Fazl Ali, Patanjali Sastri, Mahajan,

       Mukherjea, Das and Bose JJ. All the Judges except Kania, CJ.

       and Mahajan, J. had upheld provisions of
Section 7
of the Delhi

       Laws Act, 1912, Section 2 of the Ajmer Merwara (Extension of

       Laws) Act, 1947 and the first portion of Section 2 of Part C States

       (Laws) Act. However, Bose and Mukherjea, JJ. had for reasons


3 AIR 1951 SC 332
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                      Page 11 of 46
stated by them formed the majority with Kania, CJ. and Mahajan,

       J. in striking down second part of Section 2 of Part C States

       (Laws) Act, 1950 by which the executive had been given the

       power to make a provision in any enactment so extended for the

       repeal or amendment of any corresponding law (other than a

       Central Act) which was for the time being applicable to that Part C

       State. This part of
Section 2
, it was observed, suffers from the vice

       of excessive delegation and abdication of power by the

       Legislature.
On the touchstone of an earlier decision of the Privy

       Council in R. v. Burah4, this Court in
Ramesh Birch
(supra) had

       upheld constitutional validity of
Section 87
of the Reorganisation

       Act, holding it to be valid on the ‘policy and guideline’ theory if one

       has proper regard to the context of the
Reorganisation Act
and the

       object and purpose sought to be achieved by
Section 87
of the

       Reorganisation Act. It was observed:
“23. But, these niceties apart, we think that Section 87 is
              quite valid even on the “policy and guideline” theory if one
              has proper regard to the context of the Act and the object
              and purpose sought to be achieved by
Section 87
of the
              Act. The judicial decisions
referred to above
make it clear
              that it is not necessary that the legislature should “dot all
              the i's and cross all the t's” of its policy. It is sufficient if it
              gives the broadest indication of a general policy of the
              legislature. If we bear this in mind and have regard to the
              history of this type of legislation, there will be no difficulty at
              all. Section 87, like the provisions of Acts I, II and III, is a
              provision necessitated by changes resulting in territories
              coming under the legislative jurisdiction of the Centre.
4 (1878) 5 Ind App 178 (PC).
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                                Page 12 of 46
These are territories situated in the midst of contiguous
              territories which have a proper legislature. They are small
              territories falling under the legislative jurisdiction of
              Parliament which has hardly sufficient time to look after the
              details of all their legislative needs and requirements. To
              require or expect Parliament to legislate for them will entail
              a disproportionate pressure on its legislative schedule. It
              will also mean the unnecessary utilisation of the time of a
              large number of members of Parliament for, except the few
              (less than ten) members returned to Parliament from the
              Union territory, none else is likely to be interested in such
              legislation. In such a situation, the most convenient course
              of legislating for them is the adaptation, by extension, of
              laws in force in other areas of the country. As Fazl Ali, J.
              pointed out in the
Delhi Laws Act
case [AIR 1951 SC 332 :
1951 SCR 747] it is not a power to make laws that is
              delegated but only a power to “transplant” laws already in
              force after having undergone scrutiny by Parliament or one
              of the State legislatures, and that too, without any material
              change. There is no dispute before us — and it has been
              unanimously held in all the decisions — that the power to
              make modifications and restrictions in a clause of this type
              is a very limited power, which permits only changes that
              the different context requires and not changes in
              substance. There is certainly no power of modification by
              way of repeal or amendment as is available under Section
89.”
17.
Ramesh Birch
(supra) had held that once a policy of extension of

       the
Rent Act
is clear and permissible, it would seem only natural

       as a necessary corollary that the executive should be permitted to

       extend future amendments in the
Rent Act
to the Union Territory of

       Chandigarh.
After extensively examining the different judgments

       and the views expressed in Re Delhi Laws Act (supra), the

       notification was upheld with the following findings:
“31. There is certainly a good deal of force in these
              arguments but we think that they proceed on an incorrect
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 13 of 46
view of the effect of the notification impugned in the
              present case. We might have been inclined to accept the
              submissions of the learned Counsel had the effect of the
              notification been to extend law which is in “actual conflict”
              with any parliamentary enactment or which has the effect
              of “throwing out” any existing law in the Union territory. To
              borrow an expression used in an analogous context, we
              would have considered the validity of the extension
              doubtful had the extended provisions been repugnant to an
              Act of Parliament in force in the Union territory. So long as
              that is not the effect or result, we think, there is no reason
              to construe the scope of Section 87 in the restricted
              manner suggested by counsel. It is no doubt true that
              Section 87 permits an extension because there is no law in
              the Union territory in relation to a particular subject and
              Parliament has not the requisite time to attend to the
              matter because of its preoccupations. But this purpose
              does not require for its validity that there should be no
              existing law of Parliament at all on a subject. Again the
              concept of “subject” for the purposes of this argument is
              also an elastic one the precise scope of which cannot be
              defined. The concept of vacuum is as much relevant to a
              case where there is absence of a particular provision in an
              existing law as to a case where there is no existing law at
              all in the Union territory on a subject. For instance, if
              Parliament had not enacted the 1974 Act but had only
              enacted an extension of the
Transfer of Property Act
to
              Chandigarh, could it have been said that a subsequent
              notification cannot extend the provisions of the 1949 Act to
              Chandigarh because the subject of leases is governed by
              the
Transfer of Property Act
which has been already
              extended and there is, therefore, no “vacuum” left which
              could be filled in by such extension ? Again, suppose,
              initially, a
Rent Act
is extended by Parliament which does
              not contain a provision regarding one of the grounds on
              which a landlord can seek eviction — say, one enabling
              the owner to get back his house for reoccupation — and
              then the Government thinks that another enactment
              containing such a provision may also be extended, can it
              not be plausibly said that the latter is a matter on which
              there is no legislation enacted in the territory and that the
              extension of the latter enactment only fills up a void or
              vacancy ? Again, suppose the provisions of a general code
              like, say,
the Code of Civil Procedure
are extended to the
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 14 of 46
Union territory, should we construe Section 87 so as to
              preclude the extension of a later amendment to one of the
              rules to one of the orders
of the CPC
merely on the ground
              that it will have effect of varying or amending an existing
              law? We think it would not be correct to thus unduly restrict
              the scope of a provision like Section 87. The better way to
              put the principle, we think, is to say that the extension of
              an enactment which makes additions to the existing law
              would also be permissible under Section 87 so long as it
              does not, expressly or impliedly, repeal or conflict with, or
              is not repugnant to, an already existing law.
In this context,
              reference can usefully be made to the observations in
Hari
              Shankar Bagla [Harishankar Bagla v. State of M.P.
, (1955)
              1 SCR 380] at p. 391, which seem to countenance the
              “bypassing” of an existing law by a piece of delegated
              legislation and to draw the line only at its attempt to repeal
              the existing law, expressly or by necessary implication. In a
              sense, no doubt, any addition, however small, does amend
              or vary the existing law but so long as it does not really
              detract from or conflict with it, there is no reason why it
              should not stand alongside the existing law. In our view
              Section 87 should be interpreted constructively so as to
              permit its object being achieved rather than in a manner
              that will detract from its efficacy or purpose. We may also
              note, incidentally in legislative practice also, such
              successive changes have been allowed to stand together.
Lachmi Narain v. Union of India
[(1976) 2 SCC 953]
              narrates how the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941
              extended to Delhi under Act III was subsequently amended
              by Parliament Acts of 1956 and 1959 but was also sought
              to be modified by various notifications from time to time.
              These notifications were challenged on the ground that the
              power to extend by notification could be exercised only
              once and that the impugned notification did not merely
              extend but also effected modifications of a substantial
              nature in the Act sought to be extended. No contention
              was, however, raised that after the intervention of
              Parliament in 1956 and 1959 there could have been no
              extension of the Bengal Act as it would have the effect of
              adding to or varying the Parliamentary legislation
              apparently because they could stand side by side with
              each other. We, therefore, think that since the extension of
              the 1985 Act only adds provisions in respect of aspects not
              covered by the 1974 Act and in a manner not inconsistent
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 15 of 46
therewith, the impugned notification is quite valid and not
              liable to be struck down.”
18.    The distinction between conditional legislation and delegated

       legislation was explained by this Court in
Vasu Dev Singh v.

       Union of India5
in the following words:
“16. … The distinction between conditional legislation and
              delegated legislation is clear and unambiguous. In a
              conditional legislation the delegatee has to apply the law to
              an area or to determine the time and manner of carrying it
              into effect or at such time, as it decides or to understand
              the rule of legislation, it would be a conditional legislation.
              The legislature in such a case makes the law, which is
              complete in all respects but the same is not brought into
              operation immediately. The enforcement of the law would
              depend upon the fulfilment of a condition and what is
              delegated to the executive is the authority to determine by
              exercising its own judgment as to whether such conditions
              have been fulfilled and/or the time has come when such
              legislation should be brought into force. The taking effect of
              a legislation, therefore, is made dependent upon the
              determination of such fact or condition by the executive
              organ of the Government.
Delegated legislation, however,
              involves delegation of rule-making power of legislation and
              authorises an executive authority to bring in force such an
              area by reason thereof. The discretion conferred on the
              executive by way of delegated legislation is much wider.
              Such power to make rules or regulations, however, must
              be exercised within the four corners of the Act. Delegated
              legislation, thus, is a device which has been fashioned by
              the legislature to be exercised in the manner
laid down in
the legislation itself...
17.
In
Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India6
this
                 Court stated:
“The distinction between conditional legislation and
                 delegated legislation is this that in the former the
                 delegate’s power is that of determining when a
5 (2006) 12 SCC 753
6 AIR 1960 SC 554
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 16 of 46
legislative declared rule of conduct shall become
                 effective; Hampton & Co. v. U.S. and the latter involves
                 delegation of rule-making power which constitutionally
                 may be exercised by the administrative agent. This
                 means that the legislature having laid down the broad
                 principles of its policy in the legislation can then leave
                 the details to be supplied by the administrative
                 authority. In other words by delegated legislation the
                 delegate completes the legislation by supplying details
                 within the limits prescribed by the statute and in the
                 case of conditional legislation the power of legislation is
                 exercised by the legislature conditionally leaving to the
                 discretion of an external authority the time and manner
                 of carrying its legislation into effect as also the
                 determination of the area to which it is to extend;””


              In the present case, the extension of the Amendment Act to

       the Union Territory of Chandigarh falls within the ambit of

       conditional delegation and is valid and permissible.
19.
In light of the aforesaid decisions and for the same reasons as

       stated in
Ramesh Birch
(supra), we would reject the first

       contention raised by the appellants. Once a policy of extension of

       laws has been
laid down by
the Parliament and is clear and

       permissible, it would only seem as an inevitable fallout that the

       executive should be permitted to extend future amendments to the

       existing laws. Therefore, the challenge predicated on the doctrine

       of excessive delegation, separation of powers, doctrine of the law

       of agency, fails and must be rejected. Such challenge must also

       be rejected in view of the large number of eviction suits filed by

Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 17 of 46
Non-Resident Indian landlords on the strength of Notification

       dated 09.10.2009 who would be left remediless if contentions to

       the contrary are accepted.
B.     Whether amendments made vide the Amendment Act with
       regard to the rights of Non-Resident Indians by the State
       Legislature of Punjab were beyond its competence?
20.    The contention that the Amendment Act enacted by the State

       Legislature of Punjab has overstepped the jurisdiction assigned to

       it or has encroached upon a forbidden field is determinable by

       finding out the true nature and character or pith and substance of

       the Amendment Act which turns upon construction of the entries in

       the legislative Lists under the Seventh Schedule of the

       Constitution.
21.    Relevant entries from the three Lists which are germane to the

       determination of nature and character of the Amendment Act are:
List I

              Entry 17 – Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
Entry 18 – Extradition.
Entry 19 – Admission into, and emigration and expulsion

              from, India; passports and visas.
List II


Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                      Page 18 of 46
Entry 18 – Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land

              tenures including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the

              collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural

              land;      land   improvement       and agricultural    loans;   and

              colonization.
List III

              Entry 6 – Transfer of property other than agricultural land;
registration of deeds and documents.
Entry 7 – Contracts including partnership, agency, contracts

              of carriage, and other special forms of contracts, but not

              including contracts relating to agricultural land.
Entry 13 – Civil procedure, including all matters included in
the Code of Civil Procedure
at the commencement of this

              Constitution, limitation and arbitration.
22.    The entries in the three Lists are not mutually exclusive. Further,

       the entries are fields of legislation that demarcate the area and

       heads of legislation. Accordingly, they should receive the widest

       construction unless their rigour and import need to be castrated by

       competing         entries   and    other    parts   of   the   Constitution.

       Interpretation of each entry has to be fair and liberal so as to cover

       all incidental and subsidiary matters which can reasonably be said
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 19 of 46
to have been comprehended in it. The entries should not be

       interpreted in a narrow and pedantic sense. “Pith and substance”

       doctrine states that if the legislation is covered by an entry, that is,

       it is within the permitted jurisdiction of the legislature, any

       incidental encroachment in the rival field has to be disregarded.

       Only when wide construction of an entry leads to heads-on-clash

       with another entry in the same or different List, the principle of

       harmonious construction applies to reconcile the conflict and to

       give effect to each of them.
23.    Repugnancy arises between a Central and a State Act when there

       is a direct and irreconcilable conflict between the two enactments.

       It is when there is an irreconcilable conflict between the two

       legislations that the Central Legislation prevails by virtue of
Article

       254
of the Constitution. Such repugnancy or inconsistency is not

       to be readily inferred as the entries in the three Lists permit

       incidental encroachment. Consequently, every attempt must be

       made to placate the conflict and only when and in case of

       oppugnant clash, the Court should proceed to strike down the

       legislation as trespassing beyond its legitimate and legal confines.
24.
In
Vijay Kumar Sharma and Others v. State of Karnataka and

       Others7
, this Court referring to the “pith and substance” doctrine
7 (1990) 2 SCC 562
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                       Page 20 of 46
had held that a provision in a particular legislation in order to give

       effect to its dominant purpose may incidentally encroach on the

       same subject matter as covered by the provision of another

       legislation. Such partial coverage of the same area in a different

       context and to achieve a different purpose does not bring about

       the repugnancy which is intended to be covered by
Article 254(2).
Both the legislations must be substantially on the same subject

       matter for repugnancy to arise and to attract
Article 254.
If the

       subject matters covered by the legislations are different, then

       merely because the two legislations refer to some allied or

       cognate subjects, they do not cover the same field.
25.    A Constitutional Bench judgment of this Court in
Indu Bhushan

       Bose v. Rama Sundari Debi and Another
8 had inter alia

       examined Entry 3 in List I, Entry 18 in List II and Entries 6, 7 and

       13 in List III to observe that the general power of legislating in

       respect of relationship between landlord and tenant can be traced

       either under Entry 18 of List II or Entries 6 and 7 of List III. The

       expression ‘land tenures including the relation of landlord and

       tenant’ appearing in Entry 18 of List II, it was observed, was used

       only with reference to the relationship of landlord and tenant in

       respect of vacant lands and does not cover tenancy of buildings or

       house accommodation. Nevertheless, the Court did not give a
8 (1969) 2 SCC 289
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                     Page 21 of 46
finding in definite terms as the relationship of landlord and tenant

       in question was in respect of a house accommodation situated in

       a cantonment area and therefore was covered by Entry 3 of List I

       which vests exclusive power to make laws for the cantonment

       areas in the Parliament.
Subsequent decision in
Jaisingh Jairam

       Tyagi and Others v. Mamanchand Ratilal Agarwal and Others
9

       and a Constitution Bench judgment in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar v.

       Yesodai Ammal10
substantially follow
Indu Bhushan
(supra) to

       hold that the subject matter of housing and accommodation falls

       within the purview of the Concurrent List.
26.
In
Accountant and Secretarial Services Pvt. Ltd. and Another

       v. Union of India and Others11
, this Court had examined the

       question of repugnancy and interplay between the Central

       enactment, viz. the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised

       Occupants) Act, 1971
based on the pattern of the
West Bengal

       Public Land (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1962
and

       the
West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956
and the question

       which of these enactments would prevail. The Court had

       interpreted Entries 3, 32, 43 and 44 of List I, Entry 18 of List II and

       Entries 5, 6 and 7 of the List III and the corresponding entries in

       the
Government of India Act, 1935
to hold that all the three

9 (1980) 3 SCC 162
10 (1979) 4 SCC 214
11 (1988) 4 SCC 324
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                      Page 22 of 46
legislations were passed in exercise of powers conferred with

       respect to matters contained in the Concurrent List. In view of the

       repugnancy and conflict between the Central enactment on one

       hand and the State law on the other, in terms of
Article 254
, the

       Central enactment shall prevail. Further, notwithstanding the

       earlier precedents, the Court had examined the question of the

       relevant entry applicable to the tenancy legislation and rejected

       the contention that Entry 18 of List II should be interpreted as

       encompassing within its ambit legislation on the relationship of

       landlord and tenant in regard to housing and buildings. Setting out

       several reasons it was observed that the power to legislate in

       respect of tenanted premises would fall within the ambit and

       scope of Entries 6, 7 and 13 of the Concurrent List and would not

       be referable to Entry 18 of List II. The expression ‘land’ in Entry 18

       of List II should be given as wide a construction as possible, but

       has to be read with the relevant entries in other Lists to give

       meaning and content to all of them. Inclusion of buildings and

       housing in the Concurrent List is appropriate and to place

       buildings and housing within the ambit of the expression ‘land’ in

       Entry 18 of List II would denude other entries in Lists I and III

       concerning transfer of property, devolution and succession of land

       and buildings, etc. of their vigour and would render them otiose.
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                     Page 23 of 46
27.    The Amendment Act on its true construction and by reference to

       the doctrine of “pith and substance” is relatable to the relationship

       of landlord and tenant for housing and accommodation and falls

       under the Concurrent List. The dominant intention or “pith and

       substance” of the legislation is to regulate the relationship

       between Non-Resident Indian landlords and tenants for housing

       and accommodation. Merely because the Amendment Act to

       achieve its object touches upon the subject matter in respect of

       Non-Resident Indian landlords in the
Rent Act
, does not make the

       Amendment or the
Rent Act
ultra vires the Constitution.
The Rent

       Act
as amended by the Amendment Act and the Central

       legislations relating to citizenship, regulation of the right of non-

       residents to own and acquire immovable property, cover different

       subject matters and serve different objects and there is no

       repugnancy between the
Rent Act
and any Central enactment like

       Citizenship Act, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, etc. We do not

       subscribe to the view that the legislative lists under the Seventh

       Schedule envisage and mandate separate legislation by the

       Central Government for Non-Resident Indian landlords.
28.    Keeping in view the aforesaid position, the Amendment Act

       enacted by the State legislature was well within its competence.

Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                    Page 24 of 46
We would, however, note that in the context of the Union Territory

       of Chandigarh and as the subject matter falls within the

       Concurrent List, it will be immaterial to decide on the competence

       of the legislating body. The power to make laws in respect of a

       Union Territory vests with the Parliament under
Article 246(4).
In

       terms of
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act, the power to extend

       laws to the Union Territory of Chandigarh vests with the Central

       Government, that is the Parliament or the Central Executive, as

       the case may be, and is permissible.
C.     Whether
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act is arbitrary and
       unreasonable inasmuch as it does not afford any legal
       remedy to the tenants?
29.    Before we delve into this question, we would reproduce
Section

       19
(2-B) of the Rent Act which reads as under:
“19. (2-B) The owner, who is a Non-Resident Indian
                 and who having evicted a tenant from a residential
                 building or a scheduled building and/or non-residential
                 building in pursuance of an order made under Section
                 13-B, does not occupy it for a continuous period of
                 three months from the date of such eviction, or lets out
                 the whole or any part of such building from which the
                 tenant was evicted to any person, other than the tenant
                 in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3) of
                 Section 13-B, shall be punishable with imprisonment
                 for a term, which may extend to six months or with fine
                 which may be extended to one thousand rupees or
                 both.”




Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                        Page 25 of 46
The provision incorporates statutory safeguards to check

       and penalise deceitful and two-faced landlords and gives the right

       of restitution to the defrauded tenant.
30.
Section 18-A
of the Rent Act prescribes a summary procedure for

       recovery of possession applicable to eviction petitions filed by

       Non-Resident Indian landlords under
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act.

       Sub-sections (4), (5), (6) and (8) to
Section 18-A
of the Rent Act

       are reproduced:
“18-A. (4) The tenant on whom the service of summons
                 has been declared to have been validly made under
                 sub-section (3), shall have no right to contest the
                 prayer for eviction from the residential building or
                 scheduled building and/or non-residential building, as
                 the case may be, unless he files an affidavit stating the
                 grounds on which he seeks to contest the application
                 for eviction and obtains leave from the Controller as
                 hereinafter provided, and in default of his appearance
                 in pursuance of the summons or his obtaining such
                 leave, the statement made by the specified landlord or,
                 as the case may be, the widow, widower, child,
                 grandchild or the widowed daughter-in-law of such
                 specified landlord or the owner, who is a non-resident
                 Indian in the application for eviction shall be deemed to
                 be admitted by the tenant and the applicant shall be
                 entitled to an order for eviction of the tenant.
(5) The Controller may give to the tenant leave to
                 contest the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant
                 discloses such facts as would disentitle the specified
                 landlord or, as the case may be, the widow, widower,
                 child, grandchild or widowed daughter-in-law of such
                 specified landlord or the owner, who is a non-resident
                 Indian, from obtaining an order for the recovery of
                 possession of the residential building or scheduled

Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                            Page 26 of 46
building and/or non-residential building, as the case
                 may be, under Section 13-A or Section 13-B.

                 (6) Where leave is granted to the tenant to contest the
                 application, the Controller shall commence the hearing
                 on a date not later than one month from the date on
                 which leave is granted to the tenant to contest and
                 shall hear the application from day to day till the
                 hearing is concluded and application decided.
xx                xx           xx

                  (8) No appeal or second appeal shall lie against an
                 order for the recovery of possession of any residential
                 building or scheduled building and/or non-residential
                 building, as the case may be, made by the Controller in
                 accordance with the procedure specified in this section:
Provided that the High Court may, for the purpose of
                 satisfying itself that an order made by the Controller
                 under this section is in accordance with law, call for the
                 records of the case and pass such order in respect
                 thereto as it thinks fit.”
31.
In
Baldev Singh Bajwa v. Monish Saini12
, this Court referring to

       the provisions of
Section 18-A
of the Rent Act had observed:
“11. [...] These provisions indicate that in order to
                 obtain leave to contest the application of the landlord,
                 the tenant has to file an affidavit taking the grounds on
                 which he wants to contest that application. If the
                 affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as
                 would disentitle the NRI landlord from obtaining an
                 order for the recovery of immediate possession, the
                 Controller would grant leave to the tenant to contest
                 the landlord’s application for eviction. Once the leave is
                 granted, the application is required to be disposed of
                 as per the procedure applicable to the Court of Small
                 Causes. The Controller is required to commence the
                 hearing within one month from the date on which the
                 leave is granted to the tenant to contest. The
12 (2005) 12 SCC 778
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 27 of 46
application shall be heard day to day till hearing is
                 concluded and application decided. The order to direct
                 recovery of possession of the suit accommodation
                 made by the Controller is not subject to appeal or
                 second appeal. However, the High Court may call for
                 the record of the case to satisfy itself that the order
                 passed by the Controller is in accordance with law and
                 may pass such order as it thinks fit.”
32.
In
Ravi Dutt Sharma v. Ratan Lal Bhargava13
, this Court had

       discussed the object of rent control legislation and also insertions

       made to provide expeditious, effective and speedy remedy for a

       class of landlords who require the premises for bona fide use, to

       hold:
“7. […] The dominant object of the amending act [is] to
                 provide a speedy, expeditious and effective remedy for
                 a class of landlords contemplated by
Sections 14(1)(e)
and 14-A and for avoiding unusual dilatory process
                 provided otherwise by the
Rent Act
. It is common
                 experience that suits for eviction under the Act take a
                 long time commencing with the Rent Controller and
                 ending up with the Supreme Court. In many cases
                 experience has indicated that by the time the eviction
                 decree became final several years elapsed and either
                 the landlord died or the necessity which provided the
                 cause of action disappeared and if there was further
                 delay in securing eviction and the family of the landlord
                 had by then expanded, in the absence of
                 accommodation the members of the family were
                 virtually thrown on the road. It was this mischief which
                 the Legislature intended to avoid by incorporating the
                 new procedure in Chapter III-A. The Legislature in its
                 wisdom thought that in cases where the landlords
                 required their own premises for bona fide and personal
                 necessity they should be treated as a separate class
                 along with the landlords covered by Section 14-A and
                 should be allowed to reap the fruits of decrees for
                 eviction within the quickest possible time. It cannot,
13 (1984) 2 SCC 75
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 28 of 46
therefore, be said that the classification of such
                 landlords would be an unreasonable one because such
                 a classification has got a clear nexus with the objects
                 of the amending Act and the purposes which it seeks to
                 subserve.”
33.
Section 18-A
of the Rent Act requires the Controller to take up the

       matter on a day-to-day basis until the hearing on an application for

       leave to defend is concluded. No litigant can possibly object to a

       provision stipulating day-to-day hearing which ensures speedy,

       expeditious and effective decisions. The observations of this Court

       in
Ravi Dutt Sharma
(supra) are apposite. Section 18-A also

       states that the decision of the Controller is final as no appeal or

       second appeal lies against the order of eviction except that the

       High Court could, to satisfy itself of the correctness of the

       decision, examine the matter by calling for the records of the case.
Repelling a similar challenge on the ground that 25-
B of the Delhi

       Rent Control Act, 1958
does not provide for an appeal or second

       appeal against an order of eviction, in
Kewal Singh v. Smt.

       Lajwanti14
it was observed:
“19. […] An appeal is purely a creature of the statute
                 and this right has not been given in order to cut out
                 unnecessary delay. Instead the highest Court of the
                 State has been given a wide power of revision where
                 the said Court can examine the case of the tenant and
                 the landlord and the validity of the order passed by the
                 Controller. The right of the tenant, therefore, is
                 sufficiently safeguarded by the proviso to sub-section
                 (8) of
S. 25B
of the Act
referred to above
. In order to
14 (1980) 1 SCC 290
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                        Page 29 of 46
give relief to the tenant against any apparent error of
                 law or fact where no revision has been filed in the High
                 Court the statute confers power of review on the
                 Controller.”
34.    On the requirement of ‘bona fide need’ of Non-Resident Indian

       landlords under Section 13-B in
Baldev Singh Bajwa
(supra), it

       was elucidated:
“14. The phrase “bona fide requirement” or “bona fide
                 need” or “required reasonably in good faith” or
                 “required”, occurs in almost all Rent Control Acts with
                 the underlying legislative intent which has been
                 considered and demonstrated innumerable times by
                 various High Courts as also by this Court, some of
                 which we would like to refer to. In
Ram Dass v. Ishwar
                 Chander
it is said that the bona fide need should be
                 genuine and honest, conceived in good faith. It was
                 also indicated that the landlord’s desire for possession,
                 however honest it might otherwise be, has inevitably a
                 subjective element in it, and that desire, to become a
                 “requirement” in law must have the objective element
                 of a “need”, which can be decided only by taking all the
                 relevant circumstances into consideration so that the
                 protection afforded to a tenant is not rendered illusory
                 or whittled down.
15.
In
Bega Begum v. Abdul Ahad Khan
it was held by
                 this Court that the words “reasonable requirement”
                 undoubtedly postulate that there must be an element of
                 need as opposed to a mere desire or wish. The
                 distinction between desire and need should doubtless
                 be kept in mind but not so as to make even the
                 genuine need as nothing but a desire.
16.
In
Surjit Singh Kalra v. Union of India
a three-Judge
                 Bench of this Court has held as under:
“20. The tenant of course is entitled to raise all
                   relevant contentions as against the claim of the
                   classified landlords. The fact that there is no
                   reference to the words bona fide requirement in
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 30 of 46
Sections 14-B to 14-D does not absolve the
                   landlord from proving that his requirement is
                   bona fide or the tenant from showing that it is not
                   bona fide. In fact every claim for eviction against
                   a tenant must be a bona fide one. There is also
                   enough indication in support of this construction
                   from the title of Section 25-B which states
                   ‘special procedure for the disposal of
                   applications for eviction on the ground of bona
                   fide requirement’.”
17.
In
Shiv Sarup Gupta v. Dr. Mahesh Chand Gupta
this Court while dealing with the aspect of bona fide
                 requirement has said that the sense of felt need which
                 is an outcome of a sincere, honest desire, in
                 contradistinction with a mere pretence or pretext to
                 evict a tenant, refers to a state of mind prevailing with
                 the landlord. The only way of peeping into the mind of
                 the landlord is an exercise undertaken by the judge of
                 facts by placing himself in the armchair of the landlord
                 and then posing a question to himself — whether in the
                 given facts, substantiated by the landlord, the need to
                 occupy the premises can be said to be natural, real,
                 sincere and honest.
18. From the aforesaid decisions the requirement of
                 the landlord of the suit accommodation is to be
                 established as a genuine need and not a pretext to get
                 the accommodation vacated. The provisions of
                 Sections 18-A(4) and (5) concede to the tenant’s right
                 to defend the proceedings initiated under Section 13-B
                 showing that the requirement of the landlord is not
                 genuine or bona fide. The legislative intent for setting
                 up of a special procedure for NRI landlords is obvious
                 from the legislative text which has been deliberately
                 designed making distinction between the ordinary
                 landlords and special category of landlords. The
                 Controller’s power to give leave to contest the
                 application filed under Section 13-B is restricted by the
                 condition that the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses
                 such fact as would disentitle the landlord from
                 obtaining an order for recovery of possession. It is
                 needless to say that in the summary proceedings the
                 tenant’s right to contest the application would be
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                            Page 31 of 46
restricted to the parameters of
Section 13-B
of the Act.
He cannot widen the scope of his defence by relying on
                 any other fact which does not fall within the parameters
                 of Section 13-B. The tenant’s defence is restricted and
                 cannot go beyond the scope of the provisions of the
                 Act applicable to the NRI landlord. Under Section 13-B
                 the landlord is entitled to eviction if he requires the suit
                 accommodation for his or her use or the use of the
                 dependant, who ordinarily lives with him or her. The
                 requirement would necessarily have to be genuine or
                 bona fide requirement and it cannot be said that
                 although the requirement is not genuine or bona fide,
                 he would be entitled to the ejectment of the tenant nor
                 can it be said that in no circumstances will the tenant
                 not be allowed to prove that the requirement of the
                 landlord is not genuine or bona fide. A tenant’s right to
                 defend the claim of the landlord under Section 13-B for
                 ejectment would arise if the tenant could be able to
                 show that the landlord in the proceedings is not an NRI
                 landlord; that he is not the owner thereof or that his
                 ownership is not for the required period of five years
                 before the institution of proceedings and that the
                 landlord’s requirement is not bona fide.”
35.    In terms of
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act, the landlord should have

       been the owner of the premises for five years before the eviction

       petition is filed. Such landlord/owner is permitted to file an eviction

       petition only once during the lifetime and in respect of one

       building. Sub-section (3) to
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act imposes

       a restriction on sale or lease of the premises for a period of five

       years from the date of taking possession from the tenant. On

       breach of the conditions/ restrictions mentioned in sub-section (3)

       to Section 13-B, the tenant has a right to seek restoration of

       possession. Sub-section (2-B) to
Section 19
imposes a maximum

Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                            Page 32 of 46
punishment of six months imprisonment or a fine of one thousand

       rupees or both in case the landlord does not occupy the premises

       for a continuous period of three months after getting an eviction

       order or lets out the whole or any part of the premises to a third

       person other than the tenant in contravention of the provisions of

       sub-section (3) to Section 13-B. The reasoning in
Baldev Singh

       Bajwa
(supra) exposits that these restrictions and conditions are

       strong in-built checks to ensure that the need of the landlord

       should be genuine and bona fide and the tenant should not be

       subjected to frivolous and dubious eviction order by relying on

       false assertions.
36.    The presumption raised with regard to the genuine need of the

       landlord as pleaded in the petition should not be read as an axiom

       or self-evident truth, which entitles the landlord and mandates the

       Court to pass a decree of eviction. This is clear from subsequent

       elucidation by this Court in paragraphs 20 and 21 in
Baldev

       Singh Bajwa
(supra). The true ratio, in our opinion, is reflected in

       paragraph 25 which reads as under:
“25. On the interpretation given by us and on a plain
                 reading of the provisions, once in a lifetime possession
                 is given to an NRI to get one building vacated in a
                 summary manner. A non-resident Indian landlord is
                 required to prove that: (i) he is an NRI; (ii) that he has
                 returned to India permanently or for a temporary
                 period; (iii) requirement of the accommodation by him
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 33 of 46
or his dependant is genuine; and (iv) he is the owner of
                 the property for the last five years before the institution
                 of the proceedings for ejectment before the Controller.
                 The tenant’s affidavit asking for leave to contest the
                 NRI landlord’s application should confine itself to the
                 grounds which NRI landlord is required to prove, to get
                 ejectment under
Section 13-B
of the Act. The
                 Controller’s power to give leave to contest the
                 application filed under Section 13-B is circumscribed to
                 the grounds and inquiry on the aspects specified in
                 Section 13-B. The tenant would be entitled for leave to
                 contest only if he makes a strong case to challenge
                 those grounds. Inquiry would be confined to Section
                 13-B and no other aspect shall be considered by the
                 Controller.”

              The requirement of a ‘strong case’ for obtaining leave to

       defend means a good case that brings to fore reasonable and

       well-grounded basis on which the tenant seeks leave to contest

       the eviction proceedings. It does not mean setting up and

       establishing at that stage a case beyond any scintilla of doubt and

       debate. The grounds and pleas raised should reflect clear and

       strong defence and relate to the grounds mentioned in paragraph

       25 in
Baldev Singh Bajwa
(supra).
The standard applied is

       similar to parameters elucidated in
Inderjeet Kaur v. Nirpal

       Singh15
, in which this Court had held that the leave to defend

       should not be granted on mere asking but when the pleas and

       contentions raise triable issues and the dispute on facts demands

       that the matter be properly adjudicated after ascertaining the truth

       of affidavits filed by the witnesses in their cross-examination. Each
15 (2001) 1 SCC 706
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 34 of 46
case has to be decided on its merits and not on the basis of any

       pre-conceived suppositions and presumptions. By providing for a

       simplified procedure of eviction by the Non-Resident Indians,

       Section 13-B does not dilute the rights of tenants. It gives a

       chance to the tenants on merits to establish their case and when

       justified and necessary to take the matter to trial. By no means,

       therefore, Section 13-B can be held to be arbitrary and

       unreasonable.
37.    The expression ‘one building’ appearing in sub-clause (2) to

       Section 13-B was examined by a three Judge Bench of this Court

       in
Swami Nath v. Nirmal Singh16
by referring to the earlier

       judgment of this Court in
Baldev Singh Bajwa
(supra), to

       observe:
“13. Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court
                 in
Baldev Singh Bajwa v. Monish Saini
where the same
                 question had come up for consideration and it was
                 observed that on a plain reading of the provisions of
                 Section 13-B, it would be obvious that once in a lifetime
                 possession is given to an NRI to get one building
                 vacated in a summary manner. It was also submitted
                 that the ownership of the respondent landlord in
                 respect of only one building had not been disputed by
                 the petitioners and the only contention that was raised
                 on their behalf was that each separate tenancy in a
                 building would amount to a separate unit and after
                 exhausting the right of summary possession once, it
                 was no longer available to the NRI landlord to exercise
                 such an option for the second time to a particular


16 (2010) 9 SCC 452
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 35 of 46
building, which contention had been negated by the
                 courts below.
14. We have carefully considered the submissions
                 made on behalf of the respective parties and we are
                 unable to agree with the submissions made on behalf
                 of the petitioners. The interpretation sought to be given
                 to the proviso to Section 13-B(1) of the 1949 Act would
                 lead to an absurd situation which was not
                 contemplated by the legislature while introducing the
                 provisions of Section 13-B by way of amendment in
                 2001. The very object of the amendment would be
                 frustrated if the narrow and constricted meaning being
                 canvassed on behalf of the petitioners is to be
                 accepted.
15. The provisions of Section 13-B of the 1949 Act
                 have been correctly interpreted and dealt with in
Baldev Singh Bajwa
case and in that view of the
                 matter, the special leave petitions must fail and are
                 dismissed. …”

       The third contention is accordingly rejected.
D.     Whether classifying Non-Resident Indian landlords as a
       separate category renders Section 13-B invalid and ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution?
38.    Legislature’s primary function is to make laws for all or different

       groups or classes of persons. The lawmakers as elected

       representatives are in a better position than any other body which

       is removed from local and other circumstances, to know the

       needs, requirements and expectations of citizens. It, therefore,

       seems only logical that the legislature possesses the power to

       distinguish and classify persons or things subjected to such laws.

       Such a classification, however, must pass the muster of
Article 14
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 36 of 46
which proscribes hostile and invidious discrimination. Recognising

       that
Article 14
does not entirely prohibit classification by grouping

       certain persons with special peculiarities in a special category to

       meet certain specific ends, this Court in
Ram Krishna Dalmia v.

       Justice S.R. Tendolkar17
had postulated two conditions which

       must be satisfied for a classification to withstand a challenge

       under
Article 14
, namely: i) the classification should be founded on

       intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that

       are grouped together from others left out of the group; and (ii) the

       differentia must have a rational relation or nexus to the object

       sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
In
State of A.P.

       and Others v. Nallamilli Rami Reddi and Others
18, this Court

       had further elucidated that a challenge on the ground of denial of

       equal treatment will not sustain when the legislature intends to

       classify persons under a well-defined class. A classification need

       not be scientifically perfect or logically complete and would be

       justified unless it is palpably arbitrary. The test to judge the validity

       of any classification has to be practical and pragmatic by looking

       beyond the classification to the purpose of the law, that is, the

       purpose or object of the legislation and the circumstances which

       had prevailed when the law was passed and which had

17 1959 SCR 279: AIR 1958 SC 538
18 (2001) 7 SCC 708
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                        Page 37 of 46
necessitated passing of that law. Not only this, there is a

       presumption as to constitutional validity of an enactment

       predicated on the belief that the legislature understands and

       correctly appreciates the need of its own people and is free to

       recognise degrees of harm and may confine its restriction to only

       those cases where the need is deemed to be the clearest. The

       hardship that may result from the classification cannot be the

       basis for determining the validity of any statute. This requires

       distinguishing        between        under-inclusiveness   and    over-

       inclusiveness. The former classification does not confer the same

       benefit or place the same burden on others who are similarly

       situated whereas over-inclusiveness includes not only those who

       are similarly situated with respect to the purpose but others who

       are not so situated as well.
The latter is frowned upon but the

       former may pass the judicial test for the courts do exercise

       tolerance to under-inclusiveness unless it is clear that there is no

       fair reason for the law which would not require with equal force its

       extension to those whom it leaves untouched (See
Pioneer

       Urban Land & Infrastructure Limited and Another v. Union of

       India and Others
in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 43 of 2019 decided

       on 09.08.2019).
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                       Page 38 of 46
39.    The object and reasons for enacting Section 13-B in the
Rent Act
vide the Amendment Act were explained in
Baldev Singh Bajwa
(supra) in the following words:
“The State Government had been receiving
                 representations from various NRI individuals and
                 through their associations highlighting the plight of
                 Indian residents returning to India after long years
                 abroad. It was represented that the NRIs having spent
                 long years of their life abroad did not find conditions
                 congenial in their own country on their return either to
                 settle down or to take up any business. On account of
                 rigid legal provisions of the existing rent laws, the NRIs
                 were unable to recover possession of their own
                 residential building from the tenants. The Government
                 having considered the situation had decided that the
                 existing rent legislation viz. the East Punjab Urban
                 Rent Restriction Act, 1949 should be amended to
                 provide relief to NRIs to enable them to recover
                 possession of a residential or scheduled building
                 and/or one non-residential building for their own use.”

              The effect of Section 13-B and other provisions of the Rent

       Act was explained as:
“10. The amendment introduced in the Act created a
                 special class of NRI landlords and reposed special
                 rights in them to recover immediate possession from
                 the tenants occupying their premises, provided such
                 premises were required by them. Section 13-B intends
                 to    provide      immediate    possession    of    the
                 accommodation to the NRI landlord which is in
                 possession of the tenant if the landlord requires the
                 same for his or her use or for the use of anyone
                 ordinarily living with him/her and is dependent on him
                 or her. Sub-section (1) of Section 13-B postulates that
                 the NRI landlord should be the owner of the building
                 from which he has asked ejectment of the tenant. He
                 should require the same for his or her use or for the
                 use of anyone ordinarily living with him/her and is
                 dependent on him or her. He should be the owner of
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 39 of 46
that building for five years before he applied to the
                 Controller for possession of such building. The right
                 under Section 13-B of immediate possession could be
                 availed of only once during the lifetime of such an
                 owner/NRI landlord. Sub-section (2) of Section 13-B
                 gives a choice to the NRI landlord to select one among
                 several other residential buildings or scheduled
                 buildings and/or non-residential buildings for the
                 purpose of eviction of the tenant from that premises.
                 Residential building is defined in
Section 2(g)
to mean
                 a building which is not a non-residential building.
                 Scheduled building is defined in
Section 2(h)
of the Act
                 which means a residential building being used by a
                 person engaged in one or more of the professions,
                 namely, lawyers, architects, dentists, engineers,
                 veterinary surgeons, medical practitioners including
                 practitioners of indigenous systems of medicine and
                 who occupies the same partly for his business and
                 partly for his residence. Sub-section (3) of Section 13-B
                 puts a restriction on the landlord to deal with building of
                 which he has taken possession by virtue of the order
                 passed under
Section 13-B
of the Act of 1949. Under
                 this section the owner who recovers the possession of
                 the building by virtue of the order passed under Section
                 13-B shall neither transfer it either by sale or by any
                 other mode nor shall he let it out for the period of five
                 years from the date he took possession of the building.
                 In case there is a breach on the part of the owner who
                 took possession of the building, of any of the
                 conditions, the tenant who had been evicted would be
                 entitled to apply to the Controller for an order directing
                 that the tenant be restored back possession of that
                 building and on such a petition being moved, the
                 Controller would pass an appropriate order. Apart from
                 the restriction which is imposed by sub-section (3) of
                 Section 13-B on the landlord’s right to deal with the
                 building of which he took possession under the
                 provisions of Section 13-B, a further restriction has
                 been imposed on the landlord under
Section 19
(2-B) of
                 the Act of 1949.
Section 19
(2-B) contemplates that
                 when the order for possession is being passed in
                 favour of the owner-landlord under Section 13-B, he is
                 required to occupy the premises continuously for the
                 period of three months from the date of eviction of the
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 40 of 46
tenant. He is prohibited from letting out the whole or
                 any part of that building from which the tenant was
                 evicted to any other person except the tenant who had
                 been evicted by virtue of the order passed under
                 Section 13-B. In contravention of these restrictions, the
                 landlord is liable for a penal action and can be imposed
                 punishment of imprisonment for a term which may
                 extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
                 Rupees one thousand or with both.”
40.    Rent control legislation are quintessentially social legislation that

       were enacted in the 1940’s and 1950’s to protect and curb

       exploitation of tenants in view of the prevailing socio-economic

       conditions due to large scale immigration to towns and cities,

       increase in population, lack of housing facilities as landed property

       was owned by a few well-off and wealthy persons. The rent control

       legislation, therefore, interfered with the general freedom of

       contract and right of the landlord to seek eviction under the
Transfer of Property Act
. However, all such legislations invariably

       also provide for balancing the conflicting rights of the landlords. In

       several decisions, this Court has emphasised that there is a need

       for balancing the two rival interests as has been observed in

       Malpe      Vishwanath         Acharya    and   Others     v.   State    of

       Maharashtra and Another19, Joginder Pal v. Naval Kishore

       Behal20, Satyawati Sharma (Dead) By LRs v. Union of India


19 (1998) 2 SCC 1
20 (2002) 5 SCC 397
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                         Page 41 of 46
and Another21 and in the recent decision in Vinod Kumar v.
Ashok Kumar Gandhi in Civil Appeal No. 3793 of 2016 decided

       on 05.08.2019.
41.
In
Kewal Singh
(supra) this Court had rejected the challenge of

       discrimination and arbitrariness predicated on
Article 14
to the

       summary procedure under
Section 25-B
of the Delhi Rent Control

       Act, 1958 applicable in cases of personal necessity of landlords.

       The contention that Section 25-B creates a special class of

       landlords who are given favourable treatment for speedy eviction

       of tenants was rejected as without any substance. The rent control

       legislation should be just and fair to the landlords. Accordingly, it

       was observed that it is always open to the legislature to check,

       regulate and also confer rights upon the landlords to enable them

       to seek eviction in certain circumstances. Referring to the ground

       of personal necessity, it was observed:
“17. [...] Thus, such a landlord becomes a class by
                 himself. The statute thus puts personal necessity of the
                 landlord as a special class requiring special treatment
                 for quick eviction of the tenant and cuts out all delays
                 and plugs all the loopholes which may cause delay in
                 getting the relief by the landlord. It is obvious,
                 therefore, that the classification made by the legislature
                 is in public interest and is in complete consonance with
                 the objectives sought to be achieved. The landlords
                 having personal necessity have been brought together
                 as a separate class because of their special needs and
                 such a classification cannot be said to be unreasonable
21 (2008) 5 SCC 287
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 42 of 46
particularly when the legislature in its wisdom feels that
                 the landlords should get this relief as quickly as
                 possible.”
42.    The following observations in
Ravi Dutt Sharma
(supra) relating

       to the right given to the landlords for eviction in context of the rent

       control legislation are pertinent:
“7. […] Tenants cannot complain of any discrimination
                 because the
Rent Act
merely gave certain protection to
                 them in public interest and if the protection or a part of
                 it afforded by the
Rent Act
was withdrawn and the
                 common law right of the tenant under the
Transfer of
                 Property Act
was still preserved, no genuine grievance
                 could be made.”

              Similar views were also expressed in
Kewal Singh
(supra)

       in the following words:
“22. Thus, we do not see how can the tenant challenge
                 the validity of such a provision enacted by the
                 legislature from which the tenant itself derived such
                 rights.
23. In the instant case, the legislature has not taken
                 away the right of the tenant at all but has merely
                 simplified the procedure for eviction of the tenant in
                 cases falling within the ambit of
Sections 14-A
and
14(1)(e)
of the Act as discussed in the judgment. In
                 these circumstances, therefore, any challenge by the
                 tenant to the constitutionality of the Act must
                 necessarily fail and hence Section 25-B is
                 constitutionally valid.”
43.
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act cannot be held to be unconstitutional

       because it grants a right to claim eviction for bona fide need by

       summary procedure to a certain group of landlords, that is, Non-

       Resident Indians subject to and on the satisfaction of statutory
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                          Page 43 of 46
conditions which incorporate a check on frivolous evictions. The

       plea that Section 13-B ought to be struck down on the ground that

       similar rights can be extended to other landlords is without

       substance and should be rejected. It rests with the legislature to

       make laws and extend it to other similarly situated persons. The

       rent act(s) invariably give similar rights by a controlled mechanism

       and alluded riders to various other classes/groups of landlords,

       namely, government servants, members of armed forces, the

       retired or soon to retire employees of the Central and the State

       Governments, widows, etc.
44.    The right of Non-Resident Indians to initiate eviction under the

       summary procedure provided in
Section 18-A
of the Rent Act is

       not an unfettered and absolute right. It is subject to satisfaction of

       various pre-requisites and imperatives that ensure and check

       potential abuse by resorting to a short-circuit procedure. The

       requirement should arise from a genuine need of the Non-

       Resident Indian landlord or his dependent. Such landlord should

       be an owner for five years preceding the date of filing of the

       eviction petition. There is a cap on permitting the use of the

       provision which is available only once in a lifetime and only in

       respect of one building. There are restrictions and constraints on

       the re-sale and re-letting and a further requirement to possess the
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                     Page 44 of 46
property for a continuous period of three months after the

       possession is taken. These pre-conditions and post possession

       restrictions suggest that Section 13-B serves a specific policy

       objective to ensure the right of Non-Resident Indians to occupy

       their property in the Union Territory of Chandigarh and the State of

       Punjab as the case may be, after “returning” to their country. This

       right has to be balanced with the right of the tenants to establish

       their case on merits by disproving the genuine requirement of the

       Non-Resident Indians.
45.    Section 13-B cannot, therefore, be treated as an arbitrary

       classification that infringes and violates
Article 14
of the

       Constitution.     The     challenge      predicated   on   the   basis    of

       unconstitutionality of the classification is rejected.
46.    Before reserving the judgment, we had heard counsel for the

       appellants on merits and had expressed that we were not inclined

       to interfere with the factual findings. Accordingly, we have not

       dealt with the factual matrix in each case and have examined and

       answered the legal issues raised.              In view of the findings

       upholding the constitutional validity of
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act

       and its extension and applicability to the Union Territory of



Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                           Page 45 of 46
Chandigarh, we would dismiss the afore-captioned appeals by the

       tenants. There would be no order as to costs.
......................................CJI
                                                             (RANJAN GOGOI)



                                                ........................................J.
                                                    (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                                  ......................................J.
                                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 14, 2019.
Civil Appeal arising out of
SLP (C) No. 26925 of 2011 & connected matters                             Page 46 of 46