[Cites
73
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil vs Honble Speaker Karnataka Legislative ... on 13 November, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1448, 2020 (2) SCC 595, (2019) 15 SCALE 533, (2020) 1 KANT LJ 1, 2020 (1) KCCR SN 16 (SC), (2020) 1 MAD LJ 335
Author:
N. V. Ramana
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
Sanjiv Khanna
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 992   OF   2019

           SHRIMANTH BALASAHEB PATIL                          …PETITIONER

                                        VERSUS

           HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
           LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                    …RESPONDENTS


                                         WITH

                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 997   OF   2019

           RAMESH L. JARKHIHOLI AND ANOTHER                   …PETITIONERS

                                        VERSUS

           HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
           LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                    …RESPONDENTS


                                         AND

                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 998   OF   2019

           PRATAP GOUDA PATIL AND OTHERS                      …PETITIONERS

                                        VERSUS

           HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
           LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                    …RESPONDENTS
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2019.11.13
11:47:47 IST
Reason:



                                         AND



                                          1
             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1000   OF   2019

DR. K. SUDHAKAR                                    …PETITIONER
                            VERSUS

THE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY                               …RESPONDENT


                              AND

             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1001   OF   2019

ANAND SINGH                                        …PETITIONER

                            VERSUS

THE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY                               …RESPONDENT


                              AND

             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1003   OF   2019

R. SHANKAR                                         …PETITIONER

                            VERSUS

HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                    …RESPONDENTS


                              AND

             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1005   OF   2019

A. H. VISHWANATH AND OTHERS                        …PETITIONERS

                              2
                            VERSUS

HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                  …RESPONDENTS


                             AND

          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1006    OF   2019

ROSHAN BAIG                                      …PETITIONER

                            VERSUS

HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                  …RESPONDENTS


                             AND

          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1007    OF   2019

N. NAGARAJU MTB                                  …PETITIONER

                            VERSUS

HON’BLE SPEAKER, KARNATAKA
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY AND OTHERS                  …RESPONDENTS


                       JUDGMENT
TABLE   OF   CONTENTS

Introduction                                            A
Contentions                                             B
3
Issues                                                                       C
     Maintainability of Writ Petition                                             D
     Rejection of Resignations                                                    E
     Disqualification Proceedings After Resignation                               F
     Validity of Disqualification order                                           G
     Power of the Speaker to direct disqualification                              H
     till the expiry of the term
     Reference to Constitution Bench                                              I
     Individual Cases                                                             J
     Conclusions                                                                  K


     N. V. RAMANA, J.
A. INTRODUCTION
1.   Reflecting on Indian parliamentary democracy, the words of

     André Béteille, Professor Emeritus of Sociology, need to be

     observed:
“In a parliamentary democracy, the
                    obligations of constitutional morality are
                    expected to be equally binding on the
                    government and the opposition. In India, the
                    same political party treats these obligations
                    very differently when it is in office, and
                    when it is out of it. This has contributed
                    greatly to the popular perception of our
                    political system as being amoral…”1


     Although the framers of the Constitution entrusted ‘we the

     people’ with the responsibility to uphold the constitutional

     1 André Béteille, ‘Constitutional Morality’, Economic and Political Weekly, Volume 43 (40)
       (4th October 2008).
4
values having attained freedom, the question which begs herein

     to be answered is to what extent we have discharged our duty

     and sustained our democratic and constitutional obligations.
2.   In this context, the questions arising in this batch of Writ

     Petitions concern the importance of party politics in a democracy

     and the requirement to have stability within the government to

     facilitate good governance, as mandated under the Constitution.

     We need to keep in mind that the separating line between

     dissent and defection requires to be made apparent, so that

     democratic    values   are   upheld     in     balance    with   other

     constitutional considerations. In an endeavor to maintain such

     balance, the role of the Speaker is critical in maintaining the

     balance    between     democratic     values    and      constitutional

     considerations. In this regard, this Court’s role is only to

     ascertain whether the Speaker, as a neutral member, upheld the

     tradition of his office to uphold the Constitution.
3.   These Writ Petitions are filed against five different orders passed

     by the Speaker of the Karnataka Legislative Assembly: two

     orders dated 25.07.2019 in Disqualification Petition No. 01 of

     2019 and Disqualification Petition No. 07 of 2019 respectively;

     two orders dated 28.07.2019 in Disqualification Petition No. 05
5
of 2019 and Disqualification Petition No. 08 of 2019 respectively;
and a common order dated 28.07.2019 in Disqualification

      Petition Nos. 3 and 4 of 2019.
4.    Brief facts which are necessary for the disposal of the present

      petitions are that the results of the 15th Karnataka Legislative

      Assembly were declared on 15.05.2018. The contesting political

      parties secured the following seats:
Party                                 Seats Won
Bahujan Samaj Party                   1
Bharatiya Janata Party [BJP]          104
Indian National Congress [INC]        78
Janata Dal (Secular) [JD(S)]          37
Karnataka Pragnyavantha
1
Janatha Party [KPJP]
Independent                           1
Total                                 222
5.    The Petitioners herein were elected as members of 15 th

      Karnataka Legislative Assembly, as per the details given below:
W.P. (C)         PETITIONER(S)             PARTY      CONSTITUENCY
        NO.
992/        Shrimanth Balasaheb           INC       Kagawad
        2019         Patil
        997/      1. Ramesh Jarkhiholi            INC    1. Gokak
                  2. Mahesh Kumathalli                   2. Athani
2019
998/      1. Pratap Gouda Patil           INC    1. Maski
                  2. B.C. Patil                          2. Hirekerur
6
2019      3. Arbail        Shivaram                 3.   Yellapur
                                                           4.   Yeshvanthapura
                    Hebbar
                                                           5.   KR Pura
                 4. S.T. Somashekhar
                                                           6.   RR Nagar
                 5. B.A. Basvaraja
                 6. Munirathna
      1000/         Dr. K. Sudhakar             INC             Chikkaballapur
2019
1001/        Anand Singh                 INC              Vijayanagara
2019
1003/        R. Shankar                  KPJP             Ranebennur
      2019                                   Independent
      1005/      1. A.H. Vishwanath            JD(S)        1.Hunsur
                 2. K. Gopalaiah                            2.Mahalakshmi
2019
3. K.C. Narayanagowda
                                                              Layout
                                                            3.Krishanarajapet
      1006/        Roshan Baig                  INC           Shivajinagar
2019
1007/        N. Nagaraju MTB              INC             Hosakote
2019
6.   Though the BJP was the single largest party, its attempt to form

     the Government was not successful. A coalition government of

     INC and JD(S) was formed under the leadership of Mr.

     Kumaraswamy      (one   of    the   Respondents       herein).   This

     Government had a short life of about 14 months. The events

     leading up to the resignation of the Chief Minister, on losing the

     trust vote on 23.07.2019, after several days delay, form the

     backdrop to the case of the present Petitioners.
7
7.   On 11.02.2019 Disqualification Petition No. 1 of 2019 was

     instituted against Ramesh L. Jarkhiholi, Mahesh Iranagaud

     Kumathalli, Umesh G. Jadhav and B. Nagendra. The main

     allegations against the aforesaid persons were that they did not

     participate in the meetings of the party and the proceedings of

     the Assembly session held from 06.02.2019 onwards, and the

     conduct of all the aforesaid members’ was in violation of the

     whip issued by the INC in this regard. Thereafter, Petitioners in

     Writ Petition (C) No. 997 of 2019, Ramesh L. Jarkhiholi and

     Mahesh Iranagaud Kumathalli, are said to have submitted their

     resignations to the Speaker on 06.07.2019.
8.   Other Petitioners, including, Dr. K. Sudhakar, Pratap Gouda

     Patil, B. C. Patil, Arbail Shivaram Hebbar, S. T. Somashekar,

     B.A. Basvaraja, Munirathna, A.H. Vishwanath, K. Gopalaiah,

     K.C. Narayanagowda, Anand Singh, N. Nagaraju MTB and

     Roshan Baig submitted their resignations from the membership

     of the House between 01.07.2019 to 11.07.2019.
9.   However, the Speaker did not take any call on the resignation of

     the above persons. Aggrieved by the fact that their resignations

     were not accepted, and with the impending trust vote being

     inevitable, most of the above persons approached this Court by
8
way of a Writ Petition, being Writ Petition (C) No. 872 of 2019.
This Court, on 11.07.2019, in the aforesaid Writ Petition

    directed the Speaker to take a decision qua the resignations

    forthwith, and further directed the same to be laid before this

    Court. The relevant extract of the said order is as under:­

              “....Having regard to the facts of the case, we
              permit the petitioners, ten in number, to
              appear before the Hon’ble Speaker of the
              Karnataka Legislative Assembly at 6.00 p.m.
              today. We request the Hon’ble Speaker to
              grant an audience to the ten petitioners at
              the said time. The petitioners, if they so
              wish and are so inclined, shall intimate the
              Hon’ble Speaker of the Assembly their
              decision to resign, in which event, the
              Hon’ble Speaker shall take a decision
              forthwith and, in any case, in the course of
              the remaining part of the day. Such decision
              of the Hon’ble Speaker as may be taken in
              terms of the present order, be laid before the
              Court tomorrow (12.07.2019)...”
10. Meanwhile, on 11.07.2019, members of the INC withdrew their

    disqualification   complaint       against   B.    Nagendra     in

    Disqualification Petition No.1 of 2019. The Speaker, it appears,

    did not take any decision on the resignation in spite of the order

    of this Court. Simultaneously, a whip was issued by the INC and

    the JD(S) on 12.07.2019 calling upon their members to attend

    proceedings, and cautioning the members of disqualification if
9
they failed to attend the same. Further, Disqualification Petition

     Nos. 3, 4 and 5 were filed against Dr. K. Sudhakar, Pratap

     Gouda Patil, B. C. Patil, Arbail Shivaram Hebbar, S. T.

     Somashekhar, B.A. Basvaraja, Munirathna, A.H. Vishwanath, K.

     Gopalaiah, K.C. Narayanagowda, Anand Singh, N. Nagaraju

     MTB and Roshan Baig between 10.07.2019 to 12.07.2019.
11. Subsequently, when the aforesaid Writ Petition came up for

     hearing on 12.07.2019, this Court passed the order as under:
“Having regard to the weighty issues
               that have arisen and the incomplete state of
               facts, as indicated above, we are of the view
               that the matter should be considered by the
               Court further on 16th July, 2019.
In the meantime, the status quo as
               on today, with regard to the ten
               petitioners, be maintained, namely, that
               neither the issue of resignation nor the
               issue of disqualification will be decided
               by the Hon’ble Speaker.
This order has been passed by this
               Court only to enable the Court to decide the
               larger constitutional questions arising as
               indicated above.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
12. Further, this Court on 17.07.2019, passed the following order:
“The issue arising in the case is
               whether resignations submitted by Members
               of the Legislative Assembly at a point of time
10
earlier    than      petitions   for    their
disqualification under the Tenth Schedule of
the Constitution should have priority in the
decision making process or whether both
sets of proceedings should be taken up
simultaneously or the disqualification
proceedings should have precedence over
the request(s) for resignation.
Arguments have been advanced by the
learned counsels for the parties on the
touchstone of
Articles 164
, 190
, 191
, 212
and
361B
and the Tenth Schedule of the
Constitution. We have considered the same.
Constitutional principles should not receive
an exhaustive enumeration by the Court
unless such an exercise is inevitable and
unavoidable to resolve the issues that may
have arisen in any judicial proceeding.
In the present case, having regard to
the stage at which the above issues are
poised in the light of the facts and
circumstances surrounding the same, we
are of the view that the aforesaid questions
should receive an answer only at a later
stage of the proceedings. The imperative
necessity, at this stage, is to maintain
the constitutional balance and the
conflicting and competing rights that
have been canvassed before us. Such an
interim exercise has become prudent in
view of certain time frame exercise(s)
that is in the offing in the Karnataka
Legislative Assembly, particularly, the no
trust    motion    against    the   present
Government, which we are told is due for
being taken up on 18th July, 2019. In
these circumstances, the competing
claims have to be balanced by an
11
appropriate     interim    order,     which
              according to us, should be to permit the
              Hon’ble Speaker of the House to decide
              on the request for resignations by the 15
              Members of the House within such time
              frame as the Hon’ble Speaker may
              consider appropriate. We also take the
              view that in the present case the discretion
              of the Hon’ble Speaker while deciding the
              above issue should not be fettered by any
              direction or observation of this Court and
              the Hon’ble Speaker should be left free to
              decide the issue in accordance with
Article 190
read with Rule 202 of the
              Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
              Business     in   Karnataka     Legislative
              Assembly framed in exercise of the
              powers under
Article 208
of the
              Constitution.
The order of the Hon’ble Speaker on
              the resignation issue, as and when passed,
              be placed before the Court.
We also make it clear that until further
              orders the 15 Members of the Assembly,
              ought not to be compelled to participate in
              the proceedings of the ongoing session of the
              House and an option should be given to
              them that they can take part in the said
              proceedings or to opt to remain out of the
              same. We order accordingly.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
13. Disqualification Petition No. 7 of 2019 was filed against R.

    Shankar on 16.07.2019 and Disqualification Petition No. 8 of

    2019   was   filed   against   Shrimanth   Balasaheb      Patel   on
12
20.07.2019. The Speaker thereupon issued emergent notices

     between 18.07.2019 to 20.07.2019 to all the Petitioners

     regarding the pending disqualification petitions to appear before

     him on the date of hearing fixed for 23.07.2019 and 24.07.2019.

     The notices did not refer to the resignation letters which had

     been submitted by 15 Petitioners, who are parties to the Writ

     Petition (C) No. 872 of 2019 filed before this Court. The

     Petitioners have alleged that the period given in the aforesaid

     notices was too short and in fact some of them had not even

     received notices within time to respond.
14. While the aforesaid disqualification petitions/resignation letters

     were pending, the INC on 20.07.2019 had again issued a whip

     requiring their members of the Legislative Assembly to attend

     the proceedings of the House on 22.07.2019.
15. The trust vote was finally taken up for consideration on

     23.07.2019. The 17 Petitioners did not attend the House. As a

     result, the INC and JD(S) coalition Government, under the

     leadership of Mr. Kumaraswamy was in a minority, resulting in

     the resignation of Mr. Kumaraswamy as Chief Minister.
13
16. Further, as detailed above, on 25.07.2019 and 28.07.2019, the

     Speaker passed the five impugned orders in Disqualification

     Petition Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 of 2019. In these orders, the

     Speaker:
a. Rejected the resignation of the members asserting that they

          were not voluntary or genuine
       b. Disqualified all the Petitioners, and
       c. Disqualified the Petitioners till the end of the 15 th

          Legislative Assembly term
17. Aggrieved, by the aforesaid disqualifications, all the Petitioners

     herein have approached this Court under
Article 32
of the

     Constitution.
B. CONTENTIONS

     LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL MR. MUKUL ROHATGI          ON BEHALF OF

    PETITIONERS IN W.P. (C) NOS.997, 998, 1006 AND 1007 OF 2019
   Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, argued that the
     members of the house have an indefeasible right to resign but
     the speaker went beyond his constitutionally mandated duty
     and gave an opinion on the motive of the members and
     wrongfully rejected the resignations tendered by them. On the
     contrary, the speaker has to accept the resignation once it has
    been tendered in the correct format.
 Explaining   the    connection     between     resignation    and
     disqualification under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution,
14
Mr. Rohatgi stressed that once resignation was validly tendered,
  there was no question of the Speaker exercising his jurisdiction
  to disqualify a member. Disqualification under the Tenth
  Schedule was only with respect to a person who was a member,
  and not otherwise.
 The learned Senior Counsel challenging the legality of the
  disqualification order submitted that the same can be interfered
  with, if the Court finds that the order is perverse, results from
  non­application of mind, or is in violation of principles of natural
  justice. It was contended that in the present case, all three of
  the above infirmities are made out in the disqualification order
  of the Speaker.
 The Speaker, in issuing “emergent” notice returnable in 3­4 days
  is in contravention of the requirement for 7 days’ notice under
  the Karnataka Legislative Assembly (Disqualification of Members
  on Ground of Defection) Rules, 1986. This makes the order of
  the Speaker bad for non­compliance of the principles of natural
  justice, particularly when the Petitioners had only sought time of
  4 weeks to produce documents.
 Lastly, learned Senior Counsel vehemently submitted that even
  if disqualification is held to be valid in law, the same cannot take
  away the right of the Petitioners to contest in the upcoming
  elections, as there exists no bar on the right to contest elections
  under Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL CA SUNDARAM                 ON   BEHALF   OF

  PETITIONER IN W.P. (C) NO. 1000 OF 2019
 The learned Senior Counsel submitted that the resignation
  tendered in the present case was resignation from the House
  and not from the party.
15
 If resignation is tendered under
Article 190
, the Speaker’s role is
  limited   to   the   extent   of   determining   voluntariness    and
  genuineness of the same. The inquiry of the Speaker as to the
  “voluntariness” is limited in its scope to the question of whether
  the member was coerced to resign or not. The enquiry as to
  “genuineness” only related to whether the resignation letter was
  forged, or not actually made by the member. Additionally, when
  a member hands over the letter of resignation to the Speaker
  personally and informs the Speaker that the same is voluntary
  and genuine, then the Speaker has to accept the resignation
  immediately.
 The learned Senior Counsel also submitted that the motive
  behind the resignation is immaterial, as the proviso to
Article
  190(3)
of the Constitution restricts the scope of inquiry by the
  Speaker only to voluntariness and genuineness.
  LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL V. GIRI ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER             IN

  W.P.(C) NO. 1003 OF 2019
 The learned Senior Counsel distinguished the case of the
  Petitioner on the basis that he had never tendered his
  resignation. In spite of that, a separate disqualification order
  was passed against him.
 In the present case, the Petitioner belonged to KPJP. Although
  the party had decided to merge with the INC and had intimated
  the Speaker about the same, there was no formal order of
  merger. When the whip was issued by the INC, the Petitioner
  herein requested the Speaker to provide him with a separate
  seat with the opposition members. But the Speaker refused the
  same, recognizing the Petitioner to be affiliated with the INC.
16
 The learned Senior Counsel for the Petitioner brought to the
  notice of the Court the letter of intimation issued by the
  Executive Committee of his party directing him to stay on the
  side of the opposition. Therefore, without any formal order of
  merger, the Petitioner was not bound by the whip issued by the
  INC.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL V. GIRI        ON BEHALF OF    PETITIONER   IN

  W.P. (C) NO. 992 OF 2019
 The case of the Petitioner can be distinguished factually from the
  case of most of the other Petitioners as he had not tendered his
  resignation. When the whip was issued, due to prevailing
  medical conditions, the Petitioner had to urgently travel to
  Mumbai, pursuant to which he failed to participate in the
  proceedings of the House.
 Although these facts were intimated to the Speaker with
  supporting medical records, the Speaker passed the order of
  disqualification in haste without giving due notice to the
  Petitioner. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that such an
  ex parte order of disqualification, without considering relevant
  material on record and placing reliance upon extraneous
  circumstances, is untenable.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL          A.K    GANGULY   ON    BEHALF      OF

  PETITIONERS IN W.P.(C) NO. 1005 OF 2019
 This Court, vide its order dated 17.07.2019 in Writ Petition (C)
  No. 872 of 2019, granted liberty to the Petitioners herein to
  either participate or opt out of the proceedings of the ongoing
  session of the House. But the aforesaid order was ignored by the
  political party of the Petitioners herein by issuing the whip, and
17
by the Speaker in relying upon the same to disqualify the
  Petitioners.
 The learned Senior Counsel also submitted that the sanctity of
  the Petitioners’ resignation should be protected. The order of
  disqualification rendered by the Speaker is mala fide and is not
  supported by any cogent reasons.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL K.V. VISHWANATHAN          ON BEHALF OF

  PETITIONERS IN W.P. (C) NO. 997 OF 2019
 The learned senior counsel submitted that on 11.02.2019, a
  disqualification petition was filed against 4 MLAs including Dr.
  Umesh Yadav and the Petitioners herein. Subsequently, during
  the pendency of the said disqualification petition, Dr. Umesh
  Yadav submitted his resignation which was accepted by the
  Speaker. However, the Speaker, acting in a mala fide manner,
  kept the resignation letter submitted by the Petitioners herein
  pending until the disqualification petition was decided.
 Despite the orders of this Court directing the Speaker to decide
  the resignation, the Speaker kept the matter pending till the
  decision on the disqualification petition. The learned Senior
  Counsel further contended that the Speaker wrongly took into
  consideration actions pursuant to the orders of this Court dated
  17.07.2019, wherein the Petitioners were granted the liberty not
  to participate in the ongoing proceedings of the house.
  LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL SAJAN POOVAYYA ON BEHALF                OF

  PETITIONER IN W.P. (C) NO. 1001 OF 2019
 The Petitioner was a member of the INC who had resigned on
  01.07.2019 in protest against certain land dealing in his
  Constituency. However, he was put in the same group as the
  other disqualified Petitioners by the Speaker. The learned Senior
18
Counsel contends that omnibus statements and allegations have
  been rendered in the disqualification order and the same was
  passed   without        taking   into    consideration   the   documents
  submitted by the Petitioner herein.
 The learned Senior Counsel reiterated the earlier contention that
  the actions of the Petitioner stood protected by virtue of the
  interim order dated 17.07.2019 passed by a Co­ordinate Bench
  of this Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 872 of 2019.
  LEARNED SOLICITOR GENERAL TUSHAR MEHTA ON                 BEHALF OF THE

  SPEAKER:
 The learned Solicitor General submitted that members of the
  House have the right to resign.
 The learned Solicitor General submitted that this was a fit case
  for the matter to be remanded to the Speaker for fresh hearing.
  LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL KAPIL SIBAL ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
  NOS. 2   AND   3   IN   W.P. (C) NOS. 992, 997, 998, 1000, 1001,
  1003, 1006 AND 1007 OF 2019
 The learned Senior Counsel firstly stated that the impugned
  orders of disqualification can only be challenged under
Article
  226
and not under
Article 32
of the Constitution, as these are
  matters involving merely statutory rights. There is no alleged
  violation of fundamental rights which mandates the invocation
  of jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the Constitution. Further, the
  Speaker is a quasi­judicial authority, the remedy against whose
  order lies only under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
 The learned Senior Counsel emphasized upon the conduct of the
  Petitioners to prove that their resignations were motivated. The
  counsel urged this Court to take a note of the conduct of the
  members both prior and subsequent to the act of resignation to
19
comprehend the motive behind such resignation. He stated that
  motive has to be decided to determine the “genuineness” and
  “voluntariness” of the resignation, as it is the motive which acts
  as an umbilical cord between the issues of genuineness and
  voluntariness. In light of the same, learned Senior Counsel
  pointed   out   that   the   Petitioners,   after   tendering   their
  resignation, never went to the Speaker; rather they approached
  the Governor and the Supreme Court. It ought to be noted that
  the letters of resignation were tendered collectively.
 The power vested in the Speaker is a judicial exercise of power.
  The Court’s discretion in this arena is quite limited. Moreover,
  the Speaker, being the master of the House, can impose any
  restriction pursuant to the act of disqualification. It ought to be
  noted that the acts of disqualification took place within the
  House and therefore it is well within the inherent powers of the
  Speaker to impose any sanction consequent to the act of
  defection. Without such power of sanction, the position of the
  Speaker is equivalent to that of a toothless tiger.
 Additionally, it was submitted that although the Petitioners have
  repeatedly contended that the rules of natural justice have been
  violated, it ought to be noted that rules of natural justice cannot
  be put in a straitjacket. Although, these principles are
  immutable, yet they are flexible, and are not confined to
  technical limits. The Petitioners herein have to show some real
  injury or patent perversity in the order of the Speaker.
 Moreover, when the whip was issued with respect to a motion of
  confidence, the members are duty bound to accept the same.
  The Petitioners, by violating the whip, have voluntarily given up
20
membership of the party. Even assuming that the liberty
  granted by this Court in the earlier writ proceedings was correct,
  with respect to non­compulsion of the members for attending
  the Assembly, there was legal necessity to attend the Assembly
  at such a determinative point. The learned Senior Counsel made
  a distinction between ordinary whips and those which are more
  essential,   which   were necessary     for   the   survival of   the
  Government­ such as those pertaining to a trust vote, a no­
  confidence motion, or even a whip relating to the budget. He
  submitted that such a whip must be followed per se, and that a
  member could not refuse to appear/vote with respect to the
  same.
 The learned Senior Counsel proceeded to distinguish between
  consequences of resignation with that of disqualification. He
  stated that sole purpose of the Tenth Schedule is to check bulk
  defections. In light of the same, the Petitioners cannot be
  allowed to contest the by­elections, as allowing them to contest
  dilutes the effect of disqualification. There is a clear bar for
  acceptance of the nomination of disqualified candidates under
Section 36
of The Representation of the People Act, 1951.
  Therefore, the disqualified members should not be allowed to
  contest fresh elections.
 The learned Senior Counsel also contended that the Speaker has
  the power to disqualify under the Tenth Schedule, which also
  includes the power of the Speaker to command that the member
  disqualified would not be eligible to stand for re­election, on the
  seat falling vacant, till the end of the term of the House.
21
 However, since the matter involves important questions in
  relation to the power of the Speaker to decide the parallel
  proceedings of resignation and disqualification, the power of the
  Speaker to conduct inquiry as to the “voluntariness” and
  “genuineness”, the interpretation of the terms “voluntary” and
  “genuine”, the relevant material to be considered during an
  inquiry under
Article 190(3)
of the Constitution, the relevant
  period of inquiry, etc., the same is required to be considered by a
  Constitution Bench.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL DR. RAJEEV DHAVAN             ON BEHALF OF

  RESPONDENT NO. 2 IN W.P (C) NO. 1005 OF 2019
 The learned Senior Counsel defended the                  order    of
  disqualification by stating that the Speaker exercises wide range
  of power while acting in an adjudicatory capacity and the same
  should not be reduced to a mechanical exercise. Therefore, while
  deciding the issues regarding “genuineness” and “voluntariness”
  behind the act of resignation, the Speaker can look to the series
  of events leading to the resignation so as to decide the motive.
  Pursuant to the above submission, the counsel stated that
  taking into totality of facts into consideration there exist no
  ground to claim that the order of the Speaker suffers from
  perversity or that the same was passed mala fide.
 The learned Senior Counsel also submitted that there exists no
  indefeasible right of resignation as these Petitioners are acting in
  their constitutional capacity as members of the Legislative
  Assembly. Moreover, the resignations rendered in the present
  case cannot be qualified as resignation simpliciter, rather they
  indicate resignation for the cause of defection and in such a
22
situation, the Speaker could not have turned a blind eye to the
  activities of the Petitioners.
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL DEVADUTT KAMAT                     ON   BEHALF    OF

  RESPONDENT NOS. 2        AND   3   IN   W.P. (C) NOS. 992, 997, 998,
  1000, 1001, 1003, 1006 AND 1007 OF 2019
 The learned Senior Counsel reiterated the views expressed above
  by the other learned Senior Counsel and defended the orders of
  the Speaker stating that he had duly complied with the orders of
  this Court by deciding the resignations submitted by the
  Petitioners under
Article 190
of the Constitution. The learned
  Senior Counsel submitted that the orders dated 11.07.2019 and
  17.07.2019 passed by a Co­ordinate Bench of this Court in Writ
  Petition (C) No.872 of 2019 only requested the Speaker to take a
  decision on the resignations as per his discretion and within
  such time frame as he may consider appropriate. Acceptance or
  rejection of the resignations is dependent on the condition that
  the same are voluntary and genuine.
 Further, the disqualification orders passed by the Speaker were
  based on a totality of circumstances prevailing in which the
  conduct of the Petitioners was questionable. The absence of the
  Petitioners from the proceedings of the House, when the trust
  motion of their Government was being discussed, clearly shows
  their   intention   to   act   against      the   party   interest.     The
  disqualification orders were based on cumulative facts including
  the absence of the Petitioners despite repeated notices to remain
  present, and their actions and conduct in colluding with the BJP
  to engineer the fall of the coalition government.
23
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL K. SHASHIKIRAN SHETTY                 ON BEHALF OF

  RESPONDENT NOS. 2       AND   3     IN   W.P. (C) NOS. 992, 997, 998,
  1000, 1001, 1003, 1006 AND 1007 OF 2019
 Learned senior advocate supported the arguments advanced by
  the learned senior advocate, Mr. Kapil Sibal, and stated that the
  disqualification order could not be reviewed by this Court.
 Further, the Tenth Schedule is clear on the aspect of merger,
  wherein he pointed out that there is no need to communicate
  the factum of merger to R. Shankar [Petitioner in Writ Petition
  (C) No. 1003 of 2019].
LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL RAKESH DWIVEDI                       ON   BEHALF       OF

  ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
 The learned Senior Counsel submitted that it has been a matter
  of consistent practice that members disqualified under the Tenth
  Schedule can participate in the next elections. Any bar for a
  particular period is not anticipated by law with respect to
  disqualification under the Tenth Schedule.
 He further stated that the power of the Speaker is only limited to
  the   adjudication      of    the        disqualification   petition.        Any
  consequential action which flows from such disqualification is
  beyond his jurisdiction. The Speaker cannot, at will, provide any
  particular term of disqualification. Disqualification, and the
  consequences thereof, being punitive, have to be sanctioned by
  law.
 When a member gets disqualified under the Tenth Schedule, a
  consequential    vacancy       arises        thereby.   However,        it    is
  impermissible for the Speaker to decide as to who can contest
  for the said vacancy.
24
C. ISSUES
18. In view of the arguments contended, following questions arise for

     our consideration herein:
1.     Whether the Writ Petition challenging the order of the
            Speaker under
Article 32
is maintainable?
2.     Whether the order of the Speaker rejecting the resignation
            and disqualifying the Petitioners is in accordance with the
            Constitution?
3.     Even if the Speaker’s order of disqualification is valid, does
            the Speaker have the power to disqualify the members for
            the rest of the term?
4.     Whether the issues raised require a reference to the larger
            Bench?
D. MAINTAINABILITY OF THE WRIT PETITION
19. At the outset, it must be noted that learned Senior Counsel, Mr.

     Kapil Sibal has contended that this Court does not have the

     jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India to deal

     with this matter. Further, learned Senior Counsel, Dr. Rajeev

     Dhavan, has supported the aforesaid argument by stating that

     no fundamental right is violated, more so when the members of
25
Parliament or Legislative Assembly cannot invoke the ‘right to

    freedom of trade and profession’ under
Article 19 (1)(g)
of the

    Constitution of India.
20. The contours of this Court’s writ jurisdiction has been long

    established in several decisions of this Court. Where the law

    provides for a hierarchy of appeals, the parties must exhaust the

    available remedies before resorting to writ jurisdiction of this

    Court [See
U.P. State Spinning Co. Ltd. v. R.S. Pandey
, (2005)

    8 SCC 264]. At the same time, this Court in a catena of

    decisions has held that this doctrine is not a rule of law, but

    essentially a rule of policy, convenience and discretion and thus

    not a compulsion and where there is failure of principles of

    natural justice or where the orders or proceedings are wholly

    without jurisdiction warrants, this Court may exercise its writ

    jurisdiction even if the parties had other adequate legal

    remedies.
[
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Nooh
, AIR

    1958 SC 86;
Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corporation

    Ltd.
, (2003) 2 SCC 107]
21. The learned senior counsel on behalf of the Respondents have

    challenged the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of the
26
Constitution    by     placing        reliance   on   the
Kihoto

     Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651, wherein this

     Court, while dealing with the scope of judicial review stated as

     under:
“109.
In the light of the decisions
referred to above
and the nature of
               function that is exercised by the
               Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph 6,
               the scope of judicial review under
Articles 136
, and
226
and
227
of the
               Constitution in respect of an order
               passed by the Speaker/Chairman
               under Paragraph 6 would be confined to
               jurisdictional errors only viz., infirmities
               based on violation of constitutional
               mandate, mala fides, non­compliance
               with rules of natural justice and
               perversity.”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
22. We may note that writ jurisdiction is one of the valuable rights

     provided under
Article 32
of the Constitution, which in itself

     forms part of the basic structure of the Constitution. After the

     decision in the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra), the Speaker,

     while exercising the power to disqualify, is a Tribunal and the

     validity of the orders are amenable to judicial review.
On a

     perusal of the judgment in the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra),

     we do not find any explicit or implicit bar to adjudicate the issue

     under the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
27
23. The Petitioners are alleging violation of principles of natural

     justice and their right to a fair hearing. Principles of natural

     justice and right to fair hearing can be traceable to right to

     equality and rule of law enshrined under
Article 14
of the

     Constitution, read with other fundamental rights [refer to
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India
,(1978) 1 SCC 248].
24. A seven Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Ujjam Bai v.
State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 1621, held that writ

     jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the Constitution is available

     when principles of natural justice are violated. This view was

     affirmed by a nine Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra
, AIR

     1967 SC 1, in the following terms:
“54. The scope of the jurisdiction of this Court
              in dealing with writ petitions under
Article 32
was examined by a Special Bench of this Court
              in
Ujjam Bai v. State of Uttar Pradesh
[(1963) 1
              SCR 778]. This decision would show that it
              was common ground before the court that in
              three classes of cases a question of the
              enforcement of the fundamental rights may
              arise; and if it does arise, an application under
Article 32
will lie. These cases are: (1) where
              action is taken under a statute which is ultra
              vires the Constitution; (2) where the statute is
              intra vires but the action taken is without
              jurisdiction; and (3) where the action taken
28
is procedurally ultra vires as where a quasi­
               judicial authority under an obligation to act
               judicially passes an order in violation of the
               principles of natural justice.”

                                           (emphasis supplied)
25. In the context of disqualification orders, this Court has exercised

     its writ jurisdiction under
Article 32.
A three Judge Bench of

     this Court in
Jagjit Singh v. State of Haryana
, (2006) 11 SCC

     1, has explicitly held that a challenge to an order of

     disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is available under the

     writ jurisdiction of this Court. This Court held as under:
“11. The Speaker, while exercising power to
              disqualify Members, acts as a Tribunal and
              though validity of the orders thus passed
              can be questioned in the writ jurisdiction
              of this Court or High Courts, the scope of
              judicial review is limited as
laid down by
the
              Constitution           Bench           in
Kihoto
              Hollohan v. Zachillhu
[1992 Supp (2) SCC
              651]. The orders can be challenged on the
              ground of ultra vires or mala fides or having
              been made in colourable exercise of power
              based on extraneous and irrelevant
              considerations. The order would be a nullity
              if rules of natural justice are violated.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
26. Reliance can be placed on the constitutional provisions and

     debates thereupon which show that this Court can inquire into

     the legitimacy of the exercise of the power. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
29
has described
Article 32
as the very soul of the Constitution ­

     very heart of it ­ most important Article. Moreover, the

     jurisdiction conferred on this Court by
Article 32
is an important

     and integral part of the basic structure of the Constitution of

     India and no act of Parliament can abrogate it or take it away

     except   by   way   of   impermissible   erosion   of   fundamental

     principles of the constitutional scheme are settled propositions

     of Indian jurisprudence.
27. This Court, as the highest Constitutional Court, has to, and has

     always, functioned in accordance with the applicable judicially

     determined parameters while performing its constitutional duty

     to judicially review the acts of constitutional functionaries. It has

     examined questions of both fact and law, so long as it has been

     vested with the power to do so. The scrupulous discharge of

     duties by all guardians of the Constitution include the duty not

     to transgress the limitations of their own constitutionally

     circumscribed powers by trespassing into what is properly the

     domain of other constitutional organs.
28.
In any case, we note that by challenging the order directly under
Article 32
, the Petitioners have leapfrogged the judicial hierarchy

     as envisaged under the Constitution [refer to
Tamil Nadu
30
Pollution Control Board v. Sterlite Industries (I) Ltd.
, 2019

     SCC Online SC 221].
29. We do not appreciate the manner in which the petitioners have

     knocked on the doors of this Court. Among other reasons, we

     proceeded to hear the present matter due to the peculiar facts

     presented before us, wherein certain interim orders were passed

     herein by another Co­ordinate Bench of this Court in Writ

     Petition (C) No. 872 of 2019 filed by some of the present

     petitioners. We had heard the matter at some length on

     25.09.2019 and 26.09.2019, when with the consent of the

     counsel of all the parties, the matter was fixed for final hearing.

     Since a substantial amount of time has passed in the

     meanwhile, and to ensure that the same exercise need not be

     repeated before the High Court, we are left with no option but to

     hear these cases on merits.
30. Despite the fact that this Court has sufficient jurisdiction to deal

     with disqualification cases under the writ jurisdiction, a party

     challenging a disqualification order is required to first approach

     the High Court as it would be appropriate, effective and

     expeditious remedy to deal with such issues. This Court would

     have the benefit of a considered judicial verdict from the High
31
Court. If the parties are still aggrieved, then they may approach

     this Court.
31. Having ascertained that this Court has the jurisdiction to deal

     with the subject matter of the present petitions, the question

     concerning the extent of judicial review can be taken up later,

     when we analyze and discuss the aspects concerning the validity

     of the orders passed by the Speaker, disqualifying the Petitioners

     and rejecting their resignations.
E. REJECTION OF RESIGNATIONS
32. In the present case, 15 of the 17 Petitioners had tendered their

     resignation from the House before the disqualification petitions

     were adjudicated. The Speaker vide orders dated 28.07.2019 in

     Disqualification    Petition    Nos.    3    and   4    of    2019     and

     Disqualification Petition No. 5 of 2019, and order dated

     25.07.2019 in Disqualification Petition No. 1 of 2019, rejected

     the resignation of the Petitioners therein, holding that they were

     not voluntary and genuine.
33. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel, has contended that

     rejection of the resignation by the Speaker was appropriate as

     the   same    was    given     only    to   frustrate   the   object    of
32
disqualification. He has submitted that the consideration before

     the Court is limited considering the fact that the bonafides and

     motive of the Petitioners to resign was appropriately dealt under
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution. On the other hand, the

     Petitioners have strenuously contended that the inquiry required

     under
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution is limited to

     “voluntariness” and “genuineness”, and not the motive or the

     reason for resignation.
34. The first question we need to consider concerns the scope of

     judicial review with respect to acceptance/rejection of the

     resignation by the Speaker. The Respondents have contended on

     this count that the Court cannot go into this aspect as the

     acceptance/rejection of resignation is based on the subjective

     satisfaction of the Speaker, which is immune from judicial

     review.
35. We are unable to agree with this contention. It is true that 33 rd

     Constitutional Amendment changed the constitutional position

     by conferring discretion on the Speaker to reject the resignation.

     However, such discretion is not unqualified, as the resignation
33
can only be rejected if the Speaker is “satisfied that such

    resignation is not voluntary or genuine”. Determination of

    whether the resignations were “voluntary” or “genuine” cannot

    be based on the ipse dixit of the Speaker, instead it has to be

    based on his “satisfaction”. Even though the satisfaction is

    subjective, it has to be based on objective material showing that

    resignation is not voluntary or genuine. When a member tenders

    his resignation in writing, the Speaker must immediately

    conduct an inquiry to ascertain if the member intends to

    relinquish his membership. The inquiry must be in accordance

    with the provisions of the Constitution and the applicable rules

    of the House. This satisfaction of the Speaker is subject to

    judicial review.
36. The next logical question which arises for consideration

    concerns the ambit of the terms “voluntary” and “genuine” in
Article   190(3)(b)
of   the   Constitution.   Prior   to    the   33 rd

    Constitutional Amendment,
Article 190(3)(b)
read as follows:
“(3) If a member of          a House     of   the
               Legislature of a State—
(a) …..
34
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his
                  hand addressed to the Speaker or the
                  Chairman, as the case may be.”
37. The 33rd Constitutional Amendment amended
Article 190(3)(b)
of

    the Constitution and added a proviso. The revised clause reads

    as follows:
“(3) If a member of       a House    of   the
                  Legislature of a State—
(a) …..
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his
                  hand addressed to the Speaker or the
                  Chairman, as the case may be, and his
                  resignation is accepted by the Speaker or
                  the Chairman, as the case may be,

                  his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
Provided that in the case of any resignation
                  referred to in sub clause (b), if from
                  information received or otherwise and after
                  making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
                  Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may
                  be, is satisfied that such resignation is not
                  voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept
                  such resignation.”
38. Thus, prior to the 33rd Constitutional Amendment, there was no

    provision in the Article which required the resignation to be

    accepted by the Speaker to become effective. Originally, the

    position was that a member of a Legislative Assembly could
35
resign from office by a unilateral act, and the acceptance of

     resignation was not required. [refer to
Union of India v. Gopal

     Chandra Misra
, (1978) 2 SCC 301;
Moti Ram v. Param Dev
,

     (1993) 2 SCC 725]
39. First, as a starting principle, it has to be accepted that a member

     of the Legislature has a right to resign. Nothing in the

     Constitution, or any statute, prevents him from resigning. A

     member may choose to resign for a variety of reasons and his

     reasons may be good or bad, but it is his sole prerogative to

     resign. An elected member cannot be compelled to continue his

     office   if   he   chooses   to   resign.   The   33 rd   Constitutional

     Amendment does not change this position. On the contrary, it

     ensures that his resignation is on account of his free will.
40. Second, the 33rd Constitutional Amendment requires acceptance

     of resignation by the Speaker. Thus, merely addressing a

     resignation letter to the Speaker would not lead to the seat

     automatically falling vacant. The Speaker has to accept such

     resignation for the seat to become vacant. However, as discussed

     above, the Speaker has limited discretion for rejecting the

     resignation. If the resignation is voluntary or genuine, the
36
Speaker has to accept the resignation and communicate the

     same.
41. Third, the Speaker can reject the resignation, if the Speaker is

     satisfied that resignation was “not voluntary or genuine”. Herein,

     our attention is drawn to the Chapter 22, Rule 202 (2) of the

     Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Karnataka

     Legislative Assembly, which is extracted as under:
“(2) If a member hands over the letter of
               resignation to the Speaker personally and
               informs him that the resignation is
               voluntary and genuine and the Speaker has
               no information or knowledge to the contrary,
               and if he is satisfied, the Speaker may
               accept resignation immediately.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)

     The rule states that the Speaker has to take a call on the

     resignation letter addressed to him immediately, having been

     satisfied of the voluntariness and genuineness. Reading the rule

     in consonance with
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution and its

     proviso, it is clear that the Speaker’s satisfaction should be

     based on the information received and after making such inquiry

     as he thinks fit. The aforesaid aspects do not require roving

     inquiry and with the experience of a Speaker, who is the head of

     the House, he is expected to conduct such inquiry as is
37
necessary and pass an order. If a member appears before him

    and gives a letter in writing, an inquiry may be a limited inquiry.
But if he receives information that a member tendered his

    resignation under coercion, he may choose to commence a

    formal inquiry to ascertain if the resignation was voluntary and

    genuine.
42. Fourth, although the word “genuine” has not been defined, in

    this context, it would simply mean that a writing by which a

    member chooses to resign is by the member himself and is not

    forged by any third party. The word “genuine” only relates to the

    authenticity of the letter of resignation.
43. Similarly, the word “voluntary” has not been defined. In this

    context, it would mean the resignation should not be based on

    threat, force or coercion. This is evident from the Statement of

    Objects and Reasons of the 33 rd Constitutional Amendment

    which is extracted below:
1.
Articles 101 (3) (b)
, and
190 (3) (b)
of the
               Constitution permit a member of either
               House of Parliament or a member of a
               House of the Legislature of a State to resign
               his seat by writing under his hand
               addressed to the Speaker or the Chairman,
               as the case may be. In the recent past,
               there have been instances where coercive
38
measures have been resorted to for
              compelling members of' a Legislative
              Assembly to resign their membership, if
              this is not checked, it might become
              difficult for Legislatures to function in
              accordance with the provisions of the
              Constitution. It is therefore, proposed to
              amend the above two articles to impose a
              requirement as to acceptance of the
              resignation by the Speaker or the Chairman
              and to provide that the resignation shall not
              be accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman
              if he is satisfied after making such inquiry
              as he thinks fit that the resignation is not
              voluntary or genuine.
(emphasis supplied)


    The Speaker therefore has a duty to reject the resignation if

    such resignation is based on coercion, threat or force.
44. Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, has contended that a

    Speaker, as a part of his inquiry, can also go into the motive of

    the member and reject his resignation if it was done under

    political pressure. We are unable to accept this contention. The

    language of
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution does not permit

    the Speaker to inquire into the motive of the resignation. When a

    member is resigning on political pressure, he is still voluntarily

    doing so. Once the member tenders his resignation it would be

    “voluntary” and if the writing can be attributed to him, it would
39
be “genuine”. Our view is also supported by the debates on the

33rd Constitutional Amendment. It may be necessary to quote

the   debate   dated   03.05.1974    on   the   33 rd   Constitutional

Amendment, which is extracted below:
H.R. Gokhale: I do not want to reply
          elaborately to all the points because I know I
          will have to deal with these points when the
          Bill comes up for consideration. In a way, I
          am thankful to the Hon. Members. They
          have given me notice of what they are going
          to say. I will deal with some points raised.
          Sir, the idea that the Bill prevents any
          member from resigning is absolutely wrong.
          On the contrary, the basis on which the Bill
          proceeds is, the right of resignation is
          protected and the idea of acceptance of a
          resignation is also subject to a proviso that
          the acceptance is in the normal course and
          the resignation can take place only in the
          event of a conclusion being reached that
          either it is not genuine or it is not voluntary.
          Therefore, to proceed on the basis that the
          right of a Member to resign is taken away, is
          entirely wrong. This can be seen if the bill is
          properly studied. The other thing they said
          was, in the name of democracy, how do you
          prevent people from resigning. Nobody is
          prevented from resigning. On the contrary,
          the basic idea is, the ordinary right of a
          person to say ‘I do not want to continue to
          be a Member of the House’ is maintained.
          But, is it a democratic way, when a
          Member does not want to resign, people
          pressurise him to resign­ not political
          pressure but by threats of violence­ as
          had occurred in the recent past. The
40
person has no option but to resign. The
              Speaker has no option but to accept the
              resignation in the present set­up. This is
              a matter which was true in Gujarat. It may
              be true elsewhere. It was true in Gujarat. It
              had happened. A large number of people,
              about 200­300 people, went and indulged in
              acts of violence, held out threats and under
              duress, signatures were obtained. In some
              cases, Members were carried physically from
              their constituencies to the Speaker for giving
              resignations.
(emphasis supplied)

    In this regard, there is no doubt that the Petitioners have

    categorically stated and have re­affirmed before the Speaker and

    this Court, in unequivocal terms, that they have voluntarily and

    genuinely resigned their membership of the House. This Court,

    in the earlier Writ Petition, being Writ Petition (C) No. 872 of

    2019, had also directed the Speaker to look into the resignation

    of the members, but the same was kept pending.
45. In view of our above discussion we hold that the Speaker can

    reject a resignation only if the inquiry demonstrates that it is not

    “voluntary” or “genuine”. The inquiry should be limited to

    ascertaining   if   the   member     intends   to   relinquish   his

    membership out of his free will. Once it is demonstrated that a

    member is willing to resign out of his free will, the Speaker has
41
no option but to accept the resignation. It is constitutionally

     impermissible for the Speaker to take into account any other

     extraneous factors while considering the resignation. The

     satisfaction of the Speaker is subject to judicial review.
46. We are of the opinion that the aforesaid observations clarify the

     scope of the Speaker’s duty under
Article 190(3)(b)
of the

     Constitution, and answer the contention raised by the learned

     senior counsel regarding the same. However, since we are

     deciding the question of disqualification, it might not be

     necessary to make any observations on the merits of the

     petitioners’   plea   regarding    the   non­acceptance      of   their

     resignation letters, in view of our subsequent findings on

     disqualification.
F. DISQUALIFICATION PROCEEDINGS AFTER

          RESIGNATION
47. It was also contended by the Petitioners that the Speaker did not

     have the jurisdiction to deal with disqualification petitions, as

     the Petitioners having resigned were no longer members who

     could have been disqualified. This issue does not apply to the
42
Petitioners in Writ Petition (C) No. 992 of 2019 and Writ Petition

     (C) No. 1003 of 2019 as they did not tender their resignation.
48. Before we proceed to record our reasons, it is pertinent to reflect

     upon the statement of objects and reasons to the Constitution

     (Fifty­second Amendment) Act, 1985 which states that the issue

     of defection has preoccupied the national conscience from the

     1960s. The importance of the same stems from the fact that it

     has the potential to cause extensive damage to the democracy.

     In this regard, having experienced earlier Governments falling

     due to such practice, the legislature introduced the bill inserting

     the Tenth Schedule for discouraging such practice.
“The evil of political defections has been a
             matter of national concern. If it is not
             combated, it is likely to undermine the very
             foundations of our democracy and the
             principles which sustain it. With this object,
             an assurance was given in the Address by the
             President to Parliament that the government
             intended to introduce in the current session of
             Parliament an anti­defection Bill. This Bill is
             meant for outlawing defection and fulfilling the
             above assurance.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
49. This court in the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra) has clearly

     enunciated the purpose behind the introduction of the Tenth
43
Schedule, wherein it is stated that “the main purpose underlying

    the constitutional amendment and introduction of the Tenth

    Schedule is to curb the evil of defection which was causing

    immense mischief in our body politic.” The relevant extracts are

    presented below:
“9. This brings to the fore the object
              underlying the provisions in the Tenth
              Schedule. The object is to curb the evil of
              political defections motivated by lure of
              office or other similar considerations
              which endanger the foundations of our
              democracy. The remedy proposed is to
              disqualify the Member of either House of
              Parliament or of the State Legislature
              who is found to have defected from
              continuing as a Member of the House. The
              grounds of disqualification are specified in
              Paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule.”
                                     (emphasis supplied)
50. Therefore, it can be clearly concluded that the Tenth Schedule

    was brought in to cure the evil of defection recognising the

    significant impact it has on the health of our democracy. The

    91st Constitutional Amendment also strengthens the aforesaid

    view that the law needed further strengthening in order to curb

    the evil of defection. The aforesaid amendment introduced
44
Articles 75(1B)
, 164(1B)
and
361B
in the Constitution. These

     provisions bar any person who is disqualified under the Tenth

     Schedule from being appointed as a Minister or from holding

     any remunerative political post from the date of disqualification

     till the date on which the term of his office would expire or if he

     is re­elected to the legislature, whichever is earlier.
51. The intent of the amendment is crystal clear. The constitutional

     amendment sought to create additional consequences resultant

     from the determination that a person was disqualified under the

     Tenth Schedule. If we hold that the disqualification proceedings

     would become infructuous upon tendering resignation, any

     member who is on the verge of being disqualified would

     immediately resign and would escape from the sanctions

     provided under
Articles 75(1B)
, 164(1B)
and
361B.
Such an

     interpretation would therefore not only be against the intent

     behind the introduction of the Tenth Schedule, but also defeat

     the spirit of the 91st Constitutional Amendment.
52. A five Judge Bench of this Court, in the case of
Delhi

     Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress
, 1991

     Supp (1) SCC 600 ruled that             an inhibition     under the

     Constitution must be interpreted so as to give a wider
45
interpretation to cure the existing evils. The relevant extract has

     been provided below:
118. Legislation, both statutory and
               constitutional, is enacted, it is true, from
               experience of evils. But its general
               language      should      not,    therefore,
               necessarily be confined to the form that
               that evil had taken. Time works changes,
               brings into existence new conditions and
               purposes     and    new     awareness      of
               limitations. Therefore, a principle to be
               valid    must    be    capable    of   wider
               application than the mischief which gave
               it birth. This is particularly true of the
               constitutional constructions. Constitutions
               are not ephemeral enactments designed to
               meet passing occasions. These are, to use
               the words of Chief Justice Marshall,
               “designed to approach immortality as nearly
               as human institutions can approach it ….”.
In the application of a constitutional
               limitation or inhibition, our interpretation
               cannot be only of ‘what has been’ but of
               ‘what may be’. See the observations of this
               Court in
Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration
[(1978) 4 SCC 494: 1979 SCC (Cri) 155].
(emphasis supplied)
53.
In the case of
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India
, (2018) 8

     SCC 501, a five Judge Bench of this Court articulated the

     principles of constitutional interpretation, stating that Courts

     are obligated to take an interpretation which glorifies the

     democratic sprit of the Constitution:
46
284.1. While interpreting the provisions of
              the Constitution, the safe and most sound
              approach for the constitutional courts to
              adopt is to read the words of the
              Constitution in the light of the spirit of
              the     Constitution     so    that     the
              quintessential democratic nature of our
              Constitution and the paradigm of
              representative participation by way of
              citizenry     engagement       are     not
              annihilated. The courts must adopt such
              an interpretation which glorifies the
              democratic spirit of the Constitution.
284.5. The Constitution being the supreme
              instrument envisages the concept of
              constitutional governance which has, as its
              twin limbs, the principles of fiduciary nature
              of public power and the system of checks
              and balances. Constitutional governance,
              in turn, gives birth to the requisite
              constitutional trust which must be
              exhibited      by      all      constitutional
              functionaries while performing their
              official duties.
(emphasis supplied)
54.
In addition to the above, the decision of the Speaker that a

    member is disqualified, relates back to the date of the

    disqualifying action complained of. The power of the Speaker to

    decide   upon   a   disqualification   petition   was   dealt   by   a

    Constitution Bench of this Court in
Rajendra Singh Rana v.

    Swami Prasad Maurya
, (2007) 4 SCC 270. This Court, reading
47
the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 6 of the Tenth Schedule, has

clearly held that the Speaker has to decide the question of

disqualification with reference to the date it was incurred. The

Court held that:
“34. As we see it, the act of disqualification
          occurs on a member voluntarily giving up
          his membership of a political party or at the
          point of defiance of the whip issued to him.
Therefore,    the    act    that   constitutes
          disqualification in terms of para 2 of the
          Tenth Schedule is the act of giving up or
          defiance of the whip. The fact that a
          decision in that regard may be taken in
          the case of voluntary giving up, by the
          Speaker at a subsequent point of time
          cannot and does not postpone the
          incurring of disqualification by the act of
          the legislator. Similarly, the fact that the
          party could condone the defiance of a whip
          within 15 days or that the Speaker takes the
          decision only thereafter in those cases,
          cannot also pitch the time of disqualification
          as anything other than the point at which
          the whip is defied. Therefore in the
          background of the object sought to be
          achieved by the Fifty­second Amendment of
          the    Constitution     and     on   a    true
          understanding of para 2 of the Tenth
          Schedule, with reference to the other
          paragraphs of the Tenth Schedule, the
          position that emerges is that the Speaker
          has    to     decide     the    question    of
          disqualification with reference to the
          date on which the member voluntarily
          gives up his membership or defies the
48
whip. It is really a decision ex post
               facto...”
                                   (emphasis supplied)
55. As such, there is no doubt that the disqualification relates to the

     date when such act of defection takes place. The tendering of

     resignation does not have a bearing on the jurisdiction of the

     Speaker in this regard. At this point we may allude to the case of
D. Sanjeevayya v. Election Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh
, AIR

     1967 SC 1211, wherein this Court has held that:
“5.It is, therefore, not permissible, in the
              present case, to interpret
Section 150
of the
              Act in isolation without reference to
Part III
              of the Act
which prescribes the machinery
              for calling in question the election of a
              returned candidate. When an election
              petition has been referred to a Tribunal by
              the Election Commission and the former is
              seized of the matter, the petition has to be
              disposed of according to law. The Tribunal
              has to adjudge at the conclusion of the
              proceeding whether the returned candidate
              has or has not committed any corrupt
              practice at the election and secondly, it has
              to decide whether the second respondent
              should or should not be declared to have
              been duly elected. A returned candidate
              cannot get rid of an election petition filed
              against him by resigning his seat in the
              Legislature, whatever the reason for his
              resignation may be…”

     Therefore, the aforesaid principle may be adopted accordingly,

     wherein the taint of disqualification does not vaporise, on
49
resignation, provided the defection has happened prior to the

     date of resignation.
56. In light of the above, resignation and disqualification are distinct

     mechanisms provided under the law which result in vacancy.

     Further, the factum/manner of resignation may be a relevant

     consideration while deciding the disqualification petition. We do

     not agree with the submission of the Petitioners that the

     disqualification   proceedings   cannot   be   continued    if   the

     resignations are tendered. Even if the resignation is tendered,

     the act resulting in disqualification arising prior to the

     resignation does not come to an end. The pending or impending

     disqualification action in the present case would not have been

     impacted by the submission of the resignation letter, considering

     the fact that the act of disqualification in this case have arisen

     prior to the members resigning from the Assembly.


        G. VALIDITY OF DISQUALIFICATION ORDER
57. The Petitioners have challenged the orders passed by the

     Speaker disqualifying them. The Speaker has, after a detailed

     analysis, categorically concluded that the present Petitioners
50
have voluntarily given up membership of the party, through

     their undisputed conduct.
58. To examine the above contention, we need to refer to the scheme

     of Tenth Schedule and other provisions of the Constitution.

     There is no dispute that in India, since the framing of the

     Constitution, there was a constant demand for formulating a law

     on defection. It may be noted that India was one of the first

     countries to legislate on an Anti­Defection Law. Following the

     example of India, many other countries including Israel, Canada

     etc. have followed suit.
59. Relevant provisions of Paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule

     provide that:
“2.Disqualification        on   ground    of
               defection.—
(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4
               and 5, a member of a House belonging to
               any political party shall be disqualified for
               being a member of the House—
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his
               membership of such political party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in
               such House contrary to any direction issued
               by the political party to which he belongs or
               by any person or authority authorised by it
               in this behalf, without obtaining, in either
51
case, the prior permission of such political
               party, person or authority and such voting
               or abstention has not been condoned by
               such political party, person or authority
               within fifteen days from the date of such
               voting or abstention.”


     That the Speaker can disqualify a member belonging to any

     political party if he has voluntarily given up his membership of

     such political party or if he votes against the wishes of his party.

     It is in this regard that an appropriate meaning needs to be

     given to the term disqualification.
60. The dictionary meaning of the word ‘disqualification’ is ‘to

     officially stop someone from being in a competition or doing

     something because they are not suitable, or they have done

     something wrong’. However, under the Tenth Schedule this term

     occupies a specific meaning wherein, a member is stopped from

     continuing to be a member of a legislative body, if his actions fall

     in one of the conditions provided under paragraph 2.
61. In order to analyze the case at hand, we need to briefly refer to

     and understand the scheme of the Constitution with respect to

     State Legislatures.
Article 168
of the Constitution provides that

     for every State there shall be a Governor and two Houses of

     Legislature namely Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
52
or where only one such Legislative House is there, then a

     Legislative Assembly. Under
Article 172
of the Constitution every

     Legislative Assembly unless sooner dissolved shall continue for

     five years from the date appointed for its first meeting. In order

     to secure the membership of the State Legislature, such

     members     must   comply    and    conform   to   three   distinct

     qualifications enlisted under
Article 173.
62.
Article 190(3)
of the Constitution provides that the seat

     belonging to a member of the Legislative Assembly becomes

     vacant if such a member becomes subject to any disqualification

     as mentioned in clause (1) or (2) of
Article 191
of the

     Constitution, or he resigns his seat by writing under his hand

     addressed to the Speaker, and his resignation is accepted by the

     Speaker in terms of the proviso to
Article 190(3)
of the

     Constitution.
63.
Article 191
provides for disqualification of a membership which

     may be reduced as under:
“191. Disqualifications for membership.—
               (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
               chosen as, and for being, a member of the
               Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council
               of a State—
53
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the
               Government of India or the Government of
               any State specified in the First Schedule,
               other than an office declared by the
               Legislature of the State by law not to
               disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so
               declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has
               voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a
               foreign    State,   or    is   under    any
               acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence
               to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any
               law made by Parliament.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
               clause, a person shall not be deemed to hold
               an office of profit under the Government of
               India or the Government of any State
               specified in the First Schedule by reason
               only that he is a Minister either for the
               Union or for such State.
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a
               member of the Legislative Assembly or
               Legislative Council of a State if he is so
               disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.”
64. It is interesting to note that
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution

     provides for disqualification of a person (a) for being chosen as

     and (b) for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or the

     Legislative Council if his actions or candidature attract the

     grounds therein. We can therefore easily infer from the usage of
54
language under
Article 191(1)
that for disqualification such as

     holding an office of profit, unsoundness of mind, insolvency,

     etc., bars a person from continuing as a member as well as from

     contesting elections.
Article 191(2)
, on the other hand, bars a

     person only “for being a member” of the Legislative Assembly or

     the Legislative Council. This difference in phraseology would be

     explained later when we consider the part of the order of the

     Speaker which disqualified the present Petitioners for the rest of

     the legislative term.
65.
Article 192
of the Constitution provides that the Governor will be

     the authority for determination of disqualification on the

     grounds as contained under
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution.

     In contrast, the decision as to disqualification on the ground as

     contained in
Article 191(2)
of the Constitution vests exclusively

     in the Speaker in terms of paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule.

     There is no dispute that provisions under Tenth Schedule are

     relatable to disqualification as provided under
Articles 102(2)
and
191(2)
of the Constitution.
66. At this point we need to observe
Article 164 (1B)
and
361B
of the

     Constitution.
Article 164(1B)
of the Constitution reads as under:
55
“164. Other provisions as to Members

          ...
(1B). A member of the Legislative Assembly
          of a State or either House of the Legislature
          of a State having Legislative Council
          belonging to any political party who is
          disqualified for being a member of that
          House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
          Schedule shall also be disqualified to be
          appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for
          duration of the period commencing from the
          date of his disqualification till the date on
          which the term of his office as such
          member would expire or where he
          contests any election to the Legislative
          Assembly of a State or either House of
          the Legislature of a State having
          Legislative Council, as the case may be,
          before the expiry of such period, till the
          date on which he is declared elected,
          whichever is earlier.”
Article 361B
of the Constitution reads as under:
“361B. Disqualification for appointment
          on remunerative political post.­

          A member of a house belonging to any
          political party who is disqualified for being a
          member of the House under paragraph 2 of
          the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified
          to hold any remunerative political post for
          duration of the period commencing from
          the date of his disqualification till the
          date on which the term of his office as
          such member would expire or till the date
          on which he contests an election to a
56
House and is declared elected, whichever
                is earlier.”

                                          (emphasis supplied)

    From a perusal of the above provisions, it is clear that the

    disqualification of a member, apart from the political taint,

    results in two further restrictions as a means of punitive actions

    against the members disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
67. Having understood the meaning and ambit of disqualification,

    we now need to concern ourselves with the extent of judicial

    review of the order of the Speaker passed under the Tenth

    Schedule.
68. Paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule has an important bearing

    upon extent of the judicial review in case of disqualification, and

    the same is reproduced as under:
“6. Decision on questions as to
                disqualification on ground of defection.—
                (1) If any question arises as to whether a
                member of a House has become subject to
                disqualification under this Schedule, the
                question shall be referred for the decision of
                the Chairman or, as the case may be, the
                Speaker of such House and his decision
                shall be final:
Provided that where the question
                which has arisen is as to whether the
                Chairman or the Speaker of a House has
57
become subject to such disqualification, the
               question shall be referred for the decision of
               such member of the House as the House
               may elect in this behalf and his decision
               shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub­paragraph (1)
               of this paragraph in relation to any question
               as to disqualification of a member of a
               House under this Schedule shall be deemed
               to be proceedings in Parliament within the
               meaning of
Article 122
or, as the case may
               be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State
               within the meaning of Article 212.”



     Disqualification is with respect to the status of being a member

     of the House and can only be considered by the Speaker if such

     question, through a petition, is addressed/ referred to the

     Speaker. It is apparent from the reading of paragraph 6 of the

     Tenth   Schedule    that   the   decision   of   the   Speaker   on

     disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is final.
69. However, the finality which is attached to the order of Speaker

     cannot be meant to take away the power of this Court to review

     the same.
In the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra) this Court

     recognized the Speaker’s role as a tribunal and allowed judicial

     review of the orders of the same on the grounds provided

     therein. The Speaker, being a constitutional functionary, is

     generally presumed to have adjudicated with highest traditions
58
of constitutionalism. In view of the same, a limited review was

    allowed for the courts to adjudicate upon the orders passed by

    the Speaker under the Tenth Schedule. Here, we need to

    appreciate the difference in the meaning of the terms ‘final’ and

    ‘conclusive’, in the context that the order of the Speaker is final

    but not conclusive and the same is amenable to judicial review.
70. Now we come to the principles that have been evolved by Courts

    in deciding a challenge to the order passed by Speaker in

    exercise of his powers under the Tenth Schedule of the

    Constitution.
In the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra) this Court,

    while upholding the constitutionality of the Tenth Schedule of

    the Constitution, held that the finality clause under paragraph

    6(2) of the Tenth Schedule limits the scope of judicial review

    available to an aggrieved person to certain limited grounds. This

    Court, in this context, held that:
“109.
In the light of the decisions
referred
               to above
and the nature of function that is
               exercised by the Speaker/Chairman under
               Paragraph 6, the scope of judicial review
               under
Articles 136
, and
226
and
227
of the
               Constitution in respect of an order passed
               by the Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph
               6 would be confined to jurisdictional errors
               only viz., infirmities based on violation
               of constitutional mandate, mala fides,
59
non­compliance with rules of natural
                  justice and perversity.”
                                         (emphasis supplied)
71. The Petitioners contend that the principles of natural justice

    were breached when the Speaker provided for a three­days’

    notice, in derogation of Rule 7(3)(b) of the Karnataka Legislative

    Assembly (Disqualification of Members on Ground of Defection)

    Rules, 1986, wherein a seven­day period is prescribed. On the

    contrary, the Respondents have emphatically stressed on the

    fact   that    there   was    adequate    opportunity   given   to     the

    disqualified members to make out their case before the Speaker.
72. Principles     of   natural   justice   cannot   be   reduced   into    a

    straitjacket formula. The yardstick of judging the compliance of

    natural justice, depends on the facts and circumstances of each

    case.
In the case of
R.S. Dass v. Union of India
, (1986) Supp

    SCC 617, this Court made following observations:
“25. It is well established that rules of
                  natural justice are not rigid rules, they
                  are flexible and their application depends
                  upon the setting and the background of
                  statutory provision, nature of the right
                  which     may   be    affected   and   the
                  consequences which may entail, its
                  application depends upon the facts and
                  circumstances of each case....”
60
(emphasis supplied)
73. This Court in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
case (supra) held

    that the Speaker decides the question as to the disqualification

    in an adjudicatory disposition.
This view received further

    elaboration by this court in the case of
Ravi S. Naik v. Union

    of India
, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 641 at page 653:
“20...An order of an authority exercising
              judicial or quasi­judicial functions passed
              in violation of the principles of natural
              justice is procedurally ultra vires and,
              therefore, suffers from a jurisdictional
              error. That is the reason why in spite of the
              finality imparted to the decision of the
              Speakers/Chairmen by paragraph 6(1) of
              the Tenth Schedule such a decision is
              subject to judicial review on the ground of
              non­compliance with rules of natural
              justice. But while applying the principles
              of natural justice, it must be borne in
              mind that “they are not immutable but
              flexible” and they are not cast in a rigid
              mould and they cannot be put in a legal
              straitjacket. Whether the requirements of
              natural justice have been complied with
              or not has to be considered in the
              context of the facts and circumstances of
              a particular case.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
61
74. At this point, the Petitioners have placed reliance on the case of
Balachandra L. Jarkhiholi v. B. S. Yeddyurappa
, (2011) 7

     SCC 1 and argued that
in that case
, this Court had struck down

     the disqualification order solely on the basis of the fact that only

     three days’ notice was given to the members.
However, it is

     relevant to point out here, that in the
Ravi S. Naik
case (supra),

     a disqualification order wherein the Speaker had granted two

     days’ notice to the members was upheld. The question,

     therefore, is not the number of days that were given by the

     Speaker for answering the show­cause notice, rather to see

     whether an effective opportunity of hearing was provided. This

     brings us back to the point already reiterated that the principle

     of natural justice is not a straitjacket formula.
75. In this context, this aspect needs to be adjudicated in the

     individual facts and circumstances having regard to the fact as

     to whether the members received notice of hearing, the reason

     for their absence and their representation before the Speaker.

     Therefore, we will deal with the individual cases later, having

     regard to the law laid down. [Refer to Chapter J]
62
76. The second contention raised by some of the Petitioners is that

     the order of the Speaker was passed in violation of the

     constitutional mandate. We are of the considered view that such

     contention cannot be sustained.
77. The phrase “violation of constitutional mandate” speaks for itself

     and does not need much elaboration. A “constitutional mandate”

     can be understood as what is required under, or by, the

     Constitution. For instance, in the Raja Ram Pal v. Hon’ble

     Speaker,    Lok   Sabha,    (2007)   3   SCC   184,   the   phrase

     “constitutional mandate” is used in this sense:
“360...On a plain reading,
Article 122(1)
prohibits "the validity of any proceedings in
                Parliament" from being "called in question"
in a court merely on the ground of
                "irregularity of procedure". In other words,
                the procedural irregularities cannot be used
                by the court to undo or vitiate what
                happens within the four walls of the
                legislature.     But     then,    'procedural
                irregularity' stands in stark contrast to
                'substantive illegality' which cannot be
                found included in the former. We are of the
                considered view that this specific provision
                with regard to check on the role of the
                judicial organ vis­à­vis proceedings in
                Parliament uses language which is neither
                vague nor ambiguous and, therefore, must
                be treated as the constitutional mandate
                on the subject, rendering unnecessary
                search for an answer elsewhere or
63
invocation of      principles     of   harmonious
                construction.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)

     In the context of the Tenth Schedule, and an order of

     disqualification   passed     by    the    Speaker    thereunder,      the

     “constitutional mandate” is therefore nothing but what is

     constitutionally   required    of    the   Speaker.   A   “violation    of

     constitutional mandate” is merely an unconstitutional act of the

     Speaker, one that cannot be defended on the touchstone of the

     Tenth Schedule and the powers or duties of the Speaker therein

     and is in contravention or violation of the same.
78. On the point of violation of constitutional mandate, although we

     are of the opinion that there was an error committed by the

     Speaker in deciding the disqualification petitions, the same does

     not rise to a level which requires us to quash the disqualification

     orders in their entirety. The specific error which we have

     identified relates to the period of disqualification imposed by the

     Speaker in the impugned orders. However, this error is

     severable, and does not go to the root of the disqualification, and

     thus does not require us to quash the disqualification orders in

     toto. Our findings on this issue highlighted above are dealt with

     in separate section of this judgment, for the sake of clarity .
64
79. The third contention of the Petitioners is that the orders of the

     Speaker were passed with malafides, and therefore, the same

     needs to be quashed. While there is no gainsaying that the

     ground of malafides is available to an individual challenging the

     order of the Speaker, the onus of proof regarding the same is on

     the one who challenges the said action and has a very heavy

     burden to discharge. [See
E. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil

     Nadu
, (1974) 4 SCC 3;
Raja Ram Pal
case (supra); Sub­

     Committee on
Judicial Accountability v. Union of India
,

     (1991) 4 SCC 699]. In the present case, although the Petitioners

     claimed that the Speaker acted malafide, they have neither

     made any specific allegation, nor can it be said that they have

     discharged the heavy burden that is required to prove that the

     ground of malafide is made out.
80. The Petitioners have contended that the order of the Speaker is

     perverse; however, they are not able to specifically point out any

     such instance. “Perversity” has been understood by this Court in

     a catena of judgments as relating to a situation where the

     findings assailed before it have been arrived at on the basis of no
65
evidence, or thoroughly unreliable evidence, and no reasonable

    person would act upon it.
81. Although, the learned Senior Counsel Dr. Rajeev Dhavan

    contended that the “some material” test needs to be applied to

    determine perversity. However, we are not expressing any

    opinion on this issue as in the earlier case of
Mayawati v.

    Markandeya Chand
, (1998) 7 SCC 517, a three­Judge Bench of

    this Court expressed different views on the same. In our opinion,

    the impugned orders of the Speaker can be sustained from the

    challenge made on the ground of perversity as the Respondents

    have been able to show that there was sufficient material

    available before the Speaker to pass the impugned orders.

    Further, on a consideration of the totality of the facts brought on

    record before us, it cannot be held that the findings of the

    Speaker are so unreasonable or unconscionable that no tribunal

    could have arrived at the same findings. Additionally, it may be

    noticed that the counsel for the Petitioners did not even

    controvert before us, the material relied upon by the Speaker. In

    view of the above, the Petitioners failed to show any illegality in

    the orders of the Speaker.
66
82. Before we conclude we need to refer to Griffith and Ryle

     on Parliament Functions,       Practice and Procedure (1989

     edn., p. 119) say:
“Loyalty to party is the norm, being
               based on shared beliefs. A divided party
               is looked on with suspicion by the
               electorate. It is natural for Members to
               accept the opinion of their Leaders and
               Spokesmen on the wide variety of
               matters on which those Members have no
               specialist knowledge. Generally Members
               will accept majority decisions in the party
               even     when    they    disagree.   It  is
               understandable therefore that a Member
               who rejects the party whip even on a single
               occasion will attract attention and more
               criticism than sympathy. To abstain from
               voting when required by party to vote is
               to suggest a degree of unreliability. To
               vote against party is disloyalty. To join
               with others in abstention or voting with
               the other side of conspiracy.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
83. There is no gainsaying that the scope of judicial review is limited

     to only grounds elaborated under the
Kihoto Hollohan
case

     (supra). In this regard, the Petitioners have not been able to

     establish any illegality in the orders passed by the Speaker. The

     Speaker, in our view, had concluded based on material and

     evidence that the members have voluntarily given up their
67
membership of the party, thereby accruing disqualification in

     terms of the Tenth Schedule, which facts cannot be reviewed

     and evaluated by this Court in these writ petitions. So, we have

     to    accept   the   orders   of   the   Speaker   to   the   extent   of

     disqualification.
H. POWER OF THE SPEAKER TO DIRECT

            DISQUALIFICATION TILL THE EXPIRY OF THE TERM
84. The Petitioners have submitted that the Speaker, through the

     disqualification orders, has prohibited them from contesting

     elections and becoming members of the House for the remaining

     duration of the 15th Legislative Assembly of Karnataka.
85. The impugned disqualification orders not only disqualify the

     Petitioners, but also indicated the time period for which they

     would be disqualified, viz., from the date of the order till the

     expiry of the term of the 15th Legislative Assembly of Karnataka.
86. Learned counsel for the Petitioners have specifically challenged

     this finding by asserting that the Speaker did not have the

     jurisdiction. They contended that the Speaker’s orders have the

     effect of disqualifying them from contesting elections and “being
68
chosen” as members. Learned Senior Counsel asserted that the

     Constitutional   provisions,   particularly
Articles   361B
and
164(1B)
of the Constitution, clarify that the disqualification of a

     member under the Tenth Schedule does not bar him from

     contesting elections, and on a member being re­elected the bar

     under the two Articles comes to an end.
87. Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, defended the orders of

     the Speaker barring the disqualified members till the end of the

     term of the Legislative Assembly. He contended that the Speaker

     was within his jurisdiction, as the master of the House, to

     punish the members for having indulged in anti­party activities.

     While the learned Senior Counsel was unable to point to any

     specific provision in the Constitution allowing the same, he

     submitted that the Speaker has the inherent power to maintain

     the integrity and decorum of the House. The learned Senior

     Counsel gave the example of the power of the Speaker to take

     action against a member who commits a crime in the well of the

     House, despite the absence of any specific provision allowing

     him to do the same. The learned Senior Counsel lastly submitted

     that unless the Speaker had such a power, the anti­defection
69
law would be a toothless law and that constitutional morality

    requires such interpretation.
88. Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

    Election Commission of India submitted that as a matter of

    practice, the Election Commission has always allowed a person

    disqualified under the Tenth Schedule to participate in the next

    election. The learned Senior Counsel substantiated his position

    by indicating from the provisions of the Tenth Schedule of the

    Constitution that the Speaker has only been given a limited

    jurisdiction therein, that is, to decide on the question of

    disqualification. The consequences of the same, however, are

    separately provided for under the Constitution, and the Speaker

    does not have the power to decide the same. The learned Senior

    Counsel also took us through the phrasing of
Article 191
of the

    Constitution, which provides for disqualification, and
Section 36
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to indicate that

    disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is not included in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951
as a ground for rejecting

    the nomination of a candidate. Finally, the learned Senior

    Counsel submitted that barring someone from contesting

    elections is a very serious penal power which cannot be resorted
70
to by the Speaker in absence of an express and specific

     provision of law.
89. The crucial question which arises is whether the power of the

     Speaker extends to specifically disqualifying the members till the

     end of the term?
90. The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution while dealing with

     disqualification on account of defection, does not specify the

     consequences or period of such disqualification. In fact, the

     vacancy which results from the disqualification is provided

     under
Article 190(3)
of the Constitution. The scope of the

     Speaker’s powers on disqualification requires us to examine the

     other provisions of the Constitution and relevant statutory

     provisions.
91.
Article 191
of the Constitution provides for disqualification from

     the membership of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative

     Council of a State generally.
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution is

     a general provision providing for the disqualification from the

     membership of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative

     Council of a State on the grounds mentioned therein.
Article

     191(2)
of the Constitution specifically provides that a person

     disqualified under the Tenth Schedule is disqualified for being a
71
member. It is relevant to note that
Article 191(2)
of the

    Constitution, like the Tenth Schedule, does not provide that the

    “disqualification” is to operate for a particular period or

    duration.
92. The contrast in phraseology between
Article 191(1)
and
Article

    191(2)
of the Constitution is crucial for deciding the present

    controversy.
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution provides that a

    person disqualified under any one of the clauses of
Article 191(1)
is disqualified both “for being chosen as” and “for being” a

    member of the house. In contrast,
Article 191(2)
only uses the

    phrase “for being a member”, which is the language used in

    paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule. The exclusion of the phrase

    “for being chosen as” a member in
Article 191(2)
of the

    Constitution suggests that the disqualification under the Tenth

    Schedule is qualitatively and constitutionally different from the

    other types of disqualification that are provided for under
Article

    191(1)
of the Constitution. The phrase “for being chosen as” has

    a specific connotation, meaning that a person cannot become a

    member of the House, if suffering from a disqualification under
Article 191(1)
of the Constitution. At the same time, the absence

    of these words in
Article 191(2)
of the Constitution suggests that
72
a person who is no longer a member due to disqualification

    under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution does not suffer

    from the additional infirmity of not being allowed to become a

    member subsequently. Therefore, such a person is not barred

    from contesting elections.
93. This interpretation is further supported by the language

    employed in
Section 36(2)
of the Representation of the People

    Act, 1951, which provides for when a returning officer may reject

    the   nomination    of    a   candidate.
Section   36(2)(a)
,   of   the

    Representation     of    the People Act,     1951 states     that     the

    nomination may be rejected if a candidate is disqualified “for

    being chosen” to fill the seat under
Article 191
of the

    Constitution, echoing the language employed in
Article 191(1)
,

    and not
Article 191(2)
of the Constitution.
94. Apart from the above,
Articles 164(1B)
and
361B
of the

    Constitution, which were inserted by the 91 st Constitutional

    Amendment, also show that disqualification under the Tenth

    Schedule does not bar a person from contesting elections. Both

    the above constitutional provisions specifically indicate the outer

    period for which the consequences indicated therein would

    extend, which is, either till the end of the term or till the
73
disqualified member is elected, whichever is earlier. The fact that

    the phrase “whichever is earlier” is used in both these

    provisions, indicates that the Constitution contemplates a

    situation where an election takes place prior to the end of the

    term of the House. Further, the term “election” as used in the

    above provisions has not been constrained by any other word,

    which strengthens the view that a member who has been

    disqualified under the Tenth Schedule is not barred from

    contesting elections.
95. Parliament by way of an enactment under
Article 191(1)(e)
read

    with Entry 72 of the Union List in the Seventh Schedule can

    make a law providing for disqualifications of persons from

    contesting elections. It is in exercise of this power that the

    Parliament enacted
The Representation of the People Act, 1951
.

    The Preamble to the aforementioned Act makes it evident that it

    was enacted for the purpose of “providing qualifications and

    disqualifications for membership” to the Houses of Legislature.
“
An Act
to provide for the conduct of
              elections to the Houses of Parliament and to
              the House or Houses of the Legislature of
              each State, the qualifications and
              disqualifications for membership of
              those Houses, the corrupt practices and
              other offences at or in connection with such
74
elections and the decision of doubts and
              disputes arising out of or in connection with
              such elections.”

                                            (emphasis supplied)
96.
Chapter II of Part II of the Representation of the People Act,

    1951
provides for the qualification for membership of the State

    Legislature while Chapter III vide
Sections 7
to
11
provides for

    disqualification for membership of the Legislature. These

    sections not only provide for the event of disqualification, but

    also   provide   for   the   specific     periods   for   which   such

    disqualification shall operate. For instance, under
Section 8
of

    the Representation of the People Act, 1951, different periods of

    disqualification are provided depending on the specific offence

    an individual is convicted under.
97. However, the provisions do not provide for and deal with

    disqualification under the Tenth Schedule. Clearly,
Section 36
of

    the Representation of the People Act, 1951 also does not

    contemplate such disqualification. Therefore, neither under the

    Constitution nor under the statutory scheme is it contemplated

    that disqualification under the Tenth Schedule would operate as

    a bar for contesting re­elections. The language of clauses (1) and
75
(2) of
Article 191
,
Articles 164(1B)
and
361B
are contrary to the

     contention of the Respondents.
98. Given this position, we conclude that the Speaker does not have

     any explicit power to specify the period of disqualification under

     the Tenth Schedule or bar a member from contesting elections

     after disqualification until the end of the term of the Legislative

     Assembly.
99. It is necessary for us to look at the submission of the learned

     Senior Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, that the Speaker can still be

     said to have inherent powers which allows him to pass

     restrictions like the one impugned herein. On this point, the

     counsel for the Petitioners argued that such a broad inherent

     power does not exist with the Speaker. He contended that even

     for granting leave of absence, the Speaker is required to present

     the same before the Legislative Assembly, which needs to accept

     the leave application before leave of absence is actually granted.
100. We are unable to agree with the contention of the learned Senior

     Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, that the power of the Speaker to bar a

     disqualified member from contesting re­election is inherent to

     his role and is required to be read into the Constitution to

     prevent the Speaker from becoming toothless. When the express
76
provisions of the Constitution provide for a specific eventuality,

    it is not appropriate to read an “inherent” power to confer

    additional penal consequences. To do so, and accept the

    contention of the respondents, would be against the express

    provisions of the Constitution.
101. This Court has repeatedly held that a person cannot be barred

    from contesting elections if he is otherwise qualified to contest

    the same. This legal position is vividly illustrated by the

    Constitution Bench ruling in
G. Narayanaswami v. G.

    Pannerselvam
, (1972) 3 SCC 717. In dealing with the question

    as to whether a non­graduate was qualified to be a candidate for

    the graduate constituency for the Legislative Council, when such

    a requirement was not prescribed either by the Constitution or

    the Parliament, this Court reversed the judgment of the Madras

    High Court which required the candidate to be a graduate. This

    Court held that when the law does not require such a

    qualification, it cannot be imposed by the Courts, and observed

    that:
“20. We think that the language as well as
              the legislative history of
Articles 171
and
173
of the Constitution and
Section 6
of the
              Representation of People Act, 1951, enable
77
us to presume a deliberate omission of the
              qualification that the representative of the
              graduates should also be a graduate. In our
              opinion, no absurdity results if we presume
              such an intention. We cannot infer as the
              learned Judge of the Madras High Court
              had done, from the mere fact of such an
              omission and opinions about a supposed
              scheme of “functional representation”
              underlying
Article 171
of our Constitution,
              that the omission was either unintentional
              or that it led to absurd results. We think
              that, by adding a condition to be
              necessary or implied qualifications of a
              representative of the graduates which the
              Constitution­makers, or, in any event the
              Parliament, could have easily imposed,
              the learned Judge had really invaded the
              legislative sphere. The defect, if any, in
              the law could be removed only by law
              made by Parliament.
(emphasis supplied)
102. Similarly in the case of
N.S. Vardachari v. G. Vasantha Pai
,

    (1972) 2 SCC 594, a three­judge bench of this Court reiterated

    the above position, and held that once a candidate possesses the

    qualifications and is not subject to any of the disqualifications

    specified in the law, he is qualified to be a candidate and any

    other consideration becomes irrelevant. The Court held that:
“18.
The Representation of the People Act,
            1950
prescribes qualifications for being
            enrolled as an elector.
Sections 8
to
10
­A of
78
the Act set out the grounds which disqualify a
             person from being a candidate. If a person
             possesses all the qualifications prescribed in
             the Constitution as well as in the Act and has
             not incurred any of the disqualifications
             mentioned therein then he is qualified to be a
             candidate. It may look anomalous that a non­
             graduate should be a candidate in a
             Graduates' constituency. But if a candidate
             possesses the qualifications prescribed and
             has     not     incurred     any     of    the
             disqualifications     mentioned      in    the
             Constitution     or    in  the     Act   other
             consideration becomes irrelevant. That is
             the ratio of the decision of this Court
             in Narayanaswamy case.”

                                               (emphasis supplied)
103. It is clear that nothing can be added to the grounds of

    disqualification based on convenience, equity, logic or perceived

    political intentions.
104. It is the contention of the Respondents that the Court should

    consider desirability of having a stricter model of disqualification

    wherein a person who has jumped the party lines should not be

    encouraged    and       should   be        punished   with   severe   penal

    consequences for attempting to do so. Further, learned Senior

    Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, has termed the actions of the

    Petitioners as a constitutional sin.
79
105. We do not subscribe to such an extreme stand taken by the

    learned Senior Counsel, considering the fact that such extreme

    stand could have a chilling effect on legitimate dissent. In any

    case, such a change in the policy cannot be looked into by this

    Court, as the same squarely falls within the legislative forte. Any

    attempt to interfere is better termed as reconstruction, which

    falls beyond the scope of legal interpretation by the Courts. [refer

    to
G. Narayanaswami
case (supra)]
106. It is clear that the power to prescribe qualifications and

    disqualifications for membership to the State Legislature must

    be specifically provided for under the Constitution or by the

    Parliament by enacting a law. Since neither the Constitution nor

    any Act provides for defection to another party as a bar from

    contesting further elections, reading such a bar into the

    nebulous concept of the inherent powers of the Speaker is

    impermissible and invalid. Without commenting on whether the

    Speaker has inherent powers or not, a Constitution Bench of

    this Court in the
Raja Ram Pal
case (supra), while holding that

    certain unwritten powers inure with the Parliament under
Article 105(3)
of the Constitution, went on to observe even in
80
case of expulsion, the expelled candidate is not barred from

     contesting re­election.
107. Viewed from a different angle, although the Constitution may

     not say everything, this Court is mandated to expound the

     unsaid. However, such elaboration cannot be done in derogation

     of separation of powers and in a drastic or radical fashion. In

     this context, Benjamin Constant, a prominent Swiss­French

     political writer, wrote in 1814 that:
“Constitutions are seldom made by the will
                of men. Time makes them. They are
                introduced gradually and in an almost
                imperceptible     way.     Yet    there  are
                circumstances        in     which     it  is
                indispensable to make a constitution.
                But then do only what is indispensable.
                Leave room for time and experience, so
                that these two reforming powers may
                direct your already constituted powers in
                the improvement of what is done and the
                completion of what is still to be done.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
108. The contention of the Respondents that the political exigencies

     required such measures to be taken needs to be rejected. The

     Constitutional silences cannot be used to introduce changes of

     such nature.
109.
In
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra), this Court observed:
81
48. The learned author, referring to cases in
which an elected Member is seriously
unrepresentative of the general constituency
opinion, or whose personal behaviour falls
below standards acceptable to his constituents
commends that what is needed is some
additional device to ensure that a Member
pays heed to constituents' views. Brazier
speaks of the efficacy of the device where the
constituency can recall its representative.
Brazier says: [Ibid. at 52, 53]

    “What sort of conduct might attract the
    operation of the recall power? First, a
    Member might have misused his
    Membership of the House, for example
    to further his personal financial
    interests in a manner offensive to his
    constituents. They might consider
    that the action taken against him by
    the House (or, indeed, lack of action)
    was inadequate …. Thirdly, the use
    of a recall power might be
    particularly apt when a Member
    changed his party but declined to
    resign his seat and fight an
    immediate by­election. It is not
    unreasonable to expect a Member
    who crosses the floor of the House,
    or who joins a new party, to
    resubmit himself quickly to the
    electors who had returned him in
    different colours. Of course, in all
    those three areas of controversial
    conduct the ordinary process of
    reselection might well result in the
    Member being dropped as his party's
    candidate (and obviously would
    definitely have that result in the third
    case). But that could only occur when
82
the time for reselection came; and in
                      any event the constituency would still
                      have the Member representing them
                      until the next general election. A
                      cleaner and more timely parting of
                      the ways would be preferable.
Sometimes a suspended sentence
                      does not meet the case.”
49. Indeed, in a sense an anti­defection law
             is a statutory variant of its moral principle
             and justification underlying the power of
             recall. What might justify a provision for
             recall would justify a provision for
             disqualification for defection. Unprincipled
             defection is a political and social evil...
(emphasis supplied)
110. From the above, it is clear that the Speaker, in exercise of his

     powers under the Tenth Schedule, does not have the power to

     either indicate the period for which a person is disqualified, nor

     to bar someone from contesting elections. We must be careful to

     remember that the desirability of a particular rule or law, should

     not in any event be confused with the question of existence of

     the same, and constitutional morality should never be replaced

     by   political     morality,   in   deciding   what   the   Constitution

     mandates. [refer to
Indra Sawhney v. Union of India
, 1992

     Supp (3) SCC 217]
83
111. We, therefore, hold that part of the impugned orders passed by

     the Speaker which specifies that the disqualification will last

     from the date of the order to the expiry of the term of the 15 th

     Legislative Assembly of Karnataka       to be ultra vires the

     constitutional mandate, and strike down this portion of the

     disqualification orders. However, this does not go to the root of

     the order, and as such, does not affect the aspect of legality of

     the disqualification orders.
112. Before parting, having ascertained the ambit of the Speaker’s

     power, the only regret this bench has, is with respect to the

     conduct and the manner in which all the constitutional

     functionaries have acted in the current scenario. Being a

     constitutional functionary, the Constitution requires them and

     their actions to uphold constitutionalism and constitutional

     morality. In this regard, a functionary is expected to not be

     vacillated by the prevailing political morality and pressures. In

     order to uphold the Constitution, we need to have men and

     women who will make a good Constitution such as ours, better.

     In this regard, Dr. Ambedkar on 25.11.1949 stated that:
… ‘As much defence as could be offered to
               the Constitution has been offered by my
               friends Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar and
84
Mr T.T. Krishnamachari. I shall not
              therefore enter into the merits of the
              Constitution. Because I feel, however good
              a Constitution may be, it is sure to turn
              out bad because those who are called to
              work it, happen to be a bad lot. However
              bad a Constitution may be, it may turn
              out to be good if those who are called to
              work it, happen to be a good lot. The
              working of a Constitution does not depend
              wholly upon the nature of the Constitution.
              The Constitution can provide only the
              organs of State such as the Legislature, the
              Executive and the Judiciary. The factors
              on which the working of those organs of
              the State depend are the people and the
              political parties they will set up as their
              instruments to carry out their wishes and
              their politics. Who can say how the people
              of India and their parties will behave? Will
              they uphold constitutional methods of
              achieving their purposes or will they prefer
              revolutionary methods of achieving them? If
              they adopt the revolutionary methods,
              however good the Constitution may be, it
              requires no prophet to say that it will fail. It
              is, therefore, futile to pass any judgment
              upon the Constitution without reference to
              the part which the people and their parties
              are likely to play.’
                                       (emphasis supplied)
113. Dr. Rajendra Prasad reiterated the same on 26.11.1949, in the

    following words:
… ‘Whatever the Constitution may or
              may not provide, the welfare of the
              country will depend upon the way in
85
which the country is administered. That
               will    depend      upon    the    men     who
               administer it. It is a trite saying that a
               country can have only the Government it
               deserves. Our Constitution has provisions
               in it which appear to some to be
               objectionable from one point or another. We
               must admit that the defects are inherent in
               the situation in the country and the people
               at large. If the people who are elected are
               capable and men of character and
               integrity, they would be able to make the
               best even of a defective Constitution. If
               they      are    lacking    in    these,    the
               Constitution cannot help the country.
               After all, a Constitution like a machine is a
               lifeless thing. It acquires life because of the
               men who control it and operate it, and India
               needs today nothing more than a set of
               honest men who will have the interest of the
               country before them.’
                                         (emphasis supplied)
114. In view of the same, we can only point out that merely taking the

     oath to protect and uphold the Constitution may not be

     sufficient, rather imbibing the Constitutional values in everyday

     functioning is required and expected by the glorious document

     that is our Constitution. Having come to conclusion that the

     Speaker has no power under the Constitution to disqualify the

     members till the end of the term, we are constrained to make

     certain observations.
86
115. In the end we need to note that the Speaker, being a neutral

     person, is expected to act independently while conducting the

     proceedings of the house or adjudication of any petitions. The

     constitutional responsibility endowed upon him has to be

     scrupulously followed. His political affiliations cannot come in

     the way of adjudication. If Speaker is not able to disassociate

     from his political party and behaves contrary to the spirit of the

     neutrality and independence, such person does not deserve to

     be reposed with public trust and confidence.
116. In any case, there is a growing trend of Speakers acting against

     the constitutional duty of being neutral. Additionally, political

     parties are indulging in horse trading and corrupt practices, due

     to which the citizens are denied of stable governments. In these

     circumstances,   the   Parliament   is   required   to   re­consider

     strengthening certain aspects of the Tenth Schedule, so that

     such undemocratic practices are discouraged.



       I. REFERENCE TO CONSTITUTION BENCH
117. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel, has contended that the

     matters herein involve substantial questions of law, which

     require a reference to a larger bench. To support his argument,
87
he has referred to
Article 145 (3)
of the Constitution to state that

     this Court is mandated under law to refer the matters to a larger

     bench since a substantial question of law concerning the

     interpretation of the Constitution has arisen in the instant case.
118. At this juncture, it may be beneficial to quote
Article 145(3)
of

     the Constitution:
“145. Rules of Court, etc.­
                ...
(3)The  minimum number of Judges who are
                to sit for the purpose of deciding any case
                involving a substantial question of law as to
                the interpretation of this Constitution or for
                the purpose of hearing any reference under
Article 143
shall be five:
Provided that, where the Court hearing an
                appeal under any of the provisions of this
                Chapter other than
Article 132
consists of
                less than five Judges and in the course of
                the hearing of the appeal the Court is
                satisfied that the appeal involves a
                substantial question of law as to the
                interpretation of this Constitution the
                determination of which is necessary for the
                disposal of the appeal, such Court shall
                refer the question for opinion to a Court
                constituted as required by this clause for
                the purpose of deciding any case involving
                such a question and shall on receipt of the
                opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity
                with such opinion.”
88
119. There is no doubt that the requirements under
Article 145(3)
of

     the Constitution have never been dealt with extensively and,

     more often than not, have received mere lip service, wherein this

     Court has found existence of case laws which have already dealt

     with the proposition involved, and have rejected such references.

     Normatively, this trend requires consideration in appropriate

     cases,    to   ensure    that   unmeritorious    references    do   not

     unnecessarily consume precious judicial time in the Supreme

     Court.
120. In any case, we feel that there is a requirement to provide a

     preliminary analysis with respect to the interpretation of this

     provision. In this context, we need to keep in mind two

     important      phrases    occurring    in
Article   145(3)
of   the

     Constitution, which are, ‘substantial question of law’ and

     ‘interpretation of the Constitution’. By reading the aforesaid

     provision, two conditions can be culled out before a reference is

     made:
i. The Court is satisfied that the case involves a
              substantial question of law as to the interpretation of
             this Constitution;
ii. The determination of which is necessary for the disposal
              of the case.
89
121. We may state that we are not persuaded for referring the present

     case to a larger bench as the mandate of the aforesaid Article is

     that this Court needs to be satisfied as to the existence of a

     substantial question of law on the Constitutional interpretation.

     However, this does not mean that every case of constitutional

     interpretation   should    be    compulsorily   referred   to   a

     Constitutional Bench.
122. Any question of law of general importance arising incidentally, or

     any ancillary question of law having no significance to the final

     outcome, cannot be considered as a substantial question of law.

     The existence of substantial question of law does not weigh on

     the stakes involved in the case, rather, it depends on the impact

     the question of law will have on the final determination. If the

     questions having a determining effect on the final outcome have

     already been decided by a conclusive authority, then such

     questions cannot be called as “substantial questions of law”. In

     any case, no substantial question of law exists in the present

     matter, which needs reference to a larger bench. The cardinal

     need is to achieve a judicial balance between the crucial
90
obligation to render justice and the compelling necessity of

     avoiding prolongation of any lis.
123. Similar questions for reference to a larger bench had arisen in

     the case of
Abdul Rahim Ismail C. Rahimtoola v. State of

     Bombay
, AIR 1959 SC 1315, wherein this Court rejected the

     reference as the questions sought to be referred were already

     settled by an earlier five judge bench.
Likewise, this Court in the

     case   of Bhagwan    Swarup     Lal   Bishan    Lal   v. State   of

     Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 682, held that a substantial

     question of interpretation of a provision of the Constitution

     cannot arise when the law on the subject has been finally and

     effectively decided by this Court. The same is provided

     hereunder:
“11... Learned counsel suggests that the
               question raised involves the interpretation
               of a provision of the Constitution and
               therefore the appeal of this accused will
               have to be referred to a Bench consisting of
               not less than 5 Judges. Under
Article 145(3)
of the Constitution only a case involving a
               substantial question of law as to the
               interpretation of the Constitution shall be
               heard by a bench comprising not less than
               5 Judges. This Court held in
State of
               Jammu and Kashmir v. Thakur Ganga
               Singh
, AIR 1960 SC 356 that a substantial
               question of interpretation of a provision
91
of the Constitution cannot arise when
               the law on the subject has been finally
               and     effectively    decided    by     this
               Court…..As the question raised has already
               been decided by this Court, what remains is
               only the application of the principle laid
               down to the facts of the present case.
We
               cannot, therefore, hold that the question
               raised involves a substantial question of law
               as to the interpretation of the Constitution
               within the meaning
Article 145(3)
of the
               Constitution.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)


     This Court sitting in a three Judge Bench in People's Union for
Civil Liberties (PUCL) v. Union of India
, (2003) 4 SCC 399, has

     reiterated the above principle.
124. In light of the above pronouncements, we observe that question

     of constitutional interpretation would arise only if two or more

     possible constructions are sought to be placed on a provision.
In

     spite of the assertive arguments made by the learned Senior

     Counsel, Mr. Kapil Sibal, we are guided by the decisions

     rendered by two Constitutional Bench decisions of this Court in

     the
Kihoto Hollohan
case (
supra) and Rajendra Singh Rana
case (supra). These decisions form the authoritative framework

     for understanding the Tenth Schedule and have been followed in
92
a number of subsequent judgments and do not require

     reconsideration.
125. At the cost of repetition, we may note that the ambit of this

     Court’s jurisdiction under
Article 32
of the Constitution is well

     settled, which does not merit any further reference in this

     regard.   The      Respondents        have   contended   that   the

     disqualification issue cannot be dealt under the writ jurisdiction,

     however, we have already pointed out that there is no bar for

     this Court to deal with the same as portrayed by various

     precedents cited above.
126. The case mostly turns on the fact that there is ample evidence to

     portray that the defection of these Petitioners had occurred even

     before they resigned. In the impugned orders, the Speaker has

     made out a case that the acts of the Petitioners indicated

     “voluntary giving up of membership”. Therefore, the question as

     to the jurisdiction of the Speaker to deal with disqualification

     after the members have tendered the resignation does not arise,

     stricto sensu. In view of the aforesaid factual scenario, there is

     no requirement to deal with the questions of law raised by the

     Respondents.
93
127. Further, the power of the Speaker to disqualify has been

     interpreted in a number of cases, and the present case does not

     require any broad­based reference which would only prolong the

     inevitable. Such casual and cavalier references should not be

     undertaken by this Court in view of conditions prescribed under
Article   145(3)
of   the   Constitution,   which   mandates    a

     responsibility upon this Court not to indulge in excessive

     academic endeavors and preserve precious judicial time, and

     effectively dispense justice in a timely fashion.
128. The last aspect, which relates to the power of the Speaker to

     disqualify the members till the end of the term, has already been

     dealt with extensively. At the cost of repetition, we may only

     point out that the Respondents’ contention that a bar exists on

     the members till the end of the term, falls within the domain of

     the legislature. Therefore, we do not see any merit in referring

     the aforesaid case to a larger bench. [
Refer to Public Interest

     Foundation v. Union of India
, (2019) 3 SCC 224]
129. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we decline to refer the case

     to a larger bench considering that there is no substantial

     question of constitutional interpretation that arises in this case.
94
J. INDIVIDUAL CASES

     W.P. (C) NO. 992 OF 2019
130. The Petitioner (Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil) accepts that he was

     elected on the ticket of INC and claims that he proceeded to

     Chennai for personal reasons without abstaining from his

     presence in the ongoing Assembly Session. Admittedly, the

     Petitioner had abstained from attending the proceedings in the

     Assembly on 18.07.2019 and 19.07.2019. Pursuant to the same,

     the disqualification petition was filed against him on 20.07.2019

     and   he was further     directed to appear for     hearing   on

     24.07.2019. Subsequently, the Petitioner had written a letter

     dated 23.07.2019 addressing the Speaker and seeking four

     weeks’ time to file appropriate reply to the contents of the

     petition. Nevertheless, the Hon’ble Speaker proceeded and

     passed the disqualification order on 28.07.2019 which has been

     impugned in the instant petition.
131. It ought to be noted that the impugned order passed by the

     Hon’ble Speaker, refers to the communication/letters addressed

     by the petitioner of having gone to Chennai, but due to

     discomfort and health reasons had contacted his doctor friend
95
and accordingly proceeded to Mumbai where he was admitted. It

     also records that the petitioner had attended the Assembly

     sessions on 12.07.2019 and 15.07.2019 but thereafter had

     abstained from attending the session on 22.07.2019 for which

     whip had been issued on 20.07.2019. It was also admitted that

     no formal leave was granted to the Petitioner. The Speaker had

     earlier rejected the leave of absence tendered by the Petitioner as

     the documents issued by the private hospital did not inspire

     confidence. Pertinently, the petitioner’s letter dated 19.07.2019

     written to the Speaker was not countersigned by any doctors of

     the Hospital.
132. It is further recorded that the petitioner had not attended the

     Assembly sessions on 18.07.2019, 19.07.2019, 22.07.2019 and

     23.07.2019. So, the petitioner was aware that the motion

     seeking the vote of confidence was on the floor of the Karnataka

     Legislative Assembly. The petitioner accepts that he had sent

     letter dated 23.07.2019, which refers to the disqualification

     petition. The petitioner herein was clearly aware of the

     disqualification proceedings.
133. The objections filed to the writ petition also refer to the fact that

     the INC, to test the loyalty of its Members, in view of the pending
96
trust vote, had categorically informed the party members not to

     absent themselves from the proceedings of the Assembly, failing

     which action under the Tenth Schedule would be taken.
134. We do not think that the order of the Speaker suffers from

     perversity. Even the petitioner has not submitted material to

     controvert the findings recorded by the Speaker in the impugned

     order. With regard to the assertion that there was violation of

     principles of natural justice would not also stand in view of the

     fact that the Speaker has taken a holistic view and gave sound

     reasons to disqualify the petitioner after providing him sufficient

     opportunity to defend himself. Alleged violation of principles of

     natural justice also do not carry any weight in view of the factual

     background of the case read in light of the fact that trust vote

     had to be voted upon.
W. P. (C) NO. 997 OF 2019
135. The Petitioners were elected to the 15th Karnataka Legislative

     Assembly on the INC ticket. On 19.01.2019, show­cause notices

     were issued to the Petitioners by INC for having failed to attend

     the party meeting on 18.01.2019, to which explanation was
97
submitted by the Petitioners claiming that due to personal

exigencies and medical reasons they could not attend the

meeting. However, the Petitioners again failed to attend the

meeting held on 08.02.2019. The Petitioners also did not attend

the Budget session. On 08.02.2019, the Petitioner No.1 (Ramesh

Jarkhiholi) sought leave of absence in a letter addressed to the

Speaker, due to his daughter’s wedding fixed for 24.02.2019.

Similarly, the Petitioner No. 2 (Mahesh Kumathalli) had also

addressed a letter seeking leave of absence due to ill­health.

disqualification petition was filed against the two Petitioners on

11.02.2019 on the ground that the Petitioners had voluntarily

given up membership of the political party, i.e. INC and incurred

disqualification under paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth Schedule.

Thereupon,    notices   were   issued   to   the   Petitioners   on

14.02.2019, who duly filed their response disputing the contents

of the disqualification petition on 20.02.2019. While the

disqualification petition   was pending, the       two Petitioners

submitted their resignation to the Speaker along with ten other

MLAs belonging to INC/JD(S) on 06.07.2019. The Petitioners

were thereupon given notice to appear before the Speaker on

11.07.2019 in connection with the disqualification petition.
98
136. The Speaker in the impugned order has taken note of the

     surrounding circumstances, including the conduct of the

     Petitioners from February 2019 onwards. It ought to be noted

     that sufficient opportunity of hearing was accorded to the

     Petitioners herein who had also filed their responses. It ought to

     be noted that, vide notice dated 16.01.2019, a meeting of the

     INC legislative party was called for 18.01.2019. The notice stated

     that the members must compulsorily attend the meeting

     otherwise action would be taken against them under the Tenth

     Schedule. The Petitioners did not attend the party meeting on

     18.01.2019. Admittedly, the Petitioners also refrained from

     attending   the   subsequent    general   body    meeting   dated

     06.02.2019 as well as Assembly Sessions from 06.02.2019. The

     resignations were submitted by the Petitioners nearly four

     months after the Disqualification Petition had already been filed.
137. One of the contentions raised by the Petitioners is predicated on

     the order of the Speaker in the case of Dr. Umesh Yadav who

     was also named and served with the disqualification petition

     filed on 11.02.2019. Dr. Umesh Yadav had tendered his

     resignation on 04.03.2019, which was accepted by the Speaker
99
on 01.04.2019. Therefore, the Petitioners claim parity and equal

     treatment. The contention deserves to be rejected as the Speaker

     has given detailed reasons to why he was not bound by the case

     of Dr. Umesh Yadav’s resignation.
138. As observed earlier, the Speaker had sufficient material before

     him to pass the order of disqualification. There exist no

     infirmities in the order, which calls for our indulgence and

     interference.
W.P. (C) NOS. 998, 1000, 1001, 1005, 1006 AND 1007 OF
2019
139. The three Petitioners in Writ Petition (C) No. 1005 of 2019 were

     members of the JD(S), against whom a separate Disqualification

     Petition No. 5 of 2019 was moved. The Speaker passed a

     separate impugned order dated 28.07.2019 against these

     Petitioners.
140. Petitioners in Writ Petition (C) Nos. 998, 1000, 1001, 1006 and

     1007 of 2019 were all members of the INC, against whom

     Disqualification Petition Nos. 3 and 4 of 2019 were moved. A

     common     order   dated   28.07.2019,    disqualifying   the   10

     Petitioners, was passed by the Speaker.
100
141. Both the above orders are being dealt with together as there are

     certain commonalities in the facts and circumstances which

     need to be noted and highlighted, which led to the decision of

     the   Speaker.   Between   01.07.2019    and   11.07.2019,   the

     Petitioners resigned from their posts as members of the

     Legislative Assembly. However, the Speaker did not adjudicate

     upon their resignation. Aggrieved by the fact that the Speaker

     was not taking a decision, ten Petitioners approached this Court

     in WP (C) No. 872 of 2019, wherein this Court on 11.07.2019,

     passed an order directing the Speaker to take the decision

     forthwith. The Speaker, on the other hand, did not take the

     decision. The other five Petitioners impleaded themselves in the

     pending Writ Petition (C) No. 872 of 2019 and again, on

     17.07.2019, this Court granted protection to the Petitioners with

     respect to being compelled to participate in the proceedings of

     the House. As the Speaker, did not conduct the floor test, R.

     Shankar [Petitioner in Writ Petition (C) No. 1003 of 2019]

     approached this Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 929 of 2019,

     wherein this Court passed following order on 23.07.2019:
“It has been stated that the Speaker expects
               and is optimistic that the Trust Vote would
101
be taken up by the House in the Course of
               the day, perhaps later in the evening. We,
               therefore, adjourn the matter till tomorrow.
142. In this regard, it was imperative for the Speaker to pass orders

     in view of the urgency indicated by this Court. In these facts and

     circumstances, the reasonable opportunity of hearing needs to

     be assessed.
143. A notice of three days with an opportunity for hearing would

     have been sufficient in the facts and circumstances of this case,

     when viewed in light of the decision in the
Ravi S Naik
case

     (supra). In this regard, our attention was drawn to the fact that

     notices were sent to their emails, and their permanent addresses

     within their constituency. In view of the unique facts, it cannot

     be said that an opportunity was not provided to the Petitioners

     to appear before the Speaker.
144. It is altogether a different matter that the aforesaid Petitioners

     were in Mumbai even though they were aware of the notice, and

     some of them did not even bother to be represented before the

     Speaker. In this light, we cannot say that effective opportunity

     was not granted to the Petitioners. Consequently, it cannot be
102
said as well that there has been a violation of principles of

     natural justice as against the aforesaid Petitioners.
W.P. (C) NO. 1003 OF 2019
145. The Petitioner (R. Shankar) claims that he is the sole elected

     member of the House belonging to KPJP. As per the Petitioner,

     KPJP had not merged with INC and consequently whip issued by

     the INC on 11.07.2019 was not binding on the Petitioner. As a

     result, the Petitioner had not incurred any disqualification under

     the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution.
146. The Petitioner, however, accepts that he had addressed a letter

     dated 14.06.2019 to the Speaker that he was the only legislator

     elected under the KPJP ticket and he had agreed to merge his

     party with the INC. The Petitioner had relied upon paragraph

     4(2) of the Tenth Schedule stating that since he is the sole

     elected member of his party there is a deemed merger under the

     Tenth Schedule.
147. The Petitioner, however, claims that the said letter dated

     14.06.2019 was not accepted by the Speaker and, therefore,

     would be inconsequential. He relied upon the letter dated

     17.06.2019 written by the Speaker requiring him to file on

     record resolution of merger passed by KPJP, and to furnish
103
documents as per legal requirements. It was further stated that

     is stated that no such document was filed.
148. The impugned order passed by the Speaker, on the other hand,

     refers to the letter of the Speaker dated 25.06.2019 stating that

     in terms of paragraph 4(2) of the Tenth Schedule, if two thirds of

     the members of the party decides to merge with another party,

     that decision would not attract provisions of the Tenth Schedule.

     As the Petitioner had represented that he was the lone elected

     member of the KPJP and had decided to merge with INC,

     appropriate steps had been initiated. In this background, with

     effect from 25.06.2019, the Petitioner would be considered as a

     member of the INC legislative party. The Petitioner has disputed

     this letter and has stated that this letter was not addressed to

     him but was addressed to the Leader of the Congress Legislature

     Party and the President of the Karnataka Pradesh Congress

     Party. The letter dated 25.06.2019 is available on the file of the

     Speaker.
149. The contention of the Petitioner may have carried weight in other

     circumstances, but we find that it is an accepted and admitted

     position that the Petitioner, after giving letter dated 14.06.2019,

     had even become a Minister in the Government then in power.
104
Pertinently, the Petitioner does not deny the letter dated

    14.06.2019 and the fact that he had become a Minister. The

    impugned order passed by the Speaker further records that on

    25.06.2019 a direction had been issued by the Speaker to the

    Secretary,   Karnataka   Legislative   Assembly,   to   treat   the

    Petitioner as a member of the INC and allot him a seat in the

    forthcoming session. Further, on 08.07.2019, the Petitioner had

    addressed a letter to the then Chief Minister tendering his

    resignation from the Council of Ministers of which he was a part,

    with a request that his resignation be accepted. This resignation

    was also personally given to the Governor. On 12.07.2019, the

    Petitioner had addressed a letter to the Speaker about

    withdrawing support to the Government and had requested that

    he be allotted a seat on the floor in the opposite benches. These

    aspects have been highlighted in the impugned order, which

    show that the contention of the Petitioner that the Speaker did

    not apply his mind on the aspect of merger, is wrong and

    incorrect.
150. We do not find any reason and good ground to hold that the

    findings in the impugned order are perverse and based on no

    evidence. Rather the stand and plea taken by the Petitioner is
105
devoid of merit. Similarly, the plea predicated on the violation of

     principles of natural justice must fail in the light of the above

     facts.
151. Our findings on allegations of not granting specific time in all

     the      above   cases   are   based    on   the   unique   facts   and

     circumstances of each case. It should not be understood to

     mean that the Speaker could cut short the hearing period. The

     Speaker should give sufficient opportunity to a member before

     deciding a disqualification proceeding and ordinarily follow the

     time limit prescribed in the Rules of the Legislature.



       K. CONCLUSION
152. In light of the discussion above, summary of law as held herein

     is as follows:
a. The Speaker, while adjudicating a disqualification petition,
           acts as a quasi­judicial authority and the validity of the
           orders thus passed can be questioned before this Court
           under
Article 32
of the Constitution. However, ordinarily,
           the party challenging the disqualification is required to first
           approach the High Court as the same would be
           appropriate, effective and expeditious.
b. The Speaker’s scope of inquiry with respect to acceptance
          or rejection of a resignation tendered by a member of the
          legislature is limited to examine whether such a resignation
          was tendered voluntarily or genuinely. Once it is
106
demonstrated that a member is willing to resign out of his
   free will, the speaker has no option but to accept the
   resignation. It is constitutionally impermissible for the
   Speaker to take into account any extraneous factors while
   considering the resignation. The satisfaction of the Speaker
   is subject to judicial review.
c. Resignation and disqualification on account of defection
   under the Tenth Schedule, both result in vacancy of the
   seat held by the member in the legislature, but further
   consequences envisaged are different.
d. Object and purpose of the Tenth Schedule is to curb the
   evil of political defection motivated by lure of office or
   rather similar considerations which endanger the
   foundation of our democracy. By the 91 st Constitutional
   Amendment,
Articles 71 (1B)
, 164(1B)
and
361B
were
   enacted to ensure that a member disqualified by the
   Speaker on account of defection is not appointed as a
   Minister or holds any remunerative political post from the
   date of disqualification or till the date on which his term of
   office would expire or he/she is re­elected to the
   legislature, whichever is earlier.
e. Disqualification relates back to the date when the act of
   defection takes place. Factum and taint of disqualification
   does not vaporise by tendering a resignation letter to the
   Speaker. A pending or impending disqualification action
   does not become infructuous by submission of the
   resignation letter, when act(s) of disqualification have
   arisen prior to the member’s resignation letter.
f. In the earlier Constitution Bench judgment of
Kihoto
  Hollohan
(supra), the order of the Speaker under Tenth
  Schedule can be subject to judicial review on four grounds:
mala fide, perversity, violation of the constitutional
  mandate and order passed in violation of natural justice.
107
g. Our findings on allegations of not granting specific time in
   all the above cases are based on the unique facts and
   circumstances of the case. It should not be understood to
   mean that the Speaker could cut short the hearing period.
   The Speaker should give sufficient opportunity to a
   member before deciding a disqualification proceeding and
   ordinarily follow the time limit prescribed in the Rules of
   the Legislature.
h. In light of the existing Constitutional mandate, the Speaker
   is not empowered to disqualify any member till the end of
   the term. However, a member disqualified under the Tenth
   Schedule shall be subjected to sanctions provided under
Articles 75(1B)
, 164(1B)
and
361B
of Constitution, which
   provides for a bar from being appointed as a Minister or
   from holding any remunerative political post from the date
   of disqualification till the date on which the term of his
   office would expire or if he is re­elected to the legislature,
   whichever is earlier.
i. There is a growing trend of the Speaker acting against the
   constitutional duty of being neutral. Further horse trading
   and corrupt practices associated with defection and change
   of loyalty for lure of office or wrong reasons have not
   abated. Thereby the citizens are denied stable
   governments. In these circumstances, there is need to
   consider strengthening certain aspects, so that such
   undemocratic practices are discouraged and checked.
j. The existence of a substantial question of law does not
   weigh on the stakes involved in the case, rather, it depends
   on the impact the “question of law” will have on the final
   determination. If the questions having a determining effect
   on the final outcome have already been decided by a
   conclusive authority, then such questions cannot be called
   as “substantial questions of law”. In any case, no
108
substantial question of law exists in the present matter,
          which needs reference to a larger bench.
153. In view of the discussion above, we pass the following order:
1. Orders dated 25.07.2019 and 28.07.2019 passed by the

          Speaker in Disqualification Petition Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8

          of 2019, are upheld to the extent of the disqualification of

          the Petitioners therein.
2. However,   the part of Speaker’s orders detailing the

          duration of disqualification, viz., from the date of the

          respective order till the expiry of the term of the 15 th

          Legislative Assembly of Karnataka, is accordingly set aside.
154. The Writ Petitions are disposed of in the afore­stated terms. All

     pending applications are also accordingly disposed of.
..........................J.
                                                       (N.V. Ramana)


                                                ...........................J.
                                                      (Sanjiv Khanna)


                                                ...........................J.
                                                     (Krishna Murari)

     NEW DELHI;
November 13, 2019.
109