[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tirumala Medical Academy Educational ... vs Union Of India on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 783, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1430
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
Non-Reportable

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                           Writ Petition (C) No. 779 of 2018


                         TIRUMALA MEDICAL ACADEMY EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY AND ANR.

                                                                        ………PETITIONER (S)
                                                        Versus
                         UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.
                                                                       ……..RESPONDENT (S)

                                                 JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
1.    This Writ Petition is filed challenging the letter dated

                         27.04.2018 of the Dental Council        of India-Respondent No.2

                         herein to the Union of India-Respondent No.1 recommending

                         that the first Petitioner-Tirumala Medical Academy Educational

                         Society is not entitled for establishment of a dental college for

                         the academic session 2018-2019. The order dated 26.06.2018

                         passed by Respondent No.1 accepting the recommendations of

                         Respondent No.2 and disapproving the application of the first
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Petitioner for establishment of a dental college is also assailed
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2018.08.21
17:25:46 IST
in the Writ Petition.   The Petitioners seek a further direction to
Reason:
Respondent No.1 to issue appropriate orders granting letter of
1
permission for establishing a new dental college for the

academic year 2018-2019.
2. Tirumala Medical Academy Educational Society, the first

Petitioner submitted an application for establishment of a

dental college in Nizamabad, Telangana for the academic

session 2018-2019. The Executive Committee of the second

Respondent considered the proposal in its meeting held on

21.12.2017.    The Executive Committee by its letter dated

29.12.2017 recommended to the Central Government not to

approve the scheme of the first Petitioner for establishment of

dental college for the academic session 2018-2019.          It was

mentioned therein that in spite of several opportunities given

to the first Petitioner, the land use certificate was not furnished

and that certificate relating to the completion of the buildings

was also not given.     The Executive Committee was also not

satisfied with the attachment of the proposed dental college

with the Government Medical College and Hospital as the

certificate issued by the Principal Secretary to Government of

Andhra Pradesh was issued four years back in which it was

stated that the arrangement may be revoked in the future.
The first Petitioner was informed that an opportunity of being

heard shall be afforded to him on 17.01.2018 to make his
2
submissions regarding the recommendations made by the

second Respondent for not approving the proposal of the first

Petitioner to start a new dental college.             A personal hearing

was given on 17.01.2018 in respect of the deficiencies

communicated to the first Petitioner.          Certain documents were

submitted by the first Petitioner in support of its contention

that   the   said   deficiencies   have        been    rectified.   After

considering the said documents the Hearing Committee

recommended to the first Respondent that the second

Respondent      should    review       their     recommendation       of

disapproval.        By a letter dated 24.01.2018, the first

Respondent informed the first Petitioner that the scheme

submitted by it for starting a dental college had been sent

back to the second Respondent for a review on the basis of the

recommendations of the Hearing Committee.
3. Pursuant to the direction by the first Respondent to

review the scheme, the second Respondent appointed a

Committee to conduct inspection of the dental college.               The

inspection was carried out on 22 nd and 23rd March, 2018. It is

relevant to state that there was a dispute between the first

Petitioner and Vels Education Society which was running

Meghna Institute of Dental Sciences at Nizamabad regarding
3
the affiliation to the Government Hospital, Nizamabad.     Vels

Education Society filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of

Telangana and Andhra Pradesh seeking a direction to the

second Respondent not to approve the scheme of the first

Petitioner for starting a dental college. An interim order was

passed by the High Court on 17.04.2018 in I.A. No.1 of 2018 in

Writ Petition No.11172 of 2018 that the proposal of the first

Petitioner may be considered, if permissible under the

regulations having regard to the peculiar facts of the case.
4. By a letter dated 27.04.2018, the Executive Committee of

the second Respondent recommended to the first Respondent

to disapprove the application/scheme of the first Petitioner for

establishment of a dental college. Relying upon the relevant

regulations, the request of the first Petitioner regarding the

clinical attachment with the Government Hospital, Nizamabad

was rejected as only one dental college can be attached to a

Government Hospital.    Meghna Institute of Dental Sciences,

Nizamabad was already having clinical attachment to the

Government Hospital. Apart from the said deficiency, several

others were pointed out in the letter dated 27.04.2018 which

are as follows:
4
“2.    The college has four specialties clinics in
         Prothodontics,      Pedodontics,    Operative  and
         Periodontics in one clinic hall.
3.     The oral Surgery clinics are in next hall.
4.     There is no biometrics for staff attendance.
5.     There was shortage of clinical material.
6.     There was no record of work done in Register/ log
         book of      lab/ Ceramic work.
7.     Many staff have residential address of Hyderabad
         city (160 km from college).
8.     15 affidavits are incomplete, despite requests to
         complete them and give proofs of degrees,
         registration etc.
9.     The list of medical college staff (teachers + non
         teaching) was not provided in the inspection hence,
         no verification     could be done of medical teachers
         teaching the dental       students.
10.    Some Professors have no IT Returns after 2014.
11.    The library had no journals, back journals only a few
         e-    journals.
12.    No staff lives in the dental college premises.
13.    The information of annexures No. 7, 8 are to be
         provided     by the dental college directly to the
         council, as it was not provided during inspection.
14.    Medical Teaching Staff information not given.
15.    DCI cards not available.
16.    Information about university approval of appointment
         of    teachers not available.
17.    Attached Medical College details are as under:-
Department                Require   Allotted   Occupancy
                          d
                                               During last 6 On the day
                                               months         of
                                                              Inspection
General          Ward-      30                 Information not given to
Medical      including                         the Inspectors
allied specialties
General          Ward-      30
Surgical     including
allied specialties
Private Ward (A/c &          9
Non A/c)
Maternity Ward              15
Pediatric Ward               6
Intensive          Care      4
Services (4% of bed
strength)
5
Critical Care Services
(6% of bed strength)
18. Area Requirement         (As   per   Bureau      of   Indian
  Standards):-
Required                      Available
Covered Area              20 sq.m./bed                Information not given
Impatient Services        40%
Outpatient Services       35%
Department and supportive 25%
Services
19.   There are following information of Man Power
        Requirement in various departments not given by the
        college authority during Inspection:-
Medical Staff: - General Surgery-2, General Medicine-
        2,    Obstetrics & Gynaecology-2, ENT-2, Paediatrics-
2,    Anaesthesia-2,          Orthopaedics-2,
        Pharmacologist-1,        Radiologist-1,   GDMO-1,
        Community Medicine-1,          Hospital
Administration-1. Nursing Staff: Matron-1, Sister
        Incharge-6, O.T. Nurses-6, General Nurses-20,
        Labour Room Nurses-4.
Health Staff: Female Health Assistant-1, Extension
        Educator Paramedical Staff-1, Lab Technician/ Blood
        Bank Tech-4, ECG Technician-1, Pharmacist-4, Sr.
        Radiographer-1, CSSD-2, Medical Records-1.
        Engineering Staff: Civil-2, Mechanical-2, Electrical-2,
        Engineering Aid-4.
Other Staff: Drivers-2, Carpentor-1, Cooks-2, Barbar-
1,    Class IV including chowdikers-55.
Administrative Staff: Office Superintendent-1, Head
        Clerk-1, Cashier-1, Stenographer-1, UDC-2, LDC-4.
20.   Non-Teaching Staff/ Ministerial Staff: (Annexure10),
        Manager-4, Assistants-7, D.S.A. (Chair side
        attendant)-12,     Dent. Tech. (Dental Mechanic)-6
        Dent.Hygst.-2,     Radiographer-3, Photographer-1,
        Artist-1, Physical Direction-1, Electricians-4, Plumber-
2, Carpenter-1, Meson-1, A.C. Tech-1, Helpers
        Electrical-3, Sweepers &        Scavengers-9,
        Attenders-18, Security Personal-5, Dept. Secretaries-
        5, Driver-1, Nurses-2, Lab. Technicians-4.
21.   Central Library: not available any journal.
Indian Journals: No
        International Journals: No
6
Back Volumes: No
      Journal Room: No separate room (one big hall only)
      Computer/ Internet Room: No
      Room for librarian: No
22.   There are following deficiencies of Major Equipments
      in     various departments:
Prosthodontics and Crown & Bridge: Extra oral/ Intra
      oral trace-2, Preheating furnace-1, Surveying unit-1,
      Deflasking unit-4, Hydraulic press-2, Vacuum mixing
      maching-1, Curing pressure pot-1, Porcelain Furnace-
      1,     Vibrator-2, Sand blasting unit-1, Model
      Trimmer-1, Geyser-2, H.P. Grinder with suction-1,
      Heavy duty lathe-2,      Phantom     Heads-50,     Pre-
      clinical working tables-100.
Ceramic and Cast Partial Laboratory: Pindex System-
      1, Circular saw-1, Model Trimmer with Carborandum
      disc-1, Model Trimmer with Diamond disc-1, Induction
      casting machine-1, Programmable porcelain furnace
      with vacuum pump with instrument kit and material
      kit-1, Vacuum mixing maching-1, Spindle Grinder
      24,000 RPM with vacuum suction-1, Curing pressure
      pot-1, Milling machine-1, Palatal trimmer-1, Micro
      surveyor-1, Pre-clinical Prosthetics Laboratory (Work
      table preferably complete stainless steel fitted with
      light, Bunsen burner, air blower, working stool)-60
      (deficient), Adequate number of lab micro motor with
      attached hand piece-20, Plaster room for Pre-Clinical
      Work: Vibrator-2, Model Trimmer-1, Carborandum
      Disc-1, Diamond disc-1.
Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics: Dental
      Chairs and Unit-33, Glass bead sterilizers-4, Vibrator-
      2, Intra-oral X-ray Unit-Radiation safety not there,
      injectable gutta percha-1, Phantom Lab Unit-60.
      Chemical Laboratory: Model Trimmer Carborandum
      disc.-1, Model Trimmer Diamond disc-1, Spindle
      Grinder-1, Vibrator-2, Burnout furnace-1, Porcelain
      furnace-1, Sand blasint machine-1, Lab Airrotor-1,
      Pindex System-1, Circular Saw-1, Vacuum mixer-1,
      Pneumatic chisel-1.
23.   Staff Quarters (Separate from Hostel): Principal
      Bungalow- not occupied and Quarters for staff not
      occupied.
No. of equipped common rooms: None
      No. of messes: only one
24.   Boys Hostel:- 4 seater boys hostel.
7
25.   As per Hospital Attachment only clinical facility
           provided  to the proposed dental college.”
5.   The recommendation for disapproval of the scheme by

the second Respondent was accepted by the first Respondent

on 30.05.2018. The first Petitioner approached the High Court

of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana seeking a direction to

Respondent No.1 and 2 herein to consider his representation

dated 28.05.2018 for grant of permission to establish a new

dental college. By an order dated 07.06.2018, the High Court

directed the first Respondent to consider the representation

dated 28.05.2018 in accordance with law.                  The first

Respondent reconsidered the matter as per the directions of

the High Court and reiterated that the first Petitioner is not

entitled to start a new dental college for the year 2018-2019

by an order dated 26.06.2018.
6. We have heard Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel

appearing for the Petitioners, Ms. Pinky Anand, learned

Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India and Mr.

Gaurav Sharma, learned Advocate for the Dental Council of

India.   Mr. Divan submitted that the recommendation by the

second Respondent for disapproval of the scheme of the first

Petitioner to start a dental college and the acceptance of the
8
said recommendation by the first Respondent are in flagrant

violation of
Section 10 A (3) (a)
and
10 (4)
of the Indian

Medical Council Act, 1956. He contended that no opportunity

was given to the Petitioners to rectify the deficiencies pointed

out in the inspection conducted on 22 nd and 23rd March, 2018.

He also urged that the first Respondent failed to provide a

hearing to the first Petitioner before disapproval of the scheme

for starting a new dental college.    He relied upon a judgment

of this Court in
Royal Medical Trust v. Union of India
,

(2015) 10 SCC 19 in support of his contention.           Mr. Divan

urged that the dispute pertaining to the affiliation to a

Government Hospital has been settled and Vels Education

Society has withdrawn the Writ Petition filed by it in the High

Court of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.         According to him,

there is no dispute about the Petitioner No.1 being the only

college   affiliated   to   the   Government   Medical   Hospital,

Nizamabad at present.         He further submitted that all the

deficiencies pointed out in the inspection have been rectified

and he requested for a direction to Respondent No.2 to

conduct another inspection to verify whether the deficiencies

still exist. He also submitted that huge investment has been
9
made on the dental college and the Petitioners would suffer

immense hardship unless permission is granted to start the

dental college for the academic session 2018-2019.
7. The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that

the Hearing Committee of the Union of India fairly considered

the representation of the Petitioners and sent the matter back

to the second Respondent for review in January, 2018.        As

gross deficiencies have been pointed out by the second

Respondent on the basis of inspection conducted on 22 nd and

23rd March, 2018, the recommendation for disapproval of the

scheme of the first Petitioner was accepted by the first

Respondent.    She stated that there was no requirement of

giving an opportunity at every stage and in view of the

personal hearing given to the first Petitioner in January, 2018,

there was no necessity of another opportunity to be given by

the first Respondent before passing a final order. She further

submitted that there are time lines fixed in the schedule which

cannot be violated as per the judgments of this Court.

According to her, the first Petitioner is not entitled for any

relief as the last date for grant of approval by the Union of

India was 31.05.2018.   Mr.Gaurav Sharma urged that the Writ

Petition warrants dismissal as the Petitioners are not entitled
10
for the relief claimed for.      He stated that the deficiencies

pointed out have not been cured. By referring to the material

placed on record by the Petitioners, he submitted that there is

large scale shortage of clinical material.       He also contended

that the settlement arrived at between the first Petitioner and

Vels Education Society was only last week.            At the time of

consideration of his proposal by the Respondents, the first

Petitioner was not entitled for permission to start a dental

college as it was not the only college affiliated to Government

Hospital.   He supported the Additional Solicitor General by

stating that the first Petitioner was not entitled for an

opportunity after the inspection was held in view of the fact

that an oral hearing was given by the Union of India before

sending the matter back to the Dental Council of India in

January, 2018.
8.
Section 10 (A)
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and

the relevant Regulations framed under
Section 33
of the Act

were considered by this Court in
Royal Medical Trust
(supra)

in which it was held as follows:
“30. In the light of the aforesaid facets, namely, that the
     scheme under Section 10-A may itself contemplate stage-
     wise achievement of annual targets and the requirements
     of reasonable opportunity to be afforded not only at the
11
initial stage but also in cases of subsequent renewal and
further that the opportunity must be afforded at both the
stages, namely, by MCI as well as by the Central
Government, the Schedule under the Regulations must
accommodate and provide for adequate time-limits to take
care of such eventualities. The Schedule which was
brought in force by way of an amendment dated 21-9-2012
unfortunately does not provide for such stage-wise
consideration. It simply gives four stages without indicating
any time-limits to ensure grant of such reasonable
opportunity in case the decisions of disapproval are taken
against the applicants. It also does not speak of any
compliance verification. The pattern that emerges in the
present cases is common and consistent in that the
inspections were undertaken in and around April/May 2014
and the letters of disapproval were sent by the Central
Government on or about 15-7-2014. Though the
compliance was reported, no verification in that behalf was
undertaken.
31. MCI and the Central Government have been vested
with monitoring powers under Section 10-A and the
Regulations. It is expected of these authorities to discharge
their functions well within the statutory confines as well as
in conformity with the Schedule to the Regulations. If there
is inaction on their part or non-observance of the time
schedule, it is bound to have adverse effect on all
concerned. The affidavit filed on behalf of the Union of
India shows that though the number of seats had risen,
obviously       because   of    permissions     granted      for
establishment of new colleges, because of disapproval of
renewal cases the resultant effect was net loss in terms of
number of seats available for the academic year. It thus
not only caused loss of opportunity to the students
community but at the same time caused loss to the society
in terms of less number of doctors being available. MCI and
the Central Government must therefore show due diligence
right from the day when the applications are received. The
Schedule giving various stages and time-limits must
accommodate every possible eventuality and at the same
time must comply with the requirements of observance of
natural justice at various levels. In our view the Schedule
must ideally take care of:
(A) Initial assessment of the application at the first level
should comprise of checking necessary requirements such
12
as essentiality certificate, consent for affiliation and
     physical features like land and hospital requirement. If an
     applicant fails to fulfil these requirements, the application
     on the face of it, would be incomplete and be rejected.
Those who fulfil the basic requirements would be
     considered at the next stage.
(B) Inspection should then be conducted by the
     Inspectors of MCI. By very nature such inspection must
     have an element of surprise. Therefore sufficient time of
     about three to four months ought to be given to MCI to
     cause inspection at any time and such inspection should
     normally be undertaken latest by January. Surprise
     inspection would ensure that the required facilities and
     infrastructure are always in place and not borrowed or put
     in temporarily.
(C) Intimation of the result or outcome of the
     inspection would      then    be    communicated.        If  the
     infrastructure and facilities are in order, the medical
     college      concerned      should    be     given      requisite
     permission/renewal. However, if there are any deficiencies
     or shortcomings, MCI must, after pointing out the
     deficiencies, grant to the college concerned sufficient time
     to report compliance.
(D) If compliance is reported and the applicant states
     that the deficiencies stand removed, MCI must cause
     compliance verification. It is possible that such compliance
     could be accepted even without actual physical verification
     but that assessment be left entirely to the discretion of MCI
     and the Central Government. In cases where actual
     physical verification is required, MCI and the Central
     Government must cause such verification before the
     deadline.
(E) The result of such verification if positive in favour of
     the medical college concerned, the applicant ought to be
     given requisite permission/renewal. But if the deficiencies
     still persist or had not been removed, the applicant will
     stand disentitled so far as that academic year is
     concerned.
11. The     recommendation           of   the    first   Respondent      for

disapproval of the scheme of the first Petitioner by its letter

dated 29.12.2017 to the second Respondent pertained to the

initial assessment of the application at the first level. Having
13
been satisfied with the explanation of the first Petitioner during

the hearing held on 17.01.2018, the first Respondent directed

the second Respondent to review the proposal of the first

Petitioner for starting a new dental college for the academic

session 2018-2019.         It is relevant to mention                that no

inspection of the college was done at that stage.                  The only

inspection that was done was on 22 nd and 23rd March, 2018.

The first Petitioner was entitled for an opportunity to report

compliance after the deficiencies were communicated to it.

Admittedly, no such opportunity was afforded by the second

Respondent.
Consequently, the Dental Council of India did not

also call for compliance verification. No opportunity was given

by   the   first   Respondent      to   the    first   Petitioner    before

disapproving the scheme of the first Petitioner. We do not see

any substance in the submissions made on behalf of the

Respondents that there was no requirement of an opportunity

to be given to the first Petitioner.          The only inspection that

was conducted in this case was on 22 nd and 23rd March, 2018

and according to the judgment of this Court in
Royal Medical

Trust
(supra),    the   first   Petitioner    was     entitled    for   an

opportunity to rectify the deficiencies pointed out in the
14
inspection and a further hearing before a final order was

passed by the first Respondent.
12. Having held that the letter dated 27.04.2018 of the first

Respondent recommending disapproval of the scheme of first

Petitioner to start a dental college and the order dated

28.06.2018 of the first Respondent are in flagrant violation of
Section 10
of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, it is

necessary to decide as to whether the first Petitioner is

entitled for a direction for re-inspection to enable it to make

admissions for the academic session 2018-2019.
13. The time schedule for the receipt of the applications for

establishment of new dental colleges and processing them by

the Central Government is as follows:
Sl.            State of processing                     Last Date
 No.
1.      Receipt of applications by the Central Between        15thJune    to
        Government                               7 July
                                                   th
                                                             (both     days
                                                 inclusive) of any year
2.      Forwarding of applications by the By 31stJuly
        Central Government to Dental Council
        of India
3.      Technical Scrutiny, Assessment and       By 31stDecember
        Recommendations by the Dental
        Council of India
4.      Receipt of reply/ compliance from the Two months from receipt
        applicant by the Central Government of recommendation from
        and for personal hearing thereto, if any DCI     but    not    after
        and forwarding of compliance by the 31 January.
st

        Central Government to the Dental
        Council of India
5.      Final recommendation by the Dental       By 30thApril
        Council of India
6.      Issue of Letter of Permission by the     By 31stMay
15
Central Government
7.        Commencement of academic session/      1stof August
          term
8.        Last date upto which students can be   By 15thSeptember
          admitted/ Joined against stray
          vacancies arising due to any reason
14. The time schedule for receipt of application for opening of

higher       courses    of    study/increase      of    post    graduate

seats/renewal of permission and processing of the applications

by the Central Government and the Dental Council of India is

as follows:
SI.                Stage of proceeding                    Last Date
 No.
1.      Receipt of applications by the Central Between 15th March
          Government.                                  to 7th April (both
                                                       days inclusive of
                                                       any year)
2.   Forwarding of applications by the Central By 30th April
          Government to Dental Council of India.
3.   Technical    Scrutiny,   Assessment     and By 15th October
          Recommendations by the Dental Council
          of India.
4.   Receipt of reply/compliance from the Two months from
          applicant by the Central Government and receipt               of
          for personal hearing thereto, if any and recommendation
          forwarding of compliance by the Central from DCI but not
          Government to the Dental Council of India. after 15th November
5.   Final recommendations by the Dental By 31st January
          Council of India.
6.   Issue of letter of permission by the Central By 28th February
          Government.
7.   Commencement             of        academic 1st May
          session/term.
8.   Last date up to which students can be By 31st May
          admitted/Joined against stray vacancies
          arising due to any reason.
16
15. The last date for grant of permission by the Central

Government was 31.05.2018 and commencement of academic

session is 01.08.2018. A time schedule for completion of the

admission process for first BDS Course for the academic

session 2018-2019 was issued by a notification of the second

Respondent on 11.06.2018. According to the schedule, the first

round of State Counselling was scheduled to be held between

25th June to 5th July and the second counselling is to be held

between 15th July to 26th July.
16. The notification issued by the Dental Council of India with

previous sanction of the Central Government prescribing the

time schedule for receipt of applications for establishment of

new medical colleges and processing the applications was

approved by this Court in
Ashish Ranjan v. Union of India
(2016)11 SCC 225.
17. After holding that the Respondents acted in violation of

Section 10 A (3) (a) and
Section 4
by not affording an

opportunity to the Petitioner No.1, we proceed to examine

whether the Petitioners are entitled for the relief claimed in

this Writ Petition. The final order relating to the relief may be

different and not a natural consequence of the ratio decidendi

of the judgment.    This may happen either on account of a
17
subsequent event or the need to mould the relief to do the

complete justice in the matter.     See:
Sanjay Singh v. U.P.

Public Service Commission
(
2007) 3 SCC 720 and U.P.

Public Service Commission v. Manoj Kumar Yadav & Anr.
(2018) 3 SCC 706.           It has been repeatedly held by this

Court that the schedule prescribed by the Dental Council of

India is binding on all concerned and should not be ordinarily

relaxed.   Any direction given by us in this case would

necessarily involve relaxation of the time lines mentioned in

the schedule. We are not inclined to do that in this case as the

Petitioners are also responsible for the delay caused in

consideration of their proposal to start a new dental college.

Initially, they did not furnish the required information sought

by the second Respondent regarding the land and buildings

which resulted in the recommendation of disapproval of the

scheme proposed by them. If they complied with the direction

for submission of the relevant documents sought by the

Respondent No.2, the inspection of the college would have

been conducted as scheduled in December, 2017 itself.

Further delay was caused due to the order passed in the Writ

Petition filed by the Petitioners in the High Court of Telangana
18
and Andhra Pradesh by which Respondent No.1 was directed to

consider the representation made on 28.05.2018. Further, the

settlement between the Petitioners and Vels Education Society

regarding the affiliation to the Government Medical College

and Hospital was reached only last week.           In the facts and

circumstances mentioned above, we are not inclined to give

any direction to the Respondents to consider the proposal of

the Petitioner No.1 to start a new dental college for this

academic session by relaxing the schedule issued by the

Dental Council of India.
18. For the aforementioned reasons, the Writ Petition is

disposed of.
......................................J.
                                                      [S.A. BOBDE]



                                  ......................................J.
                                          [L. NAGESWARA RAO]
New Delhi,
August 21, 2018.
19