[Cites
7
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Medical Council Of India vs The Principal Kmct Medical College on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 1083, 2018 (9) SCC 766, 2018 (10) ADJ 23 NOC, (2018) 10 SCALE 140, (2018) 3 ESC 559, (2018) 4 SCT 97, 2019 (200) AIC (SOC) 4 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 154
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
Non-Reportable

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.8429 of 2018
                          (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.19919 of 2018)




                         Medical Council of India                         .... Appellant

                                                      Versus


                         The Principal KMCT Medical College
                         & Anr.                             ….Respondent(s)


                                               JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1.   The    High     Court    directed     the    Appellant     to

                         recommend grant of permission to the Respondent No.1

                         – College for admission of 150 seats in 1st year MBBS for

                         the academic session 2018-19.              By the impugned

                         judgment, the High Court also directed Respondent No.2
Signature Not Verified
– Union of India to issue a letter of permission on the
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2018.08.21
17:25:49 IST
Reason:
1 | Page
basis of recommendation of the Appellant.              Aggrieved

thereby, the MCI has filed this appeal.
2.    Respondent No.1 (hereinafter referred to as “the

College”) was granted permission to start a medical

college for the academic year 2008-09 with an intake of

100 students.       Thereafter, a Notification was issued

under
Section 11(2)
of the Medical Council of India Act,

1956 granting recognition of the course.             The College

applied for enhancement of the intake of students from

100 to 150 for the academic session 2016-17.                    The

Appellant   recommended         for   grant    of    approval    to

increase    the    intake   which     was    accepted    by     the

Government of India.         The application for renewal of

permission with an enhanced intake of 150 students for

the   academic      year    2017-18    was    also    considered

favourably by the Appellant and Respondent No.2.
3.    The College applied for renewal of permission for

the    3rd Batch of admissions with the intake of 150

students for the year 2018-19.              An inspection was

conducted on 18th/19th September, 2017. The Executive

Committee     of     the    Appellant-MCI      considered       the


                                                         2 | Page
Assessment     Report   pursuant   to     the    inspection

conducted on 18th/19th September, 2017 and noted the

following deficiencies :
“1. CT Scan is single slice against minimum 16
      slice required.
2. Examination Hall: Out of 2 Examination
      Hall available, 1 is actually an Auditorium
      which cannot be considered as Examination
      Hall; hence there is deficit of 1 Examination
      Hall.
3. Other deficiencies as pointed out in the
      assessment report.”
4.   In view of the above deficiencies, the Executive

Committee of the MCI decided to recommend not to

renew the request for permission to admit 3 rd Batch of

MBBS students against the enhanced intake of 150

students.    The deficiencies found in the inspection

conducted    on   18th/19th   September,        2017   were

communicated to the College.            The College was

informed about a hearing to be conducted on 19 th

December, 2017.    A representation was made by the

College to the Hearing Committee which found that the

two deficiencies pointed out appear to have been

rectified on the basis of the documentary evidence

submitted by the College.      The Hearing Committee
3 | Page
suggested that the Appellant “may review and make

revised recommendation without any need for

compliance verification.” Respondent No.2 referred

the matter back to the Appellant along with the

representation submitted by the College and requested

the Appellant to conduct a review.
5.   The Appellant directed another inspection to be

conducted on 14th March, 2018.         On the basis of the

inspection, the assessors submitted a Compliance

Verification Assessment Report noting the following

deficiencies:
“1. Deficiency of faculty is 7.75% as detailed
     in the report.
2.   Shortage    of   Residents    is   16.12%    as
     detailed in the report.
3.   Bed Occupancy at 10 a.m. on day of
     assessment was 53.11%.
4.   Patients: Many patients in different wards
     were admitted since two to three months. In
     one male medicine ward 22 patients out of 34
     were admitted since 29th January/ some from
     30th January some from 31st January till date.
There was only one patient in Dermatology
     ward rest of the patients as per the HOD


                                                      4 | Page
     Dermatology were shifted from Orthopaedics
     Ward.    Also 49 patients admitted in different
     wards did not require admission were admitted
     for    minor   complaints      like   low       backache/
     osteoarthritis/ vertigo etc. One patient Mr. Raju
     with amputated leg with prosthesis explained
     himself that he doesn’t have any health
     problem. Wards are not as per MCI norms.
5.     There is no separate record of OPD & IPD
     patients in the laboratory.
6.     Number of Haematology tests in the
     register/ in the system could not be shown to
     the assessors during visit.
7.     Cytopathology     workload          on    day      of
     assessment was only 3.
8.     Examination     Hall:      Capacity         of     1
     Examination Hall is 227 against requirement of
250.
9.     Other deficiencies as pointed out in the
     assessment report.”
6.   The     Executive    Committee        of    the     Appellant

considered the Compliance Verification Assessment

Report dated              14th March, 2018 along with the

previous Assessment Report of the inspection conducted


                                                             5 | Page
on 18th/19th September, 2017 and the photographs/

videography. A decision was taken to recommend not

to renew the permission for admission          against the

enhanced intake of 150. The Executive Committee of

the Appellant further decided to invoke Clause 8(3)(1)(c)

of the Establishment of Medical College Regulation

(Amendment) Act, 2010. The Appellant communicated

its decision of disapproval to Respondent No.2 which

was accepted.    Respondent No.2 directed the College

not to admit more than 100 students in the MBBS

course for the Academic Session 2018-19. The College

was granted liberty to apply afresh for the next

academic year in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Medial Council Act, 1956
and the Regulations

framed thereunder.
7.   The   College   challenged   the   said   decision   of

Respondent No.2 in the High Court of Kerala and sought

for a Mandamus to Respondent No.2 to take a decision

on the basis of the earlier inspection conducted on

18th/19th September, 2017.
6 | Page
8.    The High Court allowed the Writ Petition and

directed the Appellant to recommend increase of intake

of students from 100 to 150 to Respondent No.2 -Union

of India, within a period of three days from the date of

the judgement.     There was a further direction to the

Respondent No.2 - Union of India to issue the letter of

permission within three days thereafter.         The Writ

Petition was allowed solely on the ground that the

Appellant ought to have made a recommendation

without any further verification. The High Court was of

the opinion that the Appellant is bound to comply with

the direction given by Respondent No.2 - Union of India

and that the inspection conducted on 14 th March, 2018

was unwarranted. On the basis of the said conclusion,

the   High    Court      found   the   recommendation   for

disapproval made by the Appellant on 20 th April, 2018

and the order of Respondent No.2 accepting such

recommendation by an order dated 31 st May, 2018 to be

illegal and arbitrary.
9.    The contention of the Appellant is that there is no

fetter on the power of the Medical Council of India to


                                                  7 | Page
conduct an inspection for the purpose of verifying

compliance. It is the further case of the Appellant that it

is not bound by the observations of the Union of India

regarding the manner of compliance verification. In any

event, the observation of Respondent No.2 was only a

suggestion.   The Appellant finally contends that the

High Court could not have issued a direction in favour of

the College after 31st May, 2018 which was the last date

for issuance of letter of permission.
10. It was submitted on behalf of the College that the

intake was enhanced from 100 to 150 seats on the basis

of a recommendation made by the Appellant in the year

2016-17. Thereafter, another inspection was conducted

for renewal of the enhanced intake for the year 2017-
18.   Permission was granted to the College to make

admission to 150 seats for the year 2017-18. The Ld.

Senior   Counsel   for   the   College   relied   upon   the

inspection conducted on 18th/19th September, 2017 for

the year 2018-19 to submit that only two deficiencies

were pointed out which, even according to Respondent

No.2, have been rectified.      It was further argued on


                                                    8 | Page
behalf of the College that the Appellant was bound by

the direction issued by Respondent No.2 which is the

final authority for grant of approval.       According to the

Ld. Senior Counsel for the College, another inspection

could not have been conducted in March, 2018. The Ld.

Senior Counsel for the College submitted that the

endorsement made by the Principal of the College on

the inspection report would clearly show that the

inspection was not conducted in a proper manner.

He contended that the findings of the assessors in the

inspection conducted on 14.03.2018 were without any

basis.
11.
In
Royal Medical Trust (Registered) & Anr. v.

Union of India & Anr.1
, this Court set out the steps to

be followed scrupulously by all the parties concerned in

the following terms:
“31. ... ... ...
(A) Initial assessment of the application at the
         first   level   should   comprise   of   checking
         necessary requirements such as essentiality
         certificate, consent for affiliation and physical
         features like land and hospital requirement. If
         an applicant fails to fulfil these requirements,

1 (2015) 10 SCC 19

                                                      9 | Page
the application on the face of it, would be
incomplete and be rejected. Those who fulfil
the basic requirements would be considered
at the next stage.
(B) Inspection should then be conducted by
the Inspectors of MCI. By very nature such
inspection must have an element of surprise.
Therefore sufficient time of about three to
four months ought to be given to MCI to cause
inspection at any time and such inspection
should normally be undertaken latest by
January. Surprise inspection would ensure that
the required facilities and infrastructure are
always in place and not borrowed or put in
temporarily.
(C) Intimation of the result or outcome of the
inspection would then be communicated. If
the infrastructure and facilities are in order,
the medical college concerned should be
given requisite permission/renewal. However,
if there are any deficiencies or shortcomings,
MCI must, after pointing out the deficiencies,
grant to the college concerned sufficient time
to report compliance.
(D) If   compliance is   reported   and     the
applicant states that the deficiencies stand

                                          10 | P a g e
        removed,           MCI     must           cause      compliance
        verification.        It    is        possible        that     such
        compliance            could          be    accepted           even
        without actual physical verification but
        that assessment be left entirely to the
        discretion           of    MCI         and      the        Central
        Government. In cases where actual physical
        verification is required, MCI and the Central
        Government must cause such verification
        before the deadline.
(E) The result of such verification if positive in
        favour of the medical college concerned, the
        applicant          ought        to    be     given         requisite
        permission/renewal. But if the deficiencies still
        persist       or    had    not        been      removed,        the
        applicant will stand disentitled so far as that
        academic year is concerned.”
12. The power of the Appellant to conduct a second

inspection        was        considered            by       this     Court     in
Madha Medical College and Research Institute v.

Union of India & Anr.2
wherein it was held :
“17. While considering the above submissions,
      we must make it clear at the outset that we are
      not impressed with the argument that MCI is
      prohibited           from    conducting           a    second       or
      subsequent            inspection.           The       purpose       of
2 (2017) 15 SCC 791

                                                                      11 | P a g e
inspection by an expert team of assessors is to
verify whether a medical college has the
requisite infrastructure and facilities including
faculty, residents as well as clinical and non-
clinical    material.         The     basic     purpose      of
inspection is to verify whether the college
possesses the wherewithal and resources to
provide quality legal education consistent with
the statutory regulations which hold the field.
The powers of MCI cannot be constricted by
prohibiting       it    from      carrying     out    another
inspection, even if it were to come close on the
heels of an earlier inspection. As an expert
statutory body, MCI may have legitimate
reasons for seeking a reverification of the
observations contained in a prior inspection.
There       may        be    reasons     to      doubt      the
genuineness of the picture which has been
made out by the College during the course of
an inspection. MCI may have prima facie
reasons to believe that the actual possession of
resources and infrastructure is at variance with
what       was    portrayed         before     its   team    of
assessors.       MCI        has   been       conferred    with
statutory powers to protect the cause of
medical education. MCI is a custodian of public
interest and acts in trust for the welfare of
society. Access to medical care requires the


                                                         12 | P a g e
      presence of qualified health professionals.
Verification of the conditions which prevail in
      medical         colleges     is    central       to     the     role
      discharged        by     MCI.      Hence,        it    would      be
      manifestly contrary to public interest to restrict
      the powers of MCI to carry out a fresh
      inspection        even     though        in    its     considered
      decision, such an inspection is necessary. This
      Court cannot sit in judgment over the wisdom
      of an expert body and we find no basis to hold
      in law that there is a prohibition in carrying out
      a fresh inspection. In the absence of a
      statutory interdict, the court will not read such
      a restriction into the powers of MCI. In these
      circumstances,         we        find    no     merit     in     the
      submission.”
13. There is no restriction in conducting a second

inspection limiting it only in respect of the deficiencies

pointed out earlier, as held by this Court in
I.Q. City

Foundation & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.3
:
“31. On a reading of
Section 10-A
of the Act,
     Rules and the Regulations, as has been referred
     to     in Manohar           Lal     Sharma [Manohar                Lal
     Sharma v. Medical Council of India, (2013) 10
     SCC 60 : 6 SCEC 578] , and the view expressed
     in
Royal         Medical          Trust        [Royal      Medical
     Trust v. Union of India
, (2015) 10 SCC 19 : 7
3 (2017) 16 SCC 249

                                                                     13 | P a g e
SCEC 429], it would be inapposite to restrict the
power of the MCI by laying down as an absolute
principle that once the Central Government
sends back the matter to MCI for compliance
verification and the assessors visit the college
they shall only verify the mentioned items and
turn a Nelson's eye even if they perceive
certain other deficiencies. It would be playing
possum.     The     direction     of    the   Central
Government for compliance verification report
should not be construed as a limited remand as
is understood within the framework
of Code of
Civil Procedure
or any other law. The distinction
between the principles of open remand and
limited remand, we are disposed to think, is not
attracted.
Be it clearly stated, the said principle
also does not flow from the authority in
Royal
Medical Trust [Royal Medical Trust v. Union of
India
, (2015) 10 SCC 19 : 7 SCEC 429] . In this
context,   the    objectivity     of    the   Hearing
Committee     and    the   role    of   the   Central
Government assume great significance. The
real compliant institutions should not always be
kept under the sword of Damocles. Stability can
be brought by affirmative role played by the
Central Government. And the stability and
objectivity would be perceptible if reasons are
ascribed while expressing a view and absence


                                                14 | P a g e
    of reasons makes the decision sensitively
    susceptible.”
14. The conclusion of the High Court that a second

inspection ought not to have been conducted by the MCI

is contrary to the law
laid down by
this Court in the

judgments referred to supra.           We are also not in

agreement with the High Court that the MCI was bound

to comply with the direction issued by Respondent No.2

and that a recommendation ought to have been made

by the Appellant without verification.       It is relevant to

note that the Hearing Committee was prima facie

convinced that the deficiencies pointed out in the

inspection conducted on 18th/19th September, 2017

appeared to have been rectified on the basis of

documentary       evidence     furnished    by    the    College.

Therefore, the Hearing Committee suggested that the

Appellant       may   review     and       make    a      revised

recommendation without any need for compliance

verification.   On the basis of such recommendation of

the Hearing Committee, the matter was sent back to the

Appellant by Respondent No.2. At best, the observation

of the Hearing Committee, as affirmed by Respondent

                                                        15 | P a g e
No.2, is a suggestion.     Remand of the matter to the

Appellant -MCI for conducting a review is due to the fact

that the physical verification for compliance can be

done only by the       Appellant - MCI.   The manner of

verification of the compliance has to be necessarily left

to the Appellant -MCI. We are of the view that it is open

to the Appellant to choose the manner of compliance

verification. Remand by the Government of India to MCI

for a review does not place any restriction of verification

to only the deficiencies pointed out earlier.       MCI is

competent to conduct the inspection regarding the

compliance of the minimum standards as prescribed by

the Regulations as well.
15. We do not deem it necessary to deal with the

submission made on behalf of the College regarding the

inspection not being properly conducted. This Court has

repeatedly said that a decision taken by the Union of

India on the basis of a recommendation of an expert

body regarding the inadequacy of facilities in medical

colleges cannot be interfered with lightly. Interference

is permissible only when the colleges demonstrate


                                                 16 | P a g e
jurisdictional errors, ex facie perversity or mala fide.

[See:- Manohar Lal Sharma v. Medical Council of

India4 and
Medical Council of India v. Kalinga

Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS
)5].                   As no case

is made out by the College for interference with the

inspection report, we decline the request of Mr. Sibal for

remand of the matter to the High Court.
16. For the aforementioned reasons, the judgment of

the High Court is set aside and the Appeal is allowed.
.....................................J.
                                                     [S.A. BOBDE]


                                  .....................................J.
                                         [L. NAGESWARA RAO]

New Delhi,
August 21, 2018.
4 (2013) 10 SCC 60 : 6 SCEC 578
5 (2016) 11 SCC 530

                                                            17 | P a g e