[Cites
21
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajdeep Ghosh vs The State Of Assam on 17 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3832, 2018 (10) ADJ 5 NOC, (2018) 3 ESC 501, (2018) 3 JLJR 406, (2018) 4 SCT 108, (2018) 6 ALL WC 6092, (2018) 6 SERVLR 687, (2018) 9 SCALE 683, 2019 (197) AIC (SOC) 8 (SC), AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2694, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 108
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Arun Mishra
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 766 OF 2018

          RAJDEEP GHOSH                                                       … PETITIONER

                                                       VERSUS

          STATE OF ASSAM & ORS.                                               … RESPONDENTS

                                                     WITH
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 795/2018
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 831/2018
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 768/2018
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 763/2018 
                                         S.L.P. [C] No. 16200/2018, 
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 758/2018, 
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 771/2018, 
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 767/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 759/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 765/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 760/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 776/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 781/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 780/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 813/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 835/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 800/2018,
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 812/2018
                                                     AND
                                      WRIT PETITION [C] NO. 821/2018.


                                                  J U D G M E N T


          ARUN MISHRA, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2018.08.17
13:57:32 IST
Reason:
1.             The   writ  petitions  have  been  preferred   under
Article   32
of   the

          Constitution   of   India   questioning   the   constitutional   validity   of   Rule
1
3(1)(c)   of   the   Medical   Colleges   and   Dental   Colleges   of   Assam

(Regulations   of   Admission   into   1st  year   MBBS/BDS   Courses)   Rules,

2017 (in short referred to as ‘the Rules of 2017’). The petitioners have

come with the case that though State can provide for preference in the

matter of admission, however, such classification must be based upon

objective criteria and must have a rational nexus with the objective it

seeks to achieve.
2.    Rule 3 of the Rules of 2017 provides for eligibility for the State

quota seats. Same is extracted hereunder :
“Rule 3 – Eligibility for State Quota Seats:
The following conditions must be fulfilled:­
1.(a) The candidate must be a citizen of India.
(b)   The   candidate   must   be   a   permanent   citizen   of
         Assam.   The father/ mother or the candidate must
         be   residing   in   the   State   of   Assam   continuously   for
         not less than a period of 20 years.  (The certificate at
         Annexure – I in Application Form at Schedule – I of
         these   rules   must   be   submitted   if   a   candidate   is
         called for counseling):
Provided   that   this   shall   not   be   applicable   to   the
         sons/   daughters   of   officers   of   All   India   Services
         allotted to Assam (certificate regarding the service of
         father/ mother of the candidate from the concerned
         authority/department of Government of Assam must
         be submitted if a candidate is called for counseling.
(c) The candidate must study in all the classes from
         class VII to XII in the State of Assam and must pass
         the   Qualifying   Examination   or   its   equivalent
         examination from any Institute situated in the State
         of Assam.   (Certificate at Annexure­II in Application
         Form   at   Schedule   –   I   of   these   rules   must   be
         submitted if a candidate is called for counseling.)
2
Provided  that if  a  candidate  studies  outside  Assam
        from   Class   –   VII   onwards   because   his/her   father/
        mother   is   posted   outside   Assam   as   a   Assam   State
        Government  Employee   or  as   a   Central  Government
        employee   or   as   an   employee   of   a   Corporation/
        Agency/   instrumentality   under   Government   of
        Assam   or   Central   Government   whether   on
        deputation   or   transfer   or   regular   posting   then   the
        period for which  the said father/mother is working
        outside   the   State   shall   be   relaxable   for   such
        candidate.     (Certificate   of   employment   of
        father/mother outside the State indicating the period
        of   service   from   the   concerned   authority   must   be
        submitted if a candidate is called for counseling.)
(d) Candidate’s age should not be below 17 years and
        above  25  years  of age  on the  31 st  December of the
        year in which the admission is sought for:
Provided that the maximum age limit is relaxable by
3   years   in   case   of   candidates   belonging   to
        SC/ST(P)/ST(H)/ OBC/MOBC category.”
3.   The   petitioners   have   questioned   aforesaid   Rule   3(1)(c)   which

requires that a candidate must study in all the classes from Class VII

to XII in the State of Assam and must pass the qualifying examination

or its equivalent examination from any Institute situated in the State

of Assam. The exception has been carved out in case father or mother

is posted outside Assam as an Assam State Government employee or

Central   Government   employee   or   as   an   employee   of   a

Corporation/Agency/instrumentality under the Government of Assam

or Central Government.
4.   The   petitioners   submit   that   they   have   not   passed   Class   XII.

Some of the petitioners have not passed both Class XI and Class XII.

They are residents of the State of Assam. They claim that they have
3
studied in Assam for sufficient period. However, they are not eligible

as per the aforesaid criteria prescribed under Rule 3(1)(c) of the Rules

of 2017.
5.     The petitioners have urged that classification made is violative of
Article   14.
No   expert   study   has   been   done   so   as   to   find   out   the

candidates who have studied from Class VII to XII outside the State of

Assam are likely not to serve the State after they acquire their MBBS

degree.
In the absence of such study and collection of material, the

action   is   unsustainable   and   is   not   in   accordance   with   the   law   laid

down in
Dr. Jagadish Saran & Ors. v. Union of India
(1980) 2 SCC 768.

As the parents of the petitioner are permanent residents of State of

Assam and fulfill other conditions of eligibility, denial of State­quota

seats only on the ground that they have completed their class XI and

XII from outside the State of Assam, is clearly irrational, unreasonable

and   arbitrary.   The   State   Government   obtains   a   bond   agreement   to

serve   the   State   for   a   period   of   5   years   or   render   one   year   of   rural

service on completion of the MBBS course and in case of breach, to

pay a sum of Rs.30 lakhs to the Government as compensation. While

a   student   is   admitted   in   the   MBBS   course   that   would   ensure   the

incumbent would serve the State as provided in bond after passing out

MBBS. Considering the provisions contained in Rule 15 of the Rules of

2017,   the   requirement   of   study   in   educational   institution/s   in   the

State, as provided in Rule 3(1)(c) has to be construed as directory and
4
not mandatory.   The classification made is a hostile one and is not

based   on   any   intelligible   differentia.   In   case   any   parent   is   in   the

employment   of   other   State   Government   and   is   serving   in   the   other

State   or   in   the   case   of   a   person,   his   parent   is   doing   a   private   job

outside, could not have been discriminated and ought to have been

kept   at   par   in   the   excepted   category   as   provided   in   Rule   3(1)(c)   as

Central Government or State Government servant.
6.     The petitioners have submitted that the admission rules framed

by the State Government have undergone changes from time to time.

In   the  Rules   of  2007,   Rule   3(2)(c)  provided   for  4  years  schooling  in

Assam either in (i) HSLC or (ii) HSLC and HSSLC stages combined as

an   eligibility   condition   for   appearing   in   the   qualifying   examination.

The proviso to the said rule, however, relaxed the above condition in

case the father or the mother of the candidate have completed their

schooling in the State for a minimum of 4 years in HSLC level.
7.     Rule   3(1)   of   the   2015   Rules   provided   the   following   eligibility

conditions:
(a) The candidate must be a citizen of India.
(b)
(c) The   candidate   must   be   a   permanent   resident   of
            Assam.     The   candidate   or   his/   her   father/   mother
            must be residing in the State of Assam continuously
            for not less than a period of 20 years.  (The original
            PRC certificate at Annexure – I in Application form B
            at Schedule – I of these rules must be submitted if a
            candidate is called for counseling):
Provided   that   this   shall   not   be   applicable   to   the
            sons/   daughters   of   officers   of   All   India   Services
5
allotted to Assam (certificate regarding the service of
          father/ mother of the candidate from the concerned
          authority/   department   of   Government   of   Assam
          must   be   submitted   if   a   candidate   is   called   for
          counseling.)
(d) The candidate including sons/ daughters of officers
          of All India Services must study in all classes from
          class VII to XII in the State of Assam and must pass
          the   Qualifying   Examination   from   the   Institutes
          situated   in   the   State   of   Assam.   (Certificate   at
          Annexure­II in Application Form B at Schedule­I of
          these   rules   must   be   submitted   if   a   candidate   is
          called for counseling.)
          Provided  that if  a  candidate  studies  outside  Assam
          from Class – VII onwards because his/ her father/
          mother   is   posted   outside   Assam   as   a   State
          Government   employee   on   deputation   or   transfer   or
          regular   posting   then   the   period   for   which   father/
          mother   is   working   outside   the   State   shall   be
          relaxable   for   such   candidate.     (Certificate   of
          employment   of   father/   mother   outside   the   State
          indicating the period of service must be submitted if
          a candidate is called for counseling.)”

      In 2016 “Rule 3(1)(c) was amended as follows:
(c)   The   candidate,   including   sons/   daughters   of
          Officers   of   All   India   Services,   must   study   in   all
          classes from class VI to X in the State of Assam and
          must   pass   the   HSLC   or   its   equivalent   examination
          conducted   by   the   Government   recognized   Board/
          Council   from   any   institute   situated   in   the   State   of
          Assam   (Certificate   at   Annexure­II   in   Application
          Form   B   at   Schedule   –   I   of   these   rules   must   be
          submitted if a candidate is called for counselling).”
8.    The   petitioners   have   further   submitted   that   Rule   3(1)(c)   as

amended   in   2016,   was   questioned   before   the   Guwahati   High   Court

and it was struck down. It was declared to be irrational and violative

of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. The review petition was also

filed and the same was dismissed. Thereafter, Rules of 2017 have been
6
enacted prescribing the aforesaid criteria of study in Rule 3(1)(c). In

February 2018, NEET examination was conducted on all India basis

for   admission   in   any   medical   college   including   dental   colleges   and

Ayurvedic colleges and the result of NEET has been declared. Notice

for counseling was issued on 22.6.2018. Pursuant thereto counseling

was   held   on   29.6.2018.   As   per   the   NEET   position,   the   petitioners

claimed   that   they   were   entitled   to   admission.   However,   it   was   not

given to them owing to not fulfilling the irrational criteria under Rule

3(1)(c).
9.    In the counter affidavit filed by the State of Assam in W.P. [C]

No.758/2018, it was contended that in the Rules of 2007 requirement

of   4   years   of   school   education   between   6 th  to   12th  standard   was

necessary   in   the   State   of   Assam.   Having   regard   to   the   level   of

backwardness, inadequate development, lack of adequate number of

doctors to provide services all over the State of Assam including in the

remote   areas,   it   was   considered   to   be   quintessential   to   ensure   that

admissions   in   medical   MBBS   courses   in   the   Government   medical

colleges   do   become   available   to   bona   fide   candidates   of   Assam

belonging to the State. The rules were amended in the year 2015 and

the requirement of 6 years of schooling was introduced between 7 th to

12th standard in the State of Assam. The other two requirements were

that the candidate must be a permanent resident of State of Assam

and the candidate or his/her father/mother must be residing in the
7
State of Assam continuously for a minimum period of 20 years. This

amendment was notified. It was known to all concerned that there is a

requirement of undertaking the study in the schools of State of Assam.

Thus, after having taken a conscious decision to exercise their choice

to study class XI and XII, in schools outside the State of Assam, they

cannot   stake   the   claim   that   they   should   be   considered   eligible   for

admission in the MBBS course in Government colleges in the State of

Assam as against State quota seats. The petitioners do not fulfill the

criteria.
10.   The   amendment   of   2016   made   in   Rule   3(1)(c)   was   challenged

before   the   High   Court   of   Guwahati.   The   provisions   of   2016   were

different and in the review application, the High Court had observed

that   the   State   can   lay   down   any   reasonable   eligibility   criteria   of

domicile   for   admission   under   the   State   quota   seats   for   medical

courses in the State of Assam. It is contended that the State can lay

down   the   criteria   of   institutional   preference   or   number   of   years   of

study   in   the   State.   Thereafter,   the   amendment   in   rules   has   been

made.
11.   Rules of 2017 prescribe 6 years of schooling from Class VII to

Class  XII in  the  State  of  Assam.  Other requirements  being that  the

candidate must be a permanent resident and father/mother must be

residing in the State continuously for 20 years. Rule 15 provides for a
8
bond to be filed containing the aforesaid stipulation. The High Court

has   upheld   the   validity   of   the   rule   by   judgment   dated   2.8.2017.

Special   leave   petition   was   preferred   against   the   same   judgment.

Special leave petition was disposed of and was not decided on merits

as admissions already made were not to be disturbed after the lapse of

time   frame.  The  petitioners  were  fully aware  while  they were  taking

instructions outside the State that they could not be eligible to stake

their claim in the State quota seats in the State of Assam.  They have

not questioned the rule before appearing for NEET examination. The

stipulation of pursuing the study from Class VII to Class XII in the

State of Assam has been provided with the object that the candidates

stay back in the State of Assam after completion of their studies to

serve   the   State   and   its   requirement.   The   stipulation   made   is

constitutionally valid and is in the best interest of the State. Having

regard to the limited resources available at the State’s disposal, the

provision is constitutional and legal. It is necessary for the State of

Assam to have the doctors to take care of its inhabitants in the far­

flung northeast area.
12.   Education is a State subject and one of the Directive Principles

enshrined in Part IV of the Constitution is that the State should make

effective   provisions   for   education   within   the   limits   of   its   economy.

Concession   given   to   the   residents   of   the   State   in   the   matter   of

admission is obviously calculated to serve their interest as presumably
9
some   of   them   may   after   passing   out   of   the   college,   settle   down   as

doctors   and   serve   the   needs   of   the   locality.   The   classification   is

reasonable and has a correlation with the object to be achieved by the

legislation and is not amenable to challenge. A similar stipulation in

the case of other States has been upheld by this Court. Law has been

settled by this Court as to the MBBS/BDS courses.
13.    It was submitted by learned senior and other counsel appearing

on behalf of the petitioners that classification made in Rule 3(1)(c) of

the Rules of 2017 is violative of
Article 14
, arbitrary and unreasonable.

The condition of obtaining education from Class VII to XII in the State

of Assam is wholly uncalled for, for obtaining a better education and

the   students   usually   go   out   of   the   State.   The   state   could   not   have

deprived them of staking their claims against the State­quota seats in

the   medical   colleges   in   Assam.   It   was   also   urged   that   the   coaching

facilities are not available in the State of Assam, as such some of the

students have obtained admission outside, due to coaching facilities

available in other States. Thus, it could not be said to be reasonable to

impose a rider of obtaining an education of Class XI and XII in State of

Assam   only.   It   was   further   urged   that   the   parents   of   certain

candidates/petitioners   are   in   the   Government   service   of   other

adjoining States such as Arunachal Pradesh.  Their wards have  also

been deprived of admission as they have obtained the education from

the place where their parents are staying in other States. Thus, the
10
classification   made   is   unreasonable   and   arbitrary.   It   was   also

submitted   that   distinction   could   not   have   been   made   between   the

Government employment and private employment and in case parents

are also in private employment outside the State and the students are

obtaining education in other States where their parents are residing,

they   ought   not   to   have   been   ousted   from   the   eligibility   criteria

prescribed   in   Rules   3(1)(c).   Thus,   the   same   deserves   to   be   struck

down.
14.   Mr. Maninder Singh, learned ASG and Mr. Nalin Kohli, learned

AAG   and   other   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the

respondents supported the rule. It was submitted that it was open to

the State Government to make such a provision. The same has been

enacted in order to enable the students to obtain an education in the

State of Assam who are otherwise also residents of Assam and in order

to ensure that after obtaining the education, they cater to the needs of

the State of Assam. There is a dearth of doctors. Thus, the provision

could   have   been   made   providing   reservation   on   the   ground   of

residence   and   education   in   the   State,   otherwise,   the   classification

made is reasonable. Provision has been made for the employees of the

State of Assam or the Central Government employees or the employees

of   the   Corporation/agency/instrumentalities   or   who   are   posted

outside on deputation etc. The relaxation has been given to them. The

classification   of   obtaining   the   education   that   has   been   made   is
11
reasonable.   Besides   that,   its   aim   has   a   rational   nexus   with   the

objective sought to be achieved by serving the populace of the State of

Assam. The students who have obtained education outside the State

are   not  likely  to  stay  in   Assam.  The   provision   of   Rule  15  regarding

furnishing of bond requiring the MBBS students to serve the State for

5 years or to pay Rs.30 lakhs in case of default cannot be said to be

an   adequate   safeguard,   as   such   provision   for   such   reservation   is

permissible to be made with respect to the seats of State quota. They

are required to be fulfilled as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by

the Government.
15.   The main question for consideration is whether the classification

that   has   been   made   in   Rule   3(1)(c)   to   the   Rules   of   2017   is

unreasonable and violative of the provisions contained in
Article 14
of

the   Constitution   of   India   and   students   passing   out   or   obtaining

education   in   other   States   in   the   aforesaid   exigencies   have   been

illegally ousted from the eligibility criteria prescribed for seats of State

quota.
16.   A bare reading of Rule 3(1)(c) makes it clear that the requirement

is   multi­fold.   Firstly,   the   candidate   must   be   a   citizen   of   India,

secondly, he/she must be a permanent citizen of Assam and for that

father/mother or the candidate must be residing in the State of Assam

continuously for not less than a period of 20 years. The exception has
12
been   carved   out   with   respect   towards   of   the   employees   of   all­India

services allotted to Assam. The third requirement is that the candidate

must   study   in   all   the   classes   from   class   VII   to   XII   in   the   State   of

Assam   and   must   pass   a   qualifying   examination   equivalent   from   an

institution situated in Assam. Exception has been carved out in favour

of such candidates whose parents are posted, his/her father or mother

is   posted   outside   the   State   of   Assam   as   Assam   State   Government

employee or as Central Government employee or as the employee of

Corporation/Agency/instrumentality under the Government of Assam

or   Central   Government,   on   deputation,   transfer   or   regular   posting.

The   exception   has   been   given   for   the   period   father   or   mother   is

working   outside   the   State,   besides   the   eligibility   criteria   prescribing

the age of the candidate to be between 17 and 25 years. Three years’

relaxation   has   been   given   to   SC/ST(P)/ST(H)/OBC   category   in   the

maximum age limit.
17.    Before dwelling upon the rival submissions, it is appropriate to

take note of the various decisions referred to at Bar.  In
D.P. Joshi v.

State of Madhya Bharat & Anr.
, AIR 1955 SC 334, the student who

was   a   resident   of   Madhya   Bharat   was   obtaining   an   education   in

Indore in Malwa region in a medical college. There was discrimination

with   respect   to   the   fees.   This   Court   had   observed   that   the

classification to help the students who are residents of Madhya Bharat
13
was   made   with   the   legitimate   and   laudable   objective   to   encourage

education within its borders. The Court has observed:
“15.     The   object   of   the   classification   underlying   the
          impugned   rule   was   clearly   to   help   to   some   extent
          students   who   are   residents   of   Madhya   Bharat   in   the
          prosecution of their studies, and it cannot be disputed
          that it is quite a legitimate and laudable objective for a
          State   to   encourage   education   within   its   borders.
          Education is a State subject, and one of the directive
          principles declared in Part IV of the Constitution is that
          the   State   should   make   effective   provisions   for
          education within the limits of its economy. (Vide article
41).   The State has to contribute for the upkeep and
          the running of its educational institutions.
We   are   in   this   petition   concerned   with   a   Medical
          College,   and   it   is   well­known   that   it   requires
          considerable finance to maintain such an institution. If
          the State has to spend money on it, is it unreasonable
          that it should so order the educational system that the
          advantage of it would to some extent at least enure for
          the   benefit   of   the   State?   A   concession   given   to   the
          residents of the State in the matter of fees is obviously
          calculated   to   serve   that   end,   as   presumably   some   of
          them   might,   after   passing   out   of   the   College,   settle
          down as doctors and serve the needs of the locality.
          The classification is thus based on a ground which has
          a   reasonable   relation   to   the   subject­matter   of   the
          legislation and is in consequence not open to attack. It
          has   been   held   in
The   State   of   Punjab   v.   Ajaib   Singh
          and another
, AIR 1953 SC 10 (G), that a classification
          might validly be made on a geographical basis. Such a
          classification would be eminently just and reasonable,
          where   it   relates   to   education   which   is   the   concern
          primarily of the State. The contention, therefore, that
          the rule imposing capitation fee is in contravention of
article 14
must be rejected.”
18.
In
Kumari N. Vasundara v. State of Mysore & Anr.
1971 (2) SCC

22, this Court considered the Government rules for admission to the

pre­professional course in medical college. Rule 3 of the selection rules
14
prescribed the condition of residence for 10 years. It was held that the

object of the Rules was to ensure imparting medical education to the

best   talent   available   out   of   the   class   of   persons   who   were   likely   to

serve as doctors, the inhabitants of the State of Mysore and the same

does   not   suffer   from   the   vice   of   unreasonableness.   The   Court   had

observed:
“7.
In
D.P. Joshi v. The State of Madhya Bharat and
           Anr.
, AIR 1955 SC 334, this Court had while upholding
           by   majority   the   rules,   made   by   the   State   of   Madhya
           Bharat,   for   admission   to   the   Mahatma   Gandhi
           Memorial Medical College, Indore,  charging  capitation
           fee from non­Madhya Bharat students laid down that
           in   those   rules   the   word   "domicile"   was   used   in   its
           popular   sense   conveying   the   idea   of   residence.
           Venkatarama Ayyar. J., speaking for the majority said:
“It was also urged on behalf of the respondent
                 that the word "domicile" in the rule might be
                 construed not in its technical legal sense, but
                 in   a   popular   sense   as   meaning   "residence",
                 and   the   following   passage   in   Wharton's   Law
                 Lexicon, 14th Edition, page 344 was quoted as
                 supporting such a construction:
"By   the   term   'domicile',   in   its   ordinary
                    acceptation, is meant the place where a
                    person   lives   or   has   his   home.   In   this
                    sense, the place where a person has his
                    actual   residence,   inhabitancy,   or
                    commorancy,   is   sometimes   called   his
                    domicile".
In Mcmullen v. Wadsworth (1880) 14 A.C.
                 631,   it   was   observed   by   the   Judicial
                 Committee   that   "the   word   'domicil'   in
Article
                 63   (of   the   Civil   Code   of   Lower   Canada)
was
                 used   in   the   sense   of   residence,   and   did   not
                 refer   to   international   domicile".   What   has   to
                 be   considered   is   whether   in   the   present
                 context   "domicile"   was   used   in   the   sense   of
                 residence. The rule requiring the payment of a
15
capitation   fee   and   providing   for   exemption
     therefrom   refers   only   to   bona   fide   residents
     within   the   State.   There   is   no   reference   to
     domicile   in   the   rule   itself,   but   in   the
     Explanation which follows, Clauses (a) and (b)
     refers   to  domicile,  and  they occur  as  part  of
     the   definition   of   "bona   fide   resident".   In
     Corpus Juris Secundum, Volume 28, page 5,
     it is stated:
"The   term   'bona   fide   residence'   means
        the residence with domiciliary intent."
There   is,   therefore,   considerable   force   in   the
     contention   of   the   respondent   that   when   the
     rulemaking authorities referred to domicile in
     Clauses (a) and (b) they were thinking really of
     residence.   In   this   view   also,   the   contention
     that   the   rule   is   repugnant   to
Article   15(1)
must fail."
Under the impugned rule, in that case, no capitation
fee was to be charged from the students who were bona
fide   residents   of   Madhya   Bharat,   and   the   expression
"bona   fide   resident"   for   the   purpose   of   the   rule   was
defined as (to quote the relevant portion):
“one who is­
(a) a citizen of India whose original domicile is
     in   Madhya   Bharat   provided   he   has   not
     acquired a domicile elsewhere, or
(b) a citizen of India, whose original domicile is
     not in Madhya Bharat but who has acquired a
     domicile   in   Madhya   Bharat   and   has   resided
     there for not less than 5 years at the date, on
     which he applies for admission, or
(c)   a   person   who   migrated   from   Pakistan
     before   September   30,   1948,   and   intends   to
     reside in Madhya Bharat permanently, or
(d) x              x             x      x.”
In our view, the word "domicile" as used in Rule 3 in
the present case is also used to convey the idea of an
intention to reside or remain in the State of Mysore. If
classification   based   on   residence   does   not   impinge
upon the principle of equality enshrined in
Article 14
as   held   by   this   Court   in   the   decision   already   cited
16
which is binding upon us, then the further condition of
the residence in the State being there for at least ten
years would also seem to be equally valid unless it is
shown by the petitioner that selection of the period of
ten years makes the classification so unreasonable as
to render it arbitrary and without any substantial basis
or   intelligible   differentia.   The   object   of   framing   the
impugned   rule   seems   to   be   to   attempt   to   impart
medical education to the best talent available out of the
class   of   persons   who   are   likely,   so   far   as   it   can
reasonably   be   foreseen,   to   serve   as   doctors,   the
inhabitants of the State of Mysore. It is true that it is
not   possible   to   say   with   absolute   certainty   that   all
those   admitted   to   the   medical   colleges   would
necessarily   stay   in   Mysore   State   after   qualifying   as
doctors:   they   have   indeed   a   fundamental   right   as
citizens to settle anywhere in India and they are also
free,   if   they   so   desire   and   can   manage,   to   go   out   of
India for further studies or even otherwise. But these
possibilities   are   permissible   and   inherent   in   our
Constitutional set­up and these considerations cannot
adversely  affect   the   Constitutionality   of   the   otherwise
valid   rule.   The   problem   as   noticed   in   Minor   P.
Rajendran's case, (1968) 2 SCR 786 and as revealed by
a large number of cases which have recently come to
this Court Is that the number of candidates desirous of
having a medical education is  very much larger than
the number of seats available in medical colleges. The
need and demand for doctors in our country is so great
that   young   boys   and   girls   feel   that   in   medical
profession they can both get gainful employment and
serve the people. The State has, therefore, to formulate
with   reasonable   foresight   a   just   scheme   of
classification   for   imparting   medical   education   to   the
available candidates which would serve the object and
purpose   of   providing   broad­based   medical   aid   to   the
people   of  the  State   and  provide   medical  education  to
those who are best suited for such education. Proper
classification   inspired   by   this   consideration   and
selection   on   merit   from   such   classified   groups,
therefore,   cannot   be   challenged   on   the   ground   of
inequality violating
Article 14.
The impugned rule has
not been shown by the petitioner to suffer from the vice
of unreasonableness. The counter­affidavit filed by the
State, on the other hand, discloses the purpose to be
17
that of serving the interests of the residents of the State
          by providing medical aid for them.
8.   The   petitioner's   argument   that   candidates   whose
          parents have of necessity to remain out of Mysore State
          and who have also by compelling reasons to shift their
          residence frequently from one State to another without
          completing   ten   years   in   any   one   State,   would   suffer
          because their parents cannot afford to arrange for their
          children's   residence   in   Mysore   State   for   ten   years
          during the first 17 years of their age, merely suggests
          that   there   is   a   likelihood   of   some   cases   of   hardship
          under   the   impugned   rule.   But   cases   of   hardship   are
          likely to arise in the working of almost any rule which
          may   be   framed   for   selecting   a   limited   number   of
          candidates   for   admission   out   of   a   long   list.   This,
          however,   would   not   render   the   rule   unconstitutional.
          For   relief   against   hardship   in   the   working   of   a   valid
          rule, the petitioner has to approach elsewhere because
          it relates to the policy underlying the rule. Redress for
          the grievance against the wide gap between the number
          of   seats   in   the   medical   colleges   and   the   number   of
          candidates aspiring to become doctors for earning their
          own livelihood and for serving the needs of the country,
          is also to be sought elsewhere and not in this Court,
          which   is   only   concerned   with   the   constitutionality   of
          the rule.”
19.
In
Dr. Pradeep Jain & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
, (1984) 3 SCC

654,   the   Court   has   observed   that   for   the   MBBS   course   residence

requirement in a particular State in the matter of admission cannot be

said to be irrational or irrelevant and neither in violation of
Article 14.
The Court observed:
“19.     It   will   be   noticed   from   the   above   discussion
          that though intra­state discrimination between persons
          resident in different districts or regions of a State has
          by   and   large   been   frowned   upon   by   the   court   and
          struck down as invalid as in Minor P. Rajendran's case
          (supra)   and   Perukaruppan's   case   (supra),   the   Court
          has in
D.N. Chanchalas
case and other similar cases
          up­held   institutional   reservation   effected   through
18
university   wise   distribution   of   seats   for   admission   to
medical colleges.
The Court has also by its decisions in
D.P.   Joshi
's   case   and
N.   Vasundhara
's   case   (supra)
sustained   the   constitutional   validity   of   reservation
based  on  residence  within  a  State  for  the  purpose  of
admission to medical college. These decisions which all
relate to admission to MBBS course are binding upon
us and it is therefore not possible for us to hold, in the
face of these decisions, that residence requirement in
at State for admission to MBBS course is irrational and
irrelevant and cannot be introduced as a condition for
admission without violating the mandate of equality of
opportunity contained  in
Article  14
We  must proceed
on the basis that at least so far as admission to MBBS
course is concerned, residence requirement in a State
can be introduced as a condition for admission to the
MBBS   course.   It   is   of   course   true   that   the   Medical
Education   Review   Committee   established   by   the
Government   of   India   has   in   its   report   recommended
after   taking   into   account   all   relevant   considerations,
that   the   "final   objective   should   be   to   ensure   that   all
admissions   to   the   MBBS   course   should   be   open   to
candidates on an All India basis without the imposition
of existing domiciliary condition", but having regard to
the practical difficulties of transition to the stage where
admissions   to   MBBS   course   in   all   medical   colleges
would   be   on   All   India   Basis,   the   Medical   Education
Review   Committee   has   suggested   "that   to   begin   with
not less than 25 per cent seats in each institution may
be open to candidates on all India basis." We are not all
sure   whether   at   the   present   stage   it   would   be
consistent with the mandate of equality in its broader
dynamic sense to provide that admissions to the MBBS
course in all medical colleges in the country should be
on   all   India   basis.   Theoretically,   of   course,   if
admissions are given on the basis of all India national
entrance   examination,   each   individual   would   have
equal   opportunity   of   securing   admission,   but   that
would   not   take   into   account   diverse   consideration,
such   as,   differing   level   of   social,   economic   and
educational development of different regions, disparity
in the number of seats available for. admission to the
MBBS course in different States, difficulties which may
be experienced by students from one region who might
in the competition on all India basis get admission to
the   MBBS   course   in   another   region   far   remote   from
19
their   own   and   other   allied   factors.   There   can   be   no
doubt   that   the   policy   of   ensuring   admissions   to   the
MBBS   course  on   all  India  basis   is  a  highly  desirable
policy, based as it is on the postulate that India is one
national and every citizen of India is entitled to have
equal opportunity for education and advancement, but
it   is   an   ideal   to   be   aimed   at   and   it   may   not   be
realistically possible, in the present circumstances, to
adopt   it,   for   it   cannot   produce   real   equality   of
opportunity   unless   there   is   complete   absent   of
disparities   and   inequalities   a   situation   which   simply
does not exist in the country today. There are massive
social   and   economic   disparities   and   inequalities   not
only between State and State but also between region
and   region   within   a   state   and   even   between   citizens
and citizens within the same region. There is a yawning
gap   between   the   rich   and   the   poor   and   there   are   so
many   disabilities   and   injustices   from   which   the   poor
suffer as a class that they cannot avail themselves of
any opportunities which may in law be open to them.
They do not have the social and material resources to
take   advantage   of   these   opportunities   which   remain
merely on paper recognised by law but non­existent in
fact.     Students   from   backward   States   or   regions   will
hardly   be   able   to   compete   with   those   from   advanced
States   or   regions   because,   though   possessing   an
intelligent   mind,   they   would   have   had   no   adequate
opportunities for development so as to be in a position
to compete with others. So also students belonging to
the weaker sections who have not, by reason of their
socially   or   economically   disadvantaged   position,   been
able to secure education in good schools would be at a
disadvantage   compared   to   students   belonging   to   the
affluent or well­to­do families who have had the best of
school   education   and   in   open   All   India   Competition,
they would be likely to be worsted. There would also be
a number of students who, if they do not get admission
in   a   medical   college   near   their   residence   and   are
assigned admission in a far of college in another State
as a result of open All India competition, may not be
able to go to such other college on account of lack of
resources and facilities and in the result, they would be
effectively deprived of a real opportunity for pursuing
the medical course even though on paper they would
have   got   admission   in   medical   college.   It   would   be
tantamount   to   telling   these   students   that   they   are
20
given an opportunity of taking up the medical course,
but   if   they   cannot   afford   it   by   reason   of   the   medical
college   to   which   they  are   admitted   being  far  away   in
another   State,   it   is   their,   bad   luck:   the   State   cannot
help  it, because  the State has  done all that it could,
namely,   provide   equal   opportunity   to   all   for   medical
education. But the question is whether the opportunity
provided is real or illusory? We are therefore of the view
that a certain percentage of reservation on the basis of
residence   requirement   may   legitimately   be   made   in
Order to equalise opportunities for medical admission
on   a   broader   basis   and   to   bring   about   real   and   not
formal,   actual   and   not   merely   legal,   equality.   The
percentage of reservation made on this count may also
include   institutional   reservation   for   students   passing
the   PUC   or   pre­medical   examination   of   the   same
university or clearing the qualifying examination from
the school system of the educational hinterland of the
medical   colleges   in   the   State   and   for   this   purpose,
there   should   be   no   distinction   between   schools
affiliated   to   State   Board   and   schools   affiliated   to   the
Central   Board   of   Secondary   Education,   It   would   be
constitutionally   permissible   to   provide,   as   an   interim
measure   until   we   reach   the   stage   when   we   can
consistently   with   the   broad   mandate   of   the   rule   of
equality in the larger sense ; ensure admissions to the
M.B.B.S,   course   on   the   basis   of   national   entrance
examination an ideal which we must increasingly strive
to reach for reservation of a certain percentage of seats
in   the   medical   colleges   for   students   satisfying   a
prescribed residence requirement as also for students
who have passed P.U.C. or pre­medical examination or
any other qualifying examination held by the university
or   the   State   and   for   this   purpose   it   should   make   no
difference   whether   the   qualifying   examination   is
conducted by the State Board or by the Central Board
of Secondary Education, because no discrimination can
be   made   between   schools   alleviated   can   be   made
between   schools   affiliated   to   the   Central   Board   of
Secondary   Education.   We   may   point   out   that   at   the
close of the arguments we asked the learned Attorney
General to inform the court as to what was the stand of
the   Government   of   India   in   the   matter   of   such
reservation   and   the   learned   Attorney   General   in
response to the inquiry made by the Court filed a policy
21
statement which contained the following formulation of
          the policy of the Government of India:
Central Government is generally opposed to
                the   principle   of   reservation   based   on
                domicile   or   residence   for   admission   to   an
                institution   of   higher   education,   whether
                professional   or   otherwise.   In   view   of   the
                territorially articulated nature of the system
                of   institutions   of   higher   learning   including
                institutions of professional education, there
                is   no   objection,   however,   to   stipulating
                reservation   or   preference   for   a   reasonable
                quantum   in   undergraduate   courses   for
                students hailing from the school system of
                educational   hinterland   of   the   institutions.
                For   this   purpose,   there   should   be   no
                distinction between school affiliated to State
                Board and schools affiliated to CBSE.
We are glad to find that the policy of the Government of
          India in the matter of reservation based on residence
          requirement and institutional preference accords with
          the view taken by us in that behalf. We may point out
          that   even   if   at   some   stage   it   is   decided   to   regulate
          admissions to the M.B.B.S, course on the basis of All
          India   Entrance   Examination,   some   provision   would
          have   to   be   made   for   allocation   of   seats   amongst   the
          selected   candidates   on   the   basis   of   residence   or
          institutional  affiliation  so as to  take into account the
          aforementioned factors."
20.
In
Anant Madaan  v. State of Haryana  and Ors.
,  (1995)  2  SCC

135,   the   Court   considered   the   validity   of   the   provision   providing

reservation   of   85%   seats   on   the   basis   of   candidate’s   education   for

preceding 3 years in the State along with the requirement of domicile.

The condition was held not to be violative of
Article 14.
The Court has

observed:
“4.    The petitioners before the Punjab and Haryana
          High Court had challenged the eligibility conditions of
22
1994   insofar   as   they   require   that   candidates   should
have studied for the 10th, 11th and 12th standards as
regular   candidates   in   recognised   institutions   in
Haryana. They had  also challenged the Corrigendum.
The   two   learned   Judges   of   the   Punjab   and   Haryana
High   Court   who   heard   these   writ   petitions   differed.
Hence the petitions were referred to a third Judge who
concurred   with   one   of   the   Judges   and   held   that   the
condition requiring a candidate to have studied in the
10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes in recognised institutions
in   Haryana   was   valid.   The   condition   in   the
Corrigendum   which   required   an   affidavit   from   the
parent or guardian of the candidate that the candidate
was not appearing or had not appeared in the entrance
test   of   any   State   or   Union   Territory   was,   however,
struck   down   as   arbitrary   and   unreasonable.   In   the
present  appeals,   however,  we   are  not  concerned  with
the Corrigendum.
***                         ***                 ***
8.   In   view   of   the   above   facts,   we   have   to   consider
whether   the   condition   requiring   a   candidate   to   have
studied in 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes in a recognised
institution in the State of Haryana, can be considered
as arbitrary or unreasonable. It is by now well settled
that preference in admissions on the basis of residence,
as   well   as   institutional   preference,     is   permissible   so
long   as   there   is   no   total   reservation   on   the   basis   of
residential or institutional preference. As far back as in
1955, in the case of
D.P. Joshi v. The State of Madhya
Bharat and Anr.
, AIR 1955 SC 334, this Court, making
a distinction between the place of birth and residence,
upheld   a   preference   on   the   basis   of   residence,   in
educational institutions.
9. In the case of
Jagadish Saran (Dr) v. Union of India
,
(1980) 2 SCR 831, this Court reiterated that regional
preference or preference on the ground of residence in
granting   admission   to   medical   colleges   was   not
arbitrary   or   unreasonable   so   long   as   it   was   not   a
wholesale reservation on this basis. This Court referred
to   various   reasons   why   such   preference   may   be
required.   For   example,   the   residents   of   a   particular
region   may   have   very   limited   opportunities   for
technical education while the region may require such
technically   qualified   persons.   Candidates   who   were
residents of that region were more likely to remain in
23
the region and serve their region if they were preferred
for   admission   to   technical   institutions   in   the   State,
particularly medical colleges. A State which was short
of   medical   personnel   would   be   justified   in   giving
preference to its own residents in medical colleges as
these residents, after qualifying as doctors, were more
likely to remain in the State and give their services to
their State. The Court also observed that in the case of
women students, regional or residential preference may
be justified as their parents may not be willing to send
them   outside   the   State   for   medical   education.   We,
however, need not examine the various reasons which
have   impelled   this   Court   to   uphold   residential   or
institutional   preference   for   admission   to   medical
colleges.
The question is settled by the decision of this
Court in
Pradeep Jain (Dr) v. Union of India
, (1984) 3
SCR 942. This Court has observed, in that judgment:
(SCR p.981: SCC p.687, para 19)
     “We are, therefore, of the view that a certain
     percentage   of   reservation   on   the   basis   of
     residence   requirement   may   legitimately   be
     made   to   equalize   opportunities   for   medical
     admission   on   a   broader   basis   and   to   bring
     about   real   and   not   formal,   actual   and   not
     merely   legal,   equality.   The   percentage   of
     reservation   made   on   this   count   may   also
     include   institutional   reservation   for   students
     passing  the   PUC   or   pre­medical  examination
     of   the   same   university   or   clearing   the
     qualifying examination from the school system
     of   the   educational   hinterland   of   the   medical
     colleges in the State....”
This   Court   held
in   that   case
that   reservation   to   the
extent of 70% on this basis would be permissible.
This
percentage  of  reservation  was  subsequently increased
to 85% by this Court in the case of
Dinesh Kumar (Dr)
v. Motilal Nehru Medical College
,   (1986) 3 SCR 345.
This   Court
,
in   that   case
,   directed   an   entrance
examination   on   an   All   India   basis   for   the   remaining
15% of seats.
10. In the present case, the reservation which has been
made on the basis of candidates having studied for the
preceding three years in recognised schools/colleges in
Haryana is in respect of these 85% of seats. It excludes
15% seats which have to be filled in on an. All India
24
basis.   This   eligibility   criterion,   therefore,   is   in
           conformity with the decisions of this Court
referred to
           above
. It cannot, therefore, be considered as arbitrary
           or   unreasonable   or   violative   of
Article   14
of   the
           Constitution.”
21.
In
Dr. Jagadish Saran and Ors. v. Union of India
, (1980) 2 SCC

768, the question arose of the constitutionality of reservation of seats

or quota for local candidates in professional courses. Whether it was

in denial of equal opportunity in higher education. The Court observed

that   the   region   where   the   institution   is   situated   is   a   relevant

consideration   for  degree   courses,   but  considerations   are  different,   if

the course is on a higher level of specialty, and in case the concession

is apparently discriminatory, the burden of proof is on the respondent­

State.   Where   the   data,   facts,   and   figures   are   insufficient   the   court

would be reluctant to rule unconstitutionality and pass consequential

orders if its effect is to be wide­ranging involving policy matters. The

Court has observed that ‘equal protection of the laws’ for full growth is

guaranteed,   apart   from   ‘equality   before   the   law’.     Even   so   in   our

imperfect   society,   some   objective   standards   like   common   admission

tests   are   prescribed   to   measure   merit,   without   subjective

manipulation   or   university­wise   invidiousness.   The   Court   has

observed   that   preference   can   be   given   to   the   students   of   the

University. That strategy ensures the probability of their serving the

backward people for whom medical courses were opened. The Court

held:
25
“20. Again, if the State finds that only students from
the backward regions, when given medical graduation,
will care to serve in that area, drawn towards it by a
sense   of   belonging,   and   those   from   outside   will,   on
graduation, leave for the cities or their own regions, it
may   evolve   a   policy   of   preference   or   reservation   for
students of that University. That strategy ensures the
probability   of   their   serving   the   backward   people   for
whose benefit the medical courses were opened. Such
measures   which   make   for   equality   of   opportunity   for
medical   education   and   medical   service   for   backward
human   sectors   may   be   constitutionalised   even   by
Articles   14
and
15.
But  it   must  be   remembered   that
exceptions cannot over­rule the rule itself by running
riot or by making reservations as a matter of course, in
every   university   and   every   course.   For   instance,   you
cannot wholly exclude meritorious candidates as that
will promote sub­standard candidates and bring about
a fall in medical competence, injurious, in the long run,
to the very region. It is no blessing to inflict quacks and
medical   midgets   on   people   by   wholesale   sacrifice   of
talent   at   the   threshold.   Nor   can   the   very   best   be
rejected from admission because that will be a national
loss and the interests of no region can be higher than
those   of   the   nation.   So,   within   these   limitations,
without going into excesses, there is room for play of
the State's policy choices.
***                       ***               ***
27.     The   conclusion   that   we   reach   from   this   ruling
which adverts to earlier precedents on the point is that
university­wise   preferential   treatment   may   still   be
consistent   with   the   rule   of   equality   of   opportunity
where   it   is   calculated   to   correct   an   imbalance   or
handicap and permit equality in the larger sense.
***                       ***               ***
32.     If   university­wise   classification   for   post­graduate
medical   education   is   shown   to   be   relevant   and
reasonable   and   the   differential   has   a   nexus   to   the
larger goal of equalisation of educational opportunities
the vice of discrimination may not invalidate the rule.
***                       ***               ***
40.  Coming to brass tacks, deviation from equal marks
will meet with approval only if the essential conditions
26
set   out   above   are   fulfilled.   The   class   which   enjoys
           reservation   must   be   educationally   handicapped.   The
           reservation   must   be   geared   to   getting   over   the
           handicap. The rationale of reservation must be in the
           case of medical students, removal of regional or class
           inadequacy   or   hike   disadvantage.   The   quantum   of
           reservation   should   not   be   excessive   or   societally
           injurious, measured by the overall competency of the
           end­product,   viz.   degree­holders.   A   host   of   variables
           influence the quantification of the reservation. But one
           factor deserves great emphasis. The higher the level of
           the   specialty   the   lesser   the   role   of   reservation.   Such
           being   the   pragmatics   and   dynamics   of   social   justice
           and equal rights, let us apply the tests to the case on
           hand.
***                        ***                 ***
44.   Secondly, and more importantly, it is difficult to
           denounce   or   renounce   the   merit   criterion   when   the
           selection is for post­graduate or post­doctoral courses
           in specialised subjects. There is no substitute for sheer
           flair, for creative talent, for fine­tuned performance at
           the difficult heights of some disciplines where the best
           alone is likely to blossom as the best. To sympathise
           mawkishly with the weaker sections by selecting sub­
           standard candidates is to punish society as a whole by
           denying   the   prospect   of   excellence   say   in   hospital
           service.   Even   the   poorest,   when   stricken   by   critical
           illness, needs the attention of super­skilled specialists,
           not humdrum second­rates. So it is that relaxation on
           merit, by over­ruling equality and quality altogether, is
           a social risk where the stage is post­graduate or post­
           doctoral.”
22.    The   Court  also   observed   that  law  is  no  absolute   logic   but  the

handmaid   of   current   social   facts   of   life.     This   Court   has   held   that

considerations are different for the MBBS Course which is the basic

course and the selection for postgraduate or post­doctoral courses in

specialised subject.  It also observed that it was permissible to provide

reservation   in   basic   courses   like   MBBS   course,   but   it   would   be
27
different  if  such  reservation  is  made   for  super­skill  specialities.  The

Court   has   laid   down   such   reservation   is   permissible   in   the   basic

MBBS degree course, not postgraduate or post­doctoral courses.
23.    A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Saurabh Chaudri & Ors. v.

Union of India & Ors.
(2003) 11 SCC 146 considered the question of

reservation for postgraduate courses in medical colleges by providing

an institutional preference. With a majority, the Court observed that

the expression ‘place of birth’ is not synonymous with the expression

‘domicile’  and they reflect two  different concepts.  The term ‘place of

birth’   appears   in
Article   15(1)
but   not   domicile.   The   question   of

whether   a   reservation   on   the   basis   of   domicile   is   impermissible   in

terms   of
Article   15(1)
,   was   answered   in   the   negative.   The   strict

scrutiny test or the intermediate scrutiny test applicable in the United

States   of   America   cannot   be   applied.   Such   a   test   is   not   applied   in

Indian courts. Such a test may be applied in a case where by reason of

a   statute   the   life   and   liberty   of   a   citizen   is   in   jeopardy.   The

constitutionality   of   a   statute   is   to   be   presumed   and   the   burden   to

prove contra is on him who asserts the thing. The courts always lean

against   a   construction   which   reduces   the   statute   to   a   futility.   A

statute or any enacting provision therein must be so construed as to

make   it   effective   and   operative   on   the   principle   expressed   in   the

maxim  ut res magis valeat quam pereat i.e., it is better for a thing to

have an effect than to be made void .  Even applying the said test, it
28
was   observed   that   it   could   not   be   held   that   the   institutional

reservation should be done away with, having regard to the present­

day scenario. The lawmakers cannot shut their eyes to the local needs

also. The local needs must receive due consideration keeping in view

the duties of the State contained in
Articles 41
and
47.
The reservation

by institutional preference is not ultra vires
Article 14.
The hardship of

a   few   cannot   be   the   valid   basis   for   determining   the   validity   of   any

statute. The Court observed:
“65.   Hence,   we   may   also   notice   the   argument,
           whether   institutional   reservation   fulfills   the
           aforementioned criteria or not must be judged on the
           following: ­
1. There is a presumption of constitutionality;
2. The burden of proof is upon the writ petitioners as
           they   have   questioned   the   constitutionality   of   the
           provisions;
3.   There   is   a   presumption   as   regard   the   State's
           power on extent of its legislative competence;
4.   Hardship   of   few   cannot   be   the   basis   for
           determining the validity of any statute.
***                        ***                ***
67.     This   Court   may,   therefore,   notice   the
           following:
(i) The State runs the Universities.
(ii)   It   has   to   spend   a   lot   of   money   in   imparting
           medical education to the students of the State.
(iii)   Those   who   get   admission   in   Post   Graduate
           Courses   are   also   required   to   be   paid   stipends.
Reservation   of   some   seats   to   a   reasonable   extent,
           thus, would not violate the equality clause.
29
(iv) The criteria for institutional preference has now
come to stay. It has worked out satisfactorily in most
of the States for last about two decades.
(v)   Even   those   States   which   defied   the   decision   of
this   Court   in
Dr.   Pradeep   Jain
's   case   (supra)   had
realized the need for institutional preference.
(vi) No sufficient material has been brought on record
for   departing   from   this   well­established   admission
criteria.
(vii)   It   goes   beyond   any   cavil   of   doubt   that
institutional preference is based on a reasonable and
identifiable   classification.   It   may   be   that   while
working out the percentage of reservation invariably
some   local   students   will   have   preference   having
regard to the fact that domicile/residence was one of
the   criteria   for   admission   in   MBBS   Course.   But
together with the local students 15%, students who
had   competed   in   all   India   Entrance   Examination
would   also   be   getting   the   same   benefit.   The
percentage of students who were to get the benefit of
reservation by way of institutional preference would
further go down if the decision of this Court in Dr.
Pradeep Jain's case (supra) is scrupulously followed.
(viii) Giving of such a preference is a matter of State
policy which can be invalidated only in the event of
being   violative   of
Article   14
of   the   Constitution   of
India.
(ix)   The   students   who   would   get   the   benefit   of
institutional preference being on identifiable ground,
there is hardly any scope for manipulation.
***                        ***                ***
70.      We,   therefore,   do   not   find   any   reason   to
depart   from   the   ratio
laid   down   by
this   Court   in
Dr. Pradeep Jain
(supra). The logical corollary of our
finding   is   that   reservation   by   way   of   institutional
preference must be held to be not offending
Article
14
of the Constitution of India.”
30
24.   Reliance has also been placed on certain observations made in
Dr.

Pradeep Jain
(supra) thus :
“13.   We may now proceed to consider what are the
        circumstances in which departure may justifiably be
        made from the principle of selection based on merit.
        Obviously,   such   departure   can   be   justified   only  on
        equality­oriented   grounds,   for   whatever   be   the
        principle of selection followed for making admissions
        to   medical   colleges,   it   must   satisfy   the   test   of
        equality.
Now the concept of equality under the Constitution is
        a   dynamic   concept.   It  takes   within   its   sweep   every
        process of equalisation and protective discrimination.
        Equality must not remain mere idle incantation but
        it must become a living reality for the large masses of
        people.   In   a   hierarchical   society   with   an   indelible
        feudal   stamp   and   incurable   actual   inequality,   it   is
        absurd   to   suggest   that   progressive   measures   to
        eliminate   group   disabilities   and   promote   collective
        equality   are   antagonistic   to   equality  on   the   ground
        the   every   individual   is   entitled   to   equality   of
        opportunity   based   purely   on   merit   judged   by   the
        marks   obtained   by   him.   We   cannot   countenance
        such   a   suggestion,   for   to   do   so   would   make   that
        equality   clause   sterile   and   perpetuate   existing
        inequalities. Equality of opportunity is not simply a
        matter   of   legal   equality.   Its   existence   depends   not
        merely   on   the   absence   of   disabilities   but   on   the
        presence   of   abilities.   Where,   therefore,   there   is
        inequality,   in   fact,   legal   equality   always   tends   to
        accentuate it. What the famous poet Willian Blanks
        said   graphically   is   very   true,   namely,   "One   law   for
        the Lion and the Ox is oppression," Those who are
        unequal,   in   fact,   cannot   treated   by   identical
        standards; that may be equality in law but it would
        certainly   not   be   real   equality.   It   is,   therefore,
        necessary to take into account de facto inequalities
        which   exist   in   the   society   and   to   take   affirmative
        action by way of giving preference to the socially and
        economically   disadvantaged   persons   or   inflicting
        handicaps on those more advantageously placed, in
        Order to bring about real equality. Such affirmative
        action   though   apparently   discriminatory   is
31
calculated to produce equality an a broader basis by
eliminating   de   facto   inequalities   and   placing   the
weaker   sections   of   the   community   on   a   footing   of
equality   with   the   stronger   and   more   powerful
section,   so   that   each   member   of   the   community,
whatever is his births occupation or social position
may enjoy equal opportunity of using to the full his
natural endowments of physique, of character and of
intelligence.
We   may   in   this   connection   usefully   quote   what
Mathew,  J.  said   in  Ahmedabad  St.  Xavier's  College
Society   and   Anr.   v.   State   of   Gujarat     [1975]1   SCR
173.
“...  It is obvious that "equality in law precludes
     discrimination of any kind; whereas equality, in
     fact,   may   involve   the   necessity   of   differential
     treatment   in   Order   to   attain   a   result   which
     establishes   an   equilibrium   between   different
     situations”

We cannot, therefore, have arid equality which does
not   take   into   account   the   social   and   economic
disabilities and inequalities from which large masses
of people suffer in the country. Equality in law must
produce   real   equality;   de   jure   equality   must
ultimately find its raison d'etre in de facto equality.
The   State   must,   therefore,   resort   to   compensatory
State  action  for  the  purpose  of  making people  who
are   factually   unequal   in   their   wealth,   education   or
social   environment,   equal   in   specified   areas.   The
State must, to use again the words of Krishna Iyer.
J.   in
Jagdish   Saran
's   case   (supra)   weave   those
special facilities into the web of equality which, in an
equitable setting provide for the weak and promote
their   levelling   up   so   that,   in   the   long   run,   the
community at large may enjoy a general measure of
real   equal   opportunity   equality   is   not   negated   or
neglected where special provisions are geared to the
large   goal   of   the   disabled   getting   over   their
disablement consistently with the general good and
individual   merit."
The   scheme   of   admission   to
medical   colleges   may,   therefore,   depart   from   the
principle   of   selection   based   on   merit,   where   it   is
necessary to do so for the purpose of bringing about
32
real  equality  of  opportunity  between  those  who   are
unequal’s.
***                       ***                      ***
21.   But, then to what extent can reservation based
on   residence   requirement   within   the   State   or   on
institutional   preference   for   students   passing   the
qualifying examination held by the university or the
state be regarded as constitutionally permissible? it
is not possible to provide a categorical answer to this
question for, as pointed out by the policy statement
of   Government   of   India,   the   extent   of   such
reservation   would   depend   on   several   factors
including opportunities for professional education in
that particular area, the extent of competition, level
of   educational   development   of   the   area   and   other
relevant factors. It may be that in a State were the
level   of   educational   development   is   woefully   low,
there are comparatively inadequate opportunities for
training in the medical speciality and there is large­
scale social and economic backwardness, there may
be justification for reservation of a higher percentage
of seats in the medical colleges in the State and such
higher   percentage   may   not   militate   against   "the
equality mandate viewed in the perspective of social
justice". So many variables depending on social and
economic   facts   in   the   context   of   educational
opportunities would enter into the determination of
the question as to what in the case of any particular
State,   should   be   the   limit   of   reservation   based   on
residence   requirement   within   the   State   or   on
institutional   preference.   But,   in   our   opinion,   each
reservation should in no event exceed the outer limit
of 70 per cent of the total number of open seats after
taking   into   account   other   kinds   of   reservations
validly   made.   The   Medical   Education   Review
Committee has suggested that the outer limit should
not   exceed   75   percent   but   we   are   the   view   that   it
would   be   fair   and   just   to   fix   the   outer   limit   at   70
percent.   We   are   laying   down   this   outer   limit   of
reservation in an attempt to reconcile the apparently
conflicting claims of equality and excellence. We may
make it clear that this outer limit fixed by us will be
subject  to any reduction or attenuation  which may
be made by the Indian Medical Council which is the
statutory   body   of   medical   practitioner   whose
33
functional   obligations   include   setting   standards   for
          medical   education   and   providing   for   its   regulation
          and   coordination.   We   are   of   the   opinion   that   this
          outer limit fixed by us must gradually over the years
          be   progressively   reduced   but   that   is   a   task   which
          would   have   to   be   performed   by  the   Indian   Medical
          Council. We would direct the Indian. Medical Council
          to   consider   within   a   period   of   nine   months   from
          today whether the outer limit of 70 percent fixed by
          us   needs   to   be   reduced   and   if   the   Indian   Medical
          Council   determines   a   shorter  outer   limit,   it   will   be
          binding on the States and the Union Territories. We
          would   also   direct   the   Indian   Medical   Council   to
          subject the outer limit so fixed to reconsideration at
          the end of every three years but in no event should
          the   outer   limit   exceed   70   percent   fixed   by   us.   The
          result is that in any event at least 30 per cent of the
          open   seats   shall   be   available   for   admission   of
          students on all India basis irrespective of the State or
          university   from   which   they   come   and   such
          admissions shall be granted purely on merit on the
          basis of either all India Entrance Exam. or entrance
          examination to be held by the State. Of course, we
          need   not   add   that   even   where   reservation   on   the
          basis   of   residence   requirement   or   institutional
          preference is made in accordance with the directions
          given in this judgment, admissions from the source
          or   sources   indicated   by   such   reservation   shall   be
          based only on merit, because the object must be to
          select   the   best   and   most   meritorious   student   from
          within such source or sources.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
25.   In Nikhil Himthani v. State of Uttarakhand & Ors.  (2013) 10 SCC

237,   the   question   arose   with   respect   to   admission   into   professional

colleges pertaining to medical and dental colleges in postgraduate and

super   specialty   courses.   It   was   observed   that   merit   cannot   be

compromised   by   making   a   reservation   on   the   basis   of   other

considerations   like   residential   requirement   etc.
The   decisions   in
34
Jagadish Saran
(supra) and
Pradeep Jain
(supra) had been referred to

and it was observed:
“19. Thus, it will be clear from what has been held by
          the   three­Judge   Bench   of   this   Court   in
Magan
          Mehrotra and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors.
(supra)
          that no preference can be given to candidates on the
          basis   of   domicile   to   compete   for   the   institutional
          quota of the State if such candidates have done their
          MBBS course in colleges outside the State in view of
          the decisions of this Court in
Dr. Pradeep Jain and
          Ors.   v.   Union   of   India   and   Ors.
(supra).   Hence,
          clauses   2   and   3   of   the   Eligibility   Criteria   in   the
          Information Bulletin are also violative of
Article 14
of
          the Constitution.”
26.   The aforesaid observations have been made with respect to the

postgraduate   course   in   respect   of   which   the   different   yardstick   of

merit has to be applied. Thus, the decision in Nikhil Himthani (supra)

no way espouses the cause of the petitioners.
27.
In
Vishal Goyal & Ors. v. State of Karnataka & Ors.
(2014) 11

SCC 456, the question again came up for consideration with respect to

reservation of seats with State quota in postgraduate courses. It was

held   at   the   postgraduate   level   even   partial   reservation   based   on

residence   requirement   is   impermissible.   The   observation   has   been

made the criteria for the postgraduate course does not hold good for

basic   MBBS   course.
Decisions   in
Magan   Mehrotra   v.   Union   of   India
(2003)   11
SCC   186,  Dr.   Pradeep   Jain
(supra),
Saurabh   Chaudri
(supra),  Nikhil   Himthani  (supra)   and   other   decisions   have   been
35
considered and this Court has observed with respect to postgraduate

courses thus:
“11.      Mr.  Mariarputham is  right  that  in
Saurabh
           Chaudri   v.   Union   of   India
(supra),   this   Court   has
           held that institutional preference can be given by a
           State,   but   in   the   aforesaid   decision   of   Saurabh
           Chaudri, it has also been held that decision of the
           State   to   give   institutional   preference   can   be
           invalidated by the Court in the event it is shown that
           the   decision   of   the   State   is   ultra   vires   the   right   to
           equality Under
Article 14
of the Constitution. When
           we examine Sub­clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of the two
           Information Bulletins, we find that the expression "A
           candidate of Karnataka Origin" who only is eligible to
           appear for Entrance Test has been so defined as to
           exclude a candidate who has studied MBBS or BDS
           in an institution in the State of Karnataka but who
           does   not   satisfy   the   other   requirements   of   Sub­
           clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of the Information Bulletin
           for   PGET­2014.   Thus,   the   institutional   preference
           sought to be given by Sub­clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of
           the   Information   Bulletin   for   PGET­2014   is   clearly
           contrary to the judgment of this Court in Dr. Pradeep
           Jain's case (supra).
13.      Sub­clause   (a)   of   Clause   2.1   of   the   two
           Information   Bulletins   does   not   actually   give
           institutional preference to students who have passed
           MBBS   or   BDS   from   Colleges   or   Universities   in   the
           State   of   Karnataka,   but   makes   some   of   them
           ineligible to take the Entrance Test for admission to
           Post Graduate Medical or Dental courses in the State
           of   Karnataka   to   which   the   Information   Bulletins
           apply.”
28.    The ratio of the aforesaid decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) for the

postgraduate course is not attracted to the basic course that is MBBS

course   as
laid   down   in
the   dictum   itself.   The   eligibility   criteria   for
36
basic MBBS course may be different and can be based on domicile but

not for the postgraduate and post­doctoral courses.
29.   Dr. Kriti Lakhina & Ors. v. State of Karnataka & Ors. WP [C] No.

204/2018 decided on 4.4.2018, relied on by petitioners.   The Court

dealt with the case of admissions to postgraduate medical not that of

MBBS/BDS   course.   Thus,   the   provision   made   as   to   institutional

preference was held to be ultra vires
Article 14.
The decision is of no

applicability with respect to basic MBBS/BDS/Ayurvedic Courses.
30.
In
E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P. & Ors
. (2005) 1 SCC 394, the

Court dealt with respect to extent of reservation for a class based on

the   micro   distinction.   Further   sub­classification   of   the   Scheduled

Castes for providing reservation came up for consideration. The Court

has held that the classification whether permissible or not, must be

judged on the touchstone of the object sought to be achieved. It was

observed:
“39.     Legal   constitutional   policy   adumbrated   in   a
          statute   must   answer   the   test   of
Article   14
of   the
          Constitution   of   India.   Classification   whether
          permissible or not must be judged on the touchstone
          of the object sought to be achieved. If the object of
          reservation is to take affirmative action in favour of a
          class which is social, educationally and economically
          backward, the State's jurisdiction while exercising its
          executive   or   legislative   function   is   to   decide   as   to
          what   extent   reservation   should   be   made   for   them
          either in Public Service or for obtaining admission in
          educational institutions. In our opinion, such a class
          cannot be sub­divided so as to give more preference
37
to a minuscule proportion of the Scheduled Castes in
           preference to other members of the same class.”
31.    The decision in
Deepak Sibal v. Punjab University & Anr.
(1989) 2

SCC 145 has also been pressed into service with respect to intelligible

differentia test applied to the facts with respect to private employees.

The  said  question  arose  with   respect to   admission  to  LL.B.  classes.

There   was   the   exclusion   of   private   employees.   Admissions   were

restricted   only   to   Government,   semi­Government   and   employees   of

other   institutions   on   two   grounds.   Firstly,   regarding   production   of

bogus   certificates   of   employment   from   the   private   employers   and

secondly, imparting legal education to the employees of Government,

semi­Government and other institutions.   The Court observed that it

was   not   appropriate   to   exclude   the   employees   of   private

establishments.   The   classification   was   not   based   on   intelligible

differentia. The Court further observed that a classification need not

be   made   with   mathematical   precision   but   if   there   be   little   or   no

difference   between   the   persons   or   things   which   have   been   grouped

together and those left out of the group
,
in that case
, the classification

cannot be said to be a reasonable one.
There is no dispute with the

aforesaid   proposition   with   respect   to   intelligible   differentia   test
laid

down  in
E.V. Chinnaiah
(supra) and
Deepak Sibal
(supra).  However,

the test to be applied in the instant case is whether the classification

made is violative or irrational or lacks intelligible differentia criteria.
38
32.   As held in the aforesaid decisions, it is permissible to lay down

the   essential   educational   requirements,   residential/domicile   in   a

particular State in respect of basic courses of MBBS/BDS/Ayurvedic.

The object sought to be achieved is that the incumbent must serve the

State   concerned   and   for   the   emancipation   of   the   educational

standards of the people who are residing in a particular State, such

reservation has been upheld by this Court for the inhabitants of the

State and prescription of the condition of obtaining an education in a

State.   The   only   distinction   has   been   made   with   respect   to

postgraduate and post­doctoral super specialty course.
33.   Rule 3(1)(c) of the Rules of 2017 lays down the requirement of

obtaining education in the State and relaxation has been given to the

wards   of   the   State   Government   employees   or   Central   Government

employees or to an employee of Corporation/Agency/instrumentality

under the Government of Assam or the Central Government, whether

on deputation or transfer on regular posting from obtaining education

from class VII to XII for the period his/her father or mother is working

outside the State. As urged on behalf of the petitioners the employees

of other State Government but residents of Assam, similar relaxation

ought to have been made cannot be accepted. Thus, their exclusion

cannot   be   said   to   be   irrational   and   arbitrary.   The   wards   of   the

employees in the service of other States like Government employees of
39
Arunachal   Pradesh,   in   our   opinion,   form   a   totally   different   class.

When the wards are obtaining education outside and the parents are

working in Arunachal Pradesh as Government employee or elsewhere,

they   are   not   likely   to   come   back   to   the   State   of   Assam.     As   such

Government   of   Assam   holds   that   they   should   provide   preference   to

State   residents/institutional   preference   cannot   be   said   to

unintelligible   criteria   suffering   from   vice   of   arbitrariness   in   any

manner whatsoever, thus, Rule 3(1)(c) framed by the Government of

Assam is based on an intelligible differentia and cannot be said to be

discriminatory and in violation of
Article 14.
34.    With respect to the private employees also, the submission was

raised   that   wards   of   private   employees   working   outside   the   State

ought to have been placed at the similar footing as that of the wards of

the   State   Government/Central   Government   employees   etc.   In   our

opinion,   when   once   parents   have   moved   outside   in   a   private

employment   and   wards   obtaining   education   outside,   they   are   not

likely   to   come   back,   thus,   their   exclusion   as   afore­stated   footing

cannot be said to be irrational or illegal.
35.    It was urged that some of the students may obtain admission in

other States for the purpose of better coaching. Relevant data has not

been placed on record by the petitioners that in Assam coaching is not

available. Apart from that, when they can afford to obtain coaching in
40
other States, they stand on a different footing, they are the one who

belongs   to   an   affluent   class   who   can   afford   expensive   education   in

other States and it is not necessary that they should be adjusted in

State quota seat, they can stake claim for All India Quota Seats for the

State of Assam. They can stake their claim with respect to open seats

within   the   State   of   Assam.   The   exclusion   is   not   total   for   them.

However, with respect to the State­quota seats, since it is open to the

State   Government   to   lay   down   the   educational   as   well   as   domicile

requirement, incumbents must fulfill the criteria. The criteria so
laid

down in
Rule 3(1)(c) of Rules of 2017, cannot be said to be ultra vires

of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
36.    In   view   of   the   aforesaid   discussion,   we   find   that   the   writ

petitions/SLP   are   devoid   of   substance.     Rule   3(1)(c)   of   the   Rules   of

2017 is in consonance with the spirit of
Article 14
of the Constitution

of India. The writ petitions/SLP deserve dismissal and the same are

hereby dismissed. Parties to bear their own costs.
……………………………J.
                                                        (Arun Mishra)




New Delhi;                                              .…………………………. J.
August 17, 2018.                                        (S. Abdul Nazeer)
41