[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Bharmal Medical Store Civil Hospital ... vs State Of M.P. on 27 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 106, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1199, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1190
Author:
Navin Sinha
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Navin Sinha
,
Ranjan Gogoi
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).8590­8591 OF 2018
                              (arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 14871­14872 of 2015)

                         BHARMAL MEDICAL STORE 
                         CIVIL HOSPITAL BADNAGAR ETC.             ….APPELLANT(S)
                                              VERSUS 
                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
                         AND OTHERS                               ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     with

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).8592 OF 2018
                                   (arising out of SLP(C) No.21414 of 2015

                         APNA MEDICAZE                            ….APPELLANT(S)
                                                  VERSUS 
                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
                         AND OTHERS                                ….RESPONDENT(S)



                                                 JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
2.   The questions involved in these appeals being common,
Digitally signed by
VINOD LAKHINA
Date: 2018.08.27
13:51:02 IST
Reason:
there being a minor variation in facts, they have been heard
1
together and are being disposed by a common order.   Suffice

to observe, that in the limited nature of the controversy, we

propose   to   take   notice   of   the   facts   only   to   the   extent

necessary for purposes of the present order.
3.    Both the appellants are lessees of the State Government

for the shop premises situated within the compound of the

District   Hospital,   Ujjain,   Civil   Hospital,   Nagda,   Khachrod,

Mahidpur, Badnagar etc.   They have been asked in 2013 to

vacate   the   shop   premises  and   shift   from   the   Civil  Hospital

compound.     The   justification   is   the   formulation   of   a

Government Scheme i.e.  Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel Nishulka

Aushadhi Vitaran Yojna  for supply of free essential drugs to

all classes of patients by the Government.  It is not in dispute

that   the   shop   premises  was   constructed  by   the   authorities

and   does   not   fall   in   the   category   of   an   unauthorized

construction.  It was settled with the appellants by open bid

in 2000/2001.   The lease period has long since expired and

the lease has not been renewed.
2
4.    Learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   submits   that   the

notice   to   vacate   the   shops   in   the   hospital   premises   is

arbitrary.     No   show   cause   notice   with   an   opportunity   to

convince the authorities not to order removal was provided.

Closure of the shop will infringe the fundamental rights of the

appellants   under
Article   19(1)(g)
of   the   Constitution.     The

supply of generic medicines by the State Government will not

be   disturbed   by   the   medicine   shops   being   operated   by   the

appellants.   The   presence   of   the   shops   would   only   aid

availability of medicines to the patients.
5.    Learned   counsel   for   the   State   submitted   that   the

medicine shops were permitted at a time when patients had

to procure medicines on their own.   With the advent of the

new   scheme   for   supplies   of   medicines   by   the   Government,

there exists no need for medicine shops within the hospital

premises.  In fact, the shop premises can be better utilized to

facilitate supply of free medicines by the Government itself to

the patients.   The lease has long expired and no steps have

been taken for renewal by the appellants.
3
6.    We   have   considered   the   submissions.     The   laudable

objective   of   the   Government   to   ensure   availability   of   free

medicines to the patients in the civil hospital premises will

have   to   be   balanced   with   the   competing   interests   of   the

appellants to earn their livelihood.  If peaceful coexistence is

possible, there is no reason why the shop premises should be

shut   down   and   the   appellants   be   asked   to   vacate.   The

respondents in their counter affidavit have acknowledged the

existence of a large number of medicine shops immediately

outside the premises of the government hospital, to contend

that it was sufficient to take care of the needs of patients.  It

is but a tacit admission by the respondents, for the need to

have private medical shops in the vicinity for the convenience

of   the   patients.       Without   further   speculation,   it   would

naturally   be   so   for   myriad   reasons   such   as   availability   of

timely supplies, logistics, nature of medicines required, etc.

There   can   also   be   times   when   availability   of   a   particular

brand   medicine   may   be   a   compelling   necessity   without

awaiting   government   supply  to be replenished.   If for  such

eventualities a private medical shop is countenanced by the

respondents   at   the   gate   of   the   hospital   it   is   difficult   to
4
appreciate their insistence for removal of the appellants.  We

are,   therefore,   unable   to   sustain   the   notice   directing   the

appellants   to   vacate,   and   which   in   any   event,   has   been

ordered   without   an   opportunity   to   the   appellants   for

presenting   their   case  and convincing  the  authorities not to

remove them.
7.    The   shop   premises,   as   observed   above,   are   not

unauthorized structures, but leases have long expired and no

steps have been taken by the appellants for renewal of their

leases.     The   rent   was   Rs.300­400/­.    At   the  time  of   initial

settlement also, it was done with the appellants on the basis

of open bid.   Considering the long passage of time since the

lease   has   expired,   and   the   appellants   cannot   claim   an

indefeasible   right   to   continue   irrespective   of   such

considerations, we deem it proper to observe that it shall be

open for the respondents to hold an open bid for the shops in

question   inside   the   hospital   premises.     The   appellants   can

also   participate   in   the   same.     Needless   to   say   that   the

settlement will have to be made with the highest bidder.  The

present order cannot be construed as a complete embargo on
5
the   respondents   with   regard   to   the   shop   premises   for   all

times to come.  Any future eventuality, for justifiable reasons,

will always leave the authority a discretion for closure of the

shops for valid and germane reasons.
8.    Till such fresh bids are held, the appellants shall not be

disturbed but shall continue to pay the enhanced rate of rent

in the manner provided for in the agreement with effect from

the date of the present order.  If there are any arrears of rent,

it shall also be deposited at the agreed rate within a period of

four weeks.   The impugned orders of the High Court are set

aside.  The appeals are allowed.
…………...................J.
                                                 [RANJAN GOGOI]


                                              …………...................J.
                                                  [NAVIN SINHA]


                                              …………...................J.
                                                  [K.M. JOSEPH]

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 27, 2018
6