[Cites
28
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Shailesh Manubhai Parmar vs Election Commission Of India Through ... on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3918, 2018 (9) SCC 100, (2018) 10 SCALE 52, (2018) 3 ESC 488, (2018) 6 BOM CR 62, (2018) 7 MAD LJ 476, 2018 (8) ADJ 91 NOC, 2019 (135) ALR SOC 5 (SC), 2019 (197) AIC (SOC) 5 (SC), (2019) 1 GUJ LR 333, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2837, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 134
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.631 OF 2017


         Shailesh Manubhai Parmar                                     … Petitioner

                                                 Versus

         Election Commission of India Through
         The Chief Election Commissioner & Ors.                       … Respondents



                                            JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI.
In the instant writ petition preferred under
Article 32
of the

         Constitution of India, the petitioner who is the Chief Whip of the

         Indian National Congress party in Gujarat Legislative Assembly

         challenges the circular dated 1st August, 2017 issued by the

         Secretary, Gujarat Legislature Secretariat, the Respondent No.3

         herein, in relation to the conduct of elections for the Council of

         States.             Though the circular covers various aspects, he has

         challenged the availability of the option ―None of the Above‖
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
(NOTA).
Date: 2018.08.21
11:32:41 IST
Reason:
2
2.   It is asserted that the Election Commission of India had

issued directions to the Chief Electoral Officers of all the States

and the Union Territories (except Andaman & Nicobar Islands,

Chandigarh,    Dadra   &   Nagar Haveli,    Daman &       Diu    and

Lakshadweep) directing that the option of NOTA could be

applicable for elections in the Rajya Sabha and the said option

shall be printed on the ballot paper in the language or languages

in which the ballot paper is printed as per the directions issued

by the Election Commission in pursuance of sub-rule (1) of Rule

22 and sub-rule (1) of Rule 30 read with Rule 70 of the Conduct

of Election Rules, 1961 (for short, ‗the Rules‘). Reference has

been made to the communication dated 12th November, 2015 by

the 1st respondent to the Chief Electoral Officers of all the States

giving further directions regarding the manner of voting in

preferential system but we are only concerned with the

applicability of NOTA to the Rajya Sabha elections.             It is

contended in the petition that the circulars issued by the Election

Commission of India introducing NOTA to the elections in respect

of members of the Rajya Sabha are contrary to the mandate of
Article 80(4)
of the Constitution of India and the decision of this

Court in People’s Union for
Civil Liberties and another v.
3
Union of India and another
(PUCL) 1 .         It does not lend any

support to the understanding of the Election Commission for

introducing such an option in respect of Rajya Sabha elections.

It is averred that
Section 59
of the Representation of the People

Act, 1951 (for brevity, ‗the 1951 Act‘) provides for the manner of

voting at elections and
Section 169
empowers the Central

Government, after consulting the Election Commission, to make

rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.     Reference has

been made to Part VI of the Rules which makes special provisions

for voting at elections by Assembly members and Rule 70

provides that Rules 37(8) to 40A shall apply.       Relying on the

interpretation of the said Rules, it is urged that the scheme of the

Rules
referred to above
and Rules 71 to 76 do not remotely

conceive of NOTA but the same has been brought in by issuance

of circular by the Election Commission and, hence, the same is

unconstitutional.
3.         A counter affidavit has been filed by the 1st respondent

contending, inter alia, that the constitutional courts do not

interdict in the election process and challenge can only be made

after the election is over by filing an election petition before the
1
(2013) 10 SCC 1
4
appropriate court; that as per the pronouncement in PUCL‘s

case, there is no distinction between direct and indirect elections

and, hence, the provision of NOTA in the ballot paper of the

elections has been made applicable by the Election Commission

to Rajya Sabha to effectuate the right of electors guaranteed to

them under
Section 79A
of the Act; that though there is no need

for secrecy in Rajya Sahba elections because the law makes it

open voting, yet that does not take away the right of the elector

not to vote by expressing the option of NOTA; that even assuming

the position that the judgment in PUCL‘s case does not indicate

that this Court ever intended to apply the option of NOTA to

Rajya Sabha elections, yet the Election Commission has issued

letter dated 24th January, 2014 and further reiterated by letter

dated 12th November, 2015 that the option of NOTA would be

applicable to elections in Rajya Sabha; and that elections had

already been held by applying the said option and, therefore,

there is no justification to challenge the said directions at a

belated stage. Be it noted, the first two points were advanced as

preliminary objections and all the other grounds raised pertained

to the validity of the circular issued by the 1st respondent.
5
4.         We may immediately note that the issue of introduction of

an election process does not arise in the present case. As regards

the issue of maintainability of the writ petition, no argument was

advanced in that regard and, we have no hesitation to say,

correctly so.
5.         To understand and appreciate the controversy, it is

imperative to scrutinize what has been envisaged under
Article

80(4)
of the Constitution.
Article 80
deals with the composition

of the Council of States.
Article 80(4)
reads as follows:-
―(4) The representatives of each State in the
                   Council of States shall be elected by the
                   elected members of the Legislative Assembly of
                   the State in accordance with the system of
                   proportional representation by means of the
                   single transferable vote.‖
6.
In
Ananga Uday Singh Deo v. Ranga Nath Mishra and

others
2 , a three-Judge Bench has dealt with the nature of

election to the Council of States. It is useful to reproduce a few

passages from the same:-
―41. The system of proportional representation
                   by single transferable vote comes into
                   operation only if there is more than one
                   candidate to be elected. The election is held by
                   multi-member      constituencies.     All    the
                   candidates who compete for the seats allotted
                   to a constituency have their names printed on
2
(2002) 1 SCC 499
6
one ballot paper. Each elector has only one
vote in the sense that it will be capable of
electing one candidate only. But that vote will
not be wasted in case the candidate whom he
wishes to elect has got more than the required
number of votes, called the ―quota‖. The elector
is required to indicate his multiple preferences
by placing the figures 1, 2 and 3 in order of
preferences. The surplus votes in the hands of
the candidates declared elected are transferred
to the then candidates.‖

     x          x          x          x
43. Rule 74 provides that the Returning Officer
after rejecting the ballot papers which are
invalid arrange the remaining ballot papers in
parcels according to the first preference
recorded for each candidate; count and record
the number of papers in each parcel and the
total number; and credit to each candidate the
value of the papers in his parcel. Rule 76
provides for ascertainment of quota. It provides
that at any election where more than one seat
is to be filled, every valid ballot paper shall be
deemed to be of the value of 100, and the
quota sufficient to secure the return of a
candidate at the election shall be determined
by adding the value credited to all the
candidates and then dividing the total by a
number which exceeds by one the number of
vacancies to be filled and then to add one to
the quotient ignoring the remainder, if any,
and the resulting number is the quota. In
simple words it would work as under:
Total Number of ballot papers +1          = Quota
Number of members to be elected + 1
44. Rule 78 provides that if at the end of any
count or at the end of the transfer of any
parcel or sub-parcel of an excluded candidate
7
the value of ballot papers credited to a
          candidate is equal to, or greater than the
          quota, that candidate shall be declared
          elected.‖
7.   Presently, we may refer to Rules 79, 80 and 81 of the Rules

which read as follows:-
―79. Transfer of surplus.—(1) If at the end of
          any count the value of the ballot papers
          credited to a candidate is greater than the
          quota, the surplus shall be transferred, in
          accordance with the provisions of this Rule, to
          the continuing candidates indicated on the
          ballot papers of that candidate as being next in
          order of the elector‘s preference.
(2) If more than one candidate have a surplus,
          the largest surplus shall be dealt with first and
          the others in order of magnitude:
Provided that every surplus arising on the first
          count shall be dealt with before those arising
          on the second count and so on.
(3) Where there are more surpluses than one
          to distribute and two or more surpluses are
          equal, regard shall be had to the original votes
          of each candidate and the candidate for whom
          most original votes are recorded shall have his
          surplus first distributed; and if the values of
          their original votes are equal, the returning
          officer shall decide by lot which candidate shall
          have his surplus first distributed.
(4)(a) If the surplus of any candidate to be
          transferred arises from original votes only, the
          returning officer shall examine all the papers
          in the parcel belonging to that candidate,
8
divide the unexhausted papers into sub-
parcels according to the next preferences
recorded thereon and make a separate sub-
parcel of the exhausted papers.
(b) He shall ascertain the value of the papers
in each sub-parcel and of all the unexhausted
papers.
(c) If the value of the unexhausted papers is
equal to or less than the surplus, he shall
transfer all the unexhausted papers at the
value at which they were received by the
candidate whose surplus is being transferred.
(d) If the value of the unexhausted papers is
greater than the surplus, he shall transfer the
sub-parcels of unexhausted papers and the
value at which each paper shall be transferred
shall be ascertained by dividing the surplus by
the total number of unexhausted papers.
(5) If the surplus of any candidate to be
transferred arises from transferred as well as
original votes, the returning officer shall re-
examine all the papers in the sub-parcel last
transferred to the candidate, divide the
unexhausted      papers      into    sub-parcels
according to the next preferences recorded
thereon, and then deal with the sub-parcels in
the same manner as is provided in the case of
sub-parcels referred to in sub-rule (4).

(6) The papers transferred to each candidate
shall be added in the form of a sub-parcel to
the papers already belonging to such
candidate.
(7) All papers in the parcel or sub-parcel of an
elected candidate not transferred under this
Rule shall be set apart as finally dealt with.
9
80. Exclusion of candidates lowest on the
poll.—(1) If after all surpluses have been
transferred as hereinbefore provided, the
number of candidates elected is less than the
required number, the returning officer shall
exclude from the poll the candidate lowest on
the poll and shall distribute his unexhausted
papers among the continuing candidates
according to the next preferences recorded
thereon; and any exhausted papers shall be
set apart as finally dealt with.
(2) The papers containing original votes of an
excluded candidate shall first be transferred,
the transfer value of each paper being one
hundred.
(3) The papers containing transferred votes of
an excluded candidate shall then be
transferred in the order of the transfers in
which, and at the value at which, he obtained
them.
(4) Each of such transfers shall be deemed to
be a separate transfer but not a separate
count.
(5) If, as a result of the transfer of papers, the
value of votes obtained by a candidate is equal
to or greater than the quota, the count then
proceeding shall be completed but no further
papers shall be transferred to him.
(6) The process directed by this Rule shall be
repeated on the successive exclusions one
after another of the candidates lowest on the
poll until such vacancy is filled either by the
election of a candidate with the quota or as
hereinafter provided.
10
(7) If at any time it becomes necessary to
exclude a candidate and two or more
candidates have the same value of votes and
are the lowest on the poll, regard shall be had
to the original votes of each candidate and the
candidate for whom fewest original votes are
recorded shall be excluded; and if the values of
their original votes are equal the candidates
with the smallest value at the earliest count at
which these candidates had unequal values
shall be excluded.
(8) If two or more candidates are lowest on the
poll and each has the same value of votes at all
counts the returning officer shall decide by lot
which candidate shall be excluded.
81. Filling the last vacancies.—(1) When at
the end of any count the number of continuing
candidates is reduced to the number of
vacancies remaining unfilled, the continuing
candidates shall be declared elected.
(2) When at the end of any count only one
vacancy remains unfilled and the value of the
papers of some one candidate exceeds the total
value of the papers of all the other continuing
candidates together with any surplus not
transferred, that candidate shall be declared
elected.
(3) When at the end of any count only one
vacancy remains unfilled and there are only
two continuing candidates and each of them
has the same value of votes and no surplus
remains capable of transfer, the returning
officer shall decide by lot which of them shall
be excluded; and after excluding him in the
manner aforesaid, declare the other candidate
to be elected.‖
11
8.
In
Ananga Uday Singh Deo
(supra), interpreting the said

Rules, the Court held :-
―46. Rule 79 comes into operation in case a
          candidate or more than one candidate has
          received more votes than the required quota. If
          at the end of any count the value of the ballot
          papers credited to a candidate is greater than
          the quota, the surplus shall be transferred in
          accordance with the provisions of this Rule, to
          the continuing candidates indicated on the
          ballot papers of that candidate as being next in
          order of the elector‘s preference. After working
          out the surplus votes in order of preference in
          favour of the remaining candidates, the
          surplus votes are transferred to the remaining
          candidates and added to the value of votes
          polled by that candidate. In this exercise if any
          candidate reaches the requisite quota, then he
          is declared elected.
47. If no candidate wins on transfer of the
          surplus votes obtained by him from the
          surplus of votes from the candidate who is
          already declared elected, then the provision of
          exclusion of candidates lowest on polled votes
          as provided under Rule 80 comes into
          operation. The Returning Officer then excludes
          from the poll the candidate lowest on the poll
          and distributes his unexhausted ballot papers
          among the continuing candidates according to
          the next preference recorded thereon. The
          process is continued till the total number of
          vacancies is filled up.‖


     From the aforesaid analysis by the Court, it is discernible

that the vote of an elector has certain value and that there is

transfer of surplus votes.
12
9.         In PUCL‘s case, the constitutional validity of Rules 41(2),

41(3) and 49-O of the Rules was challenged to the extent that the

said Rules violate the secrecy of voting which is fundamental to

the concept of free and fair election and is required to be

maintained as per
Section 128
of the 1951 Act and Rules 39 and

49-N of the Rules.           The Court referred to the decision in
Lily

Thomas v. Speaker, Lok Sabha and others
3 wherein it has

been stated that voting is a formal expression of will or opinion

by the person entitled to exercise the right on the subject or issue

in question and that right to vote means the right to exercise the

right in favour of or against the motion or resolution and such a

right implies right to remain neutral as well. Thereafter, the

Court referred to
Section 79
of the 1951 Act and Rules 41(2),

41(3) and 49-O of the Rules and opined that the Rules make it

clear that a right not to vote has been recognized both under the

1951 Act and the Rules. It further expressed:-
―….A positive ―right not to vote‖ is a part of
                   expression of a voter in a parliamentary
                   democracy and it has to be recognised and
                   given effect to in the same manner as ―right to
                   vote‖. A voter may refrain from voting at an
                   election for several reasons including the
                   reason that he does not consider any of the
                   candidates in the field worthy of his vote. One
3
(1993) 4 SCC 234
13
of the ways of such expression may be to
          abstain from voting, which is not an ideal
          option for a conscientious and responsible
          citizen. Thus, the only way by which it can be
          made effectual is by providing a button in the
          EVMs to express that right. This is the basic
          requirement if the lasting values in a healthy
          democracy have to be sustained, which the
          Election Commission has not only recognised
          but has also asserted.‖
10. The Court considered the stand of the Election Commission

that in the larger interest of promoting democracy, a provision for

NOTA should be made in the EVMs/ballot papers, for such an

option, apart from promoting free and fair elections in a

democracy, will provide an opportunity to the elector to express

his dissent or disapproval against the contesting candidates and

will have the benefit of reducing bogus voting. Eventually, the

Court held that Rules 41(2) and 41(3) and Rule 49-O of the Rules

are ultra vires
Section 128
of the 1951 Act and
Article 19
of the

Constitution to the extent they violate secrecy of voting.

However, the Court held:-
―57. Giving right to a voter not to vote for any
          candidate while protecting his right of secrecy
          is extremely important in a democracy. Such
          an option gives the voter the right to express
          his disapproval with the kind of candidates
          that are being put up by the political parties.
          When the political parties will realise that a
          large number of people are expressing their
          disapproval with the candidates being put up
14
by them, gradually there will be a systemic
                     change and the political parties will be forced
                     to accept the will of the people and field
                     candidates who are known for their integrity.
58. The direction can also be supported by the
                     fact that in the existing system a dissatisfied
                     voter ordinarily does not turn up for voting
                     which in turn provides a chance to
                     unscrupulous elements to impersonate the
                     dissatisfied voter and cast a vote, be it a
                     negative one. Furthermore, a provision of
                     negative voting would be in the interest of
                     promoting democracy as it would send clear
                     signals to political parties and their candidates
                     as to what the electorate thinks about them.‖
                                                    [Emphasis added]
11. On the basis of the aforesaid analysis, the Court directed

the Election Commission to make necessary provision in the

ballot papers/EVMs for another button called ―None of the above

(NOTA)‖ so that the voters, who come to the polling booth and

decide not to vote for any of the candidates in the fray, are able to

exercise their right not to vote while maintaining their right of

secrecy.
12.
In this context, understanding of the principle
laid down in
Kuldip Nayar and others v. Union of India and others
4 in

that         regard      is   quite   instructive.   Interpreting   the   words
4
(2006) 7 SCC 1
15
‗representatives of the States‖ used in
Articles 80(1)(b)
, 80(1)(2)
,

80(4)
, the Constitution Bench ruled:-
―204. Upon being given their plain meaning,
          the words ―representatives of the States‖ in
Article 80(1)(b)
,
Article 80(2)
and
Article 80(4)
must be interpreted to connote persons who
          are elected to represent the State in the
          Council of States. It is the election that makes
          the person elected the ―representative‖. In
          order to be eligible to be elected to the Council
          of States, a person need not be a
          representative of the State beforehand. It is
          only when he is elected to represent the State
          that he becomes a representative of the State.
          Those who are elected to represent the State
          by the electoral college, which for present
          purposes means the elected Members of the
          Legislative Assembly of the State, are
          necessarily the ―representatives‖ of the State.‖

     The aforesaid passage shows the nature of representation in

the Council of States. It is clear as crystal that the nature of the

representative is different, for he becomes a representative of the

State. This is in contradistinction to an elected candidate who is

elected by the voters in a direct election because he represents a

constituency.
13. We may further note with profit that in the said case, the

Court had adverted to secrecy of voting for the election of the

Council of States. The Court noted that in the wake of ―emerging

trend of cross-voting in the Rajya Sabha and Legislative Council
16
elections‖, elections ―by open ballot‖ were incorporated.         The

Court further noted that the cumulative effect of the amendments

to
Sections 59
,
94
and
128
of the Act brought about by Act 40 of

2003 is that election for filling up of seats in the Council of States

is to be held by open ballot and the requirements of maintenance

of secrecy of voting is now made subject to an exception

mentioned in the proviso. The Court adverted to the concept of

free and fair elections and noted the contention that the

disclosure of choice or any fear or compulsion or even a political

pressure under a whip goes against the concept of free and fair

elections and that immunity from such fear or compulsion can be

ensured only if the election is held on the principle of secret

ballot.
14. Adverting to various decisions, the larger Bench opined that

the procedure by which an election has to be held should further

the object of free and fair election and as the Parliament noted

that in election to the Council of States, members elected on

behalf of political parties misuse the secret ballot and cross-vote

and there had been breach of discipline by political parties for

collateral and corrupt considerations, it legislated to provide for

an open ballot. The Court further observed that the principle of
17
secrecy is not an absolute principle though the said principle is

meant to ensure free and fair elections.       However, the higher

principle is free and fair election and purity of election.          The

larger Bench further proceeded to state:-
―464. The secrecy of ballot is a vital principle
           for ensuring free and fair elections. The higher
           principle, however, is free and fair elections
           and purity of elections. If secrecy becomes a
           source for corruption then sunlight and
           transparency have the capacity to remove it.
           We can only say that legislation pursuant to a
           legislative policy that transparency will
           eliminate the evil that has crept in would
           hopefully serve the larger object of free and fair
           elections.‖
15. We may presently refer to the notification issued by the

Election Commission on 24.01.2014. After referring to the PUCL‘s

judgment    and   the   doubt   expressed    with   regard      to   the

applicability of the option of NOTA during elections of Rajya

Sabha, the Commission has instructed thus:-
―The Commission has dully considered the
           matter and it has been decided that the NOTA
           option will also be applicable for elections to
           Rajya Sabha. Accordingly, the Commission
           hereby directs that after the name and
           particulars of the last candidate on the ballot
           paper another panel may be provided and the
           words ―None of the above (NOTA)‖ shall be
           printed therein in the language or languages in
           which the ballot paper is printed as per
           direction issued by the Commission in
           pursuance of Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 22 and Sub-
18
Rule (1) of Rule 30, read with Rule 70 of the
          Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
2. Please bring the above instructions to the
          notice of the Returning Officers for Conduct of
          Elections to the Council of States for
          compliance during the current biennial
          elections to Rajya Sabha already announced to
          fill up the vacancies to be caused in the month
          of April 2014 and all future elections to Rajya
          Sabha.
3.   Necessary instruction with regard to
          marking of ballot paper for exercising the
          option of ―None of the Above‖ and the counting
          of votes in view of the above option will be
          issued shortly.‖
16. A further circular has been issued on 12.11.2015 which

lays down thus:-
―2. It has been brought to the notice of the
          Commission that there have been some cases
          where electors, having marked Ist preference
          against one of the candidates put cross mark
          or mentioned subsequent preference (2nd, 3rd,
          etc.) against NOTA, which have led to rejection
          of the ballot paper. In the light of such cases,
          the Commission has considered the matter
          afresh and, with a view to ensuring the
          compliance of rule 73(2) of the CE Rules 1961
          and adoption of a uniform approach towards
          the requirement of providing for NOTA option
          and the manner of voting in preferential
          system using single transferable vote, the
          Commission has given the following directions
          for exercising of NOTA option in elections to
          Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Councils:-
19
(i)   Marking against NOTA shall be by way of
writing figures 1, 2, 3, etc. as in the case of
marking preference for candidates, i.e in
international form of Indian numerals or in the
Roman form or in any Indian language;
(ii) If preference ‗1‘ is marked against NOTA,
it shall be treated as a case of not voting for
any of the candidates and such ballot shall be
treated as invalid, even if ‗1‘ is also marked
against any other candidate in addition to
being marked against NOTA;
(iii) If 1st preference is validly marked against
one of the candidates, and 2nd preference is
marked against NOTA, such ballot paper shall
be treated as valid for the candidate for whom
1st preference has been marked, provided there
is no other ground to invalidate it, under rule
73(2). In such case, at the stage of examining
2nd preference, the ballot paper shall be treated
as exhausted as the 2nd preference is marked
against NOTA. Similarly, if 1st          and 2nd
preferences are validly marked against a
candidate each and 3rd preference is marked
against NOTA, the ballot shall be valid for the
first count and for the purposes of the 2nd
preference, but, at the stage of examining the
3rd preference, if such stage comes, the ballot
shall be treated as exhausted. These
instructions shall apply for subsequent
preferences also.
(iv) If     1st   preference    and   subsequent
preferences, if any, are validly marked against
the candidates and cross/tick is marked
against NOTA, the ballot paper shall not be
rejected as invalid only on this ground, and the
preferences marked against the candidates
shall be considered and counted accordingly.
However, the general provisions of the rules
and the Commission's instructions regarding
marks that may identify the voter shall apply
in the case of the mark against NOTA option,
and if the RO considers that the mark put
20
therein       reasonably      points   towards
                   identification of the voter within the meaning
                   of rule 73(2)(d), that would render the ballot
                   liable to rejection on that ground.‖
17. In the instructions to the voters for casting vote in Rajya

Sabha, it has been stated that:-
―5. Out of the candidates shown in the Ballot
                   Paper, if you do not want to elect any
                   candidate, then in the column ―Show your
                   Order of Preference‖, against ―NOTA‖ figure of
                   ―1‖ is required to be shown. In the column
                   against ―NOTA‖, instead of figure ―1‖,
                   alternative preference numbers 2, 3, 4 etc. can
                   also be shown.
6.  This figure of ―1‖ can be put against the
                   name of only one candidate or against
                   ―NOTA‖.‖
18. The criticism advanced is that the circulars are not in

accordance with the procedure envisaged under the 1951 Act and

the Rules. Placing reliance on
Ram Jawaya Kapur v. State of

Punjab5
and
Bishambhar Dayal Chandra Mohan and others

v. State of Uttar Pradesh
and others6, it is urged that it is

beyond the power of the Election Commission, the first

respondent herein, to introduce NOTA to the elections of the

members to the Council of States. As we notice, the Election

Commission has treated the pronouncement in PUCL‘s case as
5
(1955) 2 SCR 225
6
(1982) 1 SCC 39
21
its source of power. The decision in PUCL relates to direct

elections. The Court, in fact, has clearly observed that the

directions pertain to the Parliament and State Legislative

Assemblies which is constituency based and grants an option to

the voters to exercise the benefit of NOTA. In
the said decision
,

emphasis has been laid on universal adult suffrage conferred on

the citizens of India by the Constitution and the entitlement of a

voter to come to the polling booth and decide to vote for any

candidate or to exercise the right not to vote. There has been

distinction between direct and indirect elections.
In
Kuldip

Nayar
(supra), the Constitution Bench has drawn the distinction

by expressing thus:-
―441. Voting at elections to the Council of
          States cannot be compared with a general
          election. In a general election, the electors have
          to vote in a secret manner without fear that
          their votes would be disclosed to anyone or
          would result in victimisation. There is no party
          affiliation and hence the choice is entirely with
          the voter. This is not the case when elections
          are held to the Council of States as the electors
          are elected Members of the Legislative
          Assemblies      who    in    turn    have    party
          affiliations.‖

     And again:-
―454. The distinguishing feature between
          ―constituency-based  representation‖ and
22
―proportional      representation‖       in      a
                   representative democracy is that in the case of
                   the list system of proportional representation,
                   members are elected on party lines. They are
                   subject to party discipline. They are liable to be
                   expelled for breach of discipline. Therefore, to
                   give effect to the concept of proportional
                   representation, Parliament can suggest ―open
                   ballot‖. In such a case, it cannot be said that
                   “free and fair elections” would stand defeated
                   by “open ballot”. As stated above, in a
                   constituency-based election it is the people who
                   vote whereas in proportional representation it is
                   the elector who votes. This distinction is
                   indicated also in the Australian judgment in
R.
                   v. Jones7.In
constituency-based representation,
                   ―secrecy‖ is the basis whereas in the case of
                   proportional representation in a representative
                   democracy the basis can be ―open ballot‖ and it
                   would not violate the concept of ―free and fair
                   elections‖, which concept is one of the pillars of
                   democracy.‖
19. The aforesaid passages throw immense light on the

distinction between direct and indirect elections and especially on

the concept of indirect election which encompasses proportional

representation. There is voting by open ballot and it has been so

introduced to sustain the foundational values of party discipline

and to avoid any kind of cross voting thereby ensuring purity in

the election process. They have been treated as core values of

democracy and fair election. It is worth to note that in a voting for

members of the Council of States, the nature of voting by an
7
(1972) 128 CLR 221
23
elector is a grave concern.           It is because in such an election,

there is a party whip and the elector is bound to obey the

command of the party. The party discipline in this kind of

election is of extreme significance, for that is the fulcrum of the

existence of political parties. It is essential in a parliamentary

democracy. The thought of cross voting and corruption is

obnoxious in such a voting.
In this context, we may refer with

profit to the authority in
Ravi S. Naik v. Union of India and

others
8 . In the said case, the question arose relating to the

disqualification of a Member of the State Legislature under
Article

191(2)
read with the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.
The

two-Judge Bench referred to the decision in
Kihoto Hollohan v.

Zachillhu and others
9 and addressed the issue of defection

covered under paragraphs 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b) of the Tenth

Schedule. Referring to the said paragraphs, the Court ruled:-
―….The      said   paragraph     provides   for
                   disqualification of a member of a House
                   belonging to a political party ―if he has
                   voluntarily given up his membership of such
                   political party‖. The words ―voluntarily given
                   up his membership‖ are not synonymous with
                   ―resignation‖ and have a wider connotation. A
                   person     may    voluntarily  give    up  his
                   membership of a political party even though he
8
1994 Supp (2) SCC 641
9
1992 Supp (2) SCC 651
24
has not tendered his resignation from the
          membership of that party. Even in the absence
          of a formal resignation from membership an
          inference can be drawn from the conduct of a
          member that he has voluntarily given up his
          membership of the political party to which he
          belongs.‖
20. Paragraphs 2(1)(a) and 2(1)(b) of the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution read as under:-
―1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4
          and 5, a member of a House belonging to any
          political party shall be disqualified for being a
          member of the House—
(a) if he has voluntarily given up           his
          membership of such political party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such
          House contrary to any direction issued by the
          political party to which he belongs or by any
          person or authority authorized by it in this
          behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the
          prior permission of such political party, person
          or authority and such voting or abstention has
          not been condoned by such political party,
          person or authority within fifteen days from
          the date of such voting or abstention.
Explanation – For the purposes of this sub-
          paragraph,-
(a) an elected member of a House shall be
          deemed to belong to the political party, if any,
          by which he was set up as a candidate for
          election as such member;
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,-
(i)   where he is a member of any political
          party on the date of his nomination as such
25
member, be deemed to belong to such political
          party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to
          the political party of which he becomes, or, as
          the case may be, first becomes, a member
          before the expiry of six months from the date
          on which he takes his seat after complying
          with the requirements of
article 99
or, as the
          case may be, article 188.‖
21. The appellants therein were disqualified by the Speaker of

the House under the Goa Legislative Assembly (Disqualification

on Grounds of Defection) Rules, 1986.       Dealing   with   the

aspect of disqualification, the Court ruled:-
―A candidate voluntarily gives up his
          membership and inference can be drawn from
          his conduct that he has voluntarily given up
          the membership of the political party.‖
     A distinction has been drawn between resignation and

voluntarily giving up.
22. It is demonstrable that an elector can be disqualified if he

voluntarily gives up his membership of the political party. It is

submitted by Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi that an elector

belonging to a particular party may not voluntarily give up the

membership but can exercise his choice of NOTA despite his

political party setting up a candidate. According to the learned

senior counsel, this creates an anomalous situation and brings in

horse trading, corruption and use of extra constitutional methods
26
which were sought to be avoided by the introduction of the Tenth

Schedule in the Constitution by the
Constitution (Fifty-Second

Amendment) Act, 1985
. It is necessary to mention here that the

said amendment was introduced to eradicate the evil of political

defection.             The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the said

amendment provides thus:-
―The evil of political defections has been a
                      matter of national concern. If it is not
                      combated, it is likely to undermine the very
                      foundations of our democracy and the
                      principles which sustain it. With this object, an
                      assurance was given in the Address by the
                      President to Parliament that the Government
                      intended to introduce in the current session of
                      Parliament an anti-defection Bill. This Bill is
                      meant for outlawing defection and fulfilling the
                      above assurance.‖

           On a keen scrutiny of the Statement of Objects and Reasons

and the concept of disqualification to rule out defection, it is clear

that the same is indirectly defeated by the introduction of NOTA.
23. In a democracy, the purity of election is categorically

imperative.              The democratic body polity, as has been held in
Manoj Narula v. Union of India
10   , stipulates that the

quintessential idea of democracy is abhorrent to corruption and

laws emphasize on prevalence of genuine orderliness, positive
10
(2014) 9 SCC 1
27
propriety, dedicated discipline and sanguine sanctity by constant

affirmance of constitutional morality which is the pillar stone of

good governance. The purity of democracy does not withstand

anything that has the potential to create an incurable chasm in

the backbone of a democratic setup.         The law is meant to

eradicate the same. When one analyses the exercise of choice of

NOTA in the voting process of the Council of States where open

ballot is permissible and secrecy of voting has no room and

further where the discipline of the political party/parties matters,

it is clear that such choice will have a negative impact. An

elector, though a single voter, has a quantified value of his vote

and the surplus votes are transferable. There is existence of a

formula for determining the value of the vote. The concept of vote

being transferable has a different connotation. It further needs to

be stated that a candidate after being elected becomes a

representative of the State and does not represent a particular

constituency. The cumulative effect of all these aspects clearly

conveys that the introduction of NOTA to the election process for

electing members of the Council of States will be an anathema to

the fundamental criterion of democracy which is a basic feature

of the Constitution. It can be stated without any fear of
28
contradiction that the provisions for introduction of NOTA as

conceived by the Election Commission, the first respondent

herein, on the basis of the PUCL judgment is absolutely

erroneous, for
the said judgment
does not say so. We are

disposed to think that the decision could not have also said so

having regard to the constitutional provisions contained in
Article

80
and the stipulations provided under the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution. The introduction of NOTA in such an election will

not only run counter to the discipline that is expected from an

elector under the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution but also be

counterproductive     to    the   basic   grammar   of   the   law   of

disqualification of a member on the ground of defection. It is a

well settled principle that what cannot be done directly, cannot

be done indirectly.        To elaborate, if NOTA is allowed in the

election of the members to the Council of States, the prohibited

aspect of defection would indirectly usher in with immense

vigour.
24. We may further add with profit that the purpose of

introduction of NOTA in PUCL‘s case is that a provision for

negative voting can send a clear message to the political parties

and what a voter thinks about the candidates in the fray. Thus
,
29
the said decision
is directly relatable to a direct election, one

man, one vote and one value.
25. In this context, we may usefully refer to
Article 324
of the

Constitution. It reads thus:-
―324. Superintendence, direction and control
          of elections to be vested in an Election
          Commission
          (1) The superintendence, direction and control
          of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and
          the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and
          to the Legislature of every State and of
          elections to the offices of President and Vice
          President held under this Constitution shall be
          vested in a Commission (referred to in this
          Constitution as the Election Commission)
          (2) The Election Commission shall consist of
          the Chief Election Commissioner and such
          number of other Election Commissioners, if
          any, as the President may from time to time fix
          and the appointment of the Chief Election
          Commissioner        and        other      Election
          Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions
          of any law made in that behalf by Parliament,
          be made by the President
          (3) When any other Election Commissioner is
          so appointed the Chief Election Commissioner
          shall act as the Chairman of the Election
          Commission
          (4) Before each general election to the House of
          the People and to the Legislative Assembly of
          each State, and before the first general election
          and thereafter before each biennial election to
          the Legislative Council of each State having
          such Council, the President may also appoint
          after    consultation     with    the     Election
          Commission such Regional Commissioners as
          he may consider necessary to assist the
          Election Commission in the performance of the
30
functions conferred on the Commission by
         clause (1)
         (5) Subject to the provisions of any law made
         by Parliament, the conditions of service and
         tenure of office of the Election Commissioners
         and the Regional Commissioners shall be such
         as the President may by rule determine;
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner
         shall not be removed from his office except in
         like manner and on the like grounds as a
         Judge of the Supreme Court and the
         conditions of service of the Chief Election
         Commissioner shall not be varied to his
         disadvantage after his appointment: Provided
         further that any other Election Commissioner
         or a Regional Commissioner shall not be
         removed     from     office    except  on    the
         recommendation       of    the   Chief  Election
         Commissioner
         (6) The President, or the Governor of a State,
         shall, when so requested by the Election
         Commission, make available to the Election
         Commission or to a Regional Commissioner
         such staff as may be necessary for the
         discharge of the functions conferred on the
         Election Commission by clause ( 1 )‖
26.
Interpreting the said Article, the Constitution Bench in
Kuldip Nayar
(supra) held:-
―427. In this context, we would say that where
         the law on the subject is silent,
Article 324
is a
         reservoir of power for the Election Commission
         to act for the avowed purpose of pursuing the
         goal of a free and fair election, and in this view
         it also assumes the role of an adviser. But the
         power to make law under
Article 327
vests in
         Parliament, which is supreme and so, not
         bound by such advice. We would reject the
         argument by referring to what this Court has
         already said in Mohinder Singh Gill (1978) 1
31
SCC 405 and what bears reiteration here is
          that the limitations on the exercise of ―plenary
          character‖ of the Election Commission include
          one to the effect that ―when Parliament or any
          State Legislature has made valid law relating to
          or    in   connection     with    elections, the
          Commission, shall act in conformity with, not
          in violation of, such provisions‖


     From the aforesaid passage, it is quite clear that the

Election Commission has to act within the four corners of law

made by the Parliament. That apart, if any direction is issued by

this Court interpreting a provision for furtherance of purity of

election, it will be obligatory on the part of the Commission to act

in accordance with the same. The Commission cannot be allowed

to conceive of certain concepts or ideas or, for that matter, think

of a different dimension which would not fit into the legal

framework.
27. It can be said without a speck of doubt that the decision

taken by the Election Commission as regards the introduction of

NOTA in the election of the members to the Council of States also

runs counter to what has been stated hereinabove. NOTA will

destroy the concept of value of a vote and representation and

encourage defection that shall open the doors for corruption

which is a malignant disorder. It has to be remembered that
32
democracy garners its strength from the citizenry trust which is

sustained only on the foundational pillars of purity, integrity,

probity and rectitude and such stronghold can be maintained

only by ensuring that the process of elections remains unsullied

and unpolluted so that the citadel of democracy stands tall as an

impregnable    bulwark    against     unscrupulous    forces.   The

introduction of NOTA in indirect elections may on a first glance

tempt the intellect but on a keen scrutiny, it falls to the ground,

for it completely ignores the role of an elector in such an election

and fully destroys the democratic value. It may be stated with

profit that the idea may look attractive but its practical

application defeats the fairness ingrained in an indirect election.

More so where the elector‘s vote has value and the value of the

vote is transferrable. It is an abstraction which does not

withstand the scrutiny of, to borrow an expression from Krishna

Iyer, J., the ―cosmos of concreteness‖. We may immediately add

that the option of NOTA may serve as an elixir in direct elections

but in respect of the election to the Council of States which is a

different one as discussed above, it would not only undermine the

purity of democracy but also serve the Satan of defection and

corruption.
33
28. In view of the aforesaid analysis, the writ petition is allowed

and the circulars issued by the Election Commission, the first

respondent herein, introducing NOTA in respect of elections to

the Council of States are hereby quashed.      There shall be no

order as to costs.
…………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 21, 2018