[Cites
20
, Cited by
34
]
Supreme Court of India
Mr. Anurag Mittal vs Mrs. Shaily Mishra Mittal on 24 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3983, 2018 (9) SCC 691, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2946, (2018) 5 MAD LW 582, (2018) 4 RAJ LW 2917, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 103, (2018) 8 MAD LJ 394, (2018) 4 MPLJ 11, (2018) 5 MAH LJ 714, (2019) 1 PUN LR 189, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 439, (2018) 10 SCALE 202, (2018) 3 KER LT 980, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 734, (2018) 3 DMC 1, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 99, (2019) 1 CAL LJ 41, (2018) 4 CIVILCOURTC 314, (2019) 132 ALL LR 725, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 79, (2018) 5 BOM CR 505, (2019) 2 CALLT 56, (2019) 193 ALLINDCAS 193 (SC), (2018) 3 HINDULR 343, (2018) 5 CAL HN 252, (2018) 126 CUT LT 1001, (2018) 4 JCR 179 (SC), (2018) 251 DLT 552, (2019) 1 GUJ LH 197, (2018) 4 JLJR 61, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 215
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
S.A. Bobde
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Reportable

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      Civil Appeal No.18312 of 2017

                         MR. ANURAG MITTAL                     …… APPELLANT (S)
                                                  Versus
                         MRS. SHAILY MISHRA MITTAL         …….. RESPONDENT (S)


                                             JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
1.   By a judgment dated 31.08.2009, the Additional

                         District Judge, North, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi allowed the

                         petition filed by Ms. Rachna Aggarwal under
Section 13

                         (1) (i) (a)
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereinafter

                         referred to as “the Act’) and dissolved the marriage

                         between her and the Appellant.     By the said judgment

                         the petition filed under
Section 9
of the Act by the

                         Appellant for restitution of conjugal rights was dismissed.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
The Appellant filed appeals against the said judgment
Date: 2018.08.24
16:28:07 IST
Reason:
and the operation of the judgment and decree dated

                         31.08.2009 was stayed by the High Court on 20.11.2009.
1
During the pendency of the Appeal, the Appellant and

Ms. Rachna Aggarwal reached a settlement before the

Mediation Centre, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi. According to

the terms of the settlement dated 15.10.2011, the

Appellant had to move an application for withdrawal of

the Appeals within 30 days. The Appellant filed an

application to withdraw the appeals before the High

Court in terms of the settlement dated 15.10.2011 which

was taken up on 28.11.2011 by the Registrar of the High

Court of Delhi. He recorded that there was a settlement

reached between the parties before the Mediation

Centre, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi and listed the matter

before the Court on 20.12.2011.             The High Court

dismissed    the    appeals   filed   by   the   Appellant   as

withdrawn in terms of the settlement by an order dated

20.12.2011. In the meanwhile, the Appellant married the

Respondent     on    06.12.2011.       Matrimonial     discord

between the Appellant and the Respondent led to the

filing of a petition by the Respondent for declaring the

marriage as void under
Section 5 (i)
read with
Section 11
of the Act. The main ground in the petition was that the
2
appeal filed by the Appellant against the decree of

divorce dated 31st August, 2009 was pending on the date

of their marriage i.e. 06.12.2011.       The Family Court

dismissed the petition filed by the Respondent.          The

Respondent challenged the judgment of the Family Court

in the High Court. By a judgment dated 10.08.2016, the

High Court set aside the judgment of the Family Court

and allowed the appeal of the Respondent and declared

the marriage between the Appellant and the Respondent

held on 06.12.2011 as null and void. Aggrieved by the

judgment    of   the   High   Court,   the   Appellant   has

approached this Court.
2. As a pure question of law arises for our consideration

in this case, we make it clear that we are not dealing

with the merits of the allegations made by both sides.

The points that arises for consideration are:
a) Whether the dismissal of the appeal relates
      back to the date of filing of the application
      for withdrawal?
b) Whether the marriage dated 06.12.2011
      between the Appellant and the Respondent
3
during the pendency of the appeal against
      the decree of divorce is void?
3.   The Family Court framed only one substantial issue

as to whether the marriage between the parties was null

and void on account of the contravention of
Section 5 (i)
of the Act.   It was held by the Family Court that the

judgment and decree of divorce dated 31.08.2009 is a

judgment in rem which was neither reversed nor set

aside by a superior court.       As the judgment was

confirmed by the High Court, the marriage between the

parties stood dissolved w.e.f. 31.08.2009 itself.     The

Family Court also observed that there is no provision in

the Act which declares a marriage in contravention of
Section 15
to be void. It was further held by the Family

Court that the effect of stay of the judgment by a

superior court is only that the decree of divorce remained

in abeyance but it did not become non-existent.     On the

other hand, the High Court framed a question whether

the Appellant could have contracted a second marriage

after the decree of divorce was passed on 31.08.2009

notwithstanding the operation of the decree being
4
stayed.     The High Court was of the opinion that any

marriage solemnized by a party during the pendency

of the appeal wherein the operation of the decree of

divorce was stayed, would be in contravention of
Section

5 (i)
of the Act.
4.
Section 11
of the Act provides that any marriage

solemnized after commencement of the Act shall be null

and void if it contravenes any of the conditions specified

in Clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of
Section 5
.         Clause (i) of
Section 5
places a bar on marriage by a person who has

a spouse living at the time of the marriage.
Section 15
of

the Act which is relevant is as follows:
“15. Divorced persons. When may marry again.-
   When a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of
   divorce and either there is no right of appeal against the
   decree or, if there is such a right of appeal, the time for
   appealing has expired without an appeal having been
   presented, or an appeal has been presented but has been
   dismissed, it shall be lawful for either party to the
   marriage to marry again.”
5. There is no dispute that the marriage between the

Appellant and the Respondent was held on 06.12.2011

during the pendency of the appeals filed by the Appellant

against the decree of divorce in favour of Ms. Rachna

Aggarwal.     It is also clear from the record that the
5
appeals were dismissed as withdrawn on 20.12.2011

   pursuant to an application for withdrawal that was placed

   before the Registrar on 28.11.2011.                    The Family Court

   has rightly held that the decree of divorce is a judgment

   in rem.1
6. It is pertinent to take note of the Proviso to
Section 15
of the Act according to which it shall not be lawful for the

   respective parties to marry again unless at the time of

   such marriage at least one year has elapsed from the

   date of the decree in the Court of first instance.                 This

   Proviso was repealed w.e.f. 27.05.1976. 2                In
Lila Gupta

   v. Laxmi Narain3, Rajender Kumar
contracted second

   marriage with Lila Gupta before the expiry of one year

   from the date of decree of divorce.                     This Court was

   concerned with a point relating to the marriage between

   Rajender Kumar and Lila Gupta being void having been

   contracted in violation of the Proviso to
Section 15
of the

   Act. In the said context this Court observed as follows:
“8. Did the framers of law intend that a marriage
        contracted in violation of the provision contained in

1 Marsh v. Marsh 1945 AC 271
2 Hindu Marriage (Amendment ) Act, 1976, Act 68 of 1976
3 (1978) 3 SCC 258
6
the proviso to
Section 15
to be void? While enacting
the legislation, the framers had in mind the question
of treating certain marriages void and provided for
the same. It would, therefore, be fair to infer as
legislative exposition that a marriage in breach of
other conditions the legislature did not intend to treat
as void. While prescribing conditions for valid
marriage in
Section 5
each of the six conditions was
not considered so sacrosanct as to render marriage in
breach of each of it void. This becomes manifest from
a combined reading of
Sections 5
and
11
of the Act. If
the provision in the proviso is interpreted to mean
personal incapacity for marriage for a certain period
and, therefore, the marriage during that period was
by a person who had not the requisite capacity to
contract the marriage and hence void, the same
consequence must follow where there is breach of
condition (iii) of
Section 5
which also provides for
personal incapacity to contract marriage for a certain
period. When minimum age of the bride and the
bridegroom for a valid marriage is prescribed in
condition (iii) of
Section 5
it would only mean personal
incapacity for a period because every day the person
grows and would acquire the necessary capacity on
reaching the minimum age. Now, before attaining the
minimum age if a marriage is contracted
Section 11
does not render it void even though
Section 18
makes
it punishable. Therefore, even where a marriage in
breach of a certain condition is made punishable yet
the law does not treat it as void. The marriage in
breach of the proviso is neither punishable nor does
Section 11
treat it void. Would it then be fair to
attribute an intention to the legislature that by
necessary implication in casting the proviso in the
negative expression, the prohibition was absolute and
the breach of it would render the marriage void? If
void marriages were specifically provided for it is not
proper to infer that in some cases express provision is
made and in some other cases voidness had to be
inferred by necessary implication. It would be all the
more hazardous in the case of marriage laws to treat
a marriage in breach of a certain condition void even
though the law does not expressly provide for it.
Craies on Statute Law, 7th Edn., P. 263 and 264 may
be referred to with advantage:
“The words in this section are negative words,
and are clearly prohibitory of the marriage being had
7
without the prescribed requisites, but whether the
marriage itself is void ... is a question of very great
difficulty. It is to be recollected that there are no
words in the Act rendering the marriage void, and I
have sought in vain or any case in which a marriage
has been declared null and void unless there were
words in the statute expressly so declaring
it (emphasis supplied). . . . From this examination of
these Acts I draw two conclusions. First, that there
never appears to have been a decision where words
in a statute relating to marriage, though prohibitory
and negative, have been held to infer a nullity unless
such nullity was declared in the Act. Secondly, that,
viewing the successive marriage Acts, it appears that
prohibitory words, without a declaration of nullity,
were not considered by the legislature to create a
nullity [Ed. Quoting Catterall v. Sweetman, (1845) 9
Jur 951, 954] .”
9.
In the Act
under discussion there is a specific
provision for treating certain marriages contracted in
breach of certain conditions prescribed for valid
marriage in the same Act as void and simultaneously
no specific provision having been made for treating
certain other marriages in breach of certain
conditions as void. In this background even though
the proviso is couched in prohibitory and negative
language, in the absence of an express provision it is
not possible to infer nullity in respect of a marriage
contracted by a person under incapacity prescribed
by the proviso.
10. Undoubtedly the proviso opens with a prohibition
that: “It shall not be lawful” etc. Is it an absolute
prohibition violation of which would render the act a
nullity? A person whose marriage is dissolved by a
decree of divorce suffers an incapacity for a period of
one year for contracting second marriage. For such a
person it shall not be lawful to contract a second
marriage within a period of one year from the date of
the decree of the Court of first instance. While
granting a decree for divorce, the law interdicts and
prohibits a marriage for a period of one year from the
date of the decree of divorce. Does the inhibition for a
period indicate that such marriage would be void?
While there is a disability for a time suffered by a
party from contracting marriage, every such disability
does not render the marriage void. A submission that
8
the proviso is directory or at any rate not mandatory
    and decision bearing on the point need not detain us
    because the interdict of law is that it shall not be
    lawful for a certain party to do a certain thing which
    would mean that if that act is done it would be
    unlawful. But whenever a statute prohibits a certain
    thing being done thereby making it unlawful without
    providing for consequence of the breach, it is not
    legitimate to say that such a thing when done is void
    because that would tantamount to saying that every
    unlawful act is void. As pointed out earlier, it would be
    all the more inadvisable in the field of marriage laws.
    Consequences of treating a marriage void are so
    serious and far reaching and are likely to affect
    innocent persons such as children born during the
    period anterior to the date of the decree annulling the
    marriage that it has always been considered not safe
    to treat a marriage void unless the law so enacts or
    the inference of the marriage being treated void is
    either inescapable or irresistible. Therefore, even
    though the proviso is couched in a language
    prohibiting a certain thing being done, that by itself is
    not sufficient to treat the marriage contracted in
    contravention of it as void.”
7. In the said judgment, this Court also had occasion to

deal with the continuance of the marital tie even after

the decree of divorce for the period of incapacity as

provided in the Proviso to
Section 15
of the Act. In the

said context, this Court held as follows:
“13. To say that such provision continues the
    marriage tie even after the decree of divorce for the
    period of incapacity is to attribute a certain status to
    the parties whose marriage is already dissolved by
    divorce and for which there is no legal sanction. A
    decree of divorce breaks the marital tie and the
    parties forfeit the status of husband and wife in
    relation to each other. Each one becomes competent
    to contract another marriage as provided by Section
15. Merely because each one of them is prohibited
    from contracting a second marriage for a certain
    period it could not be said that despite there being a
9
decree of divorce for certain purposes the first
    marriage subsists or is presumed to subsist. Some
    incident of marriage does survive the decree of
    divorce; say, liability to pay permanent alimony but
    on that account it cannot be said that the marriage
    subsists beyond the date of decree of divorce.
Section
    13
which provides for divorce in terms says that a
    marriage solemnised may on a petition presented by
    the husband or the wife be dissolved by a decree of
    divorce on one or more of the grounds mentioned in
    that section. The dissolution is complete once
    the decree is made, subject of course, to
    appeal. But a final decree of divorce in terms
    dissolves the marriage. No incident of such dissolved
    marriage can bridge and bind the parties whose
    marriage is dissolved by divorce at a time posterior to
    the date of decree. An incapacity for second marriage
    for a certain period does not have effect of treating
    the former marriage as subsisting. During the period
    of incapacity the parties cannot be said to be the
    spouses within the meaning of clause (i), sub-section
    (1) of
Section 5
. The word “spouse” has been
    understood to connote a husband or a wife which
    term itself postulates a subsisting marriage. The word
    “spouse” in sub-section (1) of
Section 5
cannot be
    interpreted to mean a former spouse because even
    after the divorce when a second marriage is
    contracted if the former spouse is living that would
    not prohibit the parties from contracting the marriage
    within the meaning of clause (i) of sub-section (1) of
Section 5
. The expression “spouse” in clause ( i), sub-
section (1) of
Section 5
by its very context would not
    include within its meaning the expression “former
    spouse”.
(underlining ours)
8. After a comprehensive review of the scheme of the Act

and the legislative intent, this Court in
Lila Gupta
(supra)

held that a marriage in contravention of the proviso to
Section 15
is not void. Referring to
Sections 5
and
11
of
10
the Act, this Court found that a marriage contracted in

breach of only some of the conditions renders the

marriage void.    This Court was also conscious of the

absence of any penalty prescribed for contravention of

the proviso to
Section 15
of the Act. This Court referred

to the negative expression “it shall not be lawful” used in

proviso to
Section 15
which indicates that the prohibition

was absolute.    In spite of the absolute prohibition, this

Court was of the view that a marriage contracted in

violation of the proviso to
Section 15
was not void. There

was a further declaration that the dissolution of a

marriage is in rem and unless and until a Court of appeal

reversed it, marriage for all purposes was not subsisting.

The dissolution of the marriage is complete once the

decree is made, subject of course to appeal. This Court

also decided that incapacity for second marriage for a

certain period of time does not have the effect of treating

the former marriage as subsisting and the expression

‘spouse’ would not include within its meaning the

expression ‘former spouse’.
11
9. The majority judgment was concerned only with the

interpretation of proviso to
Section 15
of the Act. Justice

Pathak in his concurring judgment referred to
Section 15
,

but   refrained   from   expressing   any   opinion   on   its

interpretation.
Effective date of the Dismissal of Appeal
10.      In case of a dissolution of marriage, a second

marriage shall be lawful only after dismissal of the

appeal. Admittedly, the marriage between the Appellant

and the Respondent was on 06.12.2011 i.e. before the

order of withdrawal was passed by the Court on

20.12.2011. There is no dispute that the application for

withdrawal of the appeal was filed on 28.11.2011 i.e.

prior to the date of the marriage on 06.12.2011.           We

proceed to consider the point that whether the date of

dismissal of the appeal relates back to the date of filing

of the application for withdrawal of the appeal. Order XXI

Rule 89 (2)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908

(hereinafter referred to as “
the CPC
”) provides that

unless an application filed under Order XXI Rule 90 of the
12
CPC
is withdrawn, a person shall not be entitled to make

   or prosecute an application under
Order XXI Rule 89 of

   the CPC
.
In
Shiv Prasad v. Durga Prasad,4
the

   contention of the Appellant therein that an application

   filed under the aforesaid Rule 90 does not stand

   withdrawn until an order to the effect is recorded by the

   Court, was not accepted.       It was held that every

   applicant has a right to unconditionally withdraw his

   application and his unilateral act in that behalf is

   sufficient. No order of the Court is necessary permitting

   the withdrawal of the application. This Court concluded

   that the act of withdrawal is complete as soon as the

   applicant intimates the Court that he intends to withdraw

   the application.
The High Court of Bombay in
Anil

   Dinmani Shankar Joshi v. Chief Officer, Panvel

   Municipal Council, Panvel5
followed the judgment of

   this Court in
Shiv Prasad
(supra) and held that
the said

   judgment
is applicable to suits also. The High Court

   recognized the unconditional right of the plaintiff to

   withdraw his suit and held that the withdrawal would be
4 (1975) 1 SCC 405
5 AIR 2003 Bom. 238, 239
13
complete as soon as the plaintiff files his purshis of

   withdrawal.
11.        Order XXIII Rule 1 (1)
of the CPC
enables the

   plaintiff to abandon his suit or abandon a part of his

   claim against all or any of the defendants. Order XXIII

   Rule 1 (3)
of the CPC
requires the satisfaction of the

   Court for withdrawal of the suit by the plaintiff in case he

   is seeking liberty to institute a fresh suit.                    While

   observing that the word abandonment in Order XXIII Rule

   1 (1)
of the CPC
is “absolute withdrawal” which is

   different from the withdrawal after taking permission of

   the court, this Court held as follows6:
“12. The law as to withdrawal of suits as enacted in
      the present Rule may be generally stated in two parts:
(a) a plaintiff can abandon a suit or abandon a part
         of his claim as a matter of right without the
         permission of the court
;
in that case
he will be
         precluded from suing again on the same cause of
         action. Neither can the plaintiff abandon a suit or a
         part of the suit reserving to himself a right to bring a
         fresh suit, nor can the defendant insist that the
         plaintiff must be compelled to proceed with the suit;
         and
(b) a plaintiff may, in the circumstances mentioned
         in sub-rule (3), be permitted by the court to
         withdraw from a suit with liberty to sue afresh on
         the same cause of action. Such liberty being granted


6
K.S. Bhoopathy v. Kokila
(2000) 5 SCC 458
14
by the Court enables the plaintiff to avoid the bar in
          Order II Rule 2 and
Section 11
CPC.”
12.          Order XXIII Rule 1 (1)
of the CPC
gives an

   absolute right to the plaintiff to withdraw his suit or

   abandon any part of his claim. There is no doubt that
Order XXIII Rule 1 of the CPC
is applicable to appeals as

   well and the Appellant has the right to withdraw his

   appeal     unconditionally        and     if   he    makes   such   an

   application to the Court, it has to grant it. 7 Therefore, the

   appeal is deemed to have been withdrawn on 28.11.2011

   i.e. the date of the filing of the application for withdrawal.
On 06.12.2011 which is the date of the marriage

   between the Appellant and the Respondent, Ms. Rachna

   Aggarwal cannot be considered as a living spouse.

   Hence,
Section 5 (i)
is not attracted and the marriage

   between the Appellant and the Respondent cannot be

   declared as void.
13.          Sh. Sakha Ram Singh, learned Senior Counsel

   appearing for the Respondent placed reliance on a

   judgment of this Court in
Lila Gupta
(supra) to submit

   that the marriage between the
Appellant and the
7 Bijayananda Patnaik v. Satrughna Sahu
(1962) 2 SCR 538, 550
15
Respondent held on 06.12.2011 is void as it was in

   violation of
Section 15
of the Act.                   He relied upon the

   concurring judgment of Justice Pathak in support of his

   submission that the findings pertaining to Proviso to
Section 15
cannot be made applicable to
Section 15
. He

   submitted that there is a qualitative difference between

   the period of incapacity set out in the Proviso during

   which a second marriage cannot be contracted and the

   bar for another marriage during the pendency of an

   appeal.        We have already noted that Justice Pathak

   refrained from expressing any view on the expression of
Section 15
of the Act. However, the scope and purport of
Section 15
of the Act arise for consideration in the

   present case.
Interpretation of Section 15

   Interpretation has been explained by Cross in Statutory
   Interpretation8 as:
"The meaning that the Court ultimately attaches to the
          statutory words will frequently be that which it
          believes members of the legislature attached to them,
          or the meaning which they would have attached to the
          words had the situation before the Court been present
          to their minds. Interpretation is the process by which
          the Court determines the meaning of a statutory
8 Cross Statutory Interpretation, Ed. Dr. John Bell & Sir George Ingale, Second
Edition (1987)
16
provision for the purpose of applying it to the situation
           before it”.
14.
The Hindu Marriage Act
is a social welfare

   legislation and a beneficent legislation and it has to be

   interpreted in a manner which advances the object of the

   legislation.
The Act
intends to bring about social

   reforms.9 It is well known that this Court cannot interpret

   a socially beneficial legislation on the basis as if the

   words therein are cast in stone.10
15.         The      predominant           nature       of     the     purposive

   interpretation was recognized by this Court in
Shailesh

   Dhairyawan v. Mohan Balkrishna Lulla11
which is as

   follows:
“ 33. We may also emphasise that the statutory
           interpretation of a provision is never static but is
           always dynamic. Though the literal rule of
           interpretation, till some time ago, was treated as the
           “golden rule”, it is now the doctrine of purposive
           interpretation which is predominant, particularly in
           those cases where literal interpretation may not
           serve the purpose or may lead to absurdity. If it
           brings about an end which is at variance with the
           purpose of statute, that cannot be countenanced.
           Not only legal process thinkers such as Hart and
           Sacks rejected intentionalism as a grand strategy for
           statutory interpretation, and in its place they offered
           purposivism, this principle is now widely applied by


9
Parayankandiyal Eravath Kanapravan Kalliani Amma v. K. Devi
(1996) 4 SCC 76, para 68
10
Revanasiddappa v. Mallikarjun
, (2011) 11 SCC 1, para 40
11 (2016) 3 SCC 619
17
the courts not only in this country but in many other
          legal systems as well.”
16.       In Salomon v. Salomon & Co Ltd.12, Lord

   Watson observed that :
“In a Court of Law or Equity, what the legislature
          intended to be done or not to be done can only be
          legitimately ascertained from that which it has chosen
          to enact, either in express words or by reasonable and
          necessary implication.”


   In Black-Clawson International Ltd. v. Papierwerke

   Waldhof-Aschaffenburg AG13, Lord Reid held that:
“We often say that we are looking for the intention of
          Parliament, but that is not quite accurate. We are
          seeking the meaning of the words which Parliament
          used. We are seeking not what Parliament meant but
          the true meaning of what they said.”
17.       It is also relevant to take note of
Dy. Custodian

   v. Official Receiver14
in which it was declared that “ if it

   appears that the obvious aim and object of the statutory

   provisions would be frustrated by accepting the literal

   construction suggested by the Respondent, then it may

   be open to the Court to inquire whether an alternative

   construction which would serve the purpose of achieving

   the aim and object of the Act, is reasonably possible” .


12 [1897] AC 22 at 38
13 [1975] AC 591, p. 613
14 (1965) 1 SCR 220 at 225 F - G
18
18.
Section 15
of the Act provides that it shall be

lawful for either party to marry again after dissolution of

a marriage if there is no right of appeal against the

decree.     A second marriage by either party shall be

lawful only after dismissal of an appeal against the

decree of divorce, if filed. If there is no right of appeal,

the decree of divorce remains final and that either party

to the marriage is free to marry again. In case an appeal

is presented, any marriage before dismissal of the appeal

shall not be lawful.     The object of the provision is to

provide protection to the person who has filed an appeal

against the decree of dissolution of marriage and to

ensure that the said appeal is not frustrated.          The

purpose of
Section 15
of the Act is to avert complications

that would arise due to a second marriage during the

pendency of the appeal, in case the decree of dissolution

of marriage is reversed. The protection that is afforded

by
Section 15
is primarily to a person who is contesting

the decree of divorce.
19
19.       Aggrieved by the decree of divorce, the Appellant

filed an appeal and obtained a stay of the decree.

During the pendency of the appeal, there was a

settlement between            him and his former spouse.

After entering into a settlement, he did not intend to

contest the decree of divorce. His intention was made

clear by filing of the application for withdrawal. It cannot

be said that he has to wait till a formal order is passed in

the appeal, or otherwise his marriage dated 06.12.2011

shall be unlawful. Following the principles of purposive

construction, we are of the opinion that the restriction

placed on a second marriage in
Section 15
of the Act till

the dismissal of an appeal would not apply to a case

where parties have settled and decided not to pursue the

appeal.
20.       It is not the case of the Appellant that the

marriage dated 06.12.2011 is lawful because of the

interim order that was passed in the appeals filed by him

against the decree of divorce. He rested his case on the

petition filed for withdrawal of the appeal. The upshot of
20
the above discussion would be that the denouement of

  the Family Court is correct and upheld, albeit for different

  reasons.   The conclusion of the High Court that the

  marriage dated 06.12.2011 is void is erroneous. Hence,

  the judgment of the High Court is set aside.
21.     Accordingly, the Appeal is allowed.
……….……..J.
                                                [S.A. BOBDE]



                                      ………..………………..J.
                                  [L. NAGESWARA RAO]
NEW DELHI,
August 24th 2018
21
REPORTABLE

                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL No. 18312 Of 2017



       MR. ANURAG MITTAL                                    ... APPELLANT(S)


                                        Versus


       MRS. SHAILY MISHRA MITTAL                         ... RESPONDENT(S)




                                   JUDGMENT


       S.A.BOBDE, J.
1.      I am in agreement with the view taken by Nageswara Rao J.

       but it is necessary to state how the question before us has already

       been settled by the decision in
Lila Gupta v. Laxmi Narain and Ors.1
.
Even when the words of the proviso were found to be prohibitory in

       clear negative terms – “it shall not be lawful” etc., this Court held that

       the incapacity to marry imposed by the proviso did not lead to an

       inference of nullity, vide para 9 of
Lila Gupta
(supra).
It is all the

       more difficult to infer nullity when there is no prohibition; where there

       are no negative words but on the other hand positive words like “it

       shall be lawful.” Assuming that a marriage contracted before it

       became lawful to do so was unlawful and the words create a

       disability, it is not possible to infer a nullity or voidness vide paras 9
1
(
1978) 3 SCC 258
1
and 10 of Lila Gupta
case. The Court must have regard to the

        consequences of such an interpretation on children who might have

        been conceived or born during the period of disability.
2.      The observations in Lila Gupta’s case are wide.       They are

        undoubtedly made in the context of the proviso to sec 15 of the

        Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1976 2, since deleted. The proviso

        opened with the prohibition that “it shall not be lawful.” This Court

        considered the question whether a marriage contracted in violation of

        the proviso would be a nullity or void and came to the conclusion that

        though the proviso is couched in prohibitory and negative language,

        in the absence of an express provision it was not possible to infer

        nullity in respect of a marriage contracted by a person under

        incapacity prescribed by the proviso.
What is held in essence is that if a provision of law prescribes

        an incapacity to marry and yet the person marries while under that

        incapacity, the marriage would not be void in the absence of an

        express provision that declares nullity. Quae incapacity imposed by

        statute, there is no difference between an incapacity imposed by

        negative language such as “it shall not be lawful” or an incapacity

        imposed by positive language like “it shall be lawful (in certain

        conditions, in the absence of which it is impliedly unlawful)”. It would

        thus appear that the law is already settled by this Court that a

        marriage contracted during a prescribed period will not be void

        because it was contracted under an incapacity. Obviously, this would
2
Act 68 of 1976
2
have no bearing on the other conditions of a valid marriage.          The

decision in
Lila Gupta
case thus covers the present case on law.
3.     In any event, in the present case we are satisfied that the

appellant’s marriage was not subsisting when he married again. He

had filed an application for withdrawal of his appeal against the

decree for dissolution and had done nothing to contradict his

intention to accept the decree of dissolution.
.....................………J.
                                                        [ S.A. BOBDE ]

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 24, 2018
3