[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ved Pal (D) Tr.Lrs.. vs Prem Devi (D) Tr.Lrs.. on 10 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 641, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 118
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.8353 OF 2014


                         Ved Pal (D) through LRs 
                         & Ors.                                     ….Appellant(s)

                                           VERSUS

                         Prem Devi (D) through LRs 
                         & Ors.                                     …Respondent(s)


                                          J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)    This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final

                         judgment   and   order   dated   26.09.2006   passed   by

                         the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh

                         in R.S.A. No.4576 of 2003 whereby the High Court

                         disposed   of   the   second   appeal   in   terms   of   the
Signature Not Verified   compromise   arrived   at   between   the   parties   and
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.10
17:14:13 IST
Reason:                  decreed   the   suit.     Against   the   said   order,   the
1
appellants  herein  filed Review Application  No.75­C

of   2006   in   R.S.A.   No.4576   of   2003   which   was

dismissed   by   the   High   Court   by   order   dated

29.01.2007.
2)   Few   facts   need   to   be   mentioned   for   the

disposal of this appeal.
3)   Respondent   Nos.4   to   7   herein   filed   second

appeal   before   the   High   Court   challenging   the

judgment   and   decree   dated   01.02.2003   passed   by

the   First   Appellate   Court   which   arose   out   of

judgment/decree   dated   31.03.2001   passed   by   the

Civil Judge (Junior Division) in a civil suit filed for a

declaration   and   permanent   injunction.   The

appellants herein were arrayed as respondent Nos.4

to 6 in the second appeal out of which this appeal

arises.
4)   The Single Judge of the High Court, however,

by   impugned   order   dated   26.09.2006   disposed   of
2
the second appeal in the light of compromise, which

is said to have been arrived at between the parties.

In other words, the second appeal was not decided

on merits but disposed of in the light of compromise

arrived at between the parties.
5)    The   appellants   herein   felt   aggrieved   by   the

disposal   of   the   second   appeal   and   filed   review

petition but it was dismissed which has given rise to

filing of the present appeal by way of special leave

against   the   order   of   disposing   of   the   appeal   and

dismissing the review petition.
6)    Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are inclined to allow the appeal in part and set aside

the order passed in the review petition and permit

the appellants to file an application before the High

Court   for   amending   their   review   petition,   filed   in

disposed   of   second   appeal,   raising   all   their
3
grievances against the manner in which the second

appeal came to be disposed of in the light of alleged

compromise to enable the High Court to decide the

review petition afresh.
7)    In   this   case,   we   prefer   to   follow   this   course

keeping in view the bar contained in Order 23 Rule

3­A
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (for short

‘
the CPC
’) for filing  the suit in a case of this nature

and also another bar created under
Section 96 (3)
of

the   CPC,   which   prohibits   filing   of   any   appeal,

though in  this  case it does not apply  because the

dispute arose in second appeal filed under
Section

100
of the CPC.
8)    The purpose in making reference to these two

provisions   is   to   show   the   legislative   intent   which

does not allow the parties to take recourse to these

legal remedies to challenge the compromise once it

is arrived at in the suit/appeal. The only exception
4
being if the challenge is founded on the ground of

fraud   committed   by   the   parties   in   obtaining   any

judicial   orders,   the   suit,   in   appropriate   case,   may

lie.
9)     In this case, we find that the High Court did

not   examine   the   plea   of   the   appellants   properly

keeping in view the facts alleged in the application

and   while   negativing   the   attack   observed   that   the

appellants   are   free   to   take   recourse   to   any   other

legal   remedies.   Since   the   second   appeal   was

disposed of affecting the rights of the parties in the

light   of   compromise,   the   proper   Forum   to   re­

examine   the   issue,   in   our   opinion,   is   the   High

Court, which disposed of the second appeal rather

than any other Forum to examine the issue at this

stage.   It   is   more   so   when   we   find   that   the   High

Court did not go into the details in the proceedings

filed by the appellants in its correct perspective.
5
10)   It is for this reason, we decline to examine the

several factual and legal issues urged by the parties

in this appeal and leave these issues for the High

Court   to   examine   afresh   on   merits   in   accordance

with law and dispose of the same.
11)   The   appeal   thus   succeeds   and   is   allowed   in

part. The impugned order dated 29.01.2007 passed

in Review Petition is set aside and the High Court is

requested to decide the matter afresh on merits in

accordance   with   law   without   being   influenced   by

any   of   our   observations   on   merits   which   we   have

refrained from entering into them having formed an

opinion to remand the case to the High Court for its

disposal.
12)   Needless   to   observe,   in   case,   the   learned

Judge,   who   disposed   of   the   second   appeal,   is   not

available   to   decide  the  matter,  as  directed  by   this

Court, the matter be placed before the appropriate
6
Bench   keeping   in   view   the   provisions   of   Order   47

Rules 1 and  5
of the CPC
read with the High Court

Rules governing disposal of the review cases.
13)     The   appellants   are   at   liberty   to   amend   the

review petition or/and file fresh application raising

all   legally   permissible   grounds   to   attack   the  order

impugned   therein.   The   respondents   too   are   at

liberty to raise objections in accordance with law.
………...................................J.
                               [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

                                    
                               …...……..................................J.
                                 [S. ABDUL NAZEER]

New Delhi;
August 10, 2018
7