[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Board Of Control For Cricket vs Cricket Aasociation Of Bihar . on 9 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4179, 2018 (6) ABR 133
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
D Y Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE


                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 4235 OF 2014



          Board of Control for Cricket               .....APPELLANTS
          in India and Ors.

                                         Versus


          Cricket Association of Bihar & Ors.         .....RESPONDENTS




                                            With



                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 4236 OF 2014



                                            With


                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 1155 OF 2015



                                            With


Signature Not Verified   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 46 OF 2017
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.08.09
14:27:27 IST
Reason:




                                            With
                                          2



                      CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 47 OF 2017



                                         In



                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 4235 OF 2014
                                        With

                        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 287 OF 2017

                                        With

                      CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 959 OF 2017

                                         In


                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 1155 OF 2015

                                        With

                  CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 1835 OF 2017

                                         In
                            CIVIL APPEAL No. 4235 OF 2014



                                  JUDGMENT
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J



1         While pronouncing its judgment on 18 July 2016 in Board of Control for

Cricket in
India v Cricket Association of Bihar1
, this Court accepted the



1(2015)   3 SCC 251
3
reforms in the administration of cricket proposed by a Committee chaired by

Justice RM Lodha2. The review petition has been dismissed. On 2 January

2017, this Court directed that a Committee of Administrators3 shall supervise

the administration of BCCI through its Chief Executive Officer. The CoA was

constituted on 17 January 2017. On 24 July 2017, this Court directed that except

for certain outstanding issues which were identified, the recommendations of

the Lodha Committee must be implemented:
“...(c) All concerned shall implement the recommendations of
                   the Justice Lodha Committee Report as far as practicable,
                   barring the issues which have been raised pertaining to
                   membership, number of members of the selection
                   committee, concept of associate membership, etc. The
                   purpose is to implement the report as far as practicable
                   and, thereafter, it shall be debated as to how the scheme of
                   things can be considered so that the cricket, the ‘gentleman’s
                   game’, remains nearly perfect. Be it noted, the issue with
                   regard to disqualification or qualification of the representative
                   is kept open.”                         (Emphasis supplied)




On 23 August 2017, the CoA was entrusted to prepare a draft constitution in

accordance with the judgment rendered on 18 July 2016 and the order dated 24

July 2017. Modalities were evolved by this Court to consider the concerns of

stakeholders by ensuring that the draft constitution is duly circulated between

all the counsel so that their suggestions could be evaluated. This Court

observed :
2Abbreviated   in this judgment as the Lodha Committee

3Abbreviated   as CoA
4
“we…direct the Committee of Administrators to prepare a
             draft Constitution in terms of the main judgment as well as
             the order dated 24th July, 2017. A copy of the draft
             Constitution shall be handed over to Advocate-on-Record
             assisting the learned counsel for the respondents. A copy of
             the draft Constitution be also handed over to Mr. B.K. Prasad,
             learned counsel assisting Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Solicitor
             General . Suggestions, if any, to the draft Constitution be
             handed over to the learned counsel assisting the learned
             Amicus Curiae and Mr. Parag P. Tripathi so that they can
             prepare a chart and will be in a position to give their comments.
...
On the next date of hearing, besides the three aspects that
             have been mentioned in the order dated 24th July, 2017,
             any aspect which is sought to be raised by the Association
             can be raised. But, it is to be impressed that the
             suggestion must have acceptable sanctity. It should not
             be raised for the sake of raising an objection.” (Emphasis
             supplied)
2     On 21 September 2017, the CoA made a grievance that quite apart from

the fact that no suggestions were received, a concerted effort was made by the

office bearers of BCCI not to abide by the judgment of the Court. Hence, on 21

September 2017, the Court while recording the above submission extended

another opportunity to receive suggestions to the draft constitution :
“In the course of hearing, it is submitted by Mr. Parag P.
             Tripathi, learned senior counsel appearing for the Committee
             of Administrators that though a draft constitution was
             handed over to the office bearers of B.C.C.I. and also to all
             concerned, no suggestion has been received and a
             concerted attempt has been adopted by the office bearers
             of B.C.C.I. not to follow the judgment of this Court.
             We may hasten to add that in our previous order dated 24th
             July, 2017, we have clearly indicated that three to four
             aspects shall be debated. The suggestions in that regard can
             be given to Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, learned senior counsel
             appearing for the Committee of Administrators, Needless to
             emphasize, Mr. C.K. Khanna, Mr. Anirudh Chaudhry and Mr.
             Amitabh Choudhary, Office Bearers of B.C.C.I. shall fully
5
cooperate while giving the suggestions. If the aforesaid three
             Office Bearers do not give suggestions in accordance with the
             judgment of this Court which has accepted the Justice Lodha
             Committee report, they shall face serious consequences. The
             draft constitution shall include the suggestions given by
             Justice Lodha Committee in its entirety so that a holistic
             document comes before this Court. After the document is
             placed before the Court, the claims of Railways. Universities
             and Services and the other cricket Associations, who are of the
             view that concept of ‘one State one vote’ should not be
             applicable keeping in view their contribution to the game of
             cricket, shall be considered. The suggestions, shall be given
             within three weeks hence. For the purpose of drafting out the
             constitution after taking note of the suggestions, to make it final
             for the purpose of approval by this Court, the Office Bearers of
             B.C.C.I shall not hold a General Body Meeting.”
             (Emphasis supplied)
3     On 27 October 2017, the CoA filed a draft constitution for BCCI and its

office bearers. Suggestions to the draft received from state cricket associations

and other parties were filed by the CoA together with comments on the proposed

suggestions, in a status report dated 12 January 2018. On 1 May 2018, this

Court noted that suggestions to the draft constitution have been filed and would

be finalized by the Court. In the interest of fairness, it was however observed

that any further suggestions that a state cricket association may have, could still

be forwarded to the amicus. Accordingly, the following directions were issued :
“A draft Constitution meant for the B.C.C.I. and its Office
             Bearers has been filed on 27.10.2017. Suggestions to the
             same by various State Cricket Associations have also been
             filed and the same have been attached to the draft
             Constitution. The draft Constitution shall be finalized by
             this Court.
In the meantime, if any State Cricket Association intends
             to file any further suggestion, they may submit the same
             in bullet points to Mr. Gopal Subramanium, learned
             Amicus Curiae, who shall compile the suggestions and file
             it before this Court within three days.
6
It is hereby made clear that the draft Constitution approved
             by this Court shall not be debated upon and shall stand
             finalized, only subject to the determination made in the
             application(s) for recall of the primary judgment, pending
             adjudication before this Court.
Let the matter be listed on 11.5.2018.” (Emphasis supplied)
4     Following this comprehensive exercise which has been taken by the CoA,

the amicus and by all the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of diverse

parties, including state cricket associations and those who have served as office

bearers of BCCI, the suggestions made by all stakeholders have been compiled

and presented to the Court. The amicus has, in the course of compiling the

suggestions, informed the Court that as many as nineteen state cricket

associations, the Association of Indian Universities, the Cricket Club of India and

National Cricket Club, the Administrator appointed by the Delhi High Court for

DDCA and two officer bearers of BCCI (Mr Amitabh Choudhary, Secretary and

Mr Anirudh Chaudhary, Treasurer) have submitted suggestions. We have heard

all the stakeholders who wished to be heard at length so as to enable the Court

to form a holistic perspective. The purpose of this exercise is to finalise the text

of BCCI’s Constitution which incorporates the principles which find acceptance

by the Lodha Committee (and affirmed by this Court), while at the same time

ensuring a measure of practicality in implementation. The acrimony which

witnessed the proceedings earlier has given way to a robust cooperation by the

counsel appearing for all the stakeholders. Before we deal with the suggestions,

we must commend the approach adopted by all the stakeholders before this

Court. All the learned Counsel who advanced submissions made a fair attempt
7
to resolve the outstanding issue of finalizing the draft constitution, with a sense

of objectivity. It was after hearing extensive arguments of all the learned Counsel

that on 5 July 2018, this Court reserved orders on the question of finalizing the

draft constitution having due regard to the contents of the draft placed on the

record and the suggestions of the learned amicus Curiae and counsel.



5     Broadly speaking, the suggestions which have been received to the draft

constitution have been divided by Mr Gopal Subramanium, learned amicus

Curiae under the following heads :
a) Issues relating to membership and Associate Membership;
a) Number of members in Selection Committee and related
                matters;
b) Cooling off period;
c) Disqualifications;
d) Constitution of the Apex council;
e) Conditions imposed on State Associations;
f) Power/Duties of Office Bearers and Professional
                Management (CEO);
g) No interference at all in the functioning of BCCI; and
h) Binding value of Frequently Asked Questions issued by the
                Hon’ble Justice Lodha committee.
We propose to examine the issues which have been raised during the course of

hearing.
8
A.    Issues relating to membership and Associate Membership: One
      State – One Vote


6     Rule (3)(a)(i) of the draft constitution contemplates that membership of

BCCI shall consist of (i) Full members and; (ii) Associate members. The text of

the draft constitution provides thus :
“(ii)   Full Members

             A.      Each State shall be represented by a state cricket
                     association duly recognized by the BCCI and such
                     associations shall be Full Members. No State shall have
                     more than one Full Member at any given point of time.
B.      The associations who are the controlling bodies for
                     cricket in the following States shall be the Full Members
                     of the BCCI:
1.      Andhra Pradesh
2.      Arunachal Pradesh
3.      Assam
4.      Bihar
5.      Chhattisgarh
6.      Delhi
7.      Goa
8.      Gujarat
9.      Haryana
10.     Himachal Pradesh
11.     Jammu and Kashmir
12.     Jharkhand
13.     Karnataka
14.     Kerala
15.     Madhya Pradesh
16.     Maharashtra
17.     Manipur
18.     Meghalaya
19.     Mizoram
20.     Nagaland
21.     Orissa
22.     Punjab
23.     Rajasthan
24.     Sikkim
25.     Tamil Nadu
26.     Telangana
27.     Tripura
28.     Uttar Pradesh
9
29.      Uttarakhand
30.      West Bengal

            C.      In States with multiple Existing Members, the full
                    membership shall rotate annually among such Existing
                    Members such that only one of them will exercise the
                    rights and privileges of a Full Member at any given point
                    of time. The rotation shall be as per the policy framed by
                    the BCCI.
D.      Where disputes are pending regarding the duly
                    recognized association to represent a particular State,
                    the State shall be represented by the recognized
                    association, subject to any order of the Court or
                    resolution of the BCCI as the case may be.
(iii)    Associate Members

            A.      Any Existing Member (including an Existing Member
who is not exercising the rights and priileges of a Full
                    Member in terms of Rule 3(1)(ii)C above) shall be an
                    Associate Member of the BCCI.
B.      The BCCI may induct any other entity as an Associate
                    Member, subject to all the conditions and
                    disqualifications
laid down in
Rule 33(b)(b) below.”



7     In Chapter 1 of its report titled “The Structure and Constitution”, the

Lodha Committee dealt with membership of BCCI and anomalies perceived in

its composition. The Committee took note of the fact that several states such as

Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, the six north-eastern states (except Tripura)

and Union Territories (except Delhi) lack representation on the Board. On the

other hand, the Committee perceived an anomaly in that states like Maharashtra

and Gujarat hold three full memberships each. The Committee noted that the

Services Sports Control Board (“Services”), Railway Sports Promotion Board

(“Railways”) and Association of Indian Universities (“Universities”) do not as

such represent any specified territory but are actively involved in the game of
10
cricket whereas some members like the National Cricket Club at Kolkata and

the Cricket Club of India at Mumbai do not represent any territory. The Lodha

Committee relied upon territoriality as a determining factor for the grant of full

membership. Railways, Services and Universities not being tied to the territory

of one state were denied full membership. Though Gujarat fielded three cricket

teams (Gujarat, Saurashtra and Baroda) and so did Maharashtra (Mumbai,

Maharashtra and Vidarbha) both states would each have one Full membership.

The Lodha Committee recommended that the status of associate member

should be granted to those members who do not represent any territory.



8     In the principal judgment of this Court dated 18 July 2016, the one state -

one vote norm was accepted. While doing so this Court observed thus :
“62. That brings us to the question whether “One State One
             vote” recommended by the Committee suffers from any
             legal or other infirmity sufficient for this Court to reject the
             same. The recommendation made by the Committee has a
             two-fold impact on the current state of affairs in BCCI. The first
             is the reduction of some of the Associations and Clubs from the
             full membership of BCCI to the status of Associate Members.
             The other aspect of the recommendation is the reduction of the
             full membership of at least four existing full members to the
             status of associate members from the states of Maharashtra
             and Gujarat.
63…We see no merit in that contention nor do we see any
             reason to disagree with the recommendation made by the
             committee, who has upon a thorough consideration of all facts
             and circumstances relevant to the working of the BCCI,
             recommended the conversion of the clubs and associations
             without a territory from full members to associate members.
             This is a measure which has been recommended with a
             view to structurally streamlining the BCCI to make it more
             responsive and accountable having regard to the
             aspiration of different regions for an equal opportunity to
             participate in the growth and promotion of the game in the
             country.
11
65…a balance has to be struck with historical reality and the
             need for adopting a pragmatic, uniform and principled
             approach aimed at reforming and rationalizing BCCI’s
             structural edifice. The recommendation made by the
             Committee to the extent it provides for one vote for each state
             is unexceptionable nor should there be any compromise with
             what is proposed as a reformative measure. Even so the
             question is whether BCCI, in the peculiar situation prevalent in
             these two states, is in a position to recognize one of the three
             Associations representing different territories in those two
             States as the one that would represent the entire State.....That
             being so, the only reasonable and rational answer to the
             problem within the broad principle of One State One Vote
             would be to allow the full membership of BCCI to rotate
             among the three clubs on an annual basis.”
             (Emphasis supplied)
9     The one state – one vote norm and the principle of territoriality have given

rise to specific objections. Historically in the State of Maharashtra, there have

been three associations, each of which fields its own cricket team in the Ranji

Trophy : (i) Maharashtra; (ii) Mumbai and; (iii) Vidarbha. Similarly, in the State

of Gujarat, there have been three associations representing: (i) Gujarat; (ii)

Baroda; and (iii) Saurashtra. In both the states, these associations have made

a signal contribution to the cricketing history of the nation. Besides, fielding

teams for the Ranji Trophy, these associations have produced players of

national and international repute. The amicus has responded to the plea before

this Court for allowing full membership to the three associations each in the

States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. The amicus submits that the order of this

Court mandates that there should be an annual rotation of the constituent

members of Maharashtra and Gujarat so that every year, one of the three

constituent members would be capable of voting and participating in the general

body. Moreover, it has been submitted that for the elections to the Apex Council
12
which take place once every three years, the first member association which

has already cast a vote should not be able to cast a vote at the end of three

years but must pass it on to the next association in turn. In this manner, it has

been suggested that all the three constituent associates of the two states will

have due opportunity to not only participate in the affairs of the general body but

would have an opportunity to vote at the end of three years. In the view of the

amicus, a rotational policy is eminently practicable for Maharashtra and Gujarat

and the mandate of the principal judgment brings about parity and fairness so

that no constituent member is excluded from the general body for a period

exceeding one year. However, it has not been explained how, once full

membership has been granted, what legal principle can be applied for adopting

a rotational policy. The amicus while recognising the circumstances of history

pertaining to Maharashtra and Gujarat submits that the recommendations of the

Lodha Committee which have been accepted in the principal judgment seek to

bring about uniformity in the structure of management and a certain amount of

domestic equality. However, he suggests that the releasing of grants and such

other requirements as may be necessary for constituents must be suitably

addressed by the CoA and by the regularly elected Apex Council.



10    We are of the view that it is necessary to restore full membership in the

constitution of the BCCI to the three associations each in the State of

Maharashtra (Maharashtra, Mumbai and Vidarbha) and in Gujarat (Gujarat,

Baroda and Saurashtra). During the course of the hearing, written submissions
13
have been placed on the record in which the contributions of Baroda,

Saurashtra, Mumbai and Vidarbha have been set out. We need to extract them

here:
“BARODA CRICKET ASSOCIATION

           Cricket was introduced to Vadodara city by the Maharaja of
           Baroda, Sayajirao Gaekwad in 1934 and Moti Bagh Stadium
           was the home of Baroda cricket. Since then Baroda has
           emerged 5 times as Ranji Trophy Champrions in the year
           1942-43, 1946-47, 1949-50, 1957-58 & 2000-01.
Baroda had produced many famous cricketers of international
           level in the past such as Vijay Hazare, Gogumal Kishenchand,
           Jayasinghrao Ghorpade, Deepak Shodhan and in the present
           generation Datta Gaekwad, Chandu Borde, Kiran More,
           Anshuman Gaekwad … Jitendra Patel. Amongst the later crop,
           Irfan Pathan, Yusuf Pathan, Zaheer Khan and Munaf Patel
           have played for this association.”

           “MUMBAI CRICKET ASSOCIATION

           In the year 1928, ‘the Bombay Presidency (Proper) Cricket
           Association’ was formed having geographical limits extending
           from Sind in the north to Karnataka (excluding Mysore State)
           in the South. In the year 1935 it was re-christened as ‘Bombay
           Cricket Association’ as the newly formed Gujarat and
           Maharashtra Cricket Association receded from the territorial
           limits of the Bombay Presidency (Proper) Cricket Association.
           The present day Mumbai Cricket Association or MCA is the
           governing body for cricket in Mumbai and its surrounding
           regions like Thane and Navi Mumbai. The Mumbai cricket team
           is the team for The Mumbai Cricket Association in the Ranji
           Trophy. The team has won over 41 titles, the most recent being
           in 2015-16. It has also come runner-up in the final of the Ranji
           Trophy a total of 4 times. The association owns the Wankhede
           Stadium.
Famous cricketers produced by MCA, amongst others, include
           Abey Kuruvilla, Ajinkya Rahane, Ajit Wadekar, Ashok Mankad,
           Chandu Borde, Dilip Sardesai, Dilip Vengsarkar, Eknath
           Solkar, Farokh Engineer, Jatin Paranjpe, Polly Umrigar, Ravi
           Shastri, Rohit Sharma, Rustomji Jamshedji, Rusi Modi, Sachin
           Tendulkar, Sandeep Patil, Sanjay Manjrekar, Sunil Gavaskar,
           Vijay Manjrekar, Vijay Merchant, Vinod Kambli, Wasim Jaffer
           etc.”
14
“SUARASHTRA CRICKET ASSOCIATION

            Saurashtra is one of three cricket teams based in Gujarat
            which competes in the Ranji Trophy (the others being Baroda
            and Gujarat). Formerly it was known as Nawanagar Cricket
            Team. Nawanagar was an Indian princely state in the historical
            Halar region, located on the southern shores of the Gulf of
            Kutch. Ranjitsinhji often known as ‘Ranji’, was the ruler of the
            Indian princely state of Nawanagar from 1907 to 1933, as
            Maharaja Jam Saheb, and a noted Test cricketer who played
            for the English cricket team. He also played first-class cricket
            for Cambridge University, and county cricket for Sussex.
Ranji has widely been regarded as one of the greatest batsmen
            of all time. In 1934 the BCCI launched a national competition
            between “the princes and the princely states” and it was named
            after the greatest Indian player of that time, KS Ranjitsinhji.
Saurashtra won the Ranji Trophy in 1936-37 and were also
            runners up in the very next season of 1937-38. They have been
            runners up in Ranji Trophy (plate) in 1937-38, 2012-13 and
            2015-16.
Famous International players are         Cheteshwar     Pujara,
            Ravindra Jadeja & Jaydev Unadkat.”

            “VIDARBHA CRICKET ASSOCIATION

            Vidarbha Cricket Association is the governing body of cricket
            activities in the Vidarbha region in Maharashtra state and
            Vidarbha cricket team. Vidarbha first played first-class cricket
            in the 1957-58 season, competing against the other Central
            Zone teams until 2001-2002, after which the Ranji Trophy was
            no longer contested on a zonal basis. Vidarbha’s best seasons
            were 1970-71 and 1995-96, when it reached the quarter-finals
            of the Ranji Trophy and 2002-03 and 2011-12, when it reached
            the semi-finals of the Plate Group, Vidarbha has played more
            than 250 first-class matches.
Umesh Yadav is a member of the Vidarbha Cricket Team.
            Vidarbha won the Ranji Trophy and Irani Trophy in the 2017-
            2018 season.”




These associations have a long and abiding history of nurturing talent for the

game of cricket in India. The history of cricket in India is replete with their
15
contribution to the cause of cricket. These associations have produced players

who have brought laurels to their states and to the nation. The principle of

territoriality requires that each of the States and Union Territories should have

full membership of BCCI in terms as suggested in clause 3(a)(ii-B). This

becomes a principle of inclusion. To utilise territoriality as a basis of exclusion is

problematic because it ignores history and the contributions made by the above

associations to the development of cricket and its popularity. Having due regard

to the contributions made by Mumbai and Vidarbha in the State of Maharashtra

and by Baroda and Saurashtra in the State of Gujarat to the game of cricket, it

would be appropriate to also grant them full membership of the BCCI. We

however, maintain the decision not to grant the status of full members to the

National Cricket Club and the Cricket Club of India. Neither of the two Clubs

fields teams in the Ranji Trophy. They cannot be placed at par with the other

state associations.
Railways
11    The contribution of Railways to the cause of Indian Cricket is noteworthy.

It has been pointed out before the Court that :
“RAILWAYS SPORTS PROMOTION BOARD

             Railways Sports Promotion Board (RSPB) is a sports board run
             by the Indian Railways. It promotes 29 sporting disciplines and
             owns the Karnail Singh Stadium in New Delhi.
             RSPB is a member of the Board of Control for Cricket in India
             and RSPB fields the Railways’ cricket team in domestic cricket
             competitions in India such as the Ranji Trophy. In recent years
             since 2000, Railways have won the trophy twice and become
             runners-up as well. As Champions of the Ranji Trophy, they
16
have played the Irani Trophy twice, emerging victorious on
            both occasions.
Famous International Cricketers include Mahendra Singh
            Dhoni (played for South Eastern Railways & was employed as
            a Train Ticket Examiner), Murli Kartik, Sanjay Bangar, Karn
            Sharma. In the recently concluded ICC Women’s World Cup
            2017, the Indian Women’s Team reached the finals of the
            tournament where 10 out of the 15 women cricketers playing
            for India are employees of the Indian Railways. In fact Diana
            Fram Edulji (one of the members of the COA) has also
            represented the Railways.”
12    In suggesting the grant of full membership to the Railways, the amicus

has made certain pertinent comments which are reproduced below :
“Railways fields at least 90% of the members of the Women’s
            Cricket Team, i.e. who play for India in the national team. A
            question therefore arises whether Railways must be given a
            full membership. In view of the security of employment of the
            players from Railways as well as the ability to demonstrate
            playing skills and having regard to women’s cricket as an
            integral part of Indian Cricket, it appears necessary to consider
            this as an exception. It is only on these considerations that it is
            possible to recommend Railways to a full membership. The
            Amicus is of the opinion that this qualifies to be considered as
            an exception.”
13    The amendment proposed to the draft constitution is in the following

terms :
“E. Notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove in this
            Rule 3(a)(ii), a representative from the Indian Railways shall be
            entitled to vote at meetings of the General Body of the BCCI.
            However, such representative shall be a former cricketer from
            the Indian Railways who is elected by an association of former
            players from the Indian Railways and not a person nominated
            by the Government/Railway Sports Promotion Board.”
14    We accept the amendment proposed by the amicus. We clarify

specifically that the representative from Railways who would exercise voting
17
power must be a former cricketer who has represented Indian Railways and who

is elected by an association of former players from the Indian Railways and not

a person nominated by the government or the Railway Sports Promotion Board.



Services and Association of Indian Universities


15    The amicus has not suggested the grant of full membership to Services

and the Association of Indian Universities. For Services, he submits that

sufficient material is not available and that having regard to the need for

insulation from government control, ‘as at present advised’, it is not possible to

recommend the grant of a full membership status. As regards the Association

of Indian Universities, it has been submitted that since they do not field a team

for the Ranji Trophy, full membership status should not be granted.

On the contribution by the Services team to the cause of Indian cricket, we take

note of the following :
“SERVICE SPORTS CONTROL BOARD
             The aim of the Service Sports Control (SSCB) is to conduct
             inter-services sports championships to select and to train
             services sports persons. The board initially was known as the
             Army Sports Control Board and was established in 1919. Post-
             independence, it was rechristened as Service Sports Control
             Board and all the three services are running the organization
             on a rotational basis. The Services cricket team plays in the
             Ranji Trophy, the premier domestic first-class cricket
             competition in India. Under the auspices of the SSCB, the
             players represent the Indian armed services.
             They first played in the Ranji Trophy in 1949-50. They have
             played about 320 matches in the Ranji Trophy.”



Similarly as regards the Association of Indian Universities, we may note that :
“ALL INDIA UNIVERSITIES
18
Many Indian Universities players went on to play Test cricket.
             From the first side in 1949-50, for example, Nana Joshi, Pankaj
             Roy, Polly Umrigar, Gulabrai Ramchand, Deepak Shodhan
             and Subhash Gupte played Tests for India. Three of the 1970-
             71 side Ashok Gandotra, Mohinder Amarnath and Budhi
             Kunderan played Test cricket. Thereafter Sunil Gavaskar,
             Kenia Jayantilal, Surinder Amarnath and Dilip Doshi also
             played Test cricket.”
16    The Services team represents the Armed Forces of the nation. The

Services have a long history of association with Indian sports in general and

with cricket as well. Having regard to the pre-eminent position occupied by the

Services including the Army, Navy and Air Force in propagating the cause of

sports and cricket, we are of the view that the same principle which we have

followed in the case of Railways should be followed in their case. Similarly, the

Universities are a nucleus for encouraging the game of cricket among players

of the college going generation in the country. We would therefore also grant full

membership to the Association of Indian Universities. The amendment which

has been proposed to the draft constitution by the amicus in the case of the

Railways shall be suitably modified to also cover the Services and the

Association of Indian Universities. The representative respectively for Services

and the Association of Indian Universities shall be a former cricketer who has

played for them respectively and is elected by an association of former players

and not a person nominated by the government/ sports control board.
19
B.    Number of Selectors


17    The Lodha Committee restricted the number of selectors to three. While
doing so, it opined that with the constitution of a Cricket Talent Committee, a

three-member selection committee will be more compact, increase the authority

of the Selection Committee and make it accountable for team performance.



18    The Selection Committee is entrusted with the responsibility of selecting

cricket teams for participation at various levels. For the men’s teams, there are

two committees which look after the selection of teams for tournaments in

various formats of the game. These are:
“I     All India Senior Selection Committee:
International matches – Test Matches, ODI Matches
                   and T20 matches

                   India ‘A’ teams – both for home and away series

                   President’s XI / BCCI XI to play visiting international
                   teams

            II     All India Junior Selection Committee:
Under-23 cricket

                   Under-19 cricket

                   Under-16 cricket”
19    With twenty-eight teams, India is reported to have the highest number of

first class teams in the world. Senior selectors watch over several tournaments
20
during the course of the domestic cricketing season, from August to April every

year. These are :
“1. Ranji Trophy league matches
2. Ranji Trophy knock out matches
3. Vijay Hazare League matches
4. Vijay Hazare knock out matches
5. Mustaq Ali league matches
6. Mustaq Ali Knock out matches
7. Irani Trophy
8. Duleep Trophy
9. Deodhar Trophy.”
20    Apart from domestic cricket, senior selectors also witness India-A team

matches and matches across different formats at home and overseas. National

teams are required to be selected across different formats in accordance with

the ICC schedule. Senior selectors are also part of the team management that

selects the ‘playing eleven’ of the Indian team on the day prior to a match. On

an average, it has been stated, a senior selector travels for nearly 280 days in

a year, with a break during the IPL. Having regard to the vastness of the country

and the need to effectively select from a wide pool of talent, it has been

submitted that restricting the Selection Committee to three persons is not in the

interest of the game and that a five-member selection team would be necessary.

Another aspect which has been highlighted is that generally, a fifteen-member

squad is chosen to represent India at the international level in Test matches,
21
ODIs and T20 matches. About 40 per cent of the players participate in all the

formats. Many cricketers who have had the best of records in domestic cricket

are unable to represent the country in international matches. It has been

submitted before the Court that it is necessary to motivate cricketers at the

domestic level. Hence, cricketers who have not represented India in

international matches should not be excluded altogether from being part of the

Selection Committee.
21    We have been persuaded with the reasons which have been adduced

before the Court for enhancing the number of selectors on the Selection

Committee from three to five. Restricting the number of selectors to three was

recommended by the Lodha Committee with the specific purpose of ensuring

compactness of size, authority of decision making and monitoring performance.

While bearing these factors in consideration, it is necessary to ensure that the

purpose of a broad-based Selection Committee which facilitates a careful

evaluation of the talent pool across the country is achieved. The vast territory of

the nation, the extent of cricket being played both at the national and

international level, the need for selectors to travel extensively to spot talent from

the pool of cricketers and the need to encourage both domestic and international

cricket, are consideration which persuade us to accept the plea for modification

in regard to the number of selectors to five.
22
22    We may note that the amicus has also supported the suggestion that the

number of selectors be increased to five. He however also indicated that this

should be subject to the criteria of a selector having played a minimum of (a)

seven test matches; or (b) thirty first class matches; or (c) ten One Day

Internationals in the fifty over format and a minimum of twenty first class

matches. We accordingly accept the proposed amendment as suggested by the

amicus in the following terms :
“Clause 26(2)A(i)

            “The Men’s Selection Committee shall select the Senior
            National Team for representation in Tests, One Day
            Internationals. T20 and any other format. This Committee shall
            also be responsible for providing evaluation reports of the
            respective team performances to the Apex Council on a
            quarterly basis.”



            “Clause 26(2)A(ii)

            The Men’s Selection Committee shall consist of five persons
            to be appointed by a Cricket Advisory Committee comprising
            of reputed former international cricketers identified by the
            BCCI at the annual General Meeting, subject to the following
            criteria:
(a)    Every member of the Men’s Selection Committee
            should have played a minimum of
(i)     Seven Test Matches; or
(ii)    Thirty First class Matches; or
(iii)   Ten One Day International Matches and
                           twenty First Class Matches.
(b)    Every member of the Men’s Selection Committee
            should have retired from the game at least five years
            previously.
The senior most among the members of the Men’s Selection
            Committee shall be appointed as the Chairperson.”


            “Clause 26 (2) B (i)
23
The Junior Cricket Committee shall consist of five persons to
             be appointed by the BCCI at the Annual General Meeting, on
             such terms and conditions as may be decided by the Apex
             Council from time to time. Only former players who have played
             a minimum of 25 First Class games shall be eligible to be
             appointed to this Committee, provided that they have retired
             from the game at least five years previously. The senior most
             amongst the members of the Committee shall be appointed as
             the Chairperson.”

             “Clause 26 (2) C (ii)

             The Women’s Selection Committee shall consist of five
             persons to be appointed by the BCCI at the Annual General
             Meeting, on such terms and conditions as may be decided by
             the Apex council from time to time. Only former players who
             have represented the Women’s National Team shall be eligible
             to be appointed to this Committee, provided that they have
             retired from the game at least five years previously. The senior
             most international amongst the members of the Committee
             shall be appointed as the Chairperson.”



23    Until the elections to the BCCI take place, the CoA is empowered to

consult with the Cricket Advisory Committee, comprising of reputed former

international cricketers and to constitute a Committee of Selectors consistent

with the above criteria. In regard to the appointment of coaches, managers,

physiotherapists and other staff, we accept the modification suggested in clause

24(5) in the following terms :
“Clause 24 (5)
             To appoint Team Officials for the Indian teams which shall
             compulsorily     include    qualified    coaches,     managers,
             physiotherapists, nutritionists, trainers, analysts, counsellors
             and medics. However, the Head Coach of each of the National
             Teams shall be appointed by the Cricket Advisory Committee
             referred to in Rule 26(2)A(ii) below.”
24
C.    Cooling Off Period
24    The Lodha Committee recommended that
(i) the tenure of each term for office bearers of the BCCI and state

     associations should be three years;
(ii) a maximum of three terms should be allowed regardless of the post

     held; and
(iii)   there should be a mandatory ‘cooling off period’ after each term.




In making these recommendations, the Committee has been guided by the need

to ensure that vested interests do not emerge out of the indefinite continuation

in office of one or more individuals. These recommendations seek to enforce a

rule against self-perpetuation by stipulating the period of each term of office, the

number of terms which a single individual may hold and the requirement of a

break between successive terms. The recommendations can be construed as

an effort to ensure a dispersal of authority so that control over BCCI and the

state associations is not concentrated in the hands of one or a limited group of

persons. The proposals for setting limits on tenures and terms were

incorporated in a section which the Committee describes as the “end of the

innings”.
25
25    In the principal judgment of this Court, the recommendations of the Lodha

Committee have been accepted for the following reasons:
“20…These recommendations come in the wake of a finding
            by the Committee that under the present dispensation office
            bearers could continue for any number of terms. The
            Committee found both of these to be unacceptable and in our
            opinion rightly so.... Given the problems that often arise on
            account of the individuals holding the office for any number of
            consecutive terms, the Committee was, in our opinion, justified
            in recommending the length of a term in office ... The three
            years recommended by the Committee is, in our opinion,
            reasonable. Similarly, the prescription of cooling off period
            between two terms cannot be faulted .... Similarly, an optimum
            period of 9 years as a member of the Apex Council cannot be
            termed as unreasonable.....” (Emphasis supplied).
26    The recommendations of the Lodha Committee, as adopted by this Court,

have been clarified in two orders dated 20 January 2017 and 24 March 2017.

The clarification by this Court is that when an office bearer who completes nine

years in any post in the BCCI is disqualified to become an office bearer of the

BCCI again. A similar disqualification attaches to a person who has held any

post of an office bearer, in a state association for nine years. For the sake of

clarity, what is indicated in the order dated 24 March 2017 reads thus :
“21…What has been meant by the clarificatory order is that, if
            an office bearer has completed nine years in any post in the
            B.C.C.I., he shall stand disqualified to become an office bearer
            of the B.C.C.I. Similarly, if a person holds the post of office
            bearer in any capacity for any State Association for nine years,
            he shall stand disqualified for contesting or holding any post or
            office of the State Association. To avoid any kind of maze, we
            proceed to state by giving an example. If a person has held the
            post of office bearer in respect of a State Association for a
            period of nine years, he will not be disqualified to contest for
            the post of office bearer of the B.C.C.I.”
            (Emphasis supplied)
26
27    A considerable amount of fire has been directed against the provision for

a cooling off period. Essentially, the cooling off period stipulates that an office

bearer is not eligible to contest a succeeding election. The recommendation has

been criticised on the ground that an individual who has acquired experience in

working in a particular post for three years is unable to utilise the experience

gained (as a result of a cooling off period of three years) which would be a loss

to the game of cricket. “Continuity of service”, it has been submitted, subserves

the interest of the game and a person who has “enriched himself” over a period

of three years should be allowed to contribute even thereafter without a break.

This, it has been submitted, would enable office bearers to develop their

networks with other cricketing nations and the ICC. Moreover, since an upper

age limit of seventy years is in place, it has been submitted that the requirement

of a cooling off period may be dispensed with. The nature of cricket, it has been

urged, is rapidly evolving and an endeavour must be made to ensure that

individuals with requisite experience are able to contribute to the game.




28    While dealing with the objections to a cooling off period, it is necessary at

the outset to emphasise that the term of an office bearer cannot be regarded

either as an opportunity “to enrich himself” or as a matter involving “continuity of

service”. The expression “enriched himself” may have a legitimate connotation

if it adverts only to experience gained. Otherwise, enrichment in the form of

personal aggrandisement is precisely what was frowned upon by the Lodha

Committee, and for justifiable reasons. The position of an office bearer in the
27
state associations and in the BCCI is not a matter of ‘service’ in the conventional

sense. Office bearers should not construe their position as employees with a

vested right to a particular tenure of service. Undoubtedly, the submission that

individuals must continue for a period which enables them to develop

experience in the administration of the game cannot be discounted. Equally, it

is a matter of concern that vested interests and conflicts of interest develop

around power centres which have unbridled authority. Dispersal of authority is

a necessary safeguard to ensure against the perpetuation of power centres.

Individuals who administer the game of cricket must realise that the game is

perched far above their personal interests. Important as experience in

administration is, it is far-fetched to assume – and far more difficult for the court

to accept – that experience rests on the shoulders of a closed group of a few

individuals. In fact, opportunities to a wide body of talent encourage a dispersal

of experience and democratisation of authority.
29    Understood from the above perspective, the requirements that the term

of office of an office bearer should be three years; and that an individual should

not hold office in the BCCI for a period excess of nine years (regardless of the

post held) with a similar stipulation of nine years for the state associations is

manifestly in public interest. Both the stipulations are valuable safeguards to

ensure against the concentration of power.
28
30    The requirement of a cooling off period of three years at the end of every

term in office, however, requires careful consideration. The argument against

the imposition of such a requirement is that by requiring an office bearer who

has held a post for three years to undergo a break of three years prevents office

bearers from applying their knowledge and experience in regard to the

administration of the game of cricket. The submission which has urged before

the Court is that once there is a cap of a nine year tenure for BCCI, with a similar

tenure of nine years for the state associations, an additional cooling off period

of three years at the end of every term of office may not be necessary.




31    The amicus has earnestly supported the cooling off requirement as being

necessary,    having    regard   to   the    spirit   of   the   Lodha   Committee

recommendations. A cooling off period, it has been urged is necessary to ensure

that after a period of three years, a person is not able to migrate to another

association and occupy the position of an office bearer or to occupy any other

position in the same association. The amicus also submits that the expression

‘office bearer’ should not be allowed to be circumvented by being a member of

any other committee. Subject to these safeguards, the amicus agrees that a

person may be able to serve for a period of nine years in the BCCI and nine

years in a state association.
29
32    Having carefully evaluated the submissions which have been urged

before us, we are of the view that a cooling off period should be observed. A

cooling off period has several features which are of utmost importance : (i) it is

a safeguard against the development of vested personal interests; (ii) it ensures

against the concentration of power in a few hands; (iii) it facilitates a dispersal

of authority; and (iv) it encourages the generation of a wider body of experienced

administrators. Cooling off must be accepted as a means to prevent a few

individuals from regarding the administration of cricket as a personal turf. The

game will be better off without cricketing oligopolies.




33    However, in our view, it would be appropriate to direct that a cooling off

period of three years would apply after an individual holds two successive terms

in office either in the BCCI, or in any state association or a combination of the

two. For instance, if an office bearer has held office for two consecutive terms

in any post in a state association, such an individual must face a cooling off

period of three years. Likewise, if an individual has held any post as an office

bearer of the BCCI for a total period of six years in succession, the individual

must have a cooling off period of three years before seeking election again

either to the BCCI or to a state association. The cooling off period would apply

also in a situation where an individual holds a post for one term in a state

association followed by a post in the BCCI successively or vice versa. This

would ensure that after a period of six years involving two consecutive terms, a

cooling off period would be attracted. Allowing an individual to act as an office
30
bearer for six years in continuation, is a sufficiently long period for experience

and knowledge gained to be deployed in the interest of the game without at the

same time resulting in a monopoly of power.
The cooling off period shall read as follows :
“An office bearer who has held any post for two consecutive
              terms either in a state association or in the BCCI (or a
              combination of both) shall not be eligible to contest any further
              election without completing a cooling off period of three years.
              During the cooling off period, such an office bearer shall not be
              a member of the governing council or of any committee
              whatsoever of the BCCI or of a state association.”




The above principle shall govern Clause 6(4) as well as Clause 14(4) of the draft

constitution. The above principle will ensure that the cooling off period will come

into operation upon a person holding any post for two consecutive terms not

exceeding six years.
34      We accordingly clarify that the position as approved by the Court in the

present order shall be to the following effect:
(i)    The term for all posts of office bearers in BCCI and in state associations

        shall be three years;
(ii)    No person shall hold the position of an office bearer in any state

        association, regardless of post, for a period in excess of nine years in the

        aggregate;
31
(iii)     No person shall hold the post of office bearer in BCCI, regardless of post,

          for a period in excess of nine years in the aggregate;
(iv)      There shall be a cooling off period of three years after an individual has

          held the post of an office bearer for two consecutive terms either in a state

          association or in the BCCI or a combination of both; and
(v)       The expression ‘office bearer’ should not be permitted to be circumvented

          by being a member of any other committee or of the Governing Council

          in BCCI or any state association, as the case may be.
D. Division          of    Functions,      Professional        Management         and
        Disqualifications



35        The report of the Lodha Committee postulates that the General body of

the BCCI would consist of full members and associate members. The report

provides for an Apex Council which is responsible for the administration of the

Board.
36        This functional distinction between the General body and the Apex

Council is an institutional safeguard to ensure professional management of

BCCI. The Apex Council is entrusted with the function of professional

management through the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer

and other officers who must be recruited on a transparent and professional

basis. Of the nine members of the Apex Council, five (the President, Vice
32
President, Secretary, Joint Secretary, Treasurer and a member) are to be

elected by the General body.
We approve clause 15 (1) in regard to the Apex Council which reads thus:
“The affairs of BCCI shall be governed by the Apex Council
             and its framework of governance shall:
(i) Enable strategic guidance of the entity;
(ii) Ensure efficient monitoring of management;
(iii) Ensure the performance of the respective roles,
                   responsibilities and powers of the CEO, Managers, Cricket
                   Committees and Standing Committees except the
                   Governing Council; and
(iv) Ensure a distribution and balance of authority so that no
                  single individual has unfettered powers.”




E.    Disqualifications
37    In regard to disqualifications, we accept the clause in the draft constitution

as proposed with the incidental modifications as suggested by the amicus. The

disqualifications read as follows:
“ Clause 6 (5)

             A person shall be disqualified from being an Office Bearer, a
             member of the Governing Council or any Committee or a
             representative to the International Cricket Council or any
             similar organization if he or she:
(a) is not a citizen of India;
(b) has attained the age of 70 years;
(c) is declared to be insolvent, or of unsound mind;
(d) is a Minister or Government Servant or holds a public
                 office;
33
(e) holds any office or post in a sports or athletic association
                or federation apart from cricket;
(f)   has been an Office Bearer of the BCCI for a cumulative
                  period of 9 years or of a State association   for    a
                  cumulative period of 9 years;
(g) has been charged by a Court of Law for having committed
                any criminal offence. i.e. an    order framing charges
                has been passed by a court of law having competent
                jurisdiction.”
38    Clauses 29, 33(1), 33(2) and 45 of the draft constitution with the

modifications suggested by the amicus read as follows :
“Clause 29

            INADVERTENT OMISSION TO GIVE NOTICE OF MEETING

            Inadvertent omission to give notice of an Annual General or
            Special General Meeting or Meetings of the Apex Council or of
            any of the Committees to any member entitled thereto or the
            non-receipt thereof by such individual shall not invalidate the
            proceedings of such meetings.
Clause 33(1)

            At least four weeks prior to the Annual General Meeting at
            which an election is to be held, the Apex Council shall appoint
            an Electoral Officer, who shall be a former member of the
            Election Commission of India.
Clause 33 (2)

            The Electoral Officer shall oversee and supervise the entire
            election process including scrutiny of the electoral rolls for
            Councillors and the Players’ Cricket Association, which shall
            include all nominations and candidatures being subject to his
            scrutiny in accordance with the Rules.
Clause 45

            These Rules and Regulations of the BCCI shall not be
            repealed, added to, amended or altered except when passed
            and adopted by a 3/4th majority of the members present and
            entitled to vote at a Special General Meeting of the General
            Body convened for the purpose or at the Annual General
            Meeting. Any such amendment will not be given effect to
            without the leave of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”
34
39    We approve the above clauses. We are emphatically of the view that once

the draft constitution has been approved by this Court, any amendment should

not be given effect to without the leave of this Court.
40    Having regard to the fact that the draft constitution submitted by the CoA

on 27 October 2017 has now been approved by this Court subject to the

aforesaid modifications, we issue the following directions:
1    The Registrar of Societies under the
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration

     Act, 1975
shall upon the presentation of the said Constitution by the CEO,

     register the documents forthwith and report compliance by way of a report

     to the Secretary General of this Court within four weeks;
2    Upon the registration of the said Constitution of BCCI, each of the

     members shall undertake registration of their respective Constitutions on

     similar lines within a period of 30 days thereafter. A compliance certificate

     must be furnished to the CoA, which shall file a status report before this

     Court with reference to the compliance undertaken by the State

     Associations; and



3    In the event that any State Association does not undertake compliance

     with the abovesaid directions, the directions contained in the orders of this

     Court dated 7 October 2016 and 21 October 2016 shall revive.
35
41    The Committee of Administrators is at liberty to submit a further report for

such future directions as may be warranted and to secure compliance.
………....................................CJI
                                                  [DIPAK MISRA]




                                                  …….…......................................J
                                                  [A.M. KHANWILKAR]




                                                  ……..….......................................J
                                                  [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]

New Delhi;
August 09, 2018.