[Cites
10
, Cited by
65
]
Supreme Court of India
United India Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Hyundai Engineering And Construction ... on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3932, (2018) 10 SCALE 72, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 390, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 828, (2018) 4 TAC 11, (2018) 5 ALLMR 961, (2018) 5 ARBILR 13, (2018) 5 BOM CR 499, 2019 (135) ALR SOC 34 (SC), (2019) 193 ALLINDCAS 120, (2019) 1 ACJ 734, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 137
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8146 OF 2018
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) No.4260/2018)

                         United India Insurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.     …..Appellant(s)

                                                  :Versus:

                         Hyundai Engineering and Construction
                         Co. Ltd. & Ors.                            ....Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   The conundrum in this appeal is whether clause 7 of the

                         subject Insurance Policy dated 5th September, 2007 posits

                         unequivocal expression of the intention of arbitration or is

                         hedged with a conditionality? The learned Single Judge of the

                         High Court of Judicature at Madras vide impugned judgment
Signature Not Verified   and order dated 30th November, 2017 in O.P. No.537/2017
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.08.21
had held that post amendment of the Arbitration and
14:10:26 IST
Reason:
2
Conciliation Act, 1966
(for short, “the Act”), with effect from

        23rd October, 2015 by insertion of sub-section 6A in
Section

        11
of the Act, the limited mandate of the Court is to examine

        the factum of existence of an arbitration agreement. No more

        and no less. The learned Single Judge placed reliance on the

        two-Judge Bench decision of this Court in
Duro Felguera,

        S.A. Vs. Gangavaram Port Limited,1 and another
decision of

        its own High Court in
Jumbo Bags Ltd. Vs. New India

        Assurance Co. Ltd.2            The
appellants, however,       placed

        reliance on a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in
Oriental Insurance Company Limited                    Vs. Narbheram

        Power and Steel Private Limited,3
where this Court had an

        occasion to construe a similar clause of an insurance policy

        as in the present case. Relying on this decision, it is urged

        that the impugned judgment cannot be countenanced and

        that the High Court ought to have dismissed the original

        petition filed by the respondents under
Sections 11(4)
&
11(6)
of the Act read with      Rule 2 of the Appointment of Arbitrators
1
(2017) 9 SCC 729
2
2016 SCC OnLine Mad 9141 : (2016) 3 CTC 761 : (2016) 2 LW 769
3
(2018) 6 SCC 534
3
by the Chief Justice of Madras High Court Scheme, 1996, to

declare the arbitrator nominated by the respondents herein as

the sole arbitrator; or in addition, appoint one arbitrator on

behalf of the appellants herein so as to adjudicate all the

disputes inter se between the parties in terms of the Act.
2.   Shorn of unnecessary facts, be it noted that the

respondent Nos.1 and 2 constitute a Joint Venture (“JV”).

Respondent No.3 awarded a contract on 29th September, 2006

for design, construction and maintenance of a bridge across

the River Chambal, which was to be completed within a period

of 40 months and was commenced on 5th December, 2007 by

the JV after respondent No.3 handed over the site to it. After

commencement of the work, a Contractor All Risk Insurance

Policy (“CAR Policy”) dated 5th December, 2007 was obtained

from the appellants covering the entire project, valued at

Rs.2,13,58,76,000/-. The policy contained clause 7, which

reads thus:
“7. If any difference shall arise as to the quantum to be paid
     under this Policy (liability being otherwise admitted) such
     difference shall independently of all other questions be
4
referred to the decision of an arbitrator to be appointed in
writing by the parties in difference, or if they cannot agree
upon a single arbitrator to the decision of two disinterested
persons as arbitrators of whom one shall be appointed in
writing by each of the parties within two calendar months
after having been required so to do in writing by the other
party in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration
Act, 1940
, as amended from time to time and for the time
being in force in case either party shall refuse or fail to
appoint arbitrator within two calendar months after receipt
of notice in writing requiring an appointment the other party
shall be at liberty to appoint sole arbitrator and in case of
disagreement between the arbitrators, the difference shall be
referred to the decision of an umpire who shall have been
appointed by them in writing before entering on the reference
and who shall sit with the arbitrators and preside at their
meetings.
It is clearly agreed and understood that no difference or
dispute shall be referable to arbitration as herein before
provided, if the Company has disputed or not accepted
liability under or in respect of this Policy.
It is hereby expressly stipulated and declared that it shall be
a condition precedent to any right of action or suit upon this
policy that the award by such arbitrator, arbitrators or
umpire of the amount of the loss or damage shall be first
obtained.
It is also hereby further expressly agreed and declared that
if the Company shall disclaim liability to the insured for any
claim hereunder and such claim shall not within 3 calendar
months from the date of such disclaimer have been made the
subject matter of a suit in a court of law, then the claim
shall for all purpose be deemed to have been abandoned and
shall not thereafter be recoverable hereunder.”

                                    (emphasis supplied)
5
3.   During the construction of the bridge, on 24th December,

2009, an accident occurred causing significant loss to the

contractor. A detailed claim for a sum of Rs.1,51,59,94,543/-

was submitted by the JV to the appellants, in response to

which     the    appellants       appointed     one      Mr.    S.

Ananthapadmanabhan, Surveyor and              Loss   Adjuster, for

assessing the loss caused to the contractor. A final report was

submitted by the Surveyor on 28th February, 2011 assessing

the loss as Rs.39,09,92,828/-, however, with the finding that

the damage was on account of the faulty design and improper

execution of the project and not payable under the policy.

Besides the stated report, a Committee of Experts was set up

by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government

of India, to enquire into the accident which then submitted its

report on 7th August, 2010.
4.   The appellants took into account both these reports and

vide communication dated 21st April, 2011, intimated the

respondents that the claim put forth by the JV, was found to
6
be not payable, and accordingly, stood repudiated. The said

communication reads thus:
“UNITED INDIA INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED

    Divisional Office:010700          Post Box No.4528
    Ist Floor, Silingi Building       Gram UNDIVSEVEN
    134, Greams Road                  Phone:28290845/846
    Chennai-600 006                   Telefax:044-28290844

    Ref.:010700/CAR Claim/2011             21st April, 2011

       REGISTERED POST WITH ACKNOWLEDGE DUE

    M/s National Highways of Authority of India
    1-C-10 SFS Colony
    Talwandi, Kota
    Rajasthan-324 005

    Dear Sirs

    Kind Attn: Mr. Anoop Kulshreshtha, Project Director

    Re: Claim under Contractor‟s All Risk              Policy
    No.011900/44/07/03/60000001-      Our              Claim
    No.010703/44/09/03/90000007-Collapse of            Cable
    Stayed Bridge at Kota, Rajasthan.
We refer to the above claim lodged by you under your
    Contractor‟s All Risk Policy in respect of collapse of
    portion of bridge under construction on 24.12.2009.
You are aware that immediately on intimation of the
    occurrence, our Company had deputed Mr. S Ananta
    Padmanabhan, a duly licensed and well experienced
    civil engineer surveyor for detailed survey as required
    by
Insurance Act
. The surveyor had visited the site on
    various occasions and was in contact and
    correspondence with you when various particulars,
    information and records were obtained. Besides
    enquiries with you the surveyor had also made other
    enquiries for information including the Government,
    Police Authorities and gathered reports of the
7
respective agencies. After detailed survey, the surveyor
had submitted his Final Report dated 28.2.2011 in
respect of the claim.
Besides the Survey Report, it also found that the
occurrence was the subject matter of enquiry by a
Special Committee constituted by the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways, Govt. of India which had also
submitted a detailed report dated 7.8.2010.
We find that there had been a collapse of the lateral
span P3-P4, P4 Pylon and main span structures from
S1-S10 segments which fell into the river.
On a careful study of the records it is found that the
collapsed portion was affected entirely due to faulty
design, besides defective workmanship and materials
in execution of the project. A few of the relevant factors
are observed as under:-
In execution of the project it is found that the junction
at Pylon P4 was most critical and vulnerable which
had to be handled with due care and diligence. An
instable equilibrium had been caused at this junction,
due to shearing of the slab in the lateral span P3-P4
about 15 mts. From the P4 junction, which caused the
tilting of the pylon, dragging with it the spans P3-P4,
P3-P2 and Piers P3, P4. The release of restraints on
the movement of the bearings at P4 had not been
performed in manner necessary, contributing to a
massive failure. Lack of coordination and planning
between various consultants and failure to properly
oversee the execution had been found.
There had been change of allocation of work among
various joint venture partners which had played a key
role in the quality of workmanship. Even at the
affected P4 location, construction of Pier P4 was the
responsibility of Hyundai Engg. & Construction Co.
Whereas it was found to have been carried out by
Gatnmon India.
There had also been change in the sequence of
operations in construction to make up for lost time,
which adversely affected the stability of the P4 joint.
The summary of the findings of the Enquiry committee
is that the collapse was caused, inter alia, by
8
1) absence of stability devices during construction,
2) shortfall in design and 3) deficient workmanship.
The Enquiry     Committee      have   more   particularly
observed that
a)    the contractors are responsible for all during the
structure to reach a vulnerable stage, without taking
adequate precautions with respect to stability and
robustness of the partially completed structure and
shortfall in the design.
b)    Since they have been shortfalls at the design
responsibility also lies with.
The available records and documents clearly reveal
that the loss has occurred due to faulty design and
defective workmanship.
We find that national Highways Authority of India have
in fact initiated action by issue of show cause notice
against the Contractors.
The Kota Police had lodged FIR against various
employees of the Contractors/Sub contractors and
submitted final report which supports the above
observations.
The policy does not cover the loss in the above
circumstances. In fact the policy specifically
excludes any loss/damage caused by faulty design,
defective workmanship/material. Further, the
revelations of the expert body and the surveyors
indicate willful acts/negligence in execution of
work of such nature resulting in the occurrence.

In view of the above, we regret to inform you that
the claim is found to be not payable and
accordingly stands repudiated.
Insurers reserve their right to rely upon any further or
other materials/terms in support of the above
conclusion and the above circumstances are not
exhaustive of the basis for
the above decision
.

   Thanking You
9
Yours faithfully

             Sd/-
Senior Divisional Manager

     Copy to:
1) M/s Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. Ltd &
        Gammon India Ltd., Chambal Bridge Project. Behind
        Tilam Sangh, Rawat Bhata Road, Kota Rajasthan-
        324010.
2) Regional Office-Technical-Engineering Dept.
3) Head Office-Technical-Engineering Dept.
        Regd. & Head Office: 24, Whites Road,
        Chennai-600 014.”
                                         (emphasis supplied)
5.      The JV nevertheless entered into correspondence with

the appellants to reopen and re-assess its decision of

repudiation of the claim. Finally, the appellants informed the

respondents that it was unable to “reconsider” the claim which

has already been repudiated. The said communication reads

thus:
“UNITED INDIA INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
                  HEAD OFFICE 24, WHITES ROAD CHENNAI
                       CIN:U93090TN1938GOI000108
        Ref:No.UIIC/ENGG/CLAIMS/17-18/01           Dt:17.04.2017

        To
                           KA: Mr. Anupam Gupta
        The Project Director
        M/s National Highways Authority of India
        Project Implementation Unit
        A-575, Talwandi, Kota (Rajasthan)-324005
10
Subject: CAR Insurance Policy
     No.011900/44/07/03/60000001.
Settlement of Contractors claim
     No.010703/44/096/03/90000007.
Dear Sir,
     We refer to your letter Ref:17011/27/2006-Kota/CAR/RJ-
     05/3909 dt. 18.01.2017 and Contractor letter Ref: HZ-6718,
     dated 04.02.2017 and also the subsequent meeting held at
     our office Chennai. On perusal of the documents provided,
     we find that no further points have emerged in support of
     the claim.
In view of the above we regret our inability to reconsider
     the claim which was repudiated.
Yours faithfully

     (D. Nagalakshmi)
     Dy. General Manager
     CC:      KA: Mr. Haeng Kwon Kang
     The Chief Project Manager
Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. Ltd.
     Chambal Bridge Project, Behind Tilam Sangh
     Rawat Bhata Road, Kota Rajasthan-324 010”

                                     (emphasis supplied)
6.   As a sequel, the JV vide its letter dated 29th May, 2017

informed the appellants that disputes had arisen between the

appellants and the JV and in view thereof it was invoking the

arbitration clause No.7 contained in the Insurance Policy and

had nominated Dr. V.K. Agrawal as its Arbitrator. The
11
appellants were also called upon to either accept the name of

the sole arbitrator or nominate its own arbitrator within 30

days    from   the   date   of    receipt   of   the   communication.

Eventually, respondent Nos.1 & 2 filed a petition under
Sections 11(4)
&
11(6)
of the Act before the High Court of

Judicature at Madras being O.P. No.537/2017.
7.     The said petition was resisted by the appellants. It was

urged that the subject clause 7 of the policy was hedged with a

pre-condition expressly predicating that no difference or

dispute shall be referable to arbitration, if the appellants

disputed or did not accept its liability under or in respect of

the policy.    In other words, in case of repudiation of the claim

by the appellants, the remedy of the insured was to file a suit

within 3 months of such disclaimer. It was asserted that the

appellants had repudiated the liability vide letter dated 21st

April, 2011. That is an indisputable fact. The communication

sent by the appellants on 17th April, 2017 was a mere

reiteration and confirmation of the              repudiation already

communicated vide letter dated 21st April, 2011. It was
12
specifically denied that the said letter dated 17th April, 2017

was a final repudiation for the purpose of calculating

limitation as alleged by the applicants (respondent Nos.1 & 2).

It was urged that the dispute raised was not one of quantum

to be paid under the policy but on the very factum of alleged

loss not covered under the policy.        By virtue whereof, the

agreement      specifically   excluded   making   a   reference   to

arbitration.
8.   Notwithstanding the stand taken by the appellants, the

learned Single Judge of the High Court by the impugned

judgment allowed the petition filed by respondent Nos.1 & 2

and appointed Mr. Justice P. Jyothimani, Former Judge, High

Court of Judicature, Madras to act as an Arbitrator in the

matter, having opined that arbitration agreement existed in

the form of clause 7 of the Insurance Policy, by relying mainly

on the decision in
Duro Felguera
, (supra) and
Jumbo Bags

Ltd.
, (supra).
13
9.   We have heard Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellants and Ms. Meenakshi Arora,

learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents.
10. The clause similar to the subject clause 7 of the

Insurance Policy came up for consideration before a three-

Judge Bench of this Court in
Oriental Insurance Company

Limited
(supra).
After analysing the legal principle expounded

in a host of decisions, including the decision in
Jumbo Bags

Ltd.
(supra), the Court opined as follows:
“23. It does not need special emphasis that an arbitration
     clause is required to be strictly construed. Any expression in
     the clause must unequivocally express the intent of
     arbitration. It can also lay the postulate in which
     situations the arbitration clause cannot be given effect
     to. If a clause stipulates that under certain
     circumstances there can be no arbitration, and they are
     demonstrably clear then the controversy pertaining to
     the appointment of arbitrator has to be put to rest.
24.
In the instant case, Clause 13 categorically lays the
     postulate that if the insurer has disputed or not accepted the
     liability, no difference or dispute shall be referred to
     arbitration…..”
                                      (emphasis supplied)


While adverting to the observation in paragraphs 28 and 32 of

the
Jumbo Bags Ltd.
(supra), the Court observed thus:
14
“19. We may presently refer to the decision of the Madras
     High Court in Jumbo Bags Ltd. In the said case, the learned
     Chief Justice was interpreting clause 13 of the policy
     conditions. Referring to Vulcan Insurance Co. Ltd., he has
     held thus: (
Jumbo Bags Ltd.
case, SCC OnLine Mad para 28)

         „28. …The dispute which is not referable to arbitration,
         being not covered by the clause cannot be over the
         subject-matter of arbitration, and the remedy of the
         insured in this case is only to institute a suit.‟

     And again : (SCC OnLine Mad para 32)

         „32. I am of the view that the remedy of arbitration is not
         available to the petitioner herein in view of the
         arbitration clause specifically excluding the mode of
         adjudication of disputes by arbitration, where a claim is
         repudiated in toto. The remedy would thus only be of a
         civil suit in accordance with law.‟

     We concur with the said view.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
11. The other decision heavily relied upon by the High Court

and also by the respondents in
Duro Felguera
(supra), will be

of no avail. Firstly, because it is a two-Judge Bench decision

and also because the Court was not called upon to consider

the question which arises in the present case, in reference to

clause 7 of the subject Insurance Policy. The exposition in this

decision is a general observation about the effect of the

amended provision and not specific to the issue under
15
consideration.
The issue under consideration has been directly

        dealt with by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Oriental

        Insurance Company Limited
(supra), following the exposition

        in
Vulcan Insurance Co. Ltd.             Vs. Maharaj Singh and

        Anr.4
, which, again, is a three-Judge Bench decision having

        construed clause similar to the subject clause 7 of the

        Insurance Policy.
In paragraphs 11 & 12 of
Vulcan Insurance

        Co. Ltd.
(supra), the Court answered the issue thus:
“11. Although the surveyors in their letter dated April
                 26, 1963 had raised a dispute as to the amount of any
                 loss or damage alleged to have been suffered by
                 Respondent 1, the appellant at no point of time raised
                 any such dispute. The appellant company in its letter
                 dated July 5 and 29, 1963 repudiated the claim
                 altogether. Under clause 13 the company was not
                 required to mention any reason of rejection of the
                 claim nor did it mention any. But the repudiation of
                 the claim could not amount to the raising of a
                 dispute as to the amount of any loss or damage
                 alleged to have been suffered by Respondent 1. If
                 the rejection of the claim made by the insured be on
                 the ground that he had suffered no loss as a result of
                 the fire or the amount of loss was not to the extent
                 claimed by him, then and then only, a difference
                 could have arisen as to the amount of any loss or
                 damage within the meaning of clause 18. In this case,
                 however, the company repudiated its liability to pay any
                 amount of loss or damage as claimed by Respondent 1.
4
(1976) 1 SCC 943
16
In other words, the dispute raised by the company
       appertained to its liability to pay any amount of damage
       whatsoever. In our opinion, therefore, the dispute raised
       by the appellant company was not covered by the
       arbitration clause.
12.       As per clause 13 on rejection of the claim
       by the company an action or suit, meaning thereby a
       legal proceeding which almost invariably in India
       will be in the nature of a suit, has got to be
       commenced within three months from the date of
       such rejection; otherwise, all benefits under the
       policy stand forfeited. The rejection of the claim may
       be for the reasons indicated in the first part of clause
       13, such as, false declaration, fraud or wilful neglect of
       the claimant or on any other ground disclosed or
       undisclosed. But as soon as there is a rejection of the
       claim and not the raising of a dispute as to the amount
       of any loss or damage, the only remedy open to the
       claimant is to commence a legal proceeding, namely, a
       suit, for establishment of the company‟s liability. It may
       well be that after the liability of the company is
       established in such a suit, for determination of the
       quantum of the loss or damage reference to arbitration
       will have to be resorted to in accordance with clause 18.
       But the arbitration clause, restricted as it is by the
       use of the words ‘if any difference arises as to the
       amount of any loss or damage’, cannot take within
       its sweep a dispute as to the liability of the company
       when it refuses to pay any damage at all.”


                                         (emphasis supplied)


Again in paragraph 22, after analysing the relevant judicial

precedents, the Court concluded as follows:
17
“22. The two lines of cases clearly bear out the two distinct
     situations in law. A clause like the one in Scott v. Avery bars
     any action or suit if commenced for determination of a
     dispute covered by the arbitration clause. But if on the
     other hand a dispute cropped up at the very outset
     which cannot be referred to arbitration as being not
     covered by the clause, then Scott v. Avery clause is
     rendered inoperative and cannot be pleaded as a bar to
     the maintainability of the legal action or suit for
     determination of the dispute which was outside the
     arbitration clause.”
                                        (Emphasis supplied)
12. From the line of authorities, it is clear that the

arbitration clause has to be interpreted strictly. The subject

clause 7 which is in pari materia to clause 13 of the policy

considered by a three-Judge Bench in
Oriental Insurance

Company Limited
(supra), is a conditional expression of

intent. Such an arbitration clause will get activated or kindled

only if the dispute between the parties is limited to the

quantum to be paid under the policy. The liability should be

unequivocally admitted by the insurer. That is the pre-
condition and sine qua non for triggering the arbitration

clause. To put it differently, an arbitration clause would

enliven or invigorate only if the insurer admits or accepts its

liability under or in respect of the concerned policy. That has

been expressly predicated in the opening part of clause 7 as
18
well as the second paragraph of the same clause. In the

opening part, it is stated that the “(liability being otherwise

admitted)”.   This is reinforced and re-stated in the second

paragraph in the following words:
“It is clearly agreed and understood that no difference or
     dispute shall be referable to arbitration as herein before
     provided, if the Company has disputed or not accepted
     liability under or in respect of this Policy.”



Thus understood, there can be no arbitration in cases

where the insurance company disputes or does not

accept the liability under or in respect of the policy.
13. The core issue is whether the communication sent on

21st April, 2011 falls in the excepted category of repudiation

and denial of liability in toto or has the effect of acceptance of

liability by the insurer under or in respect of the policy and

limited to disputation of quantum. The High Court has made

no effort to examine this aspect at all. It only reproduced

clause 7 of the policy and in reference to the dictum in
Duro

Felguera
(supra) held that no other enquiry can be made by

the Court in that regard.
This is misreading of
the said
19
decision
and the amended provision and, in particular, mis-

application of the three-Judge Bench decisions of this Court in
Vulcan    Insurance    Co.   Ltd.
(supra)   and   in
Oriental

Insurance Company Ltd.
(supra).
14. Reverting to the communication dated 21st April, 2011,

we have no hesitation in taking the view that the appellants

completely denied their liability and repudiated the claim of

the JV (respondent Nos.1 & 2) for the reasons mentioned in

the communication. The reasons are specific. No plea was

raised by the respondents that the policy or the said clause 7

was void. The appellants repudiated the claim of the JV and

denied their liability in toto under or in respect of the subject

policy. It was not a plea to dispute the quantum to be paid

under the policy, which alone could be referred to arbitration

in terms of clause 7. Thus, the plea taken by the appellants is

of denial of its liability to indemnify the loss as claimed by the

JV, which falls in the excepted category, thereby making the

arbitration clause ineffective and incapable of being enforced,

if not non-existent. It is not actuated so as to make a reference
20
to arbitration. In other words, the plea of the appellants is

about falling in an excepted category and non-arbitrable

matter within the meaning of the opening part of clause 7 and

as re-stated in the second paragraph of the same clause.
15. In view of the above, it must be held that the dispute in

question is non-arbitrable and respondent Nos.1 & 2 ought to

have resorted to the remedy of a suit. The plea of respondent

Nos.1 & 2 about the final repudiation expressed by the

appellants vide communication dated 17th April, 2017 will be

of no avail. However, whether that factum can be taken as the

cause of action for institution of the suit is a matter which can

be debated in those proceedings. We may not be understood to

have expressed any opinion either way in that regard.
16. Accordingly, we allow this appeal and set aside the

impugned judgment and order and further dismiss the original

petition No.537/2017 filed by respondent Nos.1 & 2 before the

High Court of Judicature at Madras, with liberty to the said

respondents to take recourse to a civil suit for mitigation of its

grievances, if so advised. We are not expressing any opinion
21
either way on the merits of the issues to be answered in the

said proceedings.
17. The appeal is allowed in the aforementioned terms with

no order as to costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                  …………………………..….J.
                                  (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                  …………………………..….J.
                                  (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
August 21, 2018.