[Cites
18
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Suman Devi vs Manisha Devi on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3912, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 329
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
1


                                                                               REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO 8337              OF 2018
                                   (Arising out of SLP (C) No 24000 of 2017)



         SUMAN DEVI                                                         ..... APPELLANT



                                                   Versus


         MANISHA DEVI AND ORS                                               ..... RESPONDENTS




                                                JUDGMENT
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J


         1               The appellant and the first respondent contested elections for the post of

         Ward Councilor, from Ward No 18 of the District Council of Mahendergarh. The

         results of election were declared on 28 January 2016. The appellant was declared
Signature Not Verified
to be the elected candidate. On 10 February 2016, the first respondent filed an
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.08.21
11:34:10 IST
Reason:
Election Petition namely, Civil Suit 9/2016 (CS 1086/2016) under Section 176 of
2
the
Haryana Panchayati Raj Act
1994 challenging the election of the appellant.

Upon service of the election petition, the appellant filed an application under
Order

7 Rule 11 of the CPC
for rejection of the petition on the ground that the first

respondent had failed to present it in person as required by
Section 176
. Notice

was issued on the application. The respondent filed her reply. On 1 March 2016,

the first respondent moved an application for withdrawal of the election petition.

The application was allowed by the Civil Judge, Junior Division on the same day

and the first respondent was permitted to withdraw the election petition with liberty

to institute a fresh petition. Subsequently on 2 March 2016 the first respondent

filed a second election petition, Civil Suit 361/2016(CS 1106/2016). The appellant

filed an application under Order 7 Rule 11 for rejection of the election petition on

the ground that it was barred by limitation. An application was thereupon filed by

the first respondent purportedly under
Section 5
read with
Section 14
of the

Limitation Act submitting inter alia that if the limitation for filing the election petition

had expired, the period spent between the filing of the earlier petition and its

withdrawal may be excluded since the first respondent was bona fide espousing

her remedies. The appellant opposed the application.



2      By a judgment dated 19 July 2016 the Trial Court allowed the application

under Order 7 Rule 11 on the ground that the fresh election petition was presented

after the expiry of 30 days prescribed for the institution of an election petition. The

first respondent preferred an appeal which was allowed by the District Judge,
3
Narnaul on 18 January 2017. The appellant challenged the order of the District

Judge before the High Court. The Civil Revision has been dismissed by the

impugned order of the High Court dated 11 August 2017. The High Court has

observed thus:
“The application under
Section 14
of the Limitation Act was
                   filed subsequently when petitioner herein raised an
                   objections(sic).
Section 14
of the Limitation Act does not
                   provide for filing of a separate application. In any case, now
                   application under
Section 14
of the Limitation Act has already
                   been filed, therefore, the irregularity, if any, stand cured.”
3          The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that the
Haryana Panchayati Raj Act
1994 is a complete code for the presentation and

adjudication of election petitions. Counsel submitted that an election petition has

to be instituted under Section 176 within 30 days from the date of the declaration

of the results of the elections. An election petition which does not comply with

Section 176 must be rejected outright. Learned counsel submitted that this view

has consistently been followed in several decisions of the Punjab and Haryana

High Court, to which a reference was made. These are:
Joginder Singh v Baldev

Singh1
,
Rashpal Singh @ Rachpal Singh v Jasvir Singh2
,
Chet Ram v State
1
2010(1) PLR 769 paras 6 & 7
2
2009(3) RCR (Civil) 408
4
of Punjab3, Darshan Singh v Karamjit Singh4,
Parkasho v Bhola Devi5
and
Deepa Mangla v Nanak Chand6
.
4       On the other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the first

respondent submitted that a triable case arises against the appellant for submitting

a false certificate of Matriculation and hence, the order of the High Court may not

be interfered with.
5
Section 176
of the Haryana Panchayati Raj Act 1994 provides as follows:
176. Determination of validity of election enquiry by judge and
                procedure:
(1) If the validity of any election of a member of a Gram
                Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad or 2 [ * * * ]
                Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat, Chairman or Vice-Chairman,
                President or Vice-President of Panchayat Samiti or Zila
                Parishad respectively is brought in question by any person
                contesting the election or by any person qualified to vote at the
                election to which such question relates, such person may at
                any time within thirty days after the date of the declaration of
                results of the election , present an election petition to the civil
                court having ordinary jurisdiction in the area within which the
                election has been or should have been held, for the
                determination of such question.
(2) A petitioner shall not join as respondent to his election
                petition except the following persons :—
(a) where the petitioner in addition to challenging the validity of
                the election of all or any of the returned candidates claims a
                further relief that he himself or any other candidate has been
                duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than the
3
2010(4) PLR 718
4
2012(2) PLR 831
5
2012(3) PLR 541
6
CR No 523/2013 decided on 06.02.2015
5
petitioner and where no such further relief is claimed, all the
returned candidates ;
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any
corrupt practices are made in the election petition.
(3) All election petitions received under sub-section (1) in which
the validity of the election of members to represent the same
electoral division is in question, shall be heard by the same civil
court.
(4) (a) If on the holding such inquiry the civil court finds that a
candidate has, for the purpose of election committed a corrupt
practice within the meaning of sub-section (5) he shall set
aside the election and declare the candidate disqualified for the
purpose of election and fresh election may be held.
1[(aa) If on holding such enquiry the Civil Court finds that-
(i)       on the date of his election a returned candidate was not
          qualified to be elected;
(ii)      any nomination has been improperly rejected; or
(iii)     the result of the election, in so far it concerns a returned
          candidate, has been materially affected by improper
          acceptance of any nomination or by any corrupt
          practice committed in the interest of the returned
          candidate by an agent other than his election agent or
          by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any
          vote or the reception of any vote which is void or by any
          non-compliance with or violation of the provisions of
          the Constitution of India or of this Act, or any rules or
          orders made under this Act, election of such returned
          candidate shall be set aside and fresh election may be
          held.;]
(b) If, in any case to which 2[clause (a) or clause (aa)] does not
apply, the validity of an election is in dispute between two or
more candidates, the court shall after a scrutiny and
computation of the votes recorded in favour of each candidate,
declare the candidate who is found to have the largest number
of valid votes in his favour, to have been duty elected :
Provided that after such computation, if any, equality of votes
is found to exist between any candidate and the addition of one
vote will entitle any of the candidate to be declared elected,
one additional vote shall be added to the total number of valid
votes found to have been received in the favour of such
candidate or candidates, as the case may be, elected by lot
drawn in the presence of the judge in such manner as he may
determine.
6
(5) A person shall be deemed to have committed a corrupt
                   practice-
(a) who with a view to induce a voter to give or to refrain from
                   giving a vote in favour of any candidate, offers or gives any
                   money or valuable consideration, or holds out any promise of
                   individual profit, or holds out any threat of injury to any person
                   ; or
(b) who, with a view to induce any person to stand or not to
                   stand or to withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate
                   at an election, offers or gives any money or valuable
                   consideration or holds out any promise or individual profit or
                   holds out any threat of injury to any person ; or
(c) who hires or procures whether on payment or otherwise,
                   any vehicle or vessel for the conveyance of any voter (other
                   than the person himself, the members of his family or his agent)
                   to and from any polling station.
Explanation 1.– A corrupt practice shall be deemed to have
                   been committed by a candidate, if it has been committed with
                   his knowledge and consent by a person who is acting under
                   the general or special authority of such candidate with
                   reference to the election.
Explanation 2.– The expression "vehicle" means any vehicle
                   used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport
                   whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise, and
                   whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.”




Sub-section (1) of Section 176 clearly specifies a period of 30 days from the date

of the declaration of the results of the election within which an election petition has

to be filed. There is no provision for condoning delay or for extending the period

of limitation.
6          In Hukum Dev Narain Yadav v Lalit Narain Mishra7, while considering

whether the provisions of the
Limitation Act
1963 would be applicable to an election
7
(1974) 2 SCC 133
7
petition under the
Representation of People Act
1951, P.Jaganmohan Reddy, J.,

speaking for a three Judge bench of this Court held thus:
“..The applicability of these provisions has, therefore, to be
                   Judged not from the terms of the
Limitation Act
but by the
                   provisions of the Act relating to the filing of election petitions
                   and their trial to ascertain whether it is a complete code in itself
                   which does not admit of the application of any of the provisions
                   of the
Limitation Act
mentioned in
Section 29(2)
of that Act.”




This Court held that the provisions of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act do not govern

filing of election petitions or their trial.
7          In
Charan Lal Sahu v Nandkishore Bhatt8
, a two Judge bench held that

there is no common law right to challenge an election since it is purely a matter of

regulation by the terms of the statute. The right being statutory, the terms of the

statute must be complied with.
8          A three Judge bench of this Court in
Lachhman Das Arora v Ganeshi Lal9
,

construed the provisions of
Section 81 (1)
of the Representation of the People Act

1951, which prescribes a period of 45 days to file an election petition. Chief Justice

Dr AS Anand, speaking for the Court, held thus:
“7. On its plain reading, Section 81(1) lays down that an
                   election petition calling in question any election may be
8
(1973) 2 SCC 530
9
(1999) 8 SCC 532
8
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-
section (1) of Section 100 and
Section 101
of the Act to the
             High Court by any candidate at such election or by an elector
             within forty-five days from, but not earlier than, the date of
             election of the returned candidate, or if there are more than one
             returned candidate at the election and the dates of their
             election are different, the later of those two dates.
The Act
is a
             special code providing a period of limitation for filing of an
             election petition. No period for filing of an election petition is
             prescribed under the
Indian Limitation Act
.
The Act
insofar as
             it relates to presentation and trial of election disputes is a
             complete code and a special law. The scheme of the special
             law shows that the provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
of the Indian
             Limitation Act do not apply. If an election petition is not filed
             within the prescribed period of forty-five days,
Section 86(1)
of
             the Act, which provides that the High Court shall dismiss an
             election petition which does not comply with the provisions of
             Section 81 or Section 82 or Section 117, is straightaway
             attracted.”



9
The Haryana Panchayati Raj Act
1994 is a complete code for the

presentation of election petitions. The statute has mandated that an election

petition must be filed within a period of 30 days of the date of the declaration of

results. This period cannot be extended. The provision of
Section 14
of the

Limitation Act 1963 would clearly stand excluded. The legislature having made a

specific provision, any election petition which fails to comply with the statute is

liable to be dismissed. The High Court has failed to notice both the binding

judgments of this Court and its own precedents on the subject, to which we have

referred. The first respondent filed an election petition in the first instance to which

there was an objection to maintainability under
Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC
.

Confronted with the objection under Order 7 Rule 11, the first respondent obviated

a decision thereon by withdrawing the election petition. The grant of liberty to file
9
a fresh election petition cannot obviate the bar of limitation. The fresh election

petition filed by the first respondent was beyond the statutory period of 30 days

and was hence liable to be rejected.
10    We, accordingly, allow the appeal and set aside the impugned order of the

High Court dated 11 August 2017. We hold that the election petition filed by the

first respondent shall stand dismissed There shall be no order as to costs.
….....................................CJI
                                                   [DIPAK MISRA]



                                                 …......................................J
                                                   [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]


New Delhi
August 21, 2018