[Cites
6
, Cited by
40
]
Supreme Court of India
Samir Narain Bhojwani vs M/S Aurora Properties And Investments on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1218, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 782
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7079 OF 2018
                                   (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.18465/2018)

                         Samir Narain Bhojwani                          …..Appellant(s)

                                                    :Versus:

                         M/s. Aurora Properties and Investments
                         and Anr.                                      ....Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   The captioned appeal challenges the judgment and order

                         passed by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court dated

                         9th July, 2018 in Commercial Appeal No.173 of 2017, whereby

                         the Division Bench dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant

                         and upheld the decision of the learned Single Judge dated 9th
Signature Not Verified   October, 2017 in Notice of Motion No.147 of 2013, wherein the
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.08.21
learned   Single   Judge   inter   alia   passed   a   mandatory
11:33:22 IST
Reason:
2
interlocutory injunction directing the appellant to hand over 8

(eight) flats along with 16 (sixteen) car parking spaces under

the Settlement Agreement dated 4th November, 2016 and

Consent     Terms   dated        25th      September,   2017      between

respondent Nos.1 and 2 inter partes.
2.   The    relevant     facts       are     as   follows:     Respondent

No.1/plaintiff was appointed by one Andheri Kamgar Nagar

Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. (for short, „the Society’)

under a Development Agreement dated 6th October, 1996 as a

developer   under      the   Slum       Development/         Rehabilitation

Scheme to develop the suit property in question, being a plot

of land situated at Versova Link Road, Taluka Andheri and

bearing Survey No. 139, City Survey No. 1319                         (Part)

admeasuring 8892 sq. mts. or thereabouts as per Indenture of

Lease dated 31st March, 1993 and 9402 sq. mts. as per City

Survey Records. One part of the suit property was for

constructing tenements free of charge for project-affected

persons and the balance property could be used to develop

and sell the balance FSI. Respondent No.1 then executed an
3
Agreement for Sub-Development dated 22nd September, 1999

with    respondent   No.2/defendant     No.1,   transferring   the

benefits of development rights in the suit property, with the

consent of the aforementioned Society, to respondent No.2

after keeping aside 15,000 sq. ft. for itself i.e. respondent No.1.
3.     Subsequently, respondent No.2 executed an Agreement

for    Development    dated   10th   March,     2003    with   the

appellant/defendant No.2, whereunder the appellant would be

entitled to 55% of the total area available for free sale

buildings and car parking in the suit property and respondent

No.2 retained 45% of the total area available for construction

of free sale buildings and car parking by utilizing FSI which

may be available on the suit property as per the Slum

Rehabilitation Scheme. This agreement was entered into

without the consent of respondent No.1 and hence, all three

parties executed a Tripartite Agreement dated 11th September,

2009, referencing the previous agreements of 6th October,

1996 and 22nd September, 1999 wherein respondent No.1 was

entitled to an area of 22,500 sq. ft., an increase from its earlier
4
agreed upon 15,000 sq. ft., which would be allocated out of
the 45% share due to respondent No. 2
4.   Disputes arose during the construction of the building,

which resulted in respondent No.1 filing a Commercial Suit

No. 62 of 2013 against respondent No.2 and the appellant

inter alia seeking specific performance of the Development

Agreement dated 22nd September, 1999, read with the

Tripartite Agreement dated 11th September, 2009, including

handing over constructed area of 22,500 sq. ft. in the free sale

buildings along with proportionate car parking space, in the

form of 12 (twelve) flats in Wings „A‟ and „B‟ of the building

„Bay – View‟ constructed on the suit property and 24 (twenty

four) car parking spaces. Respondent No.1 also took out Notice

of Motion No. 147 of 2013 for interim reliefs, seeking to

restrain respondent No.2 and the appellant from creating third

party rights in the suit property without first handing over

possession of the 22,500 sq. ft. constructed area in the form of

flats and parking spaces. Respondent No. 1 alleged that this

interim relief was necessitated by the fact that its advocate
5
had conducted a search in the sub-registrar‟s office and found

a mortgage deed executed by the appellant in favour of a third

party with respect to 12 flats and 24 parking spaces in the

building „Bay–View‟ and that it apprehended that the appellant

would sell or create third party rights in respect of the said

flats. The alleged mortgage deed itself was not produced by

respondent No.1 on the ground that it had applied for a copy

of the same but was yet to receive it. Respondent No.1 also

sought to appoint a Court Receiver to take charge of the

premises in the suit property comprising its 22,500 sq. ft.

constructed area. An ad-interim, consent order was passed on

3rd December, 2012, in the said Notice of Motion No. 147 of

2013, whereby respondent No. 2 and the appellant agreed to

not dispose of or create third party rights in respect of 8 flats

in the completed Wings „A‟ and „B‟ of the building and 4 flats in

the under-construction Wing „C‟ of the building, totaling 12

flats.
5.       The parties filed their respective replies and rejoinders in

the suit and notice of motion. The appellant‟s stance was that
6
he had completed his contractual obligations and offered

respondent No.2 its entitlement of 45% area in the constructed

buildings but respondent No.2 had failed to take possession of

the same. The subsequent delay in construction of Wing „C‟ of

the building was due to the failure of respondent No.2 to

obtain a Commencement Certificate for Wing „C‟, resulting in

losses to the appellant. Owing to this breach committed by

respondent No.2, it was no longer entitled to its 45% share in

the constructed area and as a consequence, respondent No.1

was not entitled to its 22,500 sq. ft. area which could only be

claimed out of the respondent No.2‟s entitlement.
6.   The appellant then took out Notice of Motion No. 540 of

2013, seeking to refer the suit to arbitration under
Section 8
of

the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“the
Arbitration

Act
”) and Arbitration Application No. 86 of 2013, seeking to

appoint an arbitrator under
Section 11
of the Arbitration Act.

Both these proceedings were rejected by the High Court vide

its order dated 30th September, 2014 on the ground that while

the Development Agreement of 22nd September, 1999 between
7
respondent Nos.1 and 2 contained an arbitration clause and

similarly, the Agreement of 10th March, 2003 between the

appellant and respondent No.2 also contained an arbitration

clause, however, the Tripartite Agreement of 11th September,

2009 itself did not contain an arbitration clause and that a

mere reference made in the Tripartite Agreement to the

previous agreements would not make the arbitration clauses

therein part of the Tripartite Agreement. The appellant

challenged that decision right upto this Court in SLP (Civil) No.

2235 of 2015, which stood rejected.
7.   The appellant also initiated proceedings under
Section 9
of the Arbitration Act against respondent Nos.1 and 2 before

the High Court. The High Court refused to grant any relief in

the petition filed under
Section 9
of the Arbitration Act. The

appellant then withdrew the
Section 9
proceedings and

initiated arbitration solely against respondent No. 2 under the

Agreement dated 10th March, 2003. In the said arbitration

proceedings, respondent No.2 filed an application for interim

reliefs under
Section 17
of the Arbitration Act inter alia
8
seeking specific performance of the agreement of 10th March,

2003 including possession of its entire 45% share of flats in

the buildings constructed on the suit property. Respondent

No.2 contended that the application was necessitated by the

fact that the appellant had violated the terms of the 10th

March, 2003 Agreement and had created third-party rights in

respect of his 55% entitlement in the suit property, without

first providing respondent No.2 with the occupation and

possession of its 45% entitlement in the suit property as set

out in the said Agreement. Respondent No.2 also submitted

that the appellant had deposited a refundable amount of Rs.4

crore as part of his obligation under the Agreement but that

refund of the said deposit was not, in any way, connected with

handing over of the respondent No.2‟s entitlement of flats. In

any event, respondent No.2 had offered to refund the said

deposit in exchange for possession of the flats due to it, which

the appellant had refused.
8.   By an interim order dated 12th October, 2016, the sole

arbitrator made prima facie observations that construction of
9
Wing „C‟ in the building situated on the suit property had been

delayed owing to respondent No.2‟s failure to obtain the

Commencement Certificate for the same. Further, respondent

No.2 had allowed the appellant to construct only 88 flats so

far, which worked out to 72% of the total area to be

constructed. On that basis, the arbitrator was of the opinion

that respondent No.2 could not receive its entire 45% share in

the constructed area of 88 flats, which worked out to 31.6

flats, but instead, would receive 72% of its 45% share which

worked out to 28.5 flats. From these 28.5 flats, 12 flats were to

be kept aside for respondent No.1 as directed in the High

Court‟s ad-interim order dated 3rd December, 2012 and thus,

respondent No.2 was entitled to 16.5 flats. Out of 16.5 flats,

the appellant was directed to hand over possession of 16 flats

to respondent No. 2, after which respondent No.2 would

refund the deposit given by the appellant in respect of such

flats. The remaining amount of respondent No.2‟s entitlement

in one flat would be discharged by both respondent No.2 and

the appellant jointly disposing of the said flat at a mutually

agreed price.
10
9.   This order was challenged by the appellant, first before

the High Court and having failed there, before this Court in

SLP (Civil) No. 35563 of 2016. This Court, vide order dated

14th December, 2016, refused to set aside the High Court‟s

decision but recorded that the observations made by the sole

arbitrator and High Court would not influence the final

outcome of the matter.
10. Reverting to Notice of Motion No.147 of 2013 in the suit

filed by respondent No.1, it was then finally heard and

judgment reserved. Pending the decision, however, respondent

Nos. 1 and 2 filed Consent Terms dated 25th September, 2017

according to which respondent No.2 agreed to hand over an

additional 8 (eight) flats along with 16 (sixteen) parking spaces

to respondent No.1 in full and final settlement of the

Development Agreement of 22nd September, 1999 and the

Tripartite Agreement of 11th September, 2009.
11
11. The Learned Single Judge vide decision dated 9th

October, 2017 in Notice of Motion No.147 of 2013, relied upon

the interim order of 12th October, 2016 passed by the sole

arbitrator, terming it as an interim award. The Single Judge

was of the opinion that the apportionment of flats done by the

arbitrator had become res judicata. The arbitrator‟s finding,

that respondent No.2 was entitled to 28.5 flats, had attained

finality since the appeals to the High Court and this Court had

been rejected. Further, from these 28.5 flats, 12 flats along

with 24 parking spaces formed part of respondent No.2‟s

entitlement, which, in turn, belonged to respondent No.1, and

had been kept out of the scope of the arbitration since there

was an ad-interim order of the High Court operating in that

regard. Possession and keys of the remaining 16 flats out of

the 28.5 flats had been handed over by the appellant to

respondent No.2, for which the appellant‟s deposit had also

been refunded by respondent No.2, as directed by the

arbitrator.
12
12. The Single Judge further opined that even if respondent

No.2 was ultimately held liable to compensate the appellant for

damages, the same could not be recovered from the said 12

flats as these flats were ultimately and rightfully due to

respondent No.1 (original plaintiff) and out of bounds for the

appellant. The Single Judge rejected the appellant‟s argument

that since respondent No.1 claimed through respondent No.2,

any breach by respondent No.2 would automatically affect the

entitlement of respondent No.1 as well.
13. The question as to whether respondent No.2 was

obligated to hand over possession of 8 flats to respondent No.1

as per the settlement agreement dated 4th November, 2016

and the Consent Terms dated 25th September, 2017 and

whether the appellant had to hand over the keys of the said

flats to respondent No.1, were answered by the Single Judge in

the affirmative, with the finding that respondent No.2 was the

rightful owner of the balance 39.6 flats, including the 8 flats,

out of the 88 constructed flats, and that the appellant had no

rights over the same. The point of respondent No.2 being the
13
rightful owner of the 8 flats was based on the following

aspects:
a.   Respondent No.2 alone was entitled to develop the suit

     property as the letter of intent from the SRA was in favour

     of respondent No.2;
b.   The appellant was a contractor who had been given the

     right to develop the suit property and his rights flowed

     from respondent No. 2;
c.   Respondent No.2 had retained its right to construct 45%

     of the total area available and the appellant had even

     executed    a   Power   of    Attorney    (POA)   in    favour   of

     respondent no.2 entitling respondent No.2 to execute

     agreements for sale on ownership basis, leave and license,

     etc. for the flats and car parking spaces in the suit

     property,   including   the    said   8   flats   and   similarly,

     respondent No.2 had executed a POA in favour of the

     appellant allowing the appellant to dispose of his flats and

     car parking spaces which he was entitled to receive as part

     of his 55% share. This was even conceded to by the

     appellant in the arbitration proceedings and in light of the
14
same, the appellant was estopped from objecting to

    respondent No.2 handing over 8 flats to respondent No.1;
14. On the issue of the appellant not being the owner of the

said flats, the Single Judge recorded that merely because the

appellant had constructed the said flats and had the keys to

the same, he could not be said to be the owner of the flats and

he could not prevent respondent No.2 from handing over

possession of the 8 flats to respondent No.1. The appellant

merely had derivative rights over the suit property, flowing

from respondent No.1 through respondent No.2, and any

dispute between respondent No.2 and the appellant could not,

in any way, affect the right of respondent No.1 over the suit

property. The Consent Terms dated 25th September, 2017

between respondent Nos.1 and 2 clearly set out that

respondent No.2 was obligated to hand over 8 flats to

respondent No.1 and the right of respondent No.1 over the

said flats was paramount to the rights of the other parties.
15
15. The Single Judge thus directed the appellant, by a

mandatory order, to hand over keys and possession of the said

8 flats to respondent No.1 along with 16 parking spaces,

recording that he had moulded the reliefs originally sought by

respondent No.1 in the changed circumstances of the case and

in order to shorten the litigation and do complete justice.
16. Aggrieved by the Single Judge‟s decision, the appellant

challenged the said decision before the Division Bench of the

High Court in Commercial Appeal No.173 of 2017. It was

urged on behalf of the appellant that respondent Nos.1 and 2

had entered into the Consent Terms dated 27th September,

2017 with a view to defeat the appellant‟s claim. Unless

respondent No.2 completed its entire obligations with respect

to the building still under construction in the suit property,

respondent No.1 was not entitled to receive its 8 flats as per

the Consent Terms. The appellant further contended that the

handing over of 8 flats to respondent No.1 was, in effect, a

final relief since nothing further remained in the suit and the

interim order of the Single Judge was in fact a final order and
16
that the confirmation of the arbitral tribunal‟s order had no

effect on the proceedings before the Single Judge. These

arguments were countered by respondent No. 1 which inter

alia submitted that the actual dispute was between the

appellant and respondent No.2 and that it (respondent No.1)

was being made to suffer for such dispute. Respondent No.1

contended that the main development agreement had been

executed between the Society and respondent No.1 and the

rights of the other parties flowed through such agreement.

Hence, there was nothing wrong in the Single Judge moulding

reliefs in its favour. Respondent No.2 echoed respondent

No.1‟s arguments.
17. The Division Bench by its judgment and order dated 9th

July, 2018, upheld the mandatory direction issued by the

Single Judge at an interlocutory stage and rejected the appeal,

holding that the Single Judge had addressed the various

issues in detail and that it was right to mould the reliefs, even

at the interim stage, in light of changed circumstances in the

case. The Division Bench opined that the appellant was not
17
left remediless in case respondent No.1 failed in the suit, as

his remedies were kept open.
18. We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant, Mr. Shyam Divan, learned

senior counsel appearing for respondent No.1 and Mr.

Mahendra      K.   Ghelani,     learned    counsel     appearing      for

respondent No.2.
19. From the chronology of events, it is indisputable that the

present appeal emanates from an interlocutory order passed

by the learned Single Judge of the High Court on an

application under Order XXXIX which, in turn, has been

confirmed by the Division Bench. That interlocutory order has

been passed in the suit filed by respondent No.1 against the

appellant and respondent No.2 for the following substantive

reliefs:
“a)    this Hon‟ble Court be pleased to declare that the suit
      agreement i.e. the said Development Agreement dated 22nd
      September 1999 (Exhibit “B” to the Plaint), read with the
      said Agreement dated 11th September 2009 (Exhibit “J” to
      the plaint), are valid, subsisting and binding between the
      Plaintiff and the Defendants.
18
b)     this Hon‟ble Court be pleased to order and decree the
specific performance of the suit agreements dated 22nd
September 1999 (Exhibit “B” to the plaint), read with
Agreement dated 11th September 2009 (Exhibit “J” to the
plaint) including handing over to the Plaintiff constructed
area of 22500 sq.ft. in the free sale buildings along with
proportionate car parking space in the form of 12 flats in
Wings “A” and “B” of the building “Bay –View” situated on
the property described in Exhibit “A” to the plaint and 24 car
parking spaces.
c)     In the alternative to prayer clause (b) this Hon‟ble
Court be pleased to order, decree and direct the Defendants
to refund a sum of Rs.75,00,000/- together with interest at
18% as set out in the Particulars of Claim at Exhibit “M” to
the plaint;
d)    In the alternative to prayer (a) and (b) and in addition
to prayer (c) above, this Hon‟ble Court be pleased order,
decree and direct the Defendants to pay damages of
Rs.173,47,53,425/- (Rupees One Hundred Seventy Three
Crores Forty Seven Lacs Fifty Three Thousand Four Hundred
Twenty Five Only) as set out in particulars of Claim at
Exhibit “M” to the plaint.
e)     This Hon‟ble Court be pleased to pass an order of
Mandatory and Permanent Injunction against the
Defendants, their servants, agents, assigns and/or any other
person acting through or under them from in any manner
directly or indirectly dealing with or disposing of or
alienating or parting with the possession of or creating third
party rights in respect of the premises coming to the share of
the Defendants in Wings ”A” & “B” of the building “Bay-View”
situated on the property described in Exhibit “A” to the
plaint without first delivering to the Plaintiff, the possession
of 22500 sq.ft. constructed areas per SRA sanctioned plan
with proportionate car parking space in the form of 12 flats
in Wings “A” and “B” of the building “Bay –View” situated on
the property described in Exhibit “A” to the plaint and 24 car
parking spaces.”
19
20. During the pendency of the suit for aforementioned

reliefs,   respondent       No.1/plaintiff    filed   Notice   of   Motion

No.147/2013 for the following interim reliefs:
“(a) Pending the hearing and final disposal of the present
      suit, this Hon‟ble Court be pleased to injunct the
      Defendants, servants, agents, assigns and/or any other
      persons acting through or under them from in any manner
      directly or indirectly dealing with or disposing of or
      alienating or parting with the possession of or creating third
      party rights in respect of the premises coming to the share of
      the Defendants in Wings “A” & “B” of the building “Bay-View”
      situated on the property described in Exhibit “A” to the
      Plaint without first delivering to the Plaintiff, the possession
      of 22500 sq.ft. constructed areas per SRA sanctioned plan
      with proportionate car parking space in the form of 12 flats
      in Wings “A” and “B” of the building “Bay-View” situated on
      the property described in Exhibit “A” to the plaint and 24 car
      parking spaces.
(b) Pending the hearing and final disposal of the present suit,
      this Hon‟ble Court be pleased to appoint Court Receiver,
      High Court, Bombay and/or such other fit and proper
      person as Receiver of premises coming to the share of the
      Defendant No.1 in Wings “A” & “B” of the building “Bay-
View” situated on the property described in the Exhibit “A” to
      the Plaint with all powers under
Order XL Rule 1 of the Code
      of Civil Procedure
Code 1908 including the power to take
      possession of premises coming to the share of the Defendant
      No.1 in Wings “A” and “B” of the building “Bay-View”
      situated on the property described in the Exhibit “A” to the
      plaint and hand over to the Plaintiff the possession of
      constructed area as per SRA sanctioned plan in the free sale
      building in the form of 12 flats in Wings “A” and “B” of the
      building “Bay-View” situated on the property described in
      Exhibit “A” to the Plaint and 24 car parking spaces.
(c) ad interim reliefs in terms of prayer (a) & (b).
(d) for costs of the suit;
20
(e) for such further and other reliefs as this Hon‟ble Court
     may deem fit and proper in the nature and circumstances of
     the case.”
21. Indeed, the learned Single Judge of the High Court

granted ad-interim relief on 3rd December, 2012 during the

pendency of the Notice of Motion. The same reads thus:
“Heard the Learned Senior Advocates appearing for the
     parties. The following order is passed by consent without
     going into the merits of the case and keeping all the
     contentions of the parties open.
(i)    The Defendants shall not sell, dispose of, alienate,
     encumber, part with possession and/or create third party
     rights in respect of 4 flats in Wing “A” and 4 flats in Wing
     “B” which flats are already constructed and occupation
     certificate is obtained in respect of the same. The said 8 flats
     are identified on the sanctioned plan which is taken on
     record and marked “X” for identification.
(ii)   The Defendants shall also not sell, dispose of, alienate,
     encumber, part with possession and/or create third party
     rights in respect of 4 flats in Wing “C”, the construction of
     which is in progress. The said four flats are identified on the
     plan tendered in Court and marked “X”.
(iii)  It is clarified that the above 12 flats pertain to 45 per
     cent share in flats of Defendant No.1 as per the agreements
     entered into by and between Defendant Nos.1 and 2. The
     Defendant No.2 has informed the Court that Defendant No.2
     will be contending that Defendant No.1 is not entitled to
     their 45 per cent share in the flats so constructed on the
     ground that Defendant No.1 has allegedly not complied with
     their obligations under the Agreements.
(iv)   The Defendants shall also not sell, dispose of, alienate,
     encumber, part with possession and/or create third party
     rights in respect of the proportionate car parking spaces in
     respect of the above 12 flats also identified on the plan
     marked “X”.
21
2.    Place the above Notice of Motion along with Notice of
     Motion (L) NO.3338 of 2012 taken out by Defendant No.2
     under
Section 8
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
     for hearing and final disposal on 15th January, 2013.”



The aforementioned order was corrected on 17th December,

2012 in the following terms:
“This application is for speaking to the minutes of the order
     dated 3rd December, 2012.
2. In clause (i), 4 flats in Wing “A” and 4 flats in Wing “B” be
     read as 5 flats in Wing “A” and 3 flats in Wing “B”.
Application is accordingly disposed of.”
22. The said ad-interim arrangement continued during the

pendency of Notice of Motion. However, while finally disposing

of the Notice of Motion No. 147/2013,               the learned Single

Judge of the High Court vide judgment and order dated 9th

October, 2017 passed a mandatory order directing the

appellant to hand over 8 flats and 16 parking spaces to

respondent No.1/plaintiff. For passing such mandatory order

the learned Single Judge placed reliance on the decision of

this Court in Gaiv Dinshaw Irani and Others Versus
22
Tehmtan Irani and Others1, holding that the Courts ought to

        mould      the       relief    in   accordance   with     the   changed

        circumstances for trying the litigation or to do complete

        justice. The view so taken by the learned Single Judge

        commended to the Division Bench.
23. What has, however, been glossed over by the High Court

        is that the Settlement Agreement dated 4th November, 2016

        and the Consent Terms dated 29th September, 2017 have been

        entered into between the respondent No.1/plaintiff and

        respondent No.2/defendant No.1 inter partes. That could not

        be thrust upon the appellant/defendant No.2 who had

        executed         a     separate      agreement     with     respondent

        No.2/defendant No.1. The appellant could be bound only by

        the agreement dated 10 March, 2003 in his favour and

        executed by him.              Admittedly, the said agreement is the

        subject matter of arbitration proceedings, inter alia because

        respondent No.2 had failed to discharge its obligation

        thereunder. The appellant has already parted with the
1
(2014) 8 SCC 294
23
possession of flats to respondent No.2 in furtherance of

agreement    dated    10th   March,   2003   and   respondent

No.1/plaintiff could be accommodated only against those flats.

Asking the appellant to hand over additional 8 flats and 16

parking spaces by way of mandatory order, would be to

superimpose the liability of respondent No.2/defendant No.1

on the appellant for discharging its obligation qua respondent

No.1/plaintiff   in relation to the agreement entered between

them dated 22nd September, 1999 and including Settlement

Agreement dated 4th November, 2016 and Consent Terms

dated 25th September, 2017, to which the appellant is not a

party.
24. That apart, the learned Single Judge as well as the

Division Bench have committed fundamental error in applying

the principle of moulding of relief which could at best be

resorted to at the time of consideration of final relief in the

main suit and not at an interlocutory stage. The nature of

order passed against the appellant is undeniably a mandatory

order at an interlocutory stage. There is marked distinction
24
between moulding of relief and granting mandatory relief at an

        interlocutory stage. As regards the latter, that can be granted

        only to restore the status quo and not to establish a new set of

        things differing from the state which existed at the date when

        the suit was instituted. This Court in Dorab Cawasji Warden

        Versus Coomi Sorab Warden and Others,2 has had occasion

        to    consider     the    circumstances        warranting       grant    of

        interlocutory mandatory injunction. In paragraphs 16 & 17,

        after analysing the legal precedents on the point as noticed in

        paragraphs 11-15, the Court went on to observe as follows:
“16. The relief of interlocutory mandatory injunctions
              are thus granted generally to preserve or restore the
              status quo of the last non-contested status which
              preceded the pending controversy until the final hearing
              when full relief may be granted or to compel the undoing
              of those acts that have been illegally done or the
              restoration of that which was wrongfully taken from the
              party complaining. But since the granting of such an
              injunction to a party who fails or would fail to establish his
              right at the trial may cause great injustice or irreparable
              harm to the party against whom it was granted or
              alternatively not granting of it to a party who succeeds or
              would succeed may equally cause great injustice or
              irreparable harm, courts have evolved certain guidelines.
              Generally stated these guidelines are:
(1)   The plaintiff has a strong case for trial. That is,
              it shall be of a higher standard than a prima facie case that
              is normally required for a prohibitory injunction.
2
(1990) 2 SCC 117
25
(2)   It is necessary to prevent irreparable or serious
     injury which normally cannot be compensated in terms of
     money.
(3)   The balance of convenience is in favour of the
     one seeking such relief.
17. Being essentially an equitable relief the grant or refusal
     of an interlocutory mandatory injunction shall ultimately
     rest in the sound judicial discretion of the court to be
     exercised in the light of the facts and circumstances in each
     case. Though the above guidelines are neither exhaustive nor
     complete or absolute rules, and there may be exceptional
     circumstances needing action, applying them as prerequisite
     for the grant or refusal of such injunctions would be a sound
     exercise of a judicial discretion.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)
25. The Court, amongst others, rested its exposition on the

dictum in Halsbury‟s Laws of England, 4th edition, Volume 24,

paragraph 948, which reads thus:
“A mandatory injunction can be granted on an interlocutory
     application as well as at the hearing, but, in the absence of
     special circumstances, it will not normally be granted.
     However, if the case is clear and one which the court thinks
     ought to be decided at once, or if the act done is a simple
     and summary one which can be easily remedied, or if the
     defendant attempts to steal a march on the plaintiff, such as
     where, on receipt of notice that an injunction is about to be
     applied for, the defendant hurries on the work in respect of
     which complaint is made so that when he receives notice of
     an interim injunction it is completed, a mandatory
     injunction will be granted on an interlocutory application.”
26
26. The principle expounded in this decision has been

        consistently followed by this Court. It is well established that

        an interim mandatory injunction is not a remedy that is easily

        granted. It is an order that is passed only in circumstances

        which are clear and the prima facie material clearly justify a

        finding that the status quo has been altered by one of the

        parties to the litigation and the interests of justice demanded

        that the status quo ante be restored by way of an interim

        mandatory injunction. (See Metro Marins and Another

        Versus Bonus Watch Co. (P) Ltd. and Others3, Kishore

        Kumar Khaitan and Another Versus Praveen Kumar

        Singh4 and Purshottam Vishandas Raheja and Another

        Versus Shrichand Vishandas Raheja (Dead) through LRS.

        and Others5)
27. In the factual scenario in which mandatory order has

        been passed against the appellant, in our opinion, is in excess

        of jurisdiction. Such a drastic order at an interlocutory stage

        ought to be eschewed. It cannot be countenanced.
3   (2004) 7 SCC 478
4   (2006) 3 SCC 312
5   (2011) 6 SCC 73
27
28. Reverting to the decision in Gaiv Dinshaw Irani,

(supra), relied upon by the High Court, the Court moulded the

relief in favour of the party to the proceedings to do

substantial justice whilst finally disposing of the proceedings

and did not do so at an interlocutory stage. In other words,

reliance placed on the principle of moulding of relief is

inapposite to the fact situation of the present case.
29. Resultantly, the invocation of principle of moulding of

reliefs so also the exercise of power to grant mandatory order

at an interlocutory stage, is manifestly wrong. To put it

differently, while analysing the merits of the contentions the

High Court was swayed away by the consent agreement

between the respondents inter partes to which the appellant

was not a party. Thus, he could not be bound by the

arrangement agreed upon between the respondents inter se.

The appellant would be bound only by the agreement entered

with respondent No.2 dated 10th March, 2003 and at best the

tripartite   agreement   dated   11th   September,      2009.   The

respondent No.2 having failed to discharge its obligation under
28
the stated agreement dated 10th March, 2003, cannot be

permitted to take advantage of its own wrong in reference to

the    arrangement     agreed        upon    by   it   with    respondent

No.1/plaintiff and including to defeat the claim of the

appellant in the arbitration proceedings.
30. It would have been a different matter if the High Court

were to continue the ad-interim arrangement directed in terms

of order dated 3rd December, 2012 and as corrected on 17th

December, 2012, until the final disposal of the suit. However,

by no stretch of imagination, the appellant could be directed to

hand over 8 additional flats and 16 parking spaces to

respondent No.1 with whom the appellant has had no

independent       agreement     in    that   regard.     The    fact   that

respondent No.1 would get a right in the suit property in terms

of    agreement    dated   22nd       September,       1999,   Settlement

Agreement dated 4th November, 2016 and Consent Terms

dated 25th September, 2017 with respondent No.2, cannot be

the basis to set up a claim against the appellant and,

especially because complying with the directions in the
29
impugned order would result in bestowing        advantage on

respondent No.2 who has failed to discharge its obligation

under the agreement dated 10th March, 2003 with the

appellant.
31. In view of the above, we have no hesitation to conclude

that the High Court committed manifest error and exceeded

its jurisdiction in granting interlocutory mandatory injunction

against the appellant.
32. Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order passed

by the High Court deserves to be set aside but while doing so,

we deem it appropriate to revive the ad-interim order passed

by the Single Judge of the High Court on 3rd December, 2012

in Notice of Motion No.147/2013 and as corrected on 17th

December, 2012, which shall operate until the disposal of the

suit or until it is modified by the High Court on account of

subsequent developments, if any, as and when occasion

arises.
30
33. While parting, we make it clear that the observations

made in this judgment are only for considering the matter in

issue under consideration and shall not influence the

substantive proceedings pending between the parties.    The

same be decided on its own merits.
34. The appeal is allowed in the aforementioned terms. No

costs.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
August 21, 2018.