[Cites
3
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Food Corporation Of India vs Gen.Secy., Fci India Emplpyees Union on 20 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3902, 2018 LAB IC 4002
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL No.10499 OF 2011


                   Food Corporation of India              ….Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

                   Gen. Secy, FCI India Employees
                   Union  & Ors.                      …Respondent(s)

                                       WITH 

                               CIVIL APPEAL No.10511 OF 2011

                   Food Corporation of India              ….Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

                   The Workmen Through the 
                   Convener & Anr.                    …Respondent(s)

                                        J U D G M E N T

                   Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)    These appeals are directed against the final judgment and

                   order dated 13.12.2006 passed by the High Court of Madras at
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.20
16:41:10 IST
Reason:
Chennai in Writ Appeal No.3383 & 3382 of 2003 whereby the
1
High Court dismissed the appeals filed by appellant herein.
2)    In   order   to   appreciate   the   short   controversy   involved   in

these appeals, few relevant facts need to be mentioned infra.
3)    The appellant is a Government of India Undertaking known

as   “Food   Corporation   of  India” (hereinafter  referred to  as  “the

FCI”).     The   appellant   is   engaged   in   the   business   of   sale,

procurement, storage and distribution of food grains.
4)    In   order   to   carry   out   their   business   activities,   which   are

spread   all   over   the   country,   the   appellant   has   established   its

Branch   offices   in   every   State.   One   such   Branch   office   is   at

Chennai   (TN).   The   appellant   has   employed   a   large   number   of

employees   to   carry   out   its   business   operations   through   their

Chennai   Branch   office   with   which   we   are   concerned   in   these

appeals.
5)    In   the   year   1992,  a   dispute   arose  between  the  appellant

(FCI) and around 955 employees working in the Branch office at

Chennai as to whether these 955 employees are the employees

of   the   FCI   or   they   are   employed   by   the   contract   labourers’

Society to work in the FCI to carry out their business operations
2
and secondly, whether these 955 employees are entitled to claim

regularization of their services as FCI employees.
6)    The   case   of   the   appellant   (FCI),   in   substance,   was   that

these (955) employees were/are never the employees of the FCI

but   were/are   the   employees   of   a     contract   labourers’   Society

though working in the establishment of the FCI for doing their

work. It was stated that due to this reason, they are not entitled

to claim the status of the employees of the FCI and nor are they

entitled to claim any regularization of their services in the set up

of the FCI as the employees of the FCI.  It was stated that their

remedy, if any, would be against the contract labourers’ Society

engaged by the FCI but not against the FCI.
7)    On the other hand, the case of the workers’ Union was that

these 955 employees are, in fact, the employees of the FCI and

being   in   their   regular   employment   since   inception   have   been

discharging their duties regularly for doing the work of the FCI.

It  was   contended   that they  are therefore entitled to claim  the

regularization of their services in the set up of the FCI.
8)    Since   the   aforementioned   dispute   could   not   be   resolved
3
amicably   between   the   appellant   and   the   workers’   Union,   the

Government   of   India   by   order   dated   06.04.1992   referred   the

said   dispute   to   the   Industrial   Tribunal,   Madras   for   its

adjudication   under
Section   10
of   the   Industrial   Disputes   Act,

1947.
9)    The following reference was made for adjudication:
“Whether   the   action   of   the   management   of   Food
      Corporation of India is denying to regularize 955 contract
      labourers engaged in management of Food Corporation of
      India, Godown, Avadi through TVK Cooperative Society in
      respect of names as given in Annexure is justified ?  If not,
      to what relief they are entitled to?”
10) Both   the   parties   submitted   their   statements   in   ID   No.

39/1992   &   I.D.   55/1993   in   support   of   their   respective   stand

before   the   Industrial   Tribunal.     So   far   as   the   workers’   Union

(respondents herein) is concerned, they adduced the evidence to

prove their case whereas the appellant (FCI) did not adduce any

evidence   to   prove   their   case   despite   affording   them   an

opportunity to adduce.
11) By awards dated 19.02.1997 & 29.07.1998, the Industrial

Tribunal answered the reference in favour of the workers’ Union
4
and against the appellant. It was held that these 955 employees

are entitled to be regularized in the services of the FCI.
12) The   appellant   (FCI)   felt   aggrieved   and   filed   writ   petitions

before   the   High   Court   of   Madras   at   Chennai.   By   order   dated

07.08.2000, the Single Judge dismissed the writ petitions and

upheld   the   award   passed   by   the   Industrial   Tribunal.     The

appellant felt aggrieved and filed intra court appeals before the

Division Bench.
13) By impugned order, the Division Bench dismissed the writ

appeals   and   affirmed   the   order   of   the   Single   Judge   and   the

awards of the Industrial Tribunal, which have given rise to filing

of the present appeals by way of special leave by the FCI.
14) Having   heard   the  learned counsel for  the parties and on

perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   find   no   merit   in   these

appeals.
15) We   have   perused   the   awards   of   the   Industrial   Tribunal,

order of the Single Judge and the impugned order. Mere perusal

of them would go to show that the Industrial Tribunal examined

the   question   in   right   perspective   on   facts   and   the   evidence
5
adduced by the Union so also the Single Judge and lastly, the

Division Bench.
16) It is evident that the Tribunal, on appreciating the evidence

in   its   original   jurisdiction,   rightly   concluded   that   firstly,   the

agreement   with   the   contract   labourer   for   doing   the   work   had

come   to   an   end   in   1991   and   thereafter   it   was   not   renewed;

Secondly, all the 955 workers were being paid wages directly by

the FCI; Thirdly, the nature of work, which these workers were

performing, was of a perennial nature in the set up of the FCI;

Fourthly,   all   955   workmen   were   performing   their   duties   as

permanent workers; and lastly, no evidence was adduced by the

FCI in rebuttal to prove their case against the workers’ Union.
17) The   writ   Court   then   re­examined   the   issues   so   also   the

Division   Bench   in   the   appeals   with   a   view   to   find   out   as   to

whether the findings of the Industrial Tribunal are factually and

legally sustainable or not. The High Court, by reasoned orders,

passed   in   writ   petitions   and   appeals   affirmed   the   findings

observing that none of the findings recorded by the Industrial

Tribunal,   which   were   impugned   in   the   writ   petitions   and
6
appeals, suffer from any kind of perversity or illegality so as to

call for any interference by the High Court in writ petitions and

appeals.
18) We are inclined to affirm the concurrent findings because,

in   our   opinion,   none   of  the   findings  though   assailed   in  these

appeals call for any interference.
19) In our opinion, the very fact that the appellant (FCI) failed

to   adduce   any   evidence   to   prove   their   case,   the   Industrial

Tribunal   was   justified   in   drawing   adverse   inference   against

them.   Indeed,   nothing   prevented   the   appellant   from   adducing

evidence to prove the real state of affairs prevailing in their set

up relating to these workers. It was, however, not done by the

FCI for the reasons best known to them. It was not the case of

the appellant (FCI) that they were not afforded any opportunity

to   adduce   evidence   and   nor   any   attempt   was   made   by   the

appellant to adduce any evidence in the writ petitions or in the

intra   court   appeals   and   lastly   even   in   these   appeals   to   prove

their case.
20) That   apart,   in   our   opinion,   the   four   findings   of   fact
7
recorded against the appellant by the Industrial Tribunal were

based   on   sufficient   evidence   adduced   by   the   workers’   Union.

Indeed,  these findings being concurrent in nature are binding

on   this   Court   while   hearing   appeals   under
Article   136
of   the

Constitution.
21) These   findings,   in   our   opinion,   were   equally   relevant   for

answering the question referred to the Tribunal and further they

did not suffer from any kind of perversity or illegality so as to

call for any interference as rightly held by the High Court.
22) In the light of the foregoing discussion, the reference was

rightly answered in favour of the workers’ Union.
23) It   was   then   brought   to  our   notice   that   similar   industrial

reference   alike   the   one  in  the   present  case was  also   made  in

relation to the FCI Branch at West Bengal and the said reference

was answered in favour of workers’ Union. The matter was then

taken to the High Court unsuccessfully and then carried to this

Court at the instance of the FCI in Civil Appeal No.7452 of 2008

and   the   appeal   was   dismissed   on   20.07.2017   resulting   in

upholding the award of the Industrial Tribunal.   It was stated
8
that the FCI then implemented the award, as is clear from the

       notice on 05.10.2017, in favour of the concerned workers.                    Be

       that as it may, since we have upheld the impugned order in this

       case on the facts arising in the case at hand, we need not place

       reliance   on   any   other   matter,   which   was   not   before   the   High

       Court.
24) In the light of the foregoing discussion and examining the

       issues   arising   in   these  appeals  from  all  angles, we  are  of  the

       considered opinion that the appellant (FCI) failed to make out

       any case, which may call for any interference in the impugned

       order.
25) In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeals fail and are

       accordingly dismissed.
………...................................J.
                                          [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                                  
          
                                       …...……..................................J.
                                         [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]

       New Delhi;
August 20, 2018
9
REPORTABLE

             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

         CIVIL APPEAL Nos.10502­10505 OF 2011


K.K. Suresh &  Anr.Etc.                     ….Appellant(s)

                        VERSUS

Food Corporation of India 
& Ors. Etc.                               …Respondent(s)


                         J U D G M E N T

Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)    These appeals are directed against the final judgment and

order dated 28.06.2007 passed by the High Court of Kerala at

Ernakulam   in   Writ   Appeal   No.479   of   2002   and   Writ   Appeal

No.480   of   2002   whereby   the   High   Court,   by   a   common

judgment, dismissed the appeals filed by the appellants herein.

Against   the   said   order,   the   appellants   filed   review   petitions

which   were   disposed   of   by   the   High   Court   by   order   dated

23.08.2007   in   R.P.   No.767   of   2007   in   Writ   Appeal   No.479   of
10
2002 and R.P. No.768 of 2007 in Writ Appeal No.480 of 2002.
2)    In   order   to   appreciate   the   short   controversy   involved   in

these appeals, few relevant facts need to be mentioned infra.
3)    The appellants claiming to be working as clerical staff filed

writ   petitions   against   the   Food   Corporation   of   India­

FCI(Respondent   No.   1   herein)   in   the   Kerala   High   Court   and

prayed   therein   that   their   services   be   regularized   on   their

respective posts on which they were working since 1997 in the

set   up   of   FCI.     In   other   words,   the   appellants   (petitioners

therein) claimed a relief of regularization of their services in the

set up of FCI as regular employees of the FCI.
4)    Respondent   No.1   (FCI)   contested   the   writ   petitions  inter

alia on the ground that the appellants are not the employees of

the FCI and nor were they ever appointed by the FCI in their set

up but they (appellants) were appointed as clerical staff by one

Co­Operative   Society   called   “FCI   Head   Load   workers   Co­

Operative   Society”.   It   was,   therefore,   contended   that   in   the

absence   of   any   kind   of   relationship   of   the   employer   and   the

employee between the appellants and the FCI, a relief of either
11
absorption or regularization in the services of the FCI does not

arise   and   nor   any   relief   of   this   nature   can   be   granted   to   the

appellants against the FCI.
5)    The   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court,   by   order   dated

16.01.2002,   dismissed   the   appellants’   writ   petitions.   The

appellants felt aggrieved and filed intra court appeals before the

Division   Bench.   By   impugned   order,   the   Division   Bench

dismissed   the   appeals   and   affirmed   the   order   of   the   Single

Judge, which has given rise to filing of these appeals by special

leave by the unsuccessful writ petitioners.
6)    Having   heard   the  learned counsel for  the parties and on

perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   find   no   merit   in   these

appeals.
7)    In our considered opinion, the writ Court and the Division

Bench were right in dismissing the appellants’ writ petitions and

we do not find any reason to differ with the view taken by the

two Courts below.
8)    In   the   first   place,   the   appellants   failed   to   adduce   any
12
evidence   to   prove   existence   of   any   relationship   between   them

and   the   FCI;   Second,   when   the   documents   on   record   showed

that   the   appellants   were   appointed   by   the   FCI   Head   Load

Workers Co­Operative Society but not by the FCI then obviously

the remedy of the appellants, if at all, in relation to their any

service   dispute   was   against   the   said   Society   being   their

employer but not against the FCI;   Third, the FCI was able to

prove with the aid of evidence that the appellants were in the

employment of the said Society whereas the appellants were not

able   to   prove   with   the   aid   of   any   documents   that   they   were

appointed by the FCI and how and on what basis they claimed

to be in the employment of the FCI except to make an averment

in the writ petitions in that behalf. It was, in our opinion, not

sufficient to grant any relief to the appellants.
9)    So   far   as   the   reference   made   by   the   appellants   to   one

litigation decided by the Industrial Tribunal between one set of

persons   and   the   FCI   regarding   the   status   of   such   persons   is

concerned, in our view, it has no relevance for deciding this case

and nor it, in any way, helps the appellants for claiming relief
13
against the FCI.
10) It   is   for   the   simple   reasons   that   first,   the   case   at   hand

arose out of the writ petitions whereas the case relied on arose

out  of   industrial  reference  decided by  the Industrial Tribunal;

Second, the facts involved in the case at hand clearly prove that

there   did   not   exist   any   kind   of   employee   and   employer

relationship   between   the   appellants   and   the   FCI;   and   lastly,

there is no parity of any nature noticed on facts in the case at

hand and the case relied on by the appellants.
11) In view of the foregoing discussion, we find no good ground

to take a different view than the one taken by the two Courts

below.
14
12) The appeals are thus found to be devoid of any merit.  They

are accordingly dismissed.
………...................................J.
                                                [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                                    


                                               …...……..................................J.
                                                [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]

New Delhi;
August 20, 2018
15
REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

            CIVIL APPEAL No.10530 OF 2011


Food Corporation of India& Anr.          ….Appellant(s)

                     VERSUS

Head Load Labour Congress
(Regn.No.336/85) & Anr.                  …Respondent(s)

                     WITH 
            CIVIL APPEAL No.7961 OF 2014

Food Corporation of India& Ors.          ….Appellant(s)

                     VERSUS

Thrissur Jilla General Mazdoor
Sangh FCI Unit represented by
Its President A.K. Suresh Kumar
&  Ors.                                  …Respondent(s)


                     J U D G M E N T

Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)   These two appeals namely Civil Appeal No.10530 of 2011

and Civil Appeal No.7961 of 2014 are directed against the final
16
judgment and order dated 15.02.2010 passed by High Court of

Kerela in Writ Appeal No.249 of 2009 which arose out of order

dated 22.09.2009 passed by Single Judge in O.P. No.14360 of

1999 and against another final order dated 20.03.2014 passed

by   the   High   Court   of   Kerala   in   Writ   Appeal   No.1746   of   2013

which arose out of an order dated 04.09.2013 passed by Single

Judge in W. P. (C) No.14786 of 2013 respectively.
2)    Though these appeals arise out of an order passed by the

High Court of Kerala, but we find that these appeals also involve

more or less the same point which we have dealt with in detail

in our order passed today (20.08.2018) in Civil Appeal No.10499

of 2011, Civil Appeal No.10511 of 2011  (
Food Corporation of

India   and   Ors.  vs.  Gen.   Secretary,   FCI   India   Employees

Union   and   Ors.
)  which   arose   from   the   orders   passed   by   the

High Court of Madras.
3)    The   present   two   appeals   appeals   are   filed   by   the   FCI

against   the   Workers’   Union   of   different   branches,   the   only

difference   being   that   the   Civil   Appeal   No.10499   of   2011   and

Civil Appeal No.10511 of 2011 relate to employees working in
17
Chennai Branch Office of FCI, whereas the present appeals (C.A.

Nos.10530/2001 and 7961/2014) relate to employees working

in depots at West Hills Mavelikkare and Chelakkudy in State of

Kerala and, therefore, these appeals came to be decided by the

High Court of Kerala.
4)    In short, the facts of the present two appeals are that the

writ   petitions   were   filed   by   the   workers’   Union   against   the

appellant (FCI) seeking a mandamus against the appellant (FCI)

directing them to implement the award (Ex.P­1) passed by the

Industrial Tribunal, Chennai also in relation to the employees

working in Branch offices at Kerala named above.
5)    The said award (Ex.P­1) directed the FCI to give benefits of

regularization   of   the   workers   in   the   services   of   the   FCI

consequent   upon   abolition   of   contract   laborers   system   in

relation to Branch office at Chennai.   This award (Ex.P­1) was

upheld by this Court and attained finality.
6)    The   High   Court,     by   impugned   order,   allowed   the   writ

petitions filed by the workers’ Union (respondents herein) and

directed   the   FCI   to   give   benefits   of   the   said   award   to   the
18
members   of   the   workers’   Union   (respondent   herein),   who   are

working in two depots at Kerala finding no dissimilarity in two

set of these cases.
7)    We  also   do  not   find  any  justifiable reason(s) to  deny  the

relief   granted   by   the   High   Court   to   the   writ   petitioners

(respondents   herein)   insofar   as   these   two   appeals   are

concerned. It is more so when no distinguishing features were

pointed out by the appellants on the facts or law, which may

persuade this Court to take a different view than the one taken

by the High Court in the impugned order. What were pressed

into service were only the technical issues arising in the case

but we were not impressed by such issues. They did not go to

the root of the case.
8)    Having regard to the totality of the facts and circumstances

of the case coupled with the judicial orders passed against the

appellant   in   relation   to   identical   matters,   we   find   no   good

ground to take any other view in the case than the one taken by

Madras High Court in similar case and in the impugned orders.
19
9)     In the light of the foregoing discussion, these appeals also

fail and are accordingly dismissed.
………...................................J.
                                        [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                                    

                                       …...……..................................J.
                                        [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]

New Delhi;
August 20, 2018
20