[Cites
0
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Lalli Patel vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh And Ors. ... on 14 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 220
Author:
Kurian Joseph
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Kurian Joseph
1

                                                                          Non-Reportable



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.8258 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.32593 of 2016)

                   LALLI PATEL                                       Appellant(s)

                              Versus

                   STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & OTHERS                   Respondent(s)



                                             JUDGMENT
KURIAN, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    Whether deposit of security along with the presentation of

                   an election petition is to be made by way of payment before the

                   Specified Officer or whether it is sufficient to deposit the amount

                   in the name of the Specified Officer in the Bank, is the question

                   arising for consideration in this case.
3.    The appellant filed an election petition under Section 122 of

                   the
Signature Not Verified   Madhya    Pradesh   Panchayat       Raj   Evam   Gram      Swaraj
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2018.08.18
Adhiniyam, 1993 before the Specified Officer/Presiding Officer,
13:25:55 IST
Reason:
Collector, Rewa.
2
4.   The contesting respondent filed an application under Rule

11 of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat (Election Petition, Corrupt

Practices and Disqualification for Members) Rules, 1995 stating

that the election petition was not maintainable since the

appellant has not made the security deposit of Rs.500/- as

prescribed under Rule 7 of the 1995 Rules.
5.   Rule 7 of the 1995 Rules reads as follows:
“Rule 7. Deposit of Security: At the time of presentation of
     an election petition, the petitioner shall deposit with the
     specified officer a sum of Rs.500/- as security. Where
     the election of more than one candidate is called in
     question, a separate deposit of an equivalent amount
     shall be required in respect of each such returned
     candidates.”
6.   It is the case of the contesting respondent and the State

that the deposit has to be made with the Specified Officer and not

elsewhere. The appellant made a treasury deposit and produced

the receipt before the Specified Officer.      Learned Single Judge

and the Division Bench of the High Court in the intra-Court

appeal have taken a stand that the treasury deposit is not a

payment in terms of Rule 7 and that the deposit is to be made by

way of payment before the Specified Officer.
7.   We are afraid that the stand taken by the High Court cannot

be appreciated. The requirement of Rule 7 is ‘deposit of security’
3
and not ‘payment of security’ in cash before the Specified Officer.

What is relevant and mandatory is the deposit of security in the

name of Specified Officer, and the mode or manner of deposit is

irrelevant.
8.   It is not in dispute that the appellant has made a deposit of

Rs.1000/- as per the Challan dated 30.03.2015. As to ‘On What

Account’ the deposit was made, the Challan specifies it to have

been made “towards Election Petition” (pquko ;kfpdk ckcr). Head of

Revenue (0070) is also indicated in the Treasury Challan.

Significantly, even if payment is made to the Specified Officer, he

has to deposit the money in the treasury through the Bank. It is

the proof of such treasury deposit in the bank of the officer that

is presented along with the election petition.        That is an

absolutely permissible mode of deposit.
9.   There is no dispute that the money deposited in the bank

was deposited in the name of the prescribed authority. In this

context, we may also refer to a decision by the coordinate

Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Tika Ram

v. Darshanlal, 1988(I) M.P. Weekly Notes 192, wherein the Court

held thus:
4
“… It is not complained that the money deposited in the
      Bank was not deposited in the name of prescribed
      authority. We do not read anything in the petition to
      suggest that the deposit was so made that the prescribed
      authority had no control over the money deposited in the
      State Bank wherein, admittedly, the particulars of the
      election-petition were mentioned. The Rule in our opinion
      does not lay down any inexorable requirement of deposit
      being made in cash with the prescribed authority as
      contended by the counsel.”
10.   In view of the foregoing, the appeal is allowed.            The

impugned judgment of the High Court dated 10.02.2016 in Writ

Appeal No.914 of 2015 is set-aside. The order dated 11.09.2015

passed by the Presiding Officer, Collector, Rewa in Case No.08-A-

89/MAIN/14-15 is restored accordingly.
The Specified Officer is directed to dispose of the Election

Petition expeditiously taking note of the fact that the prescribed

period of six months has expired a long back.
11.   There will be no order as to costs.
……………………………., J.
(KURIAN JOSEPH)



                                            ……………………………., J.
(SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)
New Delhi;
August 14, 2018