[Cites
10
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India Through Its Secretary vs Maj Gen Manomoy Ganguly on 1 August, 2018
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5800 OF 2018


                      UNION OF INDIA THROUGH ITS
                      SECRETARY & ORS.                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                                VERSUS

                      MAJ. GEN. MANOMOY GANGULY                                  .....RESPONDENT(S)



                                                         JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
The respondent herein was commissioned in the Army

                                Medical Corps on 3rd March, 1980.         By ascending the career

                                ladder, he has reached the position of Lieutenant General

                                (hereinafter referred to as Lt. General), which he occupies at

                                present, though it is a different matter that he had to struggle a lot

                                for claiming his rightful promotion to the rank of Lt. General from

                                that of Major General.      Brief factual narration concerning his

                                promotion from Major General to the rank of Lt. General shall be
Signature Not Verified
stated at the relevant stage.     He is now aspiring to hold the
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.08.01
16:41:57 IST
Reason:
position of Director General Medical Services (Army) [hereinafter
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                      Page 1 of 40
referred to as ‘DGMS (Army)] which has been denied to him by

       the appellants.          Feeling aggrieved,   the respondent    had

       approached the Armed Forces Tribunal (for short, ‘ AFT’),

       Principal Bench, New Delhi by means of O.A. No. 372 of 2018

       which has been allowed by the AFT vide its judgment dated 7 th

       May, 2018. Direction was issued to the appellants to post the

       respondent as DGMS (Army) “as expeditiously as possible and

       certainly not later than one month from today and for that purpose

       take all necessary consequential steps”. The appellants have

       taken exception to the outcome, as they feel that the matter has

       not been examined in correct legal perspective. This has led to

       the filing of the present appeal wherein the validity of the

       aforesaid judgment dated 7th May, 2018 of the AFT is called in

       question.
2)     The cognizable background facts, which require mentioning for

       the purposes of appreciating the nature of legal controversy and

       resolution thereof, are recapitulated hereinbelow:
ROUND I : THE EARLIER LITIGATION
3)     As mentioned above, the respondent was commissioned in the

       Army Medical Corps on 3rd March, 1980.          He kept on getting

       promotions from time to time and attained the rank of Major
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                   Page 2 of 40
General on 14th November, 2013.
4)     When the respondent became eligible for consideration for

       promotion to the next rank of Lt. General in due course he was

       considered for promotion to the said rank by the Special

       Promotion Board (Medical) [for short, ‘SPB’] on 20 th January, 2016

       but was not empaneled for promotion. Thereafter, he was

       considered for promotion to this rank as a 1 st review case on 3rd

       October, 2016, but again not empaneled. He had submitted a

       statutory complaint dated 22nd June, 2016, after his first

       consideration to the said post and rejection thereof, to the

       Government of India wherein he was granted partial redress by

       order dated 30th January, 2017 inasmuch as it was ordered that

       the assessment of Technical Officer in the Annual Confidential

       Report (ACR) for the year 2014 be expunged on the grounds of

       inconsistency.       The expunction of these remarks necessitated

       special review of his case for promotion to the rank of Lt. General.
Review Board again did not empanel him. This led to lodging of

       another statutory complaint dated 3rd June, 2017, wherein he

       primarily questioned the award of lesser marks by the three

       Service Chiefs who were the Members of the SPB under the head

       “Overall Profile”. It may be noted that he was awarded 1.5 marks,

       out of 2 marks, under the caption ‘Overall Profile’ and his
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                    Page 3 of 40
grievance was that he was entitled to better marks under this

       head. Since disposal of statutory complaint was taking time, the

       respondent preferred O.A. No. 1093 of 2017 before the AFT

       assailing his non-selection to the rank of Lt. General.     After

       completion of pleadings, matter was heard and vide judgment

       dated 2nd September, 2017 the AFT held that he was wrongly

       allotted less marks by the Board, on account of overall profile.

       The AFT also refrained the appellants from filling the post of

       DGMS (Army) (with which this litigation is concerned) that was

       falling vacant on 1st November, 2017. The appeal against that

       order of the AFT preferred by the appellant No.1/Union of India,

       was dismissed by this Court on 10 th November, 2017 holding that

       no interference with the direction of the AFT was warranted and

       the appellant was directed to take further steps, without loss of

       time, in terms of the directions given by the AFT in its judgment

       dated 2nd September, 2017.
5)     The manner in which the aforesaid judgment was implemented

       and grievance of the respondent was ultimately redressed only at

       the highest level by giving him promotion to the rank of Lt.

       General needs to be mentioned at this stage as these events

       have some bearing on the present case.            Some of the

       observations of the AFT and the directions given by it may be
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                 Page 4 of 40
reproduced in the first instance. These are as under:
“10. We have checked and rechecked the records. A plain
              comparison of the applicant’s revised profile after getting
              redressal will indicate that the applicant with 91.25
              quantified marks jumps to seventh place, above Maj. Gen
              Sanjiv Chopra having 91.15 quantified marks, and not 16th /
              15th as indicated in Note 3 above notes and also stated in
              the counter affidavit which is totally false. If the two are
              compared in totality, the applicant is entitled to same Board
              Marks which were given to Maj Gen Sanjiv Chopra i.e. 1.7
              out of two marks and would be higher in merit than Maj
              Gen Sanjiv Chopra.
xxx   xxx    xxx
14. Therefore, in the interest of justice, we quash the
              proceedings of the Review Special Promotion Board held
              on 21.03.2017 in respect of the applicant due to wrong
              Board marks allotted to him in this Board as a result of
              incorrect date presented to the Board Members by the
              Secretary of the Board. We also direct that the applicant
              be put through a fresh Review Special Promotion Board to
              consider him for promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen in
              consonance with the paramters of relevant policies and his
              changed profile after allotting entitled Board marks as
              pointed out above, and his seniority restored. In the
              meantime the respondents will refrain from filling up the
              post of DGMS(Army) falling vacant on 01.11.2017 and will
              only proceed after the case of the applicant is decided by
              the Board.”
6)     While affirming the aforesaid order, this Court in its judgment had

       made the following observations:
“21) In the original SPB meeting, Major General Sanjiv
              Chopra was awarded 1.70 out of 2 marks whereas the
              respondent was awarded 1.50 marks. Lesser marks given
              to the respondent were because of the reason that marks
              awarded to him out of 93 were lesser than Mr. Sanjiv
              Chopra. Result of the redressal was that the marks of the
              respondent became higher than Mr. Sanjiv Chopra which
              necessitated Review SPB. This Review SPB meeting has
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 5 of 40
to be on the same standards which were adopted in
              original SPB meeting.”
7)     A clear message in the aforesaid order of the AFT as well as

       order of this Court was that the respondent is to be assigned 1.70

       marks insofar as ‘overall profile’ was concerned, which was the

       standard adopted by the SPB (Medical) itself on an earlier

       occasion. On the award of 1.70 marks under the aforesaid head,

       the overall tally of marks of respondent would have been more

       than Major General Sanjiv Chopra who was junior to the

       respondent and was promoted as Lt. General.         As a natural

       corollary, the respondent would have also been entitled to

       promotion in the said rank of Lt. General.
8)     However, notwithstanding this simple logic, the respondent had to

       struggle hard even thereafter to get his legitimate due. In the

       fresh Review by SPB (Medical) held on 4 th December, 2017, the

       respondent was again given 1.5 marks by the SPB (Medical).
When the respondent came to learn about the same, he

       immediately rushed to the AFT by means of M.A. No. 1518 of

       2017 in O.A. No. 1093 of 2017. This application was filed on 6 th

       December, 2017 seeking restraint against the appellants from

       filling up the post of DGMS (Army). In this application, the AFT

       passed orders dated 7th December, 2017 directing the appellant
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                  Page 6 of 40
not to fill up the post till the time review of the SPB is approved by

       the Competent Authority.     It also called for the records for its

       perusal. Fortunately, for the respondent, when the matter was

       examined by the Competent Authority, i.e., the Raksha Mantri, it

       did not approve the review undertaken by SPB awarding 1.5

       marks to the respondent and recommended his promotion. This

       recommendation met the approval of the ACC as well.               The

       respondent was, accordingly, promoted to the rank of Lt. General

       on 1st March, 2018 only.
9)     When M.A. 1518/2017 was taken up by the AFT, after notice to

       the appellant on 2nd February, 2018, the aforesaid note of

       Competent Authority of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) was shown

       to the AFT. The Government was directed to file an affidavit

       indicating if the name of the respondent for the post of DGMS

       (Army) had been sent in the proposal to the MoD or not? In

       response, Army filed the affidavit on 8th February, 2018 stating

       that Director General Armed Forces Medical Service (for short,

       ‘DGAFMS’) had considered the case of the respondent but found

       him not suitable for forwarding his name for DGMS (Army) to the

       Ministry of Defence (MoD) and it was approved by the Chief of

       Army Staff as well. It was also stated that some other officers had

       been recommended for appointment.
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 7 of 40
10)    After finding that his name was not forwarded to MoD for

       appointment to the post of DGMS (Army), the respondent filed

       O.A. 372 of 2018 before the AFT which has been allowed as

       aforesaid.
ORDER OF THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL
11)    The AFT has narrated the background in which the grievance of

       the respondent for promotion to the rank of Lt. General came to

       be redressed after he won the judicial battle before the AFT as

       well as this Court.
12)    Thereafter, it noted the contention of the counsel for the

       respondent that name of the respondent, being the senior most

       officer, ought to have been included in the panel of names

       forwarded by the DGAFMS for appointment to the post of DGMS

       (Army) to the Competent Authority.           Based on the said

       submission, the AFT directed the appellants to file the affidavit as

       to whether name of the respondent was included in the panel of

       names recommended for the appointment or not. In the reply, the

       appellants took the position that name of the respondent was

       considered for the appointment to the DGMS (Army) but he was

       not found ‘suitable’ for the said post and Lt. General Sanjiv
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                    Page 8 of 40
Chopra, who was the next senior officer, was recommended for

       this post.
13)    The AFT noted that circular dated 10 th July, 1992 lays down

       criteria of appointment to the posts of DGMS (Army) which

       mentions not only seniority but suitability as well.              We may

       reproduce the criteria laid down in the said circular in order to

       appreciate the manner in which the AFT proceeded with the

       matter:
“2. Taking into account various aspects relating to the
              appointment of DGsMS of Services the following criteria is
              laid down for their appointment, in future :
(i)    The inter-se seniority and suitability of officers in the
              rank of Lt. Gen. (and equivalent) holding the posts of
              Comdt AMC Centre and School, Comdt AFMC, Pune and
              the Addl. DGAFMS shall be assessed in the light of their
              earlier experience of serving in particular services and they
              shall be considered for appointment as DGsMS of services
              provided they have a minimum remainder service of six
              months, from the date of the vacancy.
(ii)  If, after the exercise of (I) above, none of the officers
              are found suitable for appointment as DGsMS of services,
              against available vacant posts, officers of Maj Gen (and
              equivalent) rank, already approved for promotion to Lt. Gen
              rank, may be considered for such appointments.
(iii) The lateral shifting of DGMS of one Service to
              another Service may be considered only in exception
              circumstances.”
14)    The criteria mentions ‘inter se seniority and suitability of the

       officers in the rank of Lt. General (and equivalent)’. What is the
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                           Page 9 of 40
exact meaning and scope of this criteria is the bone of contention.
According to the AFT, it meant ‘seniority-cum-suitability’.                The

       AFT, on that basis, formulated the following three questions

       which, according to it, arose for its consideration.
“(i) What is the judicial interpretation given by the Court to
              the concept of seniority cum suitability?
(ii)  Whether the post of DGMS (Army) which is to be
              tenated in terms of the circular of 10 th July, 1992 is required
              to be appointed based on seniority cum suitability, and
              does it give the option to the Respondents for rejecting a
              candidate to the post of DGMS(Army) despite he having
              been otherwise fit and fulfilling all other eligibility criteria;
(iii) Whether an officer who has tenure of less than one
              year can be appointed by the Respondents despite the
              minimum tenure prescribed by its own circular.”
15)    Insofar as question no. 1 is concerned, in order to find an answer

       thereto, the AFT referred to the law laid down in various

       judgments defining the meaning of ‘seniority’ and how the

       principle of ‘merit-cum-seniority’ and ‘seniority-cum-merit’ are to

       be applied.        Based on the discussion contained in the cited

       judgments, the AFT summed up the position in the following

       manner:
“20. In view of the above judgements, where-ever the term
              “seniority cum merit” is used it means that seniority is to be
              given prime importance and merely because a person
              happens to be more meritorious, he cannot be promoted or
              appointed overlooking the seniority. The usage of the term
              “merit cum seniority” is totally converse to this. In the latter
              concept, the merit will prevail over seniority. Another
              indispensable factor is where ever the term “merit” is used
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                           Page 10 of 40
as a prefix or as suffix, it will entail a comparison of two
              officers so far as their merit is conce5rned, but in the case
              of seniority cum suitability, no such comparison is
              envisaged. Suitability of an officer is totally dependent on
              the individual characterstic of the officer concerned. An
              officer may be senior, but he may be unsuitable because of
              his competence, integrity or any other reasons, but then he
              has to be declared as unsuitable or unfit and it is only in
              such circumstances that his claim to be appointment of a
              particular post will be overlooked. This would be in our
              considered view the answer to the first query.”
16)    Applying the aforesaid principle, as culled out by the AFT, in the

       instant case where the criteria was noticed as ‘seniority-cum-
suitability’, the AFT has taken the view that seniority is a decisive

       factor and suitability is a secondary factor. Then it proceeded on

       the premises that since it was not the case of the appellants that

       the respondent is unsuitable, he was wrongly overlooked. The

       AFT also remarked that there was a deliberate attempt to

       somehow recommend the name of Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra and

       ignore the respondent. It also found that there have always been

       a convention to appoint senior most person to the post of DGMS

       (Army) inasmuch as the appellants were not able to cite even a

       single case in last 20-30 years where the seniority was

       overlooked. Contrary thereto, name of the respondent was not

       even forwarded by the DGAFMS to the Competent Authority for

       consideration while sending the names of two other officers

       (including Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra). In this way the respondent
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 11 of 40
was wrongly ignored, was the opinion of the AFT.
17)    After arriving at the aforesaid conclusion, the AFT has remarked

       that though in normal circumstances the AFT would have given

       direction to the appellant to consider the suitability of the

       respondent and pass necessary order, however, that would only

       give another lever in the hands of appellant to declare him

       unsuitable. Therefore, on that basis, the AFT has itself directed

       the appellant to appoint the respondent to the post of DGMS

       (Army), primarily going by its interpretation to the criteria viz.

       seniority is the decisive factor and the respondent is the senior

       most and also that the appellants had given fair treatment to the

       respondent in the past.
THE ARGUMENTS
18)    Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General appearing for the

       appellants, attacked the very approach adopted by the AFT in

       dealing with the issue at hand. Referring to the Circular dated 1 st

       June 1992, which lays down the criteria for appointment of DGMS

       (Army), he submitted that the said circular very clearly mentions

       the criteria of ‘inter se seniority and suitability’. According to him,

       the Tribunal wrongly read this criteria as equivalent to ‘seniority-

       cum-suitability’ and in the process totally glossed over the phrase
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 12 of 40
‘inter se’. His submission was that the AFT formulated wrong

       questions, particularly question Nos. 1 and 2, which led it in wrong

       direction and resulted in wrong answers. Stressing the word ‘inter

       se’ he emphasised that this prefix applied not only to seniority but

       to suitability as well. Thus, it was inter se seniority and inter se

       suitability of the eligible persons which was required to be

       adjudged. He submitted that even if the respondent was senior

       most, when it came to inter se suitability of the respondent vis-a-

       vis other eligible officers, Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra was found to

       be more suitable for the post and for this reason he was

       recommended for appointment to the post of DGMS (Army). In

       order to support the aforesaid argument, the learned Attorney

       General produced the Notings dated 23 rd January 2018 and 24th

       January 2018. He pointed out that in this Noting the criteria laid

       down was taken note of and the case of the respondent was

       considered in the light of the said criteria in the following manner:
“3.     The criteria laid down by the MoD for the appt of
              DGsMS are placed at enclosure 1A & 2A. As per the
              criteria, Lt Gen (& equivalent) will be assessed for the appt
              of DGsMS in the light of their earlier experience in a
              particular service, provided they have a minimum residual
              service of 01 (one) year from the date of occurrence of
              vacancy.
xx         xx           xx
6)   MR 04141M Maj Gen Manomoy Ganguly, VSM is
              approved for the promotion to the rank of Lt Gen (&
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 13 of 40
Equivalent) in AMC vide MoD ID Note No
              3(2)/2017/D(Medical) dated 19th January, 2018 (Encl – 4A).
              The Gen Officer on assumption of the rank of Lt Gen would
              superannuate on 31st May, 2019 and would have a residual
              service of more than 01 (one) year. The officer has been
              proposed separately for the appt of DGHS (AF) office of
              the DGAFMS.
xx        xx           xx

              7)     it is submitted that the DGAFMS has held extensive
deliberations regarding the consideration of MR 04141M
              Maj Gen Manomoy Ganguly, VSM, for the appointment of
              DGMS (Army) consequent to his approval for promotion to
              the rank of Lt Gen (Equivalent) in AFMS by a Review
              Promotion Board held on 4th December, 2017. It has been
              submitted that, Maj Gen Manomoy Ganguly, VSM would be
              newly promoted from the rank of Maj Gen and does not
              have previous experience to the working and environs of
              the IHQ of the MoD. His proposal, therefore, for appt in the
              office of DGAFMS as DGHS(AF) would be commensurate
              with his restored seniority as well as provide him the
              opportunity to become familiar with the functions, roles and
              responsibilities of the office of the DGAFMS and various
              service HQs. The Gen Officer on promotion to the rank of
              Lt Gen (& Equivalent) would then superannuate on 31 st
              May, 2019.       Against this backdrop, the COAS has
              approved the panel for inclusion of Maj Gen Manomoy
              Ganguly, VSM for the appt of DGHS (AF).”
19)    Vis-a-vis the respondent, case of Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra, the

       next senior most officer, was considered who had residual service

       of 1 year and 17 days and, therefore, was also eligible and it was

       found that he was more suitable for the post in question and the

       Note recorded this consideration in the following terms:
“9. Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, VSM, DGHS (AF) and Col.
              Comdt. O/O DGAFMS, meets the eligibility criteria the appt
              of DGMS (Army). The COAS has approved the panel for
              the appt of DGMS (Army) as under:
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                       Page 14 of 40
Sr No. Personal Particulars            Remarks
                (a)       Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, VSM Recommended for
                          Col Comdt                   appt of DGMS
                          (MR 04142P)                 (Army)
                          DGHS     (AF)    office  of
                          DGAFMS
                (b)       Surg V Adm U K Sharma     Not
                          (MR 04262N)               Recommended.
                          DG (Org & Pers) office of
                          DGAFMS
10. Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, VSM in his illustrious service
                career of more than 37 years, has tenanted important staff
                and command appt viz: Brig Training at AFMC Pune, Brig
                IC Adm Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt., ACIDS (Med) at HQ
                IDS, New Delhi, Commandant MH Meerut and Base
                Hospital, Delhi Cantt. and MG (Med) HQ Delhi Area.
11. Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, VSM took over the appointment
                of Director General of Hospital Services (Armed Forces) in
                the office of the DGAFMS on 18th November, 2016 and
                assumed the appt of Col Commandant of the Army Medical
                Corps on 9th July, 2017. He has, thus, been recommended
                for the appointment of DGMS (Army). Proposal for his relief
                is being submitted separately.
12. MR-04262N Surg Vadm UK Sharma, DG (Org & Pers)
                in the office of DGAFMS is the senior most Medical
                Specialist and Nephrologist. The Flag Officer has been
                proposed for permanent secondment to Army in the rank of
                Lt Gen for the appointment of Commandant AH (R&R)
                which is falling vacant on 31 st March, 2018 consequent to
                superannuation of MR-03992M Lt Gen AK Das. Hence, he
                is not recommended for the appointment of DGMS (Army).”

                This Note prepared by one Brig. B. Sridhar mentions that it

       has the approval of DGAFMS as well as the Chief of the Army

       Staff.
20)    On the basis of the aforesaid Note, Director (Medical) prepared

       his Note dated 24th January 2018 as per which Lt. General Sanjiv
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 15 of 40
Chopra was recommended for appointment to DGMS (Army). Mr.

       Venugopal pointed out that even in this Note it was reiterated as

       to why DGAFMS had not included the name of the respondent

       and also specifically recorded the reason given by DGAFMS in

       recommending the name of Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra. Relevant

       portion of this Note is as under:
“Preceding notes may please be perused. DGAFMS has
              submitted proposal for posting/appointment of DGMS
              (Army) and the panel of officers proposed for the post
              contains the following two names:
Sr No. Personal Particulars          Remarks
                  (a)    Lt Gen Sanjiv Chopra, VSM, Recommended for
                         Col Comdt                  appointment  to
                         (MR 04142P)                DGMS (Army)
                         DGHS (AF)
                  (b)    Surg V Adm U K Sharma, Not
                         (MR 04262N)            Recommended.
                         DG (Org & Pers)
2. It may be highlighted here that DGAFMS has not
              included the name of MR 04141M Maj Gen Manomoy
              Ganguly, VSM, who is now the senior most Lt Gen (&
              Equivalent) officer in the AMC having residual service of
              one year eligible for appointment as DGMS (Army). It may
              also be noted here that in the past, the senior most Lt. Gen
              (& Equivalent) officer in the AMC are invariably appointed
              as DGMS (Army).
3. In this regard, DGAFMS has stated that “the DGAFMS
              has held extensive deliberations regarding consideration of
              MR 04141M Maj Gen Manomoy Ganguly, VSM for the
              appointment of DGMS (Army) consequent to his approval
              for promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen. (& Equivalent) in the
              AFMS by a Review Promotion Board held on 4 th December,
              2017. It has been submitted that Maj Gen Manomoy
              Ganguly, VSM would be newly promoted from the rank of
              the IHQ of the MoD.           His proposal therefore for
              appointment in the office of DGAFMS as DGHS (AF) would
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                       Page 16 of 40
commensurate with his restored seniority as well as
               provide him the opportunity to become familiar with the
               functions, roles and responsibilities of the office of the
               DGAFMS and various service HQs. The Gen Officer on
               promotion to the rank of Lt Gen (& Equivalent) wold then
               superannuate on 31st May, 2019. Against this backdrop,
               the COAS has approved the panel for inclusion of Maj Gen
               Manomoy Ganguly, VSM for the appointment of DGHS
               (AF)”.
Below this Note, the Additional Secretary (JN) put the

       following remarks:
“Panel sub. By DGAFMS at para 1 of the note is sub. for
               kind consideration of RM for selection of DGMS (Army).”

                      It was further put up to the Defence Secretary and

       thereafter to the Raksha Mantri, who approved the same.
21)    Based on the aforesaid Notings, the argument developed by the

       learned Attorney General was that this exercise was strictly in

       accordance with the criteria laid down in the Administrative

       Instructions dated 10th July 1992 which, inter alia, lays down the

       following procedure:
(i)     Inter se Seniority of Lt Generals

       (ii)    Their Suitability;
(iii)   Assessment of their suitability in the light of their earlier

       experience of service in particular service on the date of

       occurrence of their vacancy vide Government of India dated 10 th

       July, 1992;
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                      Page 17 of 40
(iv)   Residual service of one year; and
(v)    In case no service Lt Gen is found suitable then Maj Gen

       who are empanelled for promotion to Lt Gen may also be

       considered.
22)    It was submitted that in the matter of appointment to the post of

       DGsMS of the Services, the ‘assessment of suitability’ of a Lt.
General or its equivalent plays a vital and significant role. This is

       further reiterated by the fact that according to the policy, if none is

       found suitable, the criteria even caters for consideration of a Maj

       Gen (approved for promotion to Lt. General) for the said post.

       Consequently, even a junior who is empanelled but yet to be

       promoted to the rank of Lt. General, can be considered and

       appointed as DGMS.
23)    Mr. Venugopal also submitted that the assessment of suitability

       per se involves judging the fitness of person to be appointed to

       the post of DGMS.        This is ensured by way of a consultative

       process and thereafter formulation and submission of a proposal

       by the DGAFMS as the Cadre Controlling Authority with the

       approval of the respective Chiefs of Staff for sanction of the

       Government of India assumes vital importance. In other words,

       the fitness of a person to be appointed as DGMS is evaluated in
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 18 of 40
the consultative process.             According to him, this process of

       consultation/deliberation based on record falls in the realm of

       ‘suitability’, and consequently, evaluation of worth and merit of an

       officer for being appointed to the post of DGMS.
24)    He also submitted that while the ‘seniority’ and ‘residual service

       clause’ provide a threshold limit or bar to determine the eligibility

       for consideration, the ‘suitability’ clause in the policy provides for

       procedure to be followed to assess fitness of the officer to hold

       the post based on his appointments held, ability to lead the

       AMC/Equiv         in     operations    and   challenging   circumstances,

       organisational fitness for job (appointment) content, leadership

       qualities, competence, experience, knowledge, integrity and the

       like. Ultimately, the appointment to the post of DGMS is approved

       by exercising the executive powers of the President through the

       Central Government, which was followed in the present case.
25)    He also argued that when it comes to suitability of a person to

       man a particular post, it was to be considered by the appropriate

       authority and such considered opinion of the Competent Authority

       could not come within the purview of judicial review as held in
Mahesh Chandra Gupta v. Union of India and Others
1 in the


1   (2009) 8 SCC 273
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                         Page 19 of 40
following words:
“42. Hence,
Article 217(1)
and
Article 217(2)
operate in
               different spheres.
Article 217(1)
answers the question as to
               who “should be elevated” whereas
Article 217(2)
deals with
               the question as to who “could be elevated”. Enrolment of
               an advocate under the 1961 Act comes in the category of
               who “could be elevated” whereas the number of years of
               actual practise put in by a person, which is a significant
               factor, comes in the category as to who “should be
               elevated”.
43. One more aspect needs to be highlighted. “Eligibility”
               is an objective factor. Who could be elevated is specifically
               answered by
Article 217(2).
When “eligibility” is put in
               question, it could fall within the scope of judicial review.
However, the question as to who should be elevated, which
               essentially involves the aspect of “suitability”, stands
               excluded from the purview of judicial review.”
26)    He also sought to draw sustenance from the judgment of House

       of Lords in
Anisminic, Ltd. v. The Foreign Compensation

       Commission & Anr.2
wherein it is held that a tribunal which is the

       creature of a statute is bound to act within the parameters

       imposed by the statute and further that it is obligated to make its

       enquiry and decision according to the law of land. For that reason

       the courts can intervene when it is manifest from the record that

       the tribunal, though keeping within its mandated area of

       jurisdiction, comes to an erroneous decision through an error of

       law. In such a case the courts have right to intervene to correct

       the error.
2   (1969) 1 All E.R. 208
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                         Page 20 of 40
27)    Another judgment on which the learned Attorney General relied

       upon was the case of
Union of India and Others v. Lt. Gen.`

       Rajendra Singh Kadyan and Another
3. The relevant portion is

       quoted hereinbelow:
“29. The contention put forth before us is that there are
              factual inaccuracies in the statement recorded by the
              Cabinet Secretary in his note and, therefore, it must be
              deemed to be vitiated so as to reach a conclusion that the
              decision of the Government in this regard is not based on
              proper material. The learned Attorney General, therefore,
              took great pains to bring the entire records relating to the
              relevant period which were considered by the Cabinet
              Secretary and sought to point out that there were notings
              available on those files which justify these remarks. Prima
              facie, we cannot say, having gone through those records,
              that these notings are baseless. Critical analysis or
              appraisal of the file by the Court may neither be conducive
              to the interests of the officers concerned or for the morale
              of the entire force. Maybe one may emphasize one aspect
              rather than the other but in the appraisal of the total profile,
              the entire service profile has been taken care of by the
              authorities concerned and we cannot substitute our view to
              that of the authorities. It is a well-known principle of
              administrative law that when relevant considerations have
              been taken note of and irrelevant aspects have been
              eschewed from consideration and that no relevant aspect
              has been ignored and the administrative decisions have
              nexus with the facts on record, the same cannot be
              attacked on merits. Judicial review is permissible only to
              the extent of finding whether the process in reaching
              decision has been observed correctly and not the decision
              as such. In that view of the matter, we think there is no
              justification for the High Court to have interfered with the
              order made by the Government.”
28)    The learned Attorney General, thus, found error in the approach

       of the AFT in giving primacy to ‘seniority’ alone, ignoring the
3   (2000) 6 SCC 698
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                          Page 21 of 40
second element, namely, ‘comparative suitability’.         He also

       submitted that observation of the AFT that in the past only senior

       most officers were appointed as DGMS (Army) was factually

       incorrect as one Air Marshal H.K. Maini, though senior, was

       sidetracked and his junior Lt. General L.P. Sadhotra was

       appointed as DGMS (Army) on the basis of suitability.               Mr.

       Venugopal went to the extent of arguing that if the wrong principle

       formulated by the AFT is sustained, it may lead to serious

       consequences inasmuch as this very criteria is adopted not only

       for the post of DGMS (Army)         but other more important and

       sensitive posts like Chiefs of the Army, Air Force, Navy as well.
29)    Mr. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appeared for the respondent

       defended the order of the AFT by raising multiple arguments. At

       the outset, he highlighted the manner in which, according to him,

       the respondent was treated shabbily by the concerned officers. In

       this regard, he pointed out the manner in which he was earlier

       refused promotion to the post of Lt. General and the difficulties he

       had to surmount even after his success before the AFT as well as

       this Court, inasmuch as, in spite of the categorical directions, the

       Review Board still chose not to empanel him for promotion to the

       rank of Lt. General      But for a timely objectivity shown by the
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                   Page 22 of 40
Raksha Mantri, the respondent would have been left in the lurch

       even for the post of Lt. General
30)    Mr. Patwalia then pointed out that there had always been a

       practice of appointing the senior most eligible officer to the post of

       DGMS (Army). He submitted that solitary instance of Air Marshal

       H.K. Maini stated now by the appellants would not advance their

       case because of the reason that it is Air Marshal H.K. Maini

       himself who chose not to seek appointment to the post of DGMS

       (Army) because of his failing health. Apart therefrom, argued the

       learned senior counsel, there was no instance even as per the

       appellants.
31)    In this hue, he submitted that even in the instant case DGAFMS

       had initially prepared the Note dated 16 th January 2018 for

       appointment to the post of DGMS (Army) on the basis of seniority.

       This Note was prepared at the time when case of the respondent

       for promotion to the rank of Lt. General had not been

       recommended by the Board and this non-recommendation was

       forwarded to the Raksha Mantri.        Thus, as on that date, the

       DGAFMS proceeded on the basis that the respondent was not in

       the reckoning. He, thus, considered Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra to

       be the senior most person and recommended his name for
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 23 of 40
appointment as DGMS (Army) on the basis of his seniority. This

       was reflected in paragraph Nos. 2 and 3 of the said Note which

       read as under:
“2. The AMC in AFMS cadre has 10 (ten) Lt Gen (& Equiv)
              holding different appts in the three services. The appt of
              DGAFMS is held by the senior most Lt Gen, followed by
              the appt of the DgsMS which is held by the offrs in the
              order of seniority in the rank in the second tier of AMC
              cadre. The remaining six Lt Gen (& Equiv) are placed in
              the other appts i.e. DCIDS (Med.), DGHS (AF), DG (Org &
              Pers), Comdt Army Hosp (R&R), Comdt AFMC and Comdt
              & OIC Records, AMC C&C, Lucknow.
3. The annual average vacancies arising in a calendar
              year is around 4-5. Placement of empanelled Maj Gen (&
              Equiv) offrs on promotion to the next higher rank is
              followed strictly on the basis of their seniority and the
              availability of the appt falling vacant due to chain
              movement within the cadre to maintain inter se seniority
              and hierarchy of the appts. MR-04228K Maj Gen Anup
              Banerji, SM and MR-04432X Maj Gen RS Grewal, VSM,
              both are empanelled for promotion to the rank of Lt Gen
              (Equivalent) MoD ID Note No. 3(37)/2016/D (medical)
              dated 18 Nov 2016 for the vacancies arising in 2017, and
              hence their names were correctly forwarded in the panel of
              names of Gen officers for the appt of Comdt & OIC
              Records AMC C&C Lucknow vide this office note dated 04
              Jan 2018 in ref.”

       It is reiterated in paragraph 7 in the following manner:
“7...The DGAFMS, DgsMS, and the DCIDS are retained in
              the order of seniority for administrative reasons...”

                      He pointed out that in paragraph 4 the case of the

       respondent was discussed and it was mentioned that since his

       placement was a sub judice matter, he was not being considered

       for appointment.
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 24 of 40
32)    According to Mr. Patwalia, when it was later found that the

       Raksha Mantri had approved the name of the respondent for

       promotion to the rank of Lt. General as this recommendation was

       declassified on 19th January 2018, the DGAFMS got prepared

       another Note dated 23rd January 2018 (on which the learned

       Attorney General has placed reliance) by bringing the criteria of

       comparative suitability for the first time. According to him, it was a

       clear device to deny the respondent posting as DGMS (Army)

       who had now become the senior most officer and the event

       showed that the authorities were bent upon favouring Lt. General

       Sanjiv Chopra or their intention was to deny the respondent its

       legitimate claim somehow.
33)    Coming to the Administrative Instructions in the Circular dated 10 th

       July 1992 laying down the criteria for appointment to the office of

       DGMS (Army), the submission of Mr. Patwalia was that the

       correct interpretation would be that the senior most person had to

       be considered for the said post in the first instance, subject to his

       suitability. If he was found unsuitable only then the next senior

       most officer would be considered. According to him, there was no

       concept of ‘more suitable’ in the said Instructions. He submitted

       that the law which was discussed by the Tribunal on ‘seniority-
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 25 of 40
cum-merit’ was to emphasis that seniority plays predominant role

       even when merit is also one of the considerations. Therefore, in

       the instant case when it is ‘seniority-cum-suitability’, it implies that

       the senior most person, unless declared as unsuitable or unfit,

       was to be given appointment to the post in question. Therefore,

       according to him, the Tribunal has approached the issue in right

       perspective. For this purpose, he heavily relied upon paragraphs

       Nos. 9 and 10 from the judgment of this Court in
B.V. Sivaiah

       and Others v. K. Addanki Babu and Others4
which read as

       under:
“9. The principle of “merit-cum-seniority” lays greater
              emphasis on merit and ability and seniority plays a less
              significant role. Seniority is to be given weight only when
              merit and ability are approximately equal.
In the context of
              Rule 5(2) of the Indian Administrative Service/Indian Police
              Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955
              which prescribed that “selection for inclusion in such list
              shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with
              due regard to seniority” Mathew, J. in
Union of India v.
              Mohan Lal Capoor
has said: (SCC p. 856, para 37)

                 “[F]or inclusion in the list, merit and suitability in all
                 respects should be the governing consideration and
                 that seniority should play only a secondary role. It is
                 only when merit and suitability are roughly equal that
                 seniority will be a determining factor, or if it is not
                 fairly possible to make an assessment inter se of the
                 merit and suitability of two eligible candidates and
                 come to a firm conclusion, seniority would tilt the
                 scale.”

              Similarly, Beg, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was)
              has said: (SCC p. 851, para 22)
4   (1998) 6 SCC 720
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                          Page 26 of 40
“22. Thus, we think that the correct view, in conformity
                 with the plain meaning of words used in the relevant
                 Rules, is that the ‘entrance’ or ‘inclusion’ test for a
                 place on the select list, is competitive and
                 comparative applied to all eligible candidates and not
                 minimal like pass marks at an examination. The
                 Selection Committee has an unrestricted choice of
                 the best available talent, from amongst eligible
                 candidates, determined by reference to reasonable
                 criteria applied in assessing the facts revealed by
                 service records of all eligible candidates so that merit
                 and not mere seniority is the governing factor.”
10. On the other hand, as between the two principles of
              seniority and merit, the criterion of “seniority-cum-merit”
              lays greater emphasis on seniority.
In
State of Mysore v.
              Syed Mahmood
while considering Rule 4(3)(b) of the
              Mysore State Civil Services General Recruitment Rules,
              1957 which required promotion to be made by selection on
              the basis of seniority-cum-merit, this Court has observed
              that the Rule required promotion to be made by selection
              on the basis of “seniority subject to the fitness of the
              candidate to discharge the duties of the post from among
              persons eligible for promotion”. It was pointed out that
              where the promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit, the
              officer cannot claim promotion as a matter of right by virtue
              of his seniority alone and if he is found unfit to discharge
              the duties of the higher post, he may be passed over and
              an officer junior to him may be promoted.”
34)    He also submitted that as the authorities had themselves applied

       the criteria
laid down in
the said Circular to mean seniority is

       subject     to    suitability   (i.e.   unless   found   unsuitable),   this

       administrative instruction by the aforesaid prolonged practice had

       established itself as a legal principle from which the appellants

       could not deviate. He also referred to the following judgments in

       support of his submission that under certain circumstances even
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                          Page 27 of 40
the Court can give a positive direction to appoint or promote a

       person to a particular post:
(
a)    State of Bihar v. Dr. Braj Kumar Mishra and Others5
(b)    State of Mysore and Another v. Syed Mahmood and
              Others6


       INTERPRETATION           OF    “INTER    SE     SENIORITY       AND

       SUITABILITY”
35)    We have bestowed due consideration to various nuances of the

       issue, as argued by both the counsel for their respective parties.
36)    Before adverting to the specificity in which the appellant dealt with

       the matter of the respondent herein, we deem it appropriate to

       first go into the parameters which are required for the purpose of

       considering the appointments to the post of DGMS (Army). The

       respondent belongs to Army Medical Corps (AMC) which comes

       under Armed Forces Medical Service (AFMS). In this service,

       there are ten appointments in the rank of Lt. General (&

       Equivalent) which are held by Officers belonging to AMC. It has

       three tier structure. On the top is the post of DGAFMS, who is the

       head of AFMS. He functions directly under the Government of

       India, Ministry of Defence and is responsible to the Government

       for overall medical policy concerning the armed forces.           The
5   (1999) 9 SCC 546
6   (1968) 3 SCR 363
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                    Page 28 of 40
functions of the DGAFMS as laid down in Paragraph 18 of the

       Regulations for the Medical Services of Armed Forces 2010

       (Revised Version) (RMSAF) issued under the authority of the

       Government of India, Ministry of Defence, include inter alia that

       he is the Cadre Controlling Authority in respect of all officers of

       the AFMS, and is responsible for terms and conditions of services

       of all officers including for processing cases and obtaining

       Government sanction where necessary.        Below the DGAFMS,

       there are three posts of Director General Medical Services, one

       each for the Army, Navy and the Air Force called the DGMS

       (Army) DGMS (Navy) and DGMS (Air) respectively. The DGs of

       the three Services are Medical Advisors to the respective Chief of

       Staff and are responsible for the day to day administration and

       proper functioning of the medical services of the Army, Navy and

       Air Force.        The remaining six posts of Lt General or their

       equivalent are placed in other appointments held in other

       establishments of the Armed Forces.
37)    DGMS (Army) is in the second tier which is treated as higher than

       DGMS (Navy) or DGMS (Air).          The post of DGMS (Army) is

       normally tenable by an Officer of the rank of Lt. General belonging

       to AMC and he acts as Principal Medical Advisor to the Chief of
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                  Page 29 of 40
Army Staff.
38)    As noted above, administrative instructions dated 10 th July, 1992

       are issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Defence laying

       down the specific criteria for appointment to the post(s) of DGMS.

       We have already reproduced the aforesaid criteria.              However,

       since para (i) is the bone of contention, we reproduce the same

       hereinbelow for the sake of continuity of discussion:
“(i) The inter-se seniority and suitability of officers in the
              rank of Lt Gen (and equivalent) holding the posts of Comdt
              AMC Centre and School, Comdt AFMC, Pune and the Addl
              DG AFMS shall be assessed in the light of their earlier
              experience of serving in particular services and they shall
              be considered for appointment of DGs MS of services
              provided they have a minimum remainder service of six
              months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy.”
39)    The expression which is to be assigned its proper meaning is ‘the

       inter se seniority and suitability’. Whereas the respondent argues

       that it is nothing but ‘seniority-cum-suitability’ which means senior

       most Lt. General subject to his suitability for the post of DGMS

       (Army) is to be appointed, the plea of the appellant is that the

       word ‘inter se’ has also to be given its due meaning and it is

       related both to seniority as well as suitability. On that basis, it is

       argued that suitability is to be judged ‘inter se’ between the

       eligible persons and one who is more suitable would be entitled to

       appoint as DGMS (Army).
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 30 of 40
40)    When we read the aforesaid para (i) as a whole, we find force in

       the submission of the appellant that the word ‘inter se’ applies

       both to seniority as well as suitability.         Therefore, ‘inter se

       suitability’ is also to be assessed inasmuch as this assessment is

       ‘in the light of their earlier experience of serving in a particular

       service’. As far as consideration on the parameters of ‘inter se

       seniority’ is concerned, it would mean that a person who is senior

       gets precedence. To this extent, there is no quarrel. Question is

       as to what meaning is to be assigned to ‘inter se suitability’. Two

       questions arise from the above. First, what is the meaning of

       ‘suitability’. Second, how the expression ‘inter se suitability’ is to

       be construed, i.e. whether it should be understood as choosing a

       ‘more suitable’ officer for appointment as DGsMS. As far as inter

       se suitability is concerned, all the eligible officers in the rank of Lt.
General (& Equiv), having regard to their earlier experience of

       serving in particular services, they are to be considered for

       appointment as DGsMS of services (i.e. DGMS (Army)).
41)    Let us first consider the meaning of ‘suitability’.
42)    In English parlance, the word ‘suitable’ is assigned the meaning

       as ‘appropriate, fitted for the purpose or acceptable’. The concise

       Oxford Dictionary defines the word suitable as ‘well fitted for the
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                       Page 31 of 40
purpose; appropriate’. This ordinary meaning is to be given effect

       to as a general guide, unless this expression is given special

       meaning in a statute or rule in administrative instructions.
In
R

       (Quintavalle) v. Human Fertilisation Authority7
, the House of

       Lords remarked that “the word ‘suitability’ is an empty vessel

       which is filled with meaning by context and background.
43)    In service jurisprudence, where the word ‘suitable’ is normally

       examined from the point of view as to whether a particular person

       is suitable to hold a particular post, it is construed as ‘fit’ to hold

       that post. It would mean that the job profile and job requirement

       of a particular post would be seen and then, going by the calibre,

       competence, attributes, skill and experience of the candidate, it

       would be ascertained as to whether such a person would be able

       to discharge the duties of the post i.e. whether he is suited to

       carry out the functions of the post, to the satisfaction of his

       employer.
44)    It, thus, follows from the above that the person to be eligible

       should quality the following conditions:
(i)    the officer should be in the rank of Lt. General (& Equiv);
(ii)   such an officer should be holding the post of Comdt AM


7   (2005) UKHL 28
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 32 of 40
C&C; and
(iii)   he should have a minimum remainder service of one year

               from the date of occurrence of the vacancy.
45)    Adverting to the second question, the prefix ‘inter se’ has also to

       be given some meaning as it cannot be rendered otiose.

       Therefore, whereas while assessing ‘suitability’, it has to be seen

       that a particular officer is not unfit for the post, when it comes to

       ‘inter se suitability’, it has reference to assessing the suitability of

       all eligible officers and thereafter finding who is more suitable to

       occupy such a post. We have to keep in mind that these are very

       high ranking posts and, therefore, the competent authority is

       supposed to choose a more suitable officer for such posts. We

       are of the opinion that for expressing such an intention, the

       Circular could have been worded more appropriately and with

       clarity to avoid such doubts. However, since the word ‘inter se’ is

       used, it implies that the intention behind laying down this criteria

       was to give these posts to a better suited person after evaluating

       their inter se suitability. Of course, while doing this exercise

       seniority of an officer is also to be given due weightage, meaning

       thereby if the senior most person is competent to hold the post,

       he is to be given preference. Therefore, we conclude that the
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                      Page 33 of 40
view of the AFT that the post of DGMS (Army) is to be filled by the

       officer on the strength of ‘seniority-cum-suitability’, where seniority

       is a decisive factor and suitability is a secondary factor, is not

       correct. In the entire discussion resting with the aforesaid view,

       the Tribunal ignored the fact that it is not only seniority and

       suitability simpliciter but ‘inter se’ seniority and suitability. The

       expression ‘inter se’ is totally ignored and there is no discussion

       thereupon at all, which has led the AFT to take wrong view insofar

       as interpretation of the criteria
laid down in
the Circular dated 10 th

       July, 1992 is concerned, which talks of ‘inter se seniority and

       suitability’.
46)    Having made this legal position clear, we advert to the facts of the

       present case.
47)    Some admitted facts which are pertinent for the outcome of the

       present appeal need to be highlighted at this juncture. These are:
(i)     The respondent is the senior most Lt. General
(ii)    He fulfils the eligibility criteria for appointment to the post of

       DGMS (Army).
(iii)   DGMS (Army) is treated as better post than other DGs, i.e.

       DGMS (Navy) and DGMS (AF).
(iv)    The past practice has been to fill up the post of DGMS
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                        Page 34 of 40
(Army) from a senior most officer. Before the AFT, the appellants

       failed to give any example where seniority was ignored. In the

       past, i.e. ever since issuance of Circular dated 10 th July 1992, the

       practice has been to appoint the senior most Lt. General from

       Army. Before the AFT, the appellants could not cite a single

       deviation to the aforesaid practice. In the appeal, example of one

       Air Marshal H.K. Maini is given.        However, it is adequately

       answered by the respondent by pointing out that that happened

       because Air Marshal Maini himself chose not to be posted as

       DGMS (Army) because of his health reasons, which the

       appellants could not controvert.
(iv)   Even, in the present case, for appointment of DGMS (Army)

       the first Note dated 16th January 2018 by DGAFMS, in no

       uncertain terms, stated that the appointment to this post is to be

       made ‘strictly on the basis of their seniority’, meaning thereby the

       senior most Lt. General (& Equiv) is to be posted. That Note was

       prepared on the assumption that the respondent is not in the

       reckoning as his case for promotion to the post of Lt. General was

       not recommended.
(v)    It is for the first time that in the Note dated 23 rd January

       2018 the question of so-called ‘suitability’ is taken up. We have

       used the expression ‘so-called’ for the reason that (as would be
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                    Page 35 of 40
discussed in some detail afterwards) even this Note dated 23 rd

       January 2018 does not reflect that any exercise of “inter se

       suitability” is carried out strictly in accordance with the criteria
laid

       down in
the Circular dated 10th July 1992, i.e. on the touchstone

       of ‘inter se seniority and suitability’.
48)    Apart from the aforesaid admitted facts, we also would like to

       state some of the findings as recorded by the AFT, with which we

       are in agreement. These are listed below:
(i)    There has been some attempt (though we are not

       suggesting as to whether it was deliberate or bona fide) in

       denying the respondent his claim for promotion to the rank of Lt.
General       Events in detail on this aspect have already been

       narrated above, which need not be reiterated.           Suffice it is to

       mention that even after the orders of the AFT and affirmation

       thereafter by the judgment of this Court, the Board had stuck to

       its earlier notion about the respondent. Fortunately for him, the

       Raksha Mantri took a fair and objective view in the matter and

       granted him his deserved promotion, which was legitimately due

       to him.
(ii)   As on 16th January 2018, when DGAFMS prepared his Note

       for appointment to the post of DGMS (Army), which had fallen
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                       Page 36 of 40
vacant few months ago, he only knew that the Review Board had

       again refused to recommend the case of the respondent in the

       rank of Lt. General Therefore, he proceeded on the basis that

       since the respondent is not occupying the post of Lt. General he

       is out of reckoning and, accordingly, Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra

       was the senior most officer.       Proceeding on the aforesaid

       presumption, after excluding the respondent from consideration,

       he recommended Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra for appointment as

       DGMS (Army) being the senior most in the AFMS cadre. This

       Note went to the extent of recording that not only promotion is

       strictly on the basis of their seniority, it was being done even for

       the posts of ‘DGAFMS’, ‘DGsMS’ and the ‘CDC IDC’ who are

       retained in the order of seniority for administrative reasons.

       Within three days thereafter, when the decision of the Raksha

       Mantri to promote the respondent to the rank of Lt. General was

       declassified, in the fresh Note prepared on 23 rd January 2018,

       there was a complete turn around.       For the first time, it was

       mentioned in this Note that as per the criteria Lt. General (&

       Equiv) will be assessed for appointment of DGMS ‘in the light of

       their earlier experience in a particular service’. No doubt, this

       criteria is mentioned in the Circular dated 10 th July 1992 and,

       therefore, there may not be anything wrong per se. However, we
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                   Page 37 of 40
find substance in the submission of the learned senior counsel

       appearing for the respondent that such a realisation dawned only

       after coming to know that the respondent was also in the

       reckoning for appointment to the post of DGMS (Army) and he

       was the senior most officer.
(iii)   The manner in which this Note is written leaves a

       reasonable impression that the exercise was done to exclude the

       respondent from appointment to the post of DGMS (Army). In the

       first instance, though the criteria of assessment ‘in the light of

       their earlier experience in a particular service’ is mentioned in

       paragraph 3 of the Note, it nowhere reproduces the exact criteria,

       namely, ‘inter se seniority and suitability’. Thus, while considering

       the earlier experience in a particular service, it was to be done in

       the light of inter se seniority-cum-suitability is not reflected in the

       said Note. In fact, there is no such exercise of inter se suitability

       undertaken in this Note.
(iv)    In paragraph 7 of the Note dated 23 rd January 2018, case of

       the respondent is discussed. Qua him it is mentioned that since

       he would be newly promoted from the rank of Major General, he

       does not have ‘previous exposure to the working and environs of

       the IHQ of the MoD’.           On that basis, he is proposed for

       appointment as DGHS (AF) instead of DGMS (Army).                 This,
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                     Page 38 of 40
according to us, is not a fair and objective consideration of his

       suitability for the post of DGMS (Army) as it is not necessary to

       have working experience in IHQ alone.               Mr. Patwalia had

       vehemently         argued   that   the   respondent    had      adequate

       administrative experience while working as Major General in

       Southern Command, which was equally relevant, doing similar

       nature of duties from which he has gained sufficient experience

       making him aptly suitable for the post of DGMS (Army). He had

       also pointed out that in the past, officers who are appointed to the

       post of DGMS (Army) were not necessarily those officers who

       had earlier worked in the environs of the IHQ of the MoD. This

       fact also could not be refuted by the appellants. Therefore, we

       find that there has not been any proper and valid consideration in

       applying the criteria of inter se seniority and suitability.
49)    For the aforesaid reasons, we agree with the ultimate conclusion

       of the AFT that appointment of Lt. General Sanjiv Chopra to the

       post of DGMS (Army) warrants to be quashed.
50)    However, in view of our aforesaid discussion, we are of the view

       that the direction of the AFT that the respondent be straightaway

       appointed to the post of DGMS (Army) may not be proper. We

       are conscious about the apprehensions of the AFT, which may not
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                         Page 39 of 40
unfounded altogether. However, since we have not agreed with

       the conclusion of the AFT that the appointment to the post of

       DGMS (Army) is not based on seniority alone, it may not be

       proper to uphold such a direction of the AFT. While setting aside

       this direction, we remit the case back to the Raksha Mantri. We

       repose full faith in the Raksha Mantri and are confident that she

       would consider the entire matter in a totally dispassionate

       manner, with utmost objectivity and depicting total fairness. Copy

       of this judgment and particularly the findings recorded by us,

       including the admitted facts which are culled out hereinbefore,

       would also be placed before the Raksha Mantri. Keeping in view

       that the post is lying vacant for some time and also that time is

       running out insofar as the respondent is concerned, we direct the

       appellants to place the matter before the Raksha Mantri forthwith,

       with no loss of time, and are hopeful that the decision shall be

       taken within a week.
51)    The civil appeal is partly allowed and is disposed of in the

       aforesaid terms.
.............................................J.
                                                                      (A.K. SIKRI)

                                          .............................................J.
                                                        (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 01, 2018.
Civil Appeal No. 5800 of 2018                                           Page 40 of 40