[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Savatram Rampratap Mill vs Radheyshyam S/O Laxminarayan Goenkar ... on 20 August, 2018
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 751 OF 2008


                         Savatram Rampratap Mills                  .. Appellant(s)

                                                Versus

                         Radheyshyam s/o Laxminarayan
                         Goenka(D) Thr. LRs. & Anr.           .. Respondent(s)

                                                WITH

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9700 OF 2014
                                               AND
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9704 OF 2014


                                           J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.751 OF 2008
Signature Not Verified
1.   This appeal is filed against the final judgment
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.20
16:41:02 IST
Reason:
and order dated 16.01.2007 passed by the Division
1
Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,

Nagpur   Bench,   Nagpur   in   L.P.A.   No.46     of   2004

whereby   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court

dismissed  the   appeal filed by  the appellant herein

and upheld the order dated 25.11.2003 passed by

the Single Judge of the High Court in Writ Petition

No.1795 of 2003 by which the writ petition filed by

respondent No.1 herein was allowed and the order

passed by the Estate Officer of the National Textile

Corporation   Ltd.   (respondent  No.2   herein)   was   set

aside.
2.    Few   facts   need   to   be   mentioned  infra  for

disposal   of   the   appeal,   which   involves   a   short

question.
3.    The appellant was originally a privately owned

Company   situated   at   Akola   (Maharashtra).   It   was

engaged in the business of manufacture of cotton.
2
This   Mill   was   later   taken   over   by   the   National

Textile   Corporation   (Maharashtra)  Ltd., which  is  a

subsidiary   of   NTC­a   Government   of   India

Undertaking.
4.    Since the appellant became the Government of

India Undertaking, the provisions of
Public Premises

(Eviction   of   Unauthorized   Occupants)   Act,   1971
(hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the   Act”)   became

applicable to the appellant’s Mills.
5.    On   25.06.1993   and   04.04.2003,   the   Estate

Officer   of   the   appellant   issued   the   notices   under
Sections 4
and
7 (3)
of the Act to respondent No.1’s

predecessor,     who   was   alleged   to   be   in   an

unauthorized   occupation   of   the   appellant's

premises,   and   called   upon   him   to   vacate   the

premises specified in the notices. He was, however,
3
asked   to   attend   the   proceedings,   pursuant   to   the

notices, at Mumbai.
6.    Respondent No.1’s   predecessor felt aggrieved

by   the   issuance   of   the   notices,   particularly,   that

part   of   the   notices,   which   had   directed   him   to

attend the proceedings at Mumbai, and filed a writ

petition   in   High   Court   of   Bombay   at   Nagpur

questioning the legality and validity of the notices.
7.      The   challenge   to  the   notices   was   essentially

on   the   ground   that   when   the   public   premises   in

question is situated at Akola then the proceedings

in relation to such public premises has to be held

only at Akola rather than at Mumbai where no part

of the cause of action had arisen.
8.    In other words, the contention was that when

admittedly the entire cause of action to initiate the

proceedings   under   the   Act   had   arisen   at   Akola
4
within   the   local   limits   specified   in   notification

issued under
Section 3
where the public premises

in   question   is   situated,   the     respondent   No.1's

predecessor   cannot   be   asked   to   attend   the

proceedings at Mumbai and the proceedings under

the   Act  can  only   be validly   initiated  at Akola  that

being   within   the   local   limits   specified   in   the

notification issued under
Section 3
of the Act.
9.    The  Single Judge of the High Court accepted

the   ground  raised by  the respondents herein (writ

petitioners)   and   by   his   order   dated   25.11.2003

allowed the writ petition, in consequence, quashed

the impugned notices. It was held that the appellant

would be free to initiate the proceedings under the

Act   in   relation   to   public   premises   in   question   at

Akola. The appellant felt aggrieved and filed Letters

Patent Appeal before the Division Bench.
5
10.   By impugned order, the Division Bench upheld

the order passed by the Single Judge and dismissed

the   appeal,   which   has   given   rise   to   filing   of   the

present   appeal   by   way   of   special   leave   by   the

appellant­Mills in this Court.
11.   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are inclined to dismiss the appeal finding no merit

therein.
12.   In our considered opinion, the Division Bench

in the impugned order rightly upheld the view taken

by   the   Single   Judge   calling   for   no   interference   in

this appeal.
13.   The   short   question,   which   arose   for

consideration before the High Court, was that when

the public premises in question is situated at Akola,

whether the proceedings in relation to such public
6
premises can be initiated under the Act at Mumbai

or   it   has   to   be   initiated   at   Akola,   that   being   the

place   falling   in   the   local   limits   specified   in   the

notification   issued   under
Section   3
of   the   Act   for

exercise of jurisdiction by the Estate Officer.
14.
Section   3(b)
of   the   Act,   which   is   relevant   for

this case, reads as under:
“3.   Appointment   of   estate   officers­   The
       Central   Government   may,   by   notification   in
       the Official Gazette­
(a)……………………………
(b)     define   the   local   limits   within   which,   or
       the   categories  of   public   premises   in   respect
       of   which,   the   estate   officers   shall   exercise
       the powers conferred, and perform the duties
       imposed, on estate officers by or under this
       Act.”
15.    Construing   the  expression  "local  limits  within

which" occurring in
Section 3(b)
of the Act, the High

Court   held   and,   in   our   opinion,   rightly   that   the

Estate   Officer   has   to   exercise   its   jurisdiction   in
7
relation   to   the   public   premises   falling   in   the  local

limits specified in the notification.
16.   Since  in  this  case, the notification (Annexure

P­1),   in   clear   terms,   specified   that   the   Mill   is

situated   at   Akola   [see   Item   5(15)],   a  fortiori,   the

proceedings   in   relation   to   such   public   premises

under the Act could only be initiated at Akola­that

being the area falling in the local limits specified in

the notification for exercise of powers by the Estate

Officer.       The   High   Court   was,   therefore,   right   in

interpreting
Section   3(b)
of   the   Act   and,   in

consequence,   was   legally   justified  in   quashing   the

notices   impugned   in   the   writ   petition   as   being

without jurisdiction.
17.   Before parting, we consider it apposite to state

that   the   appellant   would   be   free   to   issue   fresh

notices   to   respondent   No.1   under   the   Act   and
8
initiate   the   proceedings  for   their   eviction   from   the

public premises at Akola.
18.   If   the   respondents   are   dispossessed   on   the

strength of any order passed by the Estate Officer,

the possession will remain with the appellant but it

will   be   subject   to   final   adjudication   of   the

proceedings once initiated by the appellant.
19.   Let   fresh   notices   be   issued   by   the   appellant

within   one   month   from   the   date   of   this   order   to

respondent   No.1   or/and   to   any   person(s),   who

claim(s) to be in possession in relation to specified

public premises under the Act.
20.   The   proceedings   be   held   at   Akola­that   being

the proper place for deciding the proceedings under

the Act, as specified in the notification issued under
Section 3
referred supra.
9
21.   The proceedings, once initiated, be completed

expeditiously strictly in accordance with law.
22.   With  these  directions, the appeal fails and is

accordingly dismissed.
IN CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 9700 & 9704 of 2014

      In   view   of   the   above   order   passed   in   C.A.

No.751   of   2008,   these   appeals   are   also   dismissed

with the same directions.
…...……..................................J.
                           [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                        ………...................................J.
                            [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]
New Delhi;
August 20, 2018
10