[Cites
15
, Cited by
494
]
Supreme Court of India
Shamanna vs The Divisional Manager The Oriental ... on 8 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3726, 2018 (9) SCC 650, 2018 (4) AKR 540, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 357, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 34, (2018) 3 ACC 724, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2911, (2018) 4 RECCIVR 26, (2019) 1 RAJ LW 190, (2018) 72 OCR 138, 2019 (1) SCC (CRI) 863, (2018) 9 SCALE 456, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 689, (2018) 4 KER LT 367, (2018) 4 ACJ 2163, (2018) 6 BOM CR 248, (2018) 5 ALL WC 4416, (2018) 189 ALLINDCAS 94 (SC), (2018) 130 ALL LR 775, (2018) 3 TAC 677, (2018) 4 JCR 161 (SC), (2018) 3 JLJR 444, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 114
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
R. Banumathi
,
Ranjan Gogoi
REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8144 OF 2018
                                      [Arising out of SLP(C) No.26955 of 2017]

                         SHAMANNA AND ANOTHER                                 ...Appellants

                                                      Versus

                         THE DIVISIONAL MANAGER
                         THE ORIENTAL INSURANCE CO. LTD. AND ORS.
                                                                ...Respondents

                                                    JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 14.09.2016

                         passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Dharwad Bench in MFA

                         No.24534 of 2010 in and by which the High Court reversed the

                         award passed by the Tribunal for “pay and recover” holding that the

                         owner of the vehicle is liable to pay the compensation to the

                         appellants/claimants. The High Court enhanced the compensation

                         from Rs.3,55,500/- to Rs.4,94,700/- with interest at the rate of 6%

                         per annum.
3.   On      14.04.2008,   Shankareppa     Pattar    son    of   the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.08.08
17:08:30 IST
appellants/claimants was travelling in a jeep bearing Reg.No.KA-
Reason:
22/M-3805. The jeep was driven negligently due to which door of the
1
jeep suddenly opened and Shankareppa was thrown out of the

vehicle and sustained grievous injuries and died in the hospital. In

the claim petition filed by the appellants/parents of the deceased

Shankareppa, the Tribunal awarded compensation of Rs.3,55,500/-

with interest at 6% per annum from the date of claim petition till

realisation. Since the driver of the jeep had no valid driving licence at

the time of the accident and since there was violation of the terms of

the insurance policy, the Tribunal directed the insurance company to

pay the compensation to the claimants and granted liberty to the

insurance company to recover the same from the owner of the

offending vehicle.
4.    Being aggrieved by the award directing the insurer to pay the

compensation amount to the claimants and recover the same from

the owner of the vehicle, the insurance company filed appeal before

the High Court.      The claimants have also filed appeal seeking

enhancement of compensation. The High Court referred to its own

judgment in the case of
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. K.C.

Subramanyam MANU/KA/0945/2012
: ILR 2012 KAR 5241 and

held that the Supreme Court directed the insurance company to

make payment to the claimants and to recover the same from the

owner of the vehicle in exercise of its discretionary power under
2
Article 142
of the Constitution of India. The High Court observed

that power under
Article 142
of the Constitution is vested only with

the Supreme Court and such power is not vested with the High

Court or the Tribunal and set aside the award passed by the

Tribunal directing the insurance company to pay compensation to

the claimants and recover the same from the owner of the vehicle is

not sustainable. The High Court held that only the owner of the

offending vehicle is liable to make the payment of the compensation

amount awarded by the Tribunal. The High Court has enhanced the

compensation awarded by the Tribunal from Rs.3,55,500/- to

Rs.4,94,700/-. To determine the loss of dependency, the High Court

has taken into consideration the age of the deceased Shankareppa

and has adopted multiplier of ‘18’ instead of multiplier of ‘14’. Being

aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court setting aside the

direction to the insurance company to “pay and recover”, the

appellants/claimants have preferred this appeal.
5.    We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. We have

gone through the impugned judgment and perused the materials

placed on record.
6.
In the case of third party risks, as per the decision in
National

Insurance Company Ltd. v. Swaran Singh and others
(2004) 3
3
SCC 297, the insurer had to indemnify the compensation amount

payable to the third party and the insurance company may recover

the same from the insured.
Doctrine of "pay and recover" was

considered by the Supreme Court in
Swaran Singh
case wherein

the Supreme Court examined the liability of the insurance company

in cases of breach of policy condition due to disqualifications of the

driver or invalid driving licence of the driver and held that in case of

third party risks, the insurer has to indemnify the compensation

amount to the third party and the insurance company may recover

the same from the insured. Elaborately considering the insurer's

contractual liability as well as statutory liability vis-a-vis the claims of

third parties, the Supreme Court issued detailed guidelines as to

how and in what circumstances, “pay and recover” can be ordered.

In para (110), the Supreme Court summarised its conclusions as

under:-
“110. The summary of our findings to the various issues as raised
      in these petitions is as follows:
(i)
Chapter XI of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
providing compulsory
      insurance of vehicles against third-party risks is a social welfare
      legislation to extend relief by compensation to victims of accidents
      caused by use of motor vehicles. The provisions of compulsory
      insurance coverage of all vehicles are with this paramount object
      and the provisions of the Act have to be so interpreted as to
      effectuate the said object.
(ii) An insurer is entitled to raise a defence in a claim petition filed
      under Section 163-A or
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles Act,
      1988, inter alia, in terms of
Section 149(2)(a)(ii)
of the said Act.
4
(iii) The breach of policy condition e.g. disqualification of the driver
or invalid driving licence of the driver, as contained in sub-section
(2)(a)(ii) of
Section 149
, has to be proved to have been committed
by the insured for avoiding liability by the insurer. Mere absence,
fake or invalid driving licence or disqualification of the driver for
driving at the relevant time, are not in themselves defences
available to the insurer against either the insured or the third
parties. To avoid its liability towards the insured, the insurer has to
prove that the insured was guilty of negligence and failed to
exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the condition of
the policy regarding use of vehicles by a duly licensed driver or one
who was not disqualified to drive at the relevant time.
(iv) Insurance companies, however, with a view to avoid their
liability must not only establish the available defence(s) raised in
the said proceedings but must also establish "breach" on the part of
the owner of the vehicle; the burden of proof wherefore would be on
them, (v) The court cannot lay down any criteria as to how the said
burden would be discharged, inasmuch as the same would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
(vi) Even where the insurer is able to prove breach on the part of
the insured concerning the policy condition regarding holding of a
valid licence by the driver or his qualification to drive during the
relevant period, the insurer would not be allowed to avoid its liability
towards the insured unless the said breach or breaches on the
condition of driving licence is/are so fundamental as are found to
have contributed to the cause of the accident. The Tribunals in
interpreting the policy conditions would apply "the rule of main
purpose" and the concept of "fundamental breach" to allow
defences available to the insurer under
Section 149(2)
of the Act.
(vii) The question, as to whether the owner has taken reasonable
care to find out as to whether the driving licence produced by the
driver (a fake one or otherwise), does not fulfill the requirements of
law or not will have to be determined in each case.
(viii) If a vehicle at the time of accident was driven by a person
having a learner's licence, the insurance companies would be liable
to satisfy the decree.
(ix) The Claims Tribunal constituted under
Section 165
read with
Section 168
is empowered to adjudicate all claims in respect of the
accidents involving death or of bodily injury or damage to property
of third party arising in use of motor vehicle. The said power of the
Tribunal is not restricted to decide the claims inter se between
claimant or claimants on one side and insured, insurer and driver
on the other. In the course of adjudicating the claim for
compensation and to decide the availability of defence or defences
to the insurer, the Tribunal has necessarily the power and
jurisdiction to decide disputes inter se between the insurer and the
insured. The decision rendered on the claims and disputes inter se
between the insurer and insured in the course of adjudication of
5
claim for compensation by the claimants and the award made
     thereon is enforceable and executable in the same manner as
     provided in
Section 174
of the Act for enforcement and execution of
     the award in favour of the claimants.
(x) Where on adjudication of the claim under the Act the Tribunal
     arrives at a conclusion that the insurer has satisfactorily proved its
     defence in accordance with the provisions of
Section 149(2)
read
     with sub-section (7), as interpreted by this Court above, the
     Tribunal can direct that the insurer is liable to be reimbursed by the
     insured for the compensation and other amounts which it has been
     compelled to pay to the third party under the award of the Tribunal.
Such determination of claim by the Tribunal will be enforceable and
     the money found due to the insurer from the insured will be
     recoverable on a certificate issued by the Tribunal to the Collector
     in the same manner under
Section 174
of the Act as arrears of land
     revenue. The certificate will be issued for the recovery as arrears of
     land revenue only if, as required by sub-section (3) of
Section 168
of the Act the insured fails to deposit the amount awarded in favour
     of the insurer within thirty days from the date of announcement of
     the award by the Tribunal.
(xi) The provisions contained in sub-section (4) with the proviso
     there under and sub-section (5) which are intended to cover
     specified contingencies mentioned therein to enable the insurer to
     recover the amount paid under the contract of insurance on behalf
     of the insured can be taken recourse to by the Tribunal and be
     extended to claims and defences of the insurer against the insured
     by relegating them to the remedy before regular court in cases
     where on given facts and circumstances adjudication of their claims
     inter se might delay the adjudication of the claims of the victims,”
     (Underlining added)
7.   As per the decision in
Swaran Singh
case, onus is always

upon the insurance company to prove that the driver had no valid

driving licence and that there was breach of policy conditions.

Where the driver did not possess the valid driving licence and there

are breach of policy conditions, “pay and recover” can be ordered in

case of third party risks. The Tribunal is required to consider as to

whether the owner has taken reasonable care to find out as to

whether the driving licence produced by the driver, does not fulfill
6
the requirements of law or not will have to be determined in each

case.
8.      The Supreme Court considered the decision of
Swaran

Singh
case in subsequent decision in
National Insurance Co. Ltd.

v. Laxmi Narain Dhut
, (2007) 3 SCC 700, wherein this Court held

that “the decision in Swaran Singh
case has no application
to

cases other than third party risks and in case of third party risks the

insurer has to indemnify the amount and if so advised, to recover

the same from the insured”.
The same principle was reiterated in

Prem Kumari v. Prahlad Dev and others (2008) 3 SCC 193.
9.      For the sake of completion, we may refer to few judgments

where the breach of policy conditions was fundamental and the

Supreme Court taking contrary view that the insurance companies

were not liable to pay the compensation.
In
National Insurance

Co., Ltd. v. Bommithi Subbhayamma and others
, (2005) 12 SCC

243, the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of Andhra Pradesh

High Court in making the insurance company liable for payment of

compensation in respect of gratuitous passengers carried in the

goods vehicle.
10.
In
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Brij Mohan and others
(2007) 7 SCC 56, the claimant was travelling in the trolley attached

to tractor carrying earth to brick kiln. It was found that the tractor
7
and the trolley were not used for “agricultural works”, the only

purpose for which the tractor was insured, when the claimant

sustained the injuries. The Supreme Court though held that the

insurance company is not liable to pay compensation, however,

invoked the power vested in the Supreme Court under
Article 142
of

the Constitution of India in directing the insurance company to

satisfy the award by paying compensation to the insured/claimant

and realise the same from the owner of the tractor.
11.
In the present case, to deny the benefit of ‘pay and recover’,

what seems to have substantially weighed with the High Court is the

reference to larger Bench made by the two-Judge Bench in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Parvathneni and another
(2009) 8

SCC 785 which doubted the correctness of the decisions which in

exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India

directing insurance company to pay the compensation amount even

though insurance company has no liability to pay.
In
Parvathneni
case, the Supreme Court pointed out that
Article 142
of the

Constitution of India does not cover such type of cases and that “if

the insurance company has no liability to pay at all, then, it cannot

be compelled by order of the court in exercise of its jurisdiction

under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India to pay the

compensation amount and later on recover it from the owner of the
8
vehicle”.
The above reference in
Parvathneni
case has been

disposed of on 17.09.2013 by the three-Judges Bench keeping the

questions of law open to be decided in an appropriate case.
12.   Since the reference to the larger bench in
Parvathneni
case

has been disposed of by keeping the questions of law open to be

decided in an appropriate case, presently the decision in
Swaran

Singh
case followed in Laxmi Narain Dhut and other cases hold

the field. The award passed by the Tribunal directing the insurance

company to pay the compensation amount awarded to the

claimants and thereafter, recover the same from the owner of the

vehicle in question, is in accordance with the judgment passed by

this Court in Swaran Singh and Laxmi Narain Dhut cases. While

so, in our view, the High Court ought not to have interfered with the

award passed by the Tribunal directing the first respondent to pay

and recover from the owner of the vehicle. The impugned judgment

of the High Court exonerating the insurance company from its

liability and directing the claimants to recover the compensation

from the owner of the vehicle is set aside and the award passed by

the Tribunal is restored.
13.   So far as the recovery of the amount from the owner of the

vehicle, the insurance company shall recover as held in the decision

in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nanjappan and others
(2004)
9
13 SCC 224 where this Court held that “….that for the purpose of

recovering the same from the insured, the insurer shall not be

required to file a suit. It may initiate a proceeding before the

concerned Executing Court as if the dispute between the insurer

and the owner was the subject matter of determination before the

Tribunal and the issue is decided against the owner and in favour of

the insurer.”
14.   In the result, the impugned judgment of the High Court insofar

as enhancement of the compensation to Rs.4,94,700/- is affirmed.

Insofar as direction of the impugned judgment directing the

appellants/claimants to recover the compensation from the owner of

the vehicle is set aside and the appeal is partly allowed. The first

respondent      insurance   company   shall   pay   the   enhanced

compensation to the appellants/claimants along with the accrued

interest and the insurance company shall recover the same from the

owner of the vehicle. No costs.
.…….…………...………J.
                                            [RANJAN GOGOI]


                                           …………….……………J.
                                             [R. BANUMATHI]
New Delhi;
August 08, 2018
10