[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamil Nadu Chamber Of Commerce And ... vs P Mahendravel And Ors. on 1 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1261, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 97
Author:
Kurian Joseph
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
Kurian Joseph
1

                                                                                   NON-REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 7421 OF 2018
                                  (Arising out of SLP(C)No.22402 of 2014)


     TAMIL NADU CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND
     INDUSTRY REPRESENTED
     THR. ITS HONY. SECRETARY AND ANR.                                               Appellant(s)


                                                        VERSUS

     P MAHENDRAVEL AND ORS.                                                          Respondent(s)


                                                 J U D G M E N T
KURIAN, J.
Leave granted.
(2)                 The crucial issue raised in this appeal pertains to the

     steps                taken   by    the   appellant-Association     for      expulsion    of

     certain members from its membership.
(3)                 The aggrieved respondents had taken up the matter before

     the civil court which went in their favour.                              This order was

     challenged before the First Appellate Court as well as before

     the                 High   Court   and     both   orders    are   in   favour    of     the

     respondents;                 and    thus   appellant-Association       is    before    this

     Court.
(4)
Signature Not Verified
The categorical finding in all the judgments is that steps
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.08.03
taken by the appellant-Association for expulsion of its members
16:59:15 IST
Reason:
were in violation of the principles of natural justice.                               There

     is also a contention on jurisdiction.
2
(5)   When the matter came up for hearing before this Court on

14th July, 2017, the following order was passed :
“Learned          senior        counsel         appearing        for       the
       petitioners       submits      that       the       issue    regarding         the
       expulsion can be decided by a retired District Judge,
       in case the opposite side also agrees.
           The respondents are directed to get instruction
       on the above submission.
List on 24.07.2017.”


(6)   On 24th July, 2017, the Court passed the following order:
“When       this    matter       came      up    before       this    Court,      on
      14.07.2017, this Court passed the following order:-
“Learned senior counsel appearing for the
                petitioners submits that the issue regarding
                the expulsion can be decided by a retired
                District Judge, in case the opposite side also
                agrees.
The   respondents   are  directed  to   get
                instruction on the above submission.
                   List on 24.07.2017.”

           Learned counsel on both sides submit that a former
      Judge of the High Court would be better in the fitness of
      things.
Therefore,          we    appoint         Hon'ble        Mr.    Justice         A.R.
      Ramalingam, Former Judge of the High Court of Madras for
      the purpose.
We        leave    it    to     the       Hon'ble       Judge    to    fix       his
      remuneration.          The expenses and the remuneration will be
      shared    by    the     petitioners        and       the     respondents        in    the
      proportion of 67:33 per cent.
The expelled members will file their reply to the
      show cause notice dated 5.3.2009, within four weeks.
The       Hon'ble       Judge   is    requested          to    send    a   Report
      within four months thereafter.
3
List after five months.”


(7)    Hon’ble Mr. Justice AR Ramalingam, Former Judge of the

High Court of Madras, has accordingly conducted an inquiry and

submitted a report to this Court.                 We do not propose to go into

the merits of the said Report.                    In case the respondents are

of the view that the said Report is otherwise faulty, it is for

them to pursue their remedies in appropriate proceedings before

the appropriate forum.
(8)    However, we hasten to make it clear that the objection

that   the   said    Report     cannot       override   the    judgment     of     the

court(s),     cannot       be   appreciated          since    all    the    parties

voluntarily agreed to refer the dispute to Hon’ble judge for an

appropriate      inquiry    after      complying      with   the    principles      of

natural justice.
(9)    We also make it clear that this judgment shall not stand

in the way of the respondents otherwise taking appropriate

recourse open to the respondents under the law for membership

in the appellant-Association.
(10) It   will    also     be   open    to    the    respondents     to    offer    an

unconditional       apology     for    whatever      inappropriate     conduct      on

their part and seek membership in the appellant-Association in

which case we are sure that the appellant-Association will

magnanimously consider their applications.
4
(11) We further make it clear that we have otherwise considered

the matter on merits.
(12) The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
..........................J.
                                       (KURIAN JOSEPH)



                                      ..........................J.
                                       (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 1, 2018.