[Cites
26
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Achal Singh on 21 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3940, 2018 LAB IC 3981, 2018 (6) ALJ 614, (2018) 10 SCALE 89, (2018) 3 ESC 459, (2018) 3 SERVLJ 360, (2018) 4 JCR 195 (SC), (2018) 4 JLJR 2, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 40, (2018) 4 SCT 59, (2018) 5 SERVLR 619, 2018 (8) ADJ 87 NOC, (2019) 134 ALL LR 365, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2738, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 152
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                       SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      Civil Appeal No. 8421 Of 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.12601 of 2018)



          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                                   ..APPELLANTS




                                                  VERSUS


          ACHAL SINGH                                                       ..RESPONDENT




                                                    WITH

                                      Civil Appeal No. 8422  of 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.18737 of 2018)

                                      Civil Appeal No. 8423 of 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.18739 of 2018)

                                                    AND 

                                      Civil Appeal No. 8424 of 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.18741 of 2018)



                                              J U D G M E N T

Signature Not Verified


          ARUN MISHRA, J.
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2018.08.21
14:53:37 IST
Reason:
1.             Leave granted.
2
2.     The   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   in   the   appeals   is   aggrieved   by

common judgment and order dated 29.11.2017 passed by the Division

Bench of the High Court of Allahabad, allowing the writ petitions filed

by   the   respondents   herein   seeking   voluntary   retirement   from   the

Government services.  Directions were issued to treat the respondents

to have retired from Government services with effect from 30.11.2017

and 31.12.2017.
3.     The main question for consideration before us is as to whether

under Rule 56 of the Uttar Pradesh Fundamental Rules (hereinafter

referred to as the “Fundamental Rules”) as amended, an employee has

unfettered   right   to   seek   voluntary   retirement   by   serving   a   notice   of

three   months   to   the   State   Government   or   whether   the   State

Government   under   the   Explanation   attached   to   Rule   56   of   the

Fundamental Rules, is authorised to decline the prayer for voluntary

retirement   in   the   public   interest  under   clause   (c)  of   Rule   56   of   the

Fundamental Rules as applicable to the State of Uttar Pradesh.
4.     The respondent ­ Dr. Achal Singh was working as Joint Director

in   Medical,   Health   and   Family   Welfare,   Lucknow   Region,   Lucknow

filed an application dated 14.12.2016 for voluntary retirement  w.e.f.

31.3.2017.  Respondent – Dr. Ajay Kumar Tiwari was holding the post

of   Joint   Director,   Medical,   Health   and   Family   Welfare,   Devi   Patan

Mandal, Gonda, filed an application on 28.2.2017 seeking voluntary

retirement  w.e.f.  31.5.2017.     Respondent   ­   Dr.   Rajendra   Kumar
3
Srivastava was working as Senior Consultant, filed an application for

voluntary   retirement   on   15.4.2015   and   respondent   ­   Dr.   Rajiv

Chaudhary   was   working   as   Senior   Consultant   at   District   Hospital,

Raibareli, he sought voluntary retirement by filing an application on

3.12.2016.   The applications remained unattended and no order had

been communicated, hence writ petitions were filed in the High Court.

The   respondents­doctors   were   members   of   the   Provincial   Medical

Services.
5.    The   High   Court   in   the   impugned   judgment   and   order   has

observed that it is the responsibility of the authorities to monitor the

health   system   in   the   State   and   they   have   to   sincerely   examine   the

issues   as   to   how   the   working   of   the   Government   hospitals   can   be

improved for the betterment of the general public and find out why

doctors are opting for voluntary retirement every day.  The High Court

also   observed   that   the   doctors   are   not   interested   in   joining   the

Government   service   when   fresh   recruitments   take   place.     The   High

Court has also noted that posts of Medical Officers are not being filled

up on account of non­availability of candidates.   The High Court has

further  noted   that   those   who   have   entered   into   Government  service

are continuously opting for voluntary retirement from service causing

serious   scarcity   of   doctors   in   Government   hospitals   and   Primary

Health Centres.
4
6.     The High Court in the impugned judgment has also referred to

the report of  the MCI and the existing proportion of one doctor per

2000   population.       In   fact,   the   number  of   doctors   is   much   smaller

than   the   number   given   in   the   MCI   report.     The   High   Court   also

observed that the doctors are being posted, in spite of scarcity, on the

administrative   posts   that  causes   wastage   of   specialised   talent.    The

High   Court   has   also   observed   that   the   authorities   must   provide

adequate   infrastructure,   working   equipment,   and   a   proper   working

environment. The hospitals should be made excellent centres of health

care.     It   should   be   the   object   of   the   State   Government   to   provide

doctors with good opportunities so as to retain them in services.   At

the   same   time,   the   High   Court   has   also   observed   that   in   order   to

enhance the better medical facilities to the poor and needy people, it

would be appropriate to maintain a balance between the senior and

junior   doctors   in   each   Primary   Health   Centres   in   rural   and   urban

areas.     There   is   a   need   to   provide   continuing   medical   education   to

doctors and to hold conferences and seminars to exchange the latest

views/opinions/knowledge etc. and their performance in such events

should also be considered for promotion etc.   At the same time, the

High Court has allowed the writ petitions and treated the doctors to

have retired voluntarily on the dates specified. Aggrieved thereby, the

State has come up in these appeals.
5
7.     It   was   urged   by   Mr.   P.N.   Mishra,   learned   senior   counsel

appeared on behalf of appellant that as per Explanation attached to

Rule 56 of the Fundamental Rules as amended in the State of Uttar

Pradesh,   it   was   open   to   the   State   Government   to   take   a   decision

whether   to   retire   an   employee   voluntarily   under   Rule   56(a)   duly

considering   the   public   interest   or   decline   the   applications   for

voluntary retirement.  It was also submitted that there is no automatic

retirement on the expiry of the period of notice of three months served

under Rule 56 as applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.  There has

to be an express order granting permission to retire voluntarily, only

thereafter an employee can be said to have retired voluntarily.   There

is a scarcity of doctors in the Provincial Health Services in the State of

Uttar   Pradesh,   thus,   the   State   Government   has   not   accepted   the

applications   for   voluntary   retirement.     The   directions   issued   by   the

High   Court   is   based   on   a   misinterpretation   of   Rule   56   of   the

Fundamental Rules and is against the public interest.
8.     It was contended by learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of   the   appellants   that   in   the   case   of   Dr.   Achal   Singh,   the   State

Government   has   passed   the   order   on   31.5.2017.     The   prayer   for

voluntary retirement was rejected on the ground of lack of specialised

doctors   and   in   public   interest   and   the   notice   seeking   voluntary

retirement   under   Rule   56   was   rejected   and   in   other   cases,   the

applications were kept pending. They further contended that Rule 56
6
contemplates a notice and not a request for voluntary retirement.  An

employee   is   not   required   to   give   reason   while   giving   a   notice   for

voluntary   retirement   and   in   any   such   event,   such   reasons   are   not

justiciable.     It   is   a   prerogative   of   the   employee   to   seek   voluntary

retirement.  The right of the employee to retire voluntarily corresponds

with   the   right  of  the   State   Government  to  retire   him in   the  case   of

deficiency in services.  As held in
Dinesh Chandra Sangma vs. State of

Assam
, (1977) 4 SCC 441, the rule provides right to retire and not to

seek it.   The acceptance of the appointing authority is required only

when the disciplinary enquiry is pending and its pendency has been

communicated to the employee.  Once notice of three months is given,

the doctor is deemed to have retired and any action of attempting to

reject   the   notice   of   voluntary   retirement   after   the   said   date   is

ineffective   in   law.     The   decision   has   to   be   taken   within   a   period   of

three   months,   otherwise,   the   employee   is   automatically   deemed   to

have retired on the lapse of three months’ period.
It was contended

that the court not to interfere with the principle of certainty of rule of

law may be applied and long­standing precedent of
Dinesh Chandra

Sangma
(supra)  may not be dislodged and be applied to the cases at

hand.     The   only   condition   of   voluntary   retirement   is   fulfilled   after

completion of 20 years of service and if it is allowed, it does not affect

the availability of doctors.  The State has not taken care to recruit the

doctors.     It   is   not   permissible   to   withhold   the   order   of   voluntary
7
retirement.
In   case   this   Court   does   not   agree   with   the   decision

rendered   in
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
(supra),  the   matter   may   be

referred to a larger Bench.   The view taken by the High Court in the

impugned judgment and order may be affirmed with the rider of an

imposition of the moratorium to balance the equities.
9.      In order to appreciate the rival submissions, it is necessary to

consider   the   Fundamental   Rules   as   amended   in   the   State   of   Uttar

Pradesh.   The same is somewhat different from the rules framed in

other States.  Rule 56 of Fundamental Rules as amended in the State

of Uttar Pradesh, is extracted hereunder:
“56.(a)     Except   as   otherwise   provided   in   this   Rule,   every
                Government   servant   other   than   a   Government   servant   in
                inferior service shall retire from service on the afternoon of the
                last day of the month in which he attains the age of fifty eight
                years.     He   may   be   retained   in   service   after   the   date   of
                compulsory retirement with the sanction of the Government on
                public   grounds   which   must   be   recorded   in   writing,   but   he
                must not be retained after the age of 60 years 1 except in very
                special circumstances.
(b)   A Government servant in inferior service shall retire from
                service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which
                he attains the age of sixty years.  He must not be retained in
                service   after   that   date,   except   in   very   special   circumstances
                and with sanction of the Government.
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) or clause
(b), the appointing authority may, at any time by notice to any
                Government   servant   (whether   permanent   or   temporary),
                without   assigning   any   reason,   require   him   to   retire   after   he
                attains the age of fifty years or such Government servant may
                by notice to the appointing authority voluntarily retire at any
                time after attaining the age of forty­five years or after he has
                completed qualifying service of twenty years.
1 In   the   Medical,   Health   and   Family   Welfare   Department   in   State   Medical   and   Health
Services, the retirement age of Medical Officers in public interest has been approved as 62
years in place of 60 years with certain conditions vide Notification No.2324/SEC­2­5­2017­
7(237)/2014 dated 31.5.2017.
8
(d)  the period of such notice shall be three months:
Provided that­
(i)     any   such   Government   servant   may   by   order   of   the
appointing   authority,   without   such   notice   or   by   a   shorter
notice, be retired forthwith at any time after attaining the age
of fifty years, and on such retirement the Government servant
shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of
his pay plus allowances, if any, for the period of the notice, or
as the case may be, for the period by which such notice falls
short   of   three   months,   at   the   same   rates   at   which   he   was
drawing immediately before this retirement;
(ii)     it   shall   be   open   to   the   appointing   authority   to   allow   a
Government   servant   to   retire   without   any   notice   or   by   a
shorter   notice   without   requiring   the   Government   servant   to
pay any penalty in lieu of notice:
Provided   further   that   such   notice   given   by   the   Government
servant against whom a disciplinary proceeding is pending or
contemplated,   shall   be   effective   only   if   it   is   accepted   by   the
appointing   authority,   provided   that   in   the   case   of   a
contemplated disciplinary proceeding the Government servant
shall be informed before the expiry of his notice that it has not
been accepted:
Provided   also   that   the   notice   once   given   by   a   Government
servant under clause (c) seeking voluntary retirement shall not
be   withdrawn   by   him   except   with   the   permission   of   the
appointing authority.
(e)   A retiring pension shall be payable and other retirement
benefits,   if   any,   shall   be   available   in   accordance   with   and
subject   to   the   provisions   of   the   relevant   Rules   to   every
Government  servant  who retires or is required or allowed to
retire under this rule.
Provided   that   where   a   Government   servant   who   voluntarily
retires  or  is  allowed  voluntarily  to  retire  under  this  rule  the
appointing   authority   may   allow   him,   for   the   purposes   of
pension and gratuity, if any, the benefit of additional service of
five years or of such period as he would have served if he had
continued   till   the   ordinary   date   of   his   superannuation,
whichever be less;
Explanation.­  (1)     The   decision   of   the   appointing   authority
under clause (c) to require the Government servant to retire as
specified   therein   shall   be   taken   if   it   appears   to   the   said
authority to be in public interest, but nothing herein contained
shall be construed to require any recital, in the order, of such
decision having been taken in the public interest.

(2)     In   order   to   be   satisfied   whether   it   will  be   in   the   public
interest to require a Government servant to retire under clause
9
(c), the appointing authority may take into consideration any
             material   relating   to   the   Government   servant   and   nothing
             herein   contained   shall   be   construed   to   exclude   from
             consideration –
(a)  any entries relating to any period before such Government
                  servant was allowed to cross any efficiency bar or before he
                  was promoted to any post in an officiating or substantive
                  capacity or on an ad hoc basis; or
(b) any   entry   against   which   a   representation   is   pending,
                  provided   that   the   representation   is   also   taken   into
                  consideration along with the entry; or
(c) any   report   of   the   Vigilance   Establishment   constituted
                  under   the
Uttar   Pradesh   Vigilance   Establishment   Act,
                  1965
.
(2A) Every such decision shall be deemed to have been taken
             in the public interest.
(3)   The expression appointing authority means the authority
             which for the time being has the power to make substantive
             appointments   to   the   post   or   service   from   which   the
             Government   servant   is   required   or   wants   to   retire;   and   the
             expression ‘qualifying service' shall have the same meaning as
             in the relevant Rules relating to retiring pension.

             (4)     Every   order   of   the   appointing   authority   requiring   a
             Government servant to retire forthwith under the first proviso
             to clause (d) of this rule shall have effect from the afternoon of
             the date of its issue, provided that if after the date of its issue,
             the Government servant concerned, bona fide and in ignorance
             of that order, performs the duties of his office his acts shall be
             deemed   to   be   valid   notwithstanding   the   fact   of   his   having
             earlier retired.”


       Reading  of  the  aforesaid  rule   makes   it  clear  that  an   employee

can be retired by the Government after he attains the age of 50 years

or   Government   servant   may   voluntarily   retire   at   any   time   after

attaining   the   age   of   45   years   or   after   he   has   completed   qualifying

service of 20 years under Rule 56(c).  It is provided in the Rule 56 that

Government may retire a Government servant without any notice or by

serving   a   shorter   notice   and   on   such   retirement,   the   Government

servant shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of
10
his   pay   plus   allowances,   if   any,   for   the   period   of   notice   or   for   the

period it falls short of three months at the same rates at which he was

drawing   immediately   before   his   retirement.     It   is   also   open   to   the

Government   to   allow   a   Government   servant   to   retire   without   any

notice   or   by   a   shorter   notice   without   requiring   the   Government

servant to pay any penalty in lieu of notice.  The proviso to Rule 56(d)

makes it clear that the notice given by the Government servant against

whom a disciplinary proceeding is pending or contemplated, shall be

effective only if it is accepted by the appointing authority and provided

that   in   case   of   a   contemplated   disciplinary   proceeding,   the

Government servant shall be informed before the expiry of the notice

that it has not been accepted. It is also provided that once a notice is

given by a Government servant seeking voluntary retirement shall not

be   withdrawn   by   him   except   with   the   permission   of   the   appointing

authority.
Rule 56(e) provides that pension and other retiral benefits shall

be available to every Government servant, who retires or is required or

allowed to retire under the rule.   Proviso to Rule 56(e) provides that

appointing authority at its discretion may allow benefits of additional

service   of   5   years   to   such   employees   who   voluntarily   retires   or   is

allowed voluntarily to retire under the rule for the purposes of pension

and   gratuity   or   of   such   period   as   he   would   have   served   if   he   had

continued till the ordinary date of his superannuation.
11
10.    The   explanation   attached   to   Rule   56   makes   it   clear   that   the

decision   of   the   appointing   authority   under   clause   (c)   of   Rule   56   to

retire a Government servant shall be taken if it appears to be in public

interest.     The   explanation   is   applicable   to   both   the   exigencies  viz.,

when   Government   retires   an   employee   or   when   an   employee   seeks

voluntary retirement, not only when Government desires to retire an

employee in public interest.   The Explanation attached to Rule 56 as

applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh is clear and precise.
11.    In our opinion, whether voluntary retirement is automatic or an

order   is   required   to   be   passed   would   depend   upon   the   phraseology

used in a particular rule under which retirement is to be ordered or

voluntary retirement is sought.  The factual position of each and every

case   has   to   be   seen   along   with   applicable   rules   while   applying   a

dictum   of   the   Court   interpreting   any   other   rule   it   should   be   Pari

Materia.   Rule 56(2) deals with the satisfaction of the Government to

require a Government servant to retire in the public interest.  For the

purpose,   the   Government   may   consider   any   material   relating   to

Government servant and may requisition any report from the Vigilance

Establishment.
12.      The   respondents   have   relied   on   dictum   in
Dinesh   Chandra

Sangma vs. State of Assam
, (1977) 4 SCC 441, a three­Judge Bench of

this Court observed as under:
12
“7.   Before   we   proceed   further   we   may   read   F.   R.   56   as
amended:
F.R.56(a) The date of compulsory retirement of a
      Government   servant   is   the   date   on   which   he
      attains the age of 55 years. He may be retained in
      service after this age with  sanction of the State
      Government   on   public   grounds   which   must   be
      recorded   in   writing   and   proposals   for   the
      retention of a Government servant in service after
      this   age   should   not   be   made   except   in   very
      special circumstances.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in these
      rules   the   appropriate   authority   may,   if   he   is   of
      the opinion that it is in the public interest to do
      so,   retire   Government   servant   by   giving   him
      notice of not less than three months in writing or
      three months' pay and allowances in lieu of such
      notice, after he has attained fifty years of age or
      has completed 25 years of service,  whichever is
      earlier.
(c) Any Government servant may, by giving notice
      of  not   less   than   three   months  in   writing  to   the
      appropriate authority, retire from service after he
      has   attained   the   age   of   fifty   years   or   has
      completed   25   years   of   service,   whichever   is
      earlier.
It   is   clear   from   the   above   that   under   F.   R.   56(b)   the
Government   may   retire   a   Government   servant   in   the   public
interest by giving him three months' notice in writing or three
months'   pay   and   allowances   in   lieu   thereof   after   he   has
attained  the age   of  fifty  years  or  has  completed  25  years  of
service, whichever is earlier.
8.   As   is   well­known   Government   servants   hold   office   during
the pleasure of the President or the Governor, as the case may
be,   under
Article   310
of   the   Constitution.   However,   the
pleasure doctrine under
Article 310
is limited by
Article 311(2).
It is clear that the services of a permanent Government servant
cannot   be   terminated   except   in   accordance   with   the   rules
made   under
Article   309
subject   to
Article   311(2)
of   the
Constitution   and   the   Fundamental   Rights.   It   is   also   well­
settled   that   even   a   temporary   Government   servant   or   a
probationer   cannot   be   dismissed   or   removed   or   reduced   in
rank   except   in   accordance   with
Article   311(2).
The   above
doctrine   of   pleasure   is   invoked   by   the   Government   in   the
public interest after a Government servant attains the age of
50   years   or   has   completed   25   years   of   service.   This   is
constitutionally   permissible   as   compulsory   termination   of
13
service   under   F.R.   56   (b)   does   not   amount   to   removal   or
            dismissal   by   way   of   punishment.   While   the   Government
            reserves its right to compulsorily retire a Government servant,
            even   against   his   wish,   there   is   a   corresponding   right   of   the
            Government servant under F. R. 56(c) to voluntarily retire from
            service   by   giving   the   Government   three   months'   notice   in
            writing. There is no question of acceptance of the request for
            voluntary retirement by the Government when the Government
            servant exercises his right under F. R. 56(c). Mr. Niren De is
            therefore right in conceding this position.
***                        ***                     ***
13.   F.R.   56   is   one   of   the   statutory   rules   which   binds   the
            Government as well as the Government servant. The condition
            of service which is envisaged in Rule 56(c) giving an option in
            absolute terms to a Government servant to voluntarily retire
            with three months' previous notice, after he reaches 50 years
            of age or has completed 25 years of service, cannot therefore
            be   equated   with   a   contract   of   employment   as   envisaged   in
            Explanation 2 to Rule 119.
14.   The   field   occupied   by   F.   R.   56   is   left   untrammelled   by
            Explanation   2   to   Rule   119.   The   words   "his   contract   of
            employment" in Explanation 2 are clinching on the point.
***                        ***                     ***
17. The High Court committed an error on law in holding that
            consent of the Government was necessary to give legal effect to
            the   voluntary   retirement   of   the   appellant   under   F.R.   56(c).
            Since  the  conditions  of F.R.  56(c) are  fulfilled in  the instant
            case,  the  appellant   must   be  held to   have  lawfully  retired   as
            notified by him with effect from August 2, 1976.
13.   It   was   submitted   that   despite   the   absence   of   any   identical

language,   the   rule   involved   in
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
(supra)  is

comparable with Uttar Pradesh Fundamental Rules and therefore, the

judgment is binding.  The submission based upon the same cannot be

accepted and Rule 56(b)(c) came up for consideration was somewhat

different and there was no such Explanation to Rule 56.
14
14.
In
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
(supra)   he   was   the   District   and

Sessions Judge at Dibrugarh in the State of Assam.   On account of

domestic troubles, he did not want to continue after attainment of the

age of 50 years.  He served a notice under Rule 56(c) as amended by

the   Governor   of   Assam   under
Article   309
of   the   Constitution   by

notification dated 22.7.1975.   The formal notice was served upon by

him.     The   Government   allowed   him   to   retire   from   the   State

Government Service and then there were certain developments in the

Government and Government sought to retrace its steps and passed

an order on 28.7.1976, countermanding its earlier order allowing him

to retire from service.   The High Court dismissed the writ application

filed   by   him.     The   Fundamental   Rule   as   applicable   in   the   State   of

Assam   came   up   for   consideration.     In   our   opinion,   it   was   quite

different.   It is provided in the Fundamental Rule 56(b) as applicable

in   the   State   of   Assam   that   public   interest   was   germane   when   a

Government servant retires.  Under Rule 56(c), a Government servant

may retire by giving notice of not less than three months.   Hence it

was observed that there was no question of acceptance of the request

for   voluntary   retirement   by   the   Government   when   the   Government

servant exercises his right under Rule 56(c).   Not only the rule was

different   it   was   passed   on   the   concession   also,   however,   the

Explanation given to Rule 56 in the State of Uttar Pradesh makes it

completely   different   and   the   provisions   in   F.R.56(c)   is   also   quite
15
different.     The   rules   as   applicable   in   Assam   for   the   purpose   of

retirement by the Government is contained in F.R.56(b) which require

retirement in public interest whereas no such rider exist in F.R.56(c)

when employee seek voluntary retirement, whereas rule in the State of

Uttar   Pradesh   both   provisions   are   conjointly   read   not   only   the

language   is   different   and   the   explanation   makes   out   the   whole

difference.
15.    The Explanation attached to Rule 56 as applicable in the State of

Uttar   Pradesh   makes   it   clear   that   when   a   decision   is   taken   by   the

authority under clause (c) of Rule 56, the right of an employee to retire

cannot be said to be absolute as in the case of resignation, voluntary

retirement is with retiral benefits whereas it may not necessarily follow

in case of resignation. The decision under the rules in U.P. is to be

based   upon   considering   the   public   interest,   whether   it   is   a   case   of

retirement   by   the   Government   or   a   case   of   a   Government   servant

seeking   voluntary   retirement.     The   decision   rendered   in
Dinesh

Chandra   Sangma
(supra)  is   distinguishable   and   was   based   on   the

differently couched rule.  The Explanation added makes the provisions

different in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The decision in the case of
Dinesh Chandra Sangma
(supra)  cannot be said to be operative being

quite distinguishable.
16
16.   Reliance   has   also   been   placed   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the

respondents on the decision rendered by this Court in
B.J. Shelat vs.

State of Gujarat
, (1978) 2 SCC 202.  The Court observed thus:
“7. Rule 161 of the Bombay Civil Services Rules provides for
            the retirement of Government servants before attaining the age
            of superannuation. Rule 161(1)(aa) provides­

            Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) :
(1) An appointing authority shall, if he is of the
                  opinion that it is in the public interest so to do,
                  have the absolute right to retire any Government
                  servant to whom clause (a) applies by giving him
                  notice of not less than three months in writing or
                  three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of such
                  notice:
*               *                *               *              *

            Sub­rule (2)(ii) is as follows:
Any   Government   servant   to   whom   clause   (a)
                  applies   may,   by   giving   notice   of   not   less   than
                  three   months   in   writing   to   the   Appointing
                  Authority, retire from service … and in any other
                  case, after he has attained the age of 55 years.
There is no dispute that the Rule applicable is Rule 161
            (2)(ii) and the appellant is entitled to retire by giving a notice of
            not  less than  3 months after he has attained the age of 55
            years. Under Rule 161(1)(aa)(1) the appointing authority has
            an absolute right to retire any Government servant to whom
            clause (a) applies in public interest by giving him notice of not
            less than three months in writing or three months’ pay and
            allowances in lieu of such notice. But the Government servant
            has   no   such   absolute   right.   A   right   is   conferred   on   the
            Government  servant   under   Rule  161(2)(ii)  to   retire   by   giving
            not   less   than   three   months’   notice   on   his   attaining   the
            prescribed age. Such a right is subject to the proviso which is
            incorporated to the                               sub­section which reads as
            follows:
Provided that it shall be open to the appointing
                  authority   to   withhold   permission   to   retire   to   a
                  Government servant who is under suspension, or
                  against   whom   departmental   proceedings   are
                  pending or contemplated, and who seeks to retire
                  under this sub­clause.
17
But for the proviso, a Government servant would be at liberty
to' retire by giving not less than three months’ notice in writing
to   the   appointing   authority   on   attaining   the   prescribed   age.
This   position   has   been   made   clear   by   this   Court   in
Dinesh
Chandra Sangma v. State of Assam
, (1977) 4 SCC 441, where
the   Court   was   considering   the   effect   of   the   (Assam)
Fundamental   Rule   56(c)   which   confers   right   on   the
Government   servant   to   voluntary   retire.   Rule   56(c)   of   the
(Assam) Fundamental Rules runs as follows :
(c)   Any   Government   servant   may,   by   giving
        notice of not less than three months in writing
        to the appropriate authority, retire from service
        after he has attained the age of fifty years or has
        completed   25   years   of   service,   whichever   is
        earlier.
On   a   construction   of   the   Rule   this   Court   held   that   the
condition of service which is envisaged in Rule 56(c) giving an
option   in   absolute   terms   to   a   Government   servant   to
voluntarily retire with three months' previous notice, after he
reaches 50 years of age or has completed 25 years of service,
cannot be equated with a contract of employment as envisaged
in Explanation 2 to Rule 119 of the Defence of India Rules and
that   Rule  56  is  a  statutory   condition   which   operated   in   law
without reference to a contract of employment and when once
the   conditions   of   Fundamental   Rule   56(c)   are   fulfilled   the
Government servant must be held to have lawfully retired. But
for the proviso to Rule 161(2)(ii), the decision of this Court in
the case cited above would be applicable and the right would
have been  absolute. But   the proviso   has restricted  the  right
conferred on the Government servant. Under the proviso it is
open   to   the   appointing   authority   to   withhold   permission   to
retire   to   a   Government   servant   when   (1)   he   is   under
suspension, or (2) against whom departmental proceedings are
pending or contemplated. Thus the permission to retire can be
withheld   by   the   appointing   authority   either   when   the
Government   servant   is   under   suspension   or   against   whom
departmental proceedings are pending or contemplated. It was
submitted on behalf of the appellant that admittedly he was
not under suspension on the date when he attained the age of
55 years and that no departmental proceedings were pending
or contemplated against him as required under the proviso. No
departmental   proceeding   was   pending   but   on   the   facts   one
cannot say that a proceeding was not under contemplation.
***                       ***                     ***
9.   Mr.   Patel   next   referred   us   to   the   meaning   of   the   word
"withhold"   in   Webster's   Third   New   International   Dictionary
which   is   given   as   "hold   back"   and   submitted   that   the
permission should be deemed to have been withheld if it is not
18
communicated.   We   are   not   able   to   read   the   meaning   of   the
             word   "withhold"   as   indicating   that   in   the   absence   of   a
             communication   it   must   be   understood   as   the   permission
             having been withheld.”


       The rule which came up for consideration in
B.J. Shelat
(supra)

was   the   Rule   161   of   Bombay   Civil   Services   Rules,   1959.   The   Rule

161(1)   (aa)   provides   that   appointing   authority   may   retire   a

Government servant in public interest by giving him a notice of not

less than three months or three months’ pay and allowances in lieu

thereof.  Rule 161(2)(ii) did not employ the word public interest when

the Government servant seeks voluntary retirement.    This has  been

added to the Rule applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.   Neither

there is any provision in the aforesaid rules that require to pass an

order   to   decide   an   application   by   a   Government   servant   seeking

voluntary retirement that too considering the public interest.   Under

the   rules,   it   was   open   to   the   appointing   authority   to   withhold   the

permission to retire a Government servant who is under suspension or

against whom the departmental enquiry was pending or contemplated.
The rules considered by this Court in
B.J. Shelat
(supra) were different

and did not contain the provision like Explanation as incorporated in

the Fundamental Rule 56 as applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
In that context, the discussion has been made and cannot be applied

to a rule differently couched in U.P.
19
17.   Reliance was also placed on the decision rendered by this Court

in
State of Bombay vs. United Motors
,  AIR 1953 SC 252 and  Bengal

Immunity vs. State of Bihar,  AIR 1955 SC 661, in which it has been

observed that Explanation can be read as proviso and it explain the

scope of the main provision and the Explanation becomes part of the

main section.  There is no dispute with the aforesaid proposition.  The

Explanation   in   rules   in   question   has   to   be   applied   to   both   the

situations as contemplated in Rule 56(c) and is applicable to both the

exigencies not only when Government decides to retire an employee,

but   also   applicable   where   voluntary   retirement   is   sought   by   an

employee.  It cannot be said that no further restriction by explanation

has been added in a case where an employee has decided to obtain

voluntary retirement.   The public interest is the prime consideration

on   which   authority   has   to   decide   such   a   prayer   as   per   the   rules

applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
18.   It was also urged that principles of certainty of rule of law are

squarely applicable in the present case.  Reliance has been placed on

the decision of
State of Haryana vs. S.K. Singhal
,  (1999) 4 SCC 293.

This Court considered Rule 5.32(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules

and observed thus:
“6.  The said rule  5.32(B) of the Punjab  Civil Service Rules,
             (Vol.II) reads as follows:
“Rule   5.32(B)(1)   At   any   time   a   government
                   employee has completed twenty years’ qualifying
                   service, he may, by giving notice of not less than
20
three   months   in   writing   to   the   appointing
      authority   retire   from   service.   However,   a
      government   employee   may   make   a   request   in
      writing   to   the   appointing   authority   to   accept
      notice   of   less   than   three   months   giving   reason
      therefor. On receipt of a request, the appointing
      authority   may   consider   such   request   for   the
      curtailment   of   the   period   of   notice   of   three
      months   on   merits   and   if   it   is   satisfied   that   the
      curtailment of the period of notice will not cause
      any administrative inconvenience, the appointing
      authority may relax the requirement of notice of
      three   months   on   the   condition   that   the
      government   employee   shall   not   apply   for
      commutation of a part of his pension before the
      expiry of the period of notice of three months.
(2) The notice of voluntary retirement given under
      sub­rule   (1)   shall   require   acceptance   by   the
      appointing   authority   subject   to   Rule   2.2,   of
      Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.II :
Provided   that   where   the   appointing   authority
      does   not   refuse   to   grant   the   permission   for
      retirement   before   the   expiry   of   the   period
      specified   in   sub­rule   (1)   supra,   the   retirement
      shall become effective from the date of expiry of
      the said period:
Provided   further   that   before   a   government
      employee   gives   notice   of   voluntary   retirement
      with   reference   to   sub­rule   (1)   he   should   satisfy
      himself   by   means   of   a   reference   to   the
      appropriate   authority   that   he   has,   in   fact,
      completed   twenty   years’   service   qualifying   for
      pension.”

      ***                         ***                        ***
8.   It   will   be   noticed   that   under   Rule   5.32(B),   a   government
employee   who   has   completed   20   years   of   qualifying   service
may, by giving notice of not less than 3 months in writing to
the appointing authority, retire from service. There is provision
for requesting for relaxation of the notice period of 3 months
and   for   consideration   thereof.   As   to   what   the   appointing
authority is to do is governed squarely by sub­rule (2). That
sub­rule   states  that   the  notice  of  voluntary  retirement   given
under sub­rule (1) "shall" require acceptance by the appointing
authority subject to Rule 2.2 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules
(Vol.II). Acceptance of the request is subject to Rule 2.2 of the
Rules. But  the proviso to sub­rule  (2) of Rule  5.32(B) states
that if the permission to retire is not refused within the period
21
specified in sub­rule (1), the retirement shall become effective
from the date of expiry of the period. Therefore, it is clear that
if a person has completed 20 years qualifying service and has
given a notice under Rule 5.32(B) of 3 months (or if his request
for relaxation of 3 months is accepted), then the request "shall"
be accepted subject to invoking the provision of Rule 2.2 of the
Punjab Civil Services Rules (Vol.II). Under Rule 2.2, the "future
good conduct" of an employee is an implied condition of every
grant of pension. In other words, what all it means is that even
if   the   acceptance   of   the   voluntary   retirement   is   mandatory,
there is an obligation cast on the retired employee to maintain
good   conduct   after   such   retirement.   The  words   "future   good
conduct" mean good conduct after retirement. If the employee
does not continue to maintain good conduct after retirement,
then the Government can withhold or withdraw the pension or
a part of it in case he is convicted of serious crime or in case
he be guilty of grave misconduct. Such a decision to withhold
or withdraw the whole or part of pension would be final and
conclusive, that is to say, so far as the governmental hierarchy
is concerned. It will be noticed that Rule 2.2 does not obstruct
the voluntary retirement to come into force automatically on
the   expiry   of   3   months   and   it   only   enables   withdrawal   or
withholding   of   pension   subject   to   certain   conditions,   to   a
retired employee.
9.   The   employment   of   government   servants   is   governed   by
rules.   These   rules   provide   a   particular   age   as   the   age   of
superannuation. Nonetheless, the rules confer a right on the
Government to compulsorily retire an employee before the age
of   superannuation   provided   the   employee   has   reached   a
particular age or has completed a particular number of years
of qualifying service in case it is found that his service has not
been found to be satisfactory. The rules also provide that an
employee who has completed the said number of years in his
age or who has completed the prescribed number of years of
qualifying service could give notice of, say, three months that
he would voluntarily retire on the expiry of the said period of
three   months.   Some   Rules   are   couched   in   language   which
results in an automatic retirement of the employee upon expiry
of the period specified in the employee's notice. On the other
hand, certain rules in some other departments are couched in
language  which  makes  it  clear  that  even  upon  expiry of the
period specified in the notice, the retirement is not automatic
and an express order granting permission is required and has
to be communicated. The relationship of master and servant in
the latter type of rules continues after the period specified in
the   notice   till   such   acceptance   is   communicated;   refusal   of
permission could also be communicated after 3 months and
the   employee   continues   to   be   in   service.   Cases   like
Dinesh
Chandra Sangma v. State of Assam
, (
1977) 4 SCC 441, B.J.
Shelat   v.   State   of   Gujarat
,   (
1978)   2   SCC   202   and   Union   of
22
India v. Sayed Muzaffar Mir
, (1995) Supp (1) SCC 76 belong to
the former category where it is held that upon the expiry of the
period, the voluntary retirement takes effect automatically as
no order of refusal is passed within the notice period.
On the
other hand
H.P. Horticultural Produce Marketing & Processing
Corpn.   Ltd.   v.   Suman   Behari   Sharma
,   (1996)   4   SCC   584
belongs   to   the   second   category   where   the   bye­laws   were
interpreted as not giving an option "to retire" but only provided
a limited right to "seek" retirement thereby implying the need
for a consent of the employer even if the period of the notice
has   elapsed.   We   shall   refer   to   these   two   categories   in   some
detail.
***                        ***                       ***
13.     Thus, from the aforesaid three decisions it is clear that
if the right to voluntarily retirement is conferred in absolute
terms   as   in
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
case   by   the   relevant
rules and there is no provision in rules to withhold permission
in  certain contingencies the  voluntary retirement  comes into
effect automatically on the expiry of the period specified in the
notice.
If,   however,   as   in
B.J.   Shelat
case   and   as   in
Sayed
Muzaffar Mir
case, the concerned authority is empowered to
withhold permission to retire if certain conditions exist, viz., in
case   the   employee   is   under   suspension   or   in   case   a
departmental enquiry is pending or is contemplated, the mere
pendency   of   the   suspension   or   departmental   enquiry   or   its
contemplation   does   not   result   in   the   notice   for   voluntary
retirement   not   coming   into   effect   on   expiry   of   the   period
specified.
What   is   further   needed   is   that   the   concerned
authority   concerned   must   pass   a   positive   order   withholding
permission to retire and must also communicate the same to
the   employee   as   stated   in
B.J.   Shelat
case   and   in
Sayed
Muzaffar   Mir
case   before   the   expiry   of   the   notice   period.
Consequently,   there   is   no   requirement   of   an   order   of
acceptance of the notice to be communicated to the employee
nor   can   it   be   said   that   non­communication   of   acceptance
should be treated as amounting to withholding of permission.
***                        ***                       ***
18.     In   the   case   before   us   sub­rule   (1)   of   Rule   5.32(B)
contemplates   a   “notice   to   retire”   and   not   a   request   seeking
permission to retire. The further "request" contemplated by the
sub­rule   is   only   for   seeking   exemption   from   the   3   months’
period. The proviso to sub­rule (2) makes a positive provision
that "where the appointing authority does not refuse to grant
the permission for retirement before the expiry of the period
specified in Sub­rule (1), the retirement shall become effective
from the date of expiry of the said period. The case before us
stands   on   a   stronger   footing   than
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
case  so   far  as the  employee  is  concerned.  As  already  stated
23
Rule 2.2 of Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.II only deals with a
              situation   of  withholding  or  withdrawing  pension   to  a   person
              who has already retired.”
19.    Rule   5.32(b)(2)  of   Punjab   Rules   clearly   provide   that   where   the

appointing authority does not refuse to grant the permission to retire

before   the   expiry   of   the   period   in   sub­rule   (1),   the   retirement   shall

become effective from the date of the expiry of the said date.  There is

no   such   provision   of   notice   becoming   effective   from   the   date   of   the

expiry   of   the   period   in   the   Fundamental   Rules   as   applicable   to   the

State   of   Uttar   Pradesh.       In   the   context   of   the   proviso,   the   notice

becomes effective from the date of expiry of the period, in that context

this Court has made observations in the aforesaid dictum that Rule

2.2   does   not   obstruct   the   voluntary   retirement   to   come   into   force

automatically on the expiry of three months.
20.
In the
State of Haryana
(supra), this Court also observed that

some rules are couched in language, which results in an automatic

retirement of the employee upon the expiry of the period specified in

the employee’s notice.  On the other hand, certain rules in some other

departments are couched in the language which makes it clear that

even upon expiry of the period specified in the notice, the retirement is

not automatic and an express order granting permission is required

and has to be communicated.  The relationship of master and servant

in the latter type of rules continues after the period specified in the
24
notice   till   such   acceptance   is   communicated   and   the   refusal   of

permission could also be communicated after three months and the

employee   continues   to   be   in   service.     It   is   the   aforesaid   later

observations made by this Court, which are squarely applicable to the

rule in question as applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
21.
In
Himachal   Pradesh   Horticultural   Produce   Marketing   &

Processing   Corporation  Ltd.  vs.  Suman   Behari  Sharma
(1996)  4   SCC

584,   the   Court   considered   the   language   employed   in   the   applicable

bye­laws.   It   was   observed   that   if   the   permission   for   voluntary

retirement is not granted, the employee would not be able to retire.

The Court observed:
“8. Clause (2) of the bye­law inter alia provides for voluntary
             retirement   from  service  of  HPMC  on   completion   of 25  years’
             service or on attaining the age of 50 years whichever is earlier.
             The employee, however, has a right to make a request in that
             behalf   and   his   request   would   become   effective   only   if   he   is
             'permitted'   to   retire.   The   words   "may   be...permitted   at   his
             request" clearly indicate that the said clause does not confer
             on the employee a  right  to  retire on completion of either  25
             years’ service or on attaining the age of 50 years. It confers on
             the employee a right to make a request to permit him to retire.
             Obviously,   if   request   is   not   accepted   and   permission   is   not
             granted the employee will not be able to retire as desired by
             him. Para (5) of the bye­law is in the nature of an exception to
             para (2) and permits the employee who has not completed 25
             years’   service   or   has   attained   50   years   of   age   to   seek
             retirement if he has completed 20 years’ satisfactory service.
             He can do  so by giving three  months'  notice  in  writing. The
             contention of the learned Counsel for HPMC was that though
             para 5 of the bye­law relaxes the conditions prescribed by para
             (2), the relaxation is only with respect to the period of service
             and  attainment   of  age  of  50  years  and  it  cannot   be  read  to
             mean   that   the   requirement   of   permission   is   dispensed   with.
On   the   other   hand,   the   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent
             submitted   that   as   para   5   opens   with   the   words
             "Notwithstanding the provision under para (2)" and the words
             "may   be...permitted   at   his   request"   are   absent   that   would
             mean that the employee has a right to retire after giving three
25
months'   notice   and   no   acceptance   of   such   a   request   is
             necessary. We cannot agree with the interpretation canvassed
             by learned counsel for the respondent. The bye­law has to be
             read   as   a   whole.   Para   (2)   thereof   confers   a   right   on   the
             employee to request for voluntary retirement on completion of
             25 years’ service or on attaining the age of 50 years, but his
             desire would materialise only if he is permitted to retire and
             not   otherwise.   Ordinarily,   in   a   matter   like   this   an   employee
             who has put in less number of years of service would not be on
             a   better   fooling   than   the   employee   who   has   put   in   longer
             service. It could not have been the intention of the rule­making
             authority   while   framing   para   5   of   the   bye­law   to   confer   on
             such   an   employee   a   better   and   a   larger   right   to   retire   after
             giving   three   months'   notice   in   writing.   The   words   "seek
             retirement" in para 5 indicate that the right which is conferred
             by it is not the right to retire but a right to ask for retirement.
             The   word   "seek"   implies   a   request   by   the   employee   and
             corresponding acceptance or permission by HPMC. Therefore,
             there  cannot  be  automatic retirement   or snapping  of service
             relationship on expiry of three months' period.”
22.
In
Padubidri   Damodar   Shenoy   vs.   Indian   Airlines   Ltd.   &   Anr.
(2009)   10   SCC   514,   a   question   arose   of   voluntary   retirement   from

service   which   was   not   acceded   to   by   the   competent   authority   by

according approval. The matter travelled to this Court. It was held that

voluntary retirement did not come into force.  The Court observed:
“33.   There   is   nothing   to   indicate   in   Regulation   12   that   if
             employer decides to withhold approval of voluntary retirement,
             such   refusal   of   approval   must   be   communicated   to   the
             petitioner during the period of notice. True it is that notice of
             three months for voluntary retirement  given  by an employee
             covered by Clause (b) remains valid even if no communication
             is   received   within   the   notice   period   but   it   becomes   effective
             only on its approval by the competent authority. As a matter of
             fact, this seems to have been understood by both the parties.
34.   The   appellant   issued   a   notice   of   voluntary   retirement
             under Regulation 12(b) on 30­9­2005. The notice period was to
             expire on         31­12­2005. It is an admitted position that the
             competent   authority   neither   gave   an   approval   nor   indicated
             disapproval to the appellant within the notice period of three
             months.   The   employee   never   treated   that   there   has   been
             cessation of employment on the expiry of three months’ notice
             period inasmuch as he continued to attend his duties after 31­
             12­2005   until   30­6­2006.   It   is   only   by   his   letter   dated   8­6­
             2006   that   the   appellant   requested   the   respondent   to   relieve
26
him in terms of his notice dated 30­9­2005 by 30­6­2006 and
             he stopped attending work from 1­7­2006. The letter dated 8­
             6­2006 does not make any material difference as the fact of
             the   matter   is   that   after   the   expiry   of   the   notice   period,   the
             appellant   continued   to   attend   his   duties   for   many   months
             thereafter.
35.   By   the   letter   dated   15­9­2006   the   respondent
             communicated   to   the   appellant   that   his   application   for
             voluntary   retirement  under   Service  Regulation   12(b)   has  not
             been acceded to by the competent authority. Since the notice
             for voluntary retirement by an employee who has not attained
             55   years   but   has   completed   20  years  of  continuous  service,
             under the proviso appended to Regulation 12(b), is subject to
             approval   by   the   competent   authority   and   that   approval   was
             not   granted,   the  voluntary   retirement   of   the   appellant   never
             came into effect.”
23.
In
C.V. Francis vs. Union of India & Ors
. (2013) 14 SCC 486, this

Court observed that it would depend upon the language used in the

rule   whether   notice   for   voluntary   retirement   would   come   into   effect

automatically. There has to be a stipulation in the scheme providing

that even without acceptance of his application, it would be deemed

that the application for voluntary retirement had been accepted. There

is no such provision in the rules in question.
In
C.V. Francis
(supra),

this Court observed:
“13. It is well­established that a voluntary retirement scheme
             introduced by a company, does not entitle an employee as a
             matter   of   right   to   the   benefits   of   the   Scheme.   Whether   an
             employee should be allowed to retire in terms of the scheme is
             a decision which can only be taken by the employer company,
             except in cases where the scheme itself provides for retirement
             to   take   effect   when   the   notice   period   comes   to   an   end.   A
             voluntary   retirement   scheme   introduced   by   a   company   is
             essentially   a   part   of   the   company's   desire   to   weed   out   the
             deadwood.
14.   The   petitioner's   contention   that   his   application   for
             voluntary   retirement   came   into   effect   on   the   expiry   of   the
             period   of   notice   given   by   him   must   fail,   since   there   was   no
             such stipulation in the scheme that even without acceptance
             of   his   application   it   would   be   deemed   that   the   petitioner's
27
voluntary retirement application had been accepted. Once that
              is  not  accepted,  the  entire  case of the petitioner  falls to  the
              ground. The decision in Tek Chand case (2001) 3 SCC 290 will
              not, therefore, have any application to the facts of this case,
              particularly   when   the   petitioner's   application   for   voluntary
              retirement had not been accepted and he had been asked to
              rejoin   his   services.   The   petitioner   was   fully   aware   of   this
              position   as   he   continued   to   apply   for   leave   after   the   notice
              period was over.”
24.    Decision in
Tek Chand vs. Dile Ram
(2001) 3 SCC 290 has been

relied upon by the respondents. This Court considered Rule 48­A(2) of

the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, proviso to said rule

contained a provision where the appointing authority did not refuse to

grant   the   permission   for   retirement   before   the   expiry   of   the   period

specified in the said notice, the retirement shall become effective from

the   date   of   expiry   of   the   said   period.   The   relevant   observations   are

extracted hereunder:
“31. It is not disputed that the appointing authority did not
              refuse to grant the permission for retirement before expiry of
              the   period   specified   in   the   said   application   dated   5.12.1994
              given by Nikka Ram. Further, no communication whatsoever
              was made to him within the said period. During the course of
              the argument before the High Court, the learned counsel for
              the   parties   referred   to   Rule   48­A   of   the   Rules,   of   course,
              placing   their   own   interpretation.   Since   the   said   Rule   is
              material and has bearing on the question to be determined, it
              is extracted below:
"48­A.   Retirement   on   completion   of   20   years’
                    qualifying   service.   ­   (1)   At   any   time   after   a
                    government   servant   has   completed   twenty   years'
                    qualifying   service,   he   may,   by   giving   notice   of   not
                    less than three months in writing to the appointing
                    authority, retire from service:
Provided   that   this   sub­rule   shall   not   apply   to   a
                    government servant, including scientist or technical
                    expert who is ­
(i) on assignments under the Indian Technical and
                    Economic   Cooperation   (ITEC)   Programme   of   the
28
Ministry   of   External   Affairs   and   other   aid
      programmes.
(ii)   posted   abroad   in   foreign­based   offices   of   the
      Ministries / Departments.
(iii)   on   a   specific   contract   assignment   to   a   foreign
      Government,  unless,   after   having  been   transferred
      to India, he has resumed the charge of the post in
      India and served for a period of not less than one
      year.
(2)  The  notice   of   voluntary  retirement   given   under
      sub­rule   (1)   shall   require   acceptance   by   the
      appointing authority:
Provided  that  where the appointing authority  does
      not   refuse   to   grant   the   permission   for   retirement
      before the expiry of the period specified in the said
      notice,   the   retirement   shall   become   effective   from
      the date of expiry of the said period.”

       ***                        ***                       ***
33. It is clear from sub­rule (2) of the Rule that the appointing
authority   is   required   to   accept   the   notice   of   voluntary
retirement   given   under   sub­rule   (1).   It   is   open   to   the
appointing   authority   to   refuse   also,   on   whatever   grounds
available to it, but such refusal has to be before the expiry of
the period specified in the notice. The proviso to sub­rule (2) is
clear and certain in its terms. If the appointing authority does
not   refuse   to   grant   the   permission   for   retirement   before   the
expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the retirement
sought for becomes effective from the date of expiry of the said
period. In this case, admittedly, the appointing authority did
not refuse to grant the permission for retirement to Nikka Ram
before   the   expiry   of   the   period   specified   in   the   notice   dated
5.12.1994.   The   learned   Senior   Counsel   for   the   respondent
argued   that   the   acceptance   of   voluntary   retirement   by
appointing authority in all cases is mandatory.
In the absence
of such express acceptance the government servant continues
to be in service. In support of this submission, he drew  our
attention   to   Rule   56(k)   of   Fundamental   Rules.   He   also
submitted that acceptance may be on a later date, that is, even
after the expiry of the period specified in the notice and the
retirement   could   be   effective   from   the   date   specified   in   the
notice. Since the proviso to sub­rule (2) of Rule 48­A is clear in
itself and the said Rule 48­A is self­contained, in our opinion,
it is unnecessary to look to other provisions, more so in the
light   of   law
laid   down   by
this   Court.   An   argument   that
acceptance can be even long after the date of the expiry of the
period specified in the notice and that the voluntary retirement
may become effective from the date specified in the notice, will
lead to anomalous situation. Take a case, if an application for
29
voluntary retirement is accepted few years later from the date
              specified   in   the   notice   and   voluntary   retirement   becomes
              operative   from   the   date   of   expiry   of   the   notice   period   itself,
              what   would   be   the  position   or  status   of  such   a   government
              servant during the period from the date of expiry of the notice
              period up to the date of acceptance of the voluntary retirement
              by the appointing authority? One either continues in service or
              does   not   continue   in   service.   It   cannot   be   both   that   the
              voluntary retirement could be effective from the date of expiry
              of the period mentioned in the notice and still a Government
              servant could continue in service till the voluntary retirement
              is   accepted.   The   proviso   to   sub­rule   (2)   of   Rule   48­A   of   the
              Rules does not admit such situation.”

                     ***                         ***                       ***
35. In our view, this judgment fully supports the contention
              urged   on   behalf   of   the   appellant   in   this   regard.   In   this
              judgment, it is observed that there are three categories of rules
              relating to seeking of voluntary retirement after notice. In the
              first   category,   voluntary   retirement   automatically   comes   into
              force on expiry of notice period. In the second category also,
              retirement comes into force unless an order is passed during
              notice period withholding permission to retire and in the third
              category voluntary retirement does not come into force unless
              permission to this effect is granted by the competent authority.
In  such  a  case,   refusal   of  permission   can  be   communicated
              even after the expiry of the notice period. It all depends upon
              the   relevant   rules.   In   the   case   decided,   the   relevant   Rule
              required acceptance of notice by appointing authority and the
              proviso   to   the   Rule   further   laid   down   that   retirement   shall
              come into force automatically if the appointing authority did
              not   refuse   permission   during   the   notice   period.   Refusal   was
              not communicated to the respondent during the notice period
              and the Court held that voluntary retirement came into force
              on expiry of the notice period and subsequent order conveyed
              to him that he could not be deemed to have voluntary retired
              had no effect. The present case is almost identical to the one
              decided by this Court in the aforesaid decision.”

       The rule which came up for consideration was entirely different.

There is no provision contained in rule in question in the case at hand

like   the   proviso   to   Rule   48­A(2
)
referred   to   above
due   to   which   the

retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of period of

notice in case the same was not refused.
30
25.   In our considered opinion, under Rule 56 as applicable in the

State of Uttar Pradesh, notice of voluntary retirement does not come

into   effect   automatically   on   the   expiry   of   the   three   months   period.

Under the rule in question, the appointing authority has to accept the

notice   for   voluntary   retirement   or   it   can   be   refused   on   permissible

grounds.
26.   In our opinion, the Rule 56(c) does not fall in the category where

there   is   an   absolute   right   on   the   employee   to   seek   voluntary

retirement.   In view of the aforesaid dictum and what is held by this

Court, we find that the prayer made to make a reference to a larger

Bench,   in   case   this   Court   does   not   follow   the   earlier   decision   is

entirely devoid of merit as on the basis of what has been held by this

Court in the earlier decisions, we have arrived at the conclusion.   This

Court has authoritatively laid down the law umpteen number of time.
27.   Reliance has also been placed on behalf of respondents on the

decision in
Mahant Dhanmir vs. Madan Mohan
, (1987) Supp SCC 528,

in which this Court observed that law should not be unsettled unless

there   are   compelling   reasons.     There   is   no   dispute   that   the   said

proposition   has   already   been   held.     There   is   no   question   of   law

unsettling   the   law   but   is   of   its   application,   which   unfortunately

appears as against the interests of the respondents in view of language

employed in the rule in question.  An attempt in vain has been made
31
by   the   respondents   to   wriggle   out   of   the   clutches   of   the   various

decisions by raising the aforesaid argument.
28.    It   was   also   urged   that   the   Rule   56(c)   does   not   require   the

employee to give reasons for voluntary retirement.   No doubt under

Rule 56(c) there is no requirement for an employee to give any reason,

however, while considering the prayer, the appointing authority has to

keep   in   mind   the   public   interest   as   provided   in   the   Explanation

attached to F.R. 56.
29.    Learned   counsel   also   urged   that   outside   the   proviso   to   Rule

56(d),  there  is  no  general  right of  appointing  authority to   reject  the

notice of voluntary retirement of an employee on the ground of public

interest.     For   this   purpose,   threefold   submission   has   been   made.

Firstly,   that   the   principle   of   liberty   under   the   Constitution   and

specifically Part III of the Constitution requires that any restriction on

freedom and liberty must have the sanction of the law and that law

must   be   just,   fair   and   reasonable.     Presently,   there   is   no   law   as

enacted under
Article 309
of the Constitution.   Secondly, the right of

Government employee and that of the Government are delineated in

terms of Fundamental Rules governing State Government employees.

Thus, if any Fundamental Rules do not restrict the general liberty of

an employee or do not empower the employer to act in a certain way,

an   action   otherwise   would   be   impermissible.     For   this   purpose,
32
reliance   has   been   placed   on  Moti   Ram   Deka   vs.   G.M.,   North   East

Frontier Railway, (1964) 5 SCR 683.  It was also submitted that public

interest restriction that applies to the State in the case of compulsory

retirement, applies on account of
Article 311.
The Court observed:
27.   In this connection, it is necessary to emphasise that the
             rule­making   authority   contemplated   by
Art.   309
cannot   be
             validly exercised so as to curtail or affect the rights guaranteed
             to public servants under
Art. 311(1).
Art. 311(1) is intended to
             afford   a   sense   of   security   to   public   servants   who   are
             substantively appointed to a permanent  post and one of the
             principal   benefits   which   they   are   entitled   to   expect   is   the
             benefit of pension after rendering public service for the period
             prescribed by the Rules. It would, we think, not be legitimate
             to contend that the right to earn a pension to which a servant
             substantively appointed to a permanent post is entitled can be
             curtailed by Rules framed under
Art. 309
so as to make the
             said right either ineffective or illusory. Once the scope of Art.
311(1) and (2) is duly determined, it must be held that no Rule
             framed under
Art. 309
can trespass on the rights guaranteed
             by
Art. 311.
This position is of basic importance and must be
             borne in mind in dealing with the controversy in the present
             appeals.
30.   The reliance placed on Moti Ram Deka (supra) is of no avail as it

has no application to the instant case as no right conferred by
Article

311
of   the   Constitution   can   be   said   to   have   been   taken   away   and

service rule dehors of it can provide for the concept of public interest.
31.   There is no doubt about it that Rule 56(d) provides that where a

disciplinary   enquiry   is   pending   or   contemplated   and   in   the   case   of

contemplated   disciplinary   enquiry,   the   Government   servant   shall   be

informed before the expiry of notice that it has not been accepted.  The

proviso to Rule 56(d) has no application where a disciplinary enquiry
33
is   not   contemplated   or   pending.     When   the   proviso   itself   is   not

applicable, in no case it will dilute the provisions of Explanation with

respect to exigencies mentioned in clause (c) of Rule 56.
32.   The   submission   made   upon   principle   of   liberty   and   its

curtailment, the law must be just, fair and reasonable can also not be

accepted as the Fundamental Rules are statutory rules and have been

made by the Governor under
section 241(2)(b)
of the Government of

India Act,1935 and provisions of rule in question cannot be said to be

unfair, unreasonable and oppressive.
33.   The   concept   of   liberty   not   to   serve   when   the   public   interest

requires   cannot   be   attracted   as   retirement   which   carries   pecuniary

benefits can be subject to certain riders.   The general public has the

right   to   obtain   treatment   from   super   skilled   specialists,   not   second

rates.
In
Jagadish  Saran   vs.  Union   of India
,  (1980)  2   SCC  768,   the

Court observed thus:
"44.  Secondly,  and  more importantly,  it  is  difficult to
             denounce   or   renounce   the   merit   criterion   when   the
             selection is for post­graduate or post­doctoral courses
             in   specialised   subjects….   To   sympathise   mawkishly
             with   the   weaker   sections   by   selecting   sub­standard
             candidates, is to punish society as a whole by denying
             the prospect of excellence say in hospital service. Even
             the poorest, when stricken by critical illness, needs the
             attention   of   super­skilled   specialists,   not   humdrum
             second­rates.   So   it   is   that   relaxation   on   merit,   by
             overruling   equality   and   quality   altogether,   is   a   social
             risk where the stage is post­graduate or post­doctoral.”
34
34.    The   concept   of   public   interest   can   also   be   invoked   by   the

Government when voluntary retirement sought by an employee, would

be against the public interest.   The provisions cannot be said to be

violative of any of the rights. There is already paucity of the doctors as

observed   by   the   High   Court,   the   system   cannot   be   left   without

competent senior persons and particularly, the High Court has itself

observed that doctors are not being attracted to join services and there

is   an   existing   scarcity   of   the   doctors.     Poorest   of   the   poor   obtain

treatment at the Government hospitals.   They  cannot  be put at the

peril, even when certain doctors are posted against the administrative

posts.  It is not that they have been posted against their seniority or to

the   other   cadre.     Somebody   has   to   man   these   administrative   posts

also, which are absolutely necessary to run the medical services which

are part and parcel of the right to life itself. In the instant case, where

the right of the public are involved in obtaining treatment, the State

Government has taken a decision as per Explanations to decline the

prayer   for   voluntary   retirement   considering   the   public   interest.     It

cannot be said that State has committed any illegality or its decision

suffers from any vice of arbitrariness.
35.    The decision of the Government cater to the needs of the human

life   and   carry   the   objectives   of   public   interest.   The   respondents   are

claiming the right to retire under Part III of the Constitution such right

cannot be supreme than  right to  life. It has to be interpreted along
35
with the rights of the State Government in Part IV of the Constitution

as it is obligatory upon the State Government to make an endeavour

under
Article 47
to look after the provisions for health and nutrition.

The fundamental duties itself are enshrined under
Article 51(A)
which

require observance.   The right under
Article 19(1)(g)
is subject to the

interest of the general public and once service has been joined, the

right   can   only   be   exercised   as   per   rules   and   not   otherwise.     Such

conditions   of   service   made   in   public   interest   cannot   be   said   to   be

illegal or arbitrary or taking away the right of liberty.  The provisions

of the rule in question cannot be said to be against the Constitutional

provisions.   In case of voluntary retirement, gratuity, pensions, and

other dues etc. are payable to the employee in accordance with rules

and when there is a requirement of the services of an employee, the

appointing authority may exercise its right not to accept the prayer for

voluntary retirement.  In case all the doctors are permitted to retire, in

that situation, there would be a chaos and no doctor would be left in

the Government hospitals, which would be against the concept of the

welfare state and injurious to public interest.  In the case of voluntary

retirement, there is a provision in Rule 56 that a Government servant

may be extended benefit of an additional period of five years then an

actual period of service rendered  by him there  is  the corresponding

obligation to serve in dire need.
36
36.   It was urged that in the State of Tamil Nadu, Government has

amended the rules not to retire Government doctors, if there is any

scarcity of doctors it is open to the Government of Uttar Pradesh to

amend its rules.  In India, the Government sponsored Medical Services

to cater to the needs of poorest of the poor and have­nots otherwise

there is the commercialisation of the charitable medical profession.  In

other States too, it is seen sometime that when a doctor is transferred

from one place to another, the doctor forwards application resigning

from the post or seeks voluntary retirement as he does not want to

move out and leave his lucrative private practice and joins the duty

only when he obtains posting back to the place of his choice.  In such

a scenario people cannot be deprived of the services of good doctors. In

view of the scarcity of the doctors and the unfortunate privatisation

and   commercialisation   of   the   noble   medical   profession,   for

maintaining the efficiency of the State Medical Services, the decision

taken by the Government is permissible as per rules and cannot be

interfered with.  Unfortunately, the High Court has given the aforesaid

observations pointing out the shortage of specialised doctors and at

the same time has ultimately decided against the State Government

on wrong interpretation without considering the Explanation attached

to Rule 56 applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.  The preface given

by the High Court is just opposite to its conclusion.   The High Court
37
ought   to   have   rejected   and   not   to   allow   the   prayer   of   voluntary

retirement made by the doctors.
37.    It was urged that some of the doctors suffered from neck pain

etc. as such prayer ought to have been accepted but they have not

given any such serious ailments which may make their functioning in

the hospital difficult in any manner whatsoever.   It was the pretext

that   was   used   by   them   to   seek   voluntary   retirement.   It   is   for   the

Government to consider the efficacy. Doctors too have right under the

Rights   of   Persons   with
Disabilities   Act,   2016
,   they   can   continue   in

services unfettered by such ailments.
38.    Under
Article 47
it is the duty of the State to improve the public

health, which is a primary duty under the Directive Principles of the

State   Policy   and   the   statutory   expression   which   may   be   enforced.

When we consider
Article 51A
containing Fundamental Duties, it is a

duty of every citizen under
Article 51A(g)
to have compassion for living

creatures and to have humanism is also contemplated under
Article

51A(h)
and to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and

collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of

endeavours and achievement.  It cannot be done by depriving poorest

of the poor essential medical services and to leave them at the mercy

of doctors.  There cannot be an exodus from the Government Medical

Services   at   large,   which   is   being   projected   in   the   instant   case,
38
definitely this cannot be permitted to happen within four corners of

law as it has to be living organism and has to live up to the essence

and   spirit   of   constitution   and   cannot   ignore   and   overlook   needs   of

poorest strata of the society.
39.  It   was   urged   that   the   State   Government   is   discriminating

between   the   doctors   in   the   Provincial   Medical   Services   with   the

doctors  working in  the State­owned  Hospitals  and Medical  Colleges.

In   the   Medical   Colleges   etc.   doctors   are   being   permitted   to   retire.

Instances of 7 doctors have been given, who were permitted to retire in

2016, 2017 and 2018.  Doctors of Medical Colleges are on a different

footing  than   that   of   Provincial   Medical   Services.     Even   otherwise   in

view   of   the   scarcity   of   the   doctors,   no   ground   of   equality   can   be

claimed and the doctors of different services form different class, apart

from that there is no concept of negative equality that too against the

public interest.   In case, such a plea is allowed, none may be left to

serve public at large.
40.    There are several decisions of the High Court, namely,  Dr. Anil

Dewan   vs.   State   of   Punjab,  ILR   1   Punjab   &   Haryana   46;
State   of

Punjab vs. Dr. Harbir Singh Dhillon
, 2010 SCC Online P&H 6159 and

Dr. Kalpana Singh vs. State of Rajasthan, (2014) SCC Online Raj 6253,

were   cited   to   show   that   the   decision   in
Dinesh   Chandra   Sangma
(supra) had been followed.  We have considered the aforesaid decisions
39
and we find that it would depend upon the scheme of the Rules.
Each

and every judgment has to be considered in the light of the provisions

which   came   up   for   consideration   and   question  it   has   decided,

language employed in the rules, and it cannot be said to be of general

application   as   already   observed   by   this   Court   in
State   of   Haryana
(supra).
41.    It   was   also   contended   that   the   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   may

amend rules, in our opinion there is no such necessity in view of the

Explanation the State has already amended its rules so as to enable it

to   pass   an   order   with   respect   to   retirement   whether   it   is   at   the

instance of the Government or at the instance of the employee for both

the public interest is germane.
42.  The submission was also made with respect to the imposition of

moratorium period of one year on retirement and that there should be

the recruitment of the doctors and thereafter acceptance of voluntary

retirement by the State.   We do not propose to venture into it.   The

action   of   the   State   Government   was   appropriate   in   disallowing   the

prayer   seeking   voluntary   retirement.     The   Government   may   fill   the

vacancies  if   any.  But  that  would  not  bring doctors   of   experience   at

senior level and exodus of doctors cannot be permitted to weaken the

services   when   the   public   interest   requires   to   serve   for   the   sake   of

efficient   medical   profession   and   fulfil   Directive   Principles   of   State
40
Policy   once   they   found   statutory   expression   in   the   rules   cannot   be

made   mockery.     When   services   are   required,   denial   of   voluntary

retirement is permissible under  the Rules applicable  in the State of

Uttar Pradesh.
43.   In view of the above, we allow the civil appeals and hereby set

aside  the impugned judgment and  order passed by the High  Court.

The applications for intervention and to implead stand allowed.
…………………………..J.
                                                         (Arun Mishra)  




                                                          …………………………..J.
                                                        (S. Abdul Nazeer)    

August 21, 2018.
New Delhi.