[Cites
17
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Alagu Pharmacy vs N Magudeswari on 14 August, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3821, (2019) 1 PAT LJR 241, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2956, (2018) 3 PUN LR 772, (2018) 5 MAD LW 413, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 375, (2018) 2 RENCR 331, (2018) 9 SCALE 637, (2018) 189 ALLINDCAS 57 (SC), (2018) 6 ALL WC 6084, (2018) 3 ALL RENTCAS 690, (2018) 130 ALL LR 692, (2018) 4 ICC 180, (2018) 4 JCR 135 (SC), (2019) 1 JLJR 9, 2018 (8) SCC 311, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 156
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1



                                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 8256-8257 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.24615-24616 of 2017)



                         M/s Alagu Pharmacy & Ors.                                     ……Appellants


                                                              Versus


                         N. Magudeswari                                               ..…. Respondent



                                                          JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
Leave granted.
2.       This appeal is directed against the final judgment and order dated

                         29.03.2016 in Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No.586 of 2016 as well as

                         against the order dated 02.12.2016 in Review Petition No.89 of 2016 in said
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.14
17:46:47 IST
Reason:
2
Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No.586 of 2016 passed by the High Court of

Judicature at Madras, Bench at Madurai.
3.       The appellants 2 to 4 are doing business in the name and style of M/s

Alagu Pharmacy i.e. the appellant No.1. The appellants claim to be tenants

in the suit property owned by the respondent herein since 1998. On or about

22.02.2012 a lease agreement was entered into, which according to the

appellants was signed by the respondent, extending/renewing the period of

lease.    On 13.11.2013 and 07.12.2013 the respondent had issued legal

notices calling upon the appellants to vacate the suit property alleging inter

alia that the lease agreement dated 22.02.2012 was not signed by the

respondent and was a forged document, to which reply was given by the

appellants on 17.01.2014. On 17.01.2014 itself a complaint (Exh.P-10) was

lodged by the respondent alleging commission of forgery. According to the

appellants, on 20.01.2014 the respondent alongwith her husband and some

henchmen tried to evict the appellants which attempt was successfully

resisted by the appellants. In the circumstances, O.S. No.135 of 2014 was

filed by the appellants on 21.01.2014 seeking relief of permanent injunction

against the respondent from interfering with their peaceful possession and

enjoyment of the suit property save and except by due process of law. After
3
hearing the appellants, an ad interim injunction was granted by the District

Munsif, Coimbatore.
4.    It appears that on 29.01.2014 a compromise (Exh.P-11) was entered

into between the appellants and the respondent.         It is the case of the

appellants that they were summoned to the police station in connection with

the complaint lodged by the respondent (Exh.P-10) and under the pressure

employed by the police, said Exh. P-11 was entered into. Soon thereafter an

Eviction Petition i.e. R.C.O.P. No.29 of 2014 was filed by the respondent

before the Principal Rent Controller-cum-District Munsif, Coimbatore for

eviction of the appellants. It is the case of the appellant that they were again

asked to appear before the police on 27.03.2014 and under the pressure

exerted by the police a compromise deed was entered into under which the

appellants agreed to vacate the suit property. Said compromise deed was

presented before the Court on 28.03.2014 and following order was passed

by the Rent Controller and Principal District Munsif, Coimbatore:
“Petition dated 08.02.2014 filed under
Section 10(2)(ii)(a)
,
10(3)(c)
of Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control)
      Act, 1960 and the petitioner filed this petition against the
      respondents to vacate the premises and to deliver the vacant
      possession of the petition mentioned property more fully
      described hereunder in the schedule and cost of this petition.
4
This petition coming on this day for hearing before me in
      the presence of Thiru. M. Sanjaiyan, Advocate for petitioner
      and of Thiru. Somasundaram, Advocate for respondent. Both
      parties filed compromise memo and both parties present and
      this day this Court doth order direct as follows:
1. That the respondents be and are hereby granted
                   time upto 31.10.2015 to vacate the petition
                   mentioned property and to handover the vacant
                   possession of the same to the petitioner/landlord
                   and
2. That the respondents are hereby directed to pay
                   the present monthly rent of Rs.19080/- pm to the
                   petitioner/landlord till the date of delivery of
                   possession of the property (i.e. upto 31.10.2015)
                   by way of cheque; and
3. That in case of default to do so by the
                   respondents, the petitioners are entitled to take
                   appropriate action through court of law against the
                   respondents.
4. The compromise petition do form part of this final
                   order, and
5. That there be no order as to cost.”
5.    On 07.10.2015, a letter was sent by the respondent calling upon the

appellants to vacate the premises by 31.10.2015 in terms of the aforesaid

compromise decree.     On 07.12.2015, an appeal being R.C.A. (CFR)

No.31591 of 2015 was filed by the appellants before the Principal

Subordinate Judge, Coimbatore against the aforesaid compromise decree
5
dated 28.03.2014. Along with said appeal IA No.465 of 2015 was also

preferred seeking condonation of delay of 604 days in filing said appeal.
6.       The respondent having contested the matter, said IA No.465 of 2015

was taken up for consideration by the appellate court. It was submitted on

behalf of the appellants that they were pressurized into signing the

compromise deed and said compromise was brought about because of

pressure exerted by the police. Reliance was placed on complaint Exh.P-10

by the respondent and compromise letter Exh.P-11 dated 29.01.2014. On

the other hand, it was submitted on behalf of the respondent that there were

numerous occasions for the appellants to raise a grievance that the

compromise in question was brought about by coercion and yet no such

objection was ever raised. It was, therefore, submitted that the delay of 604

days in preferring the appeal ought not to be condoned.
7.       The appellate court by its Order dated 19.01.2016 accepted said IA

No.465 of 2015 and condoned the delay subject to payment of Rs.2000/- by

the appellants to the respondent. It was observed by the appellate court as

under:
6
“8. The main contention of the respondent is compromise
made before the trial court with free will and now the
respondent is tried to drag on the matter and preventing the
respondent from enjoying the fruit source of the compromise
decree. On the side of respondent Ex.R1 and R4 marked.
Ex.R1 compromise memo; R2 document for already received
the certified copy of fair and final order; R3 letter from the
respondent to the petitioner; R4 postal acknowledgement. On
perusal of respondent side documents to disprove the facts of
Ex.P-10 and Ex.P-11 no documents have been filed. The
landlord-tenant relationship is admitted. The allegations made
by the respondent against the petitioners is lease deed dated
22.02.2012 is forged one and complaint has been given to the
police regarding the forged documents and the petitioners
themselves come to the agreement they are undertake to vacate
the petition mentioned property, there is no police threat or
complaint or coercion by the police or by the respondent. In
order to consider the documents filed by the petitioners Ex.P-10
is the police complaint, prepared by the respondent
Magudeswari against the 2nd petitioner/appellant. In the
complaint the allegations made against the 2nd petitioner is that
there is life threat to the respondents and the lease deed has
been created by the 2nd petitioner by forging the signature of the
respondent and requesting the police to take proper legal action
against the 2nd petitioner. Once the written complaint filed
before the police mentioning the name of the accused, if the
police finds it is true for that police have to register FIR against
the accused and proceed with the investigation as per law. But
on perusing of Exh.P-11 compromise letter dated 29.01.2014
between the respondent and the 2nd petitioner addressing to the
inspector of police, City Crime Branch. In continuation the
RCOP has been filed and memo of compromise filed,
compromise decree has been passed. As stated above the duty
of the police is only to register the case against the accused and
proceed against the accused for the offence committed for the
crime, they are not entitled to make any compromise against the
crime unless and until it is provided by law and further before
when compromise arrived at court, the previous compromise
has been arrived at police station. From Ex.P-11 itself there
7
arises suspicion whether the petitioner has put into any force or
      any threat to make the compromise before the court. Hence
      from the above discussions there is a police force with regard to
      file the compromise regarding RCOP 29/14 and previously
      compromise letter has been arrived before the police. Hence
      there is a suspicion arises petitioner must be put into any threat
      or coercion at the time of filing the compromise memo in
      RCOP and now the petitioner filed the petition to condone the
      delay of 604 days. Hence from the above discussions it is clear
      the petitioners have explained the delay of 604 days in filing the
      appeal and the explanation submitted by the petitioners is
      acceptable one.”
8.    The aforesaid order was challenged by the respondent by preferring

Civil Revision Petition before the High Court of Judicature at Madras which

Revision Petition was allowed by the High Court vide its orders dated

29.03.2016. It was observed by the High Court as under:
“5. There are two courses open to the tenants. One is that the
      tenants would have stated before the Court which recorded the
      compromise that the compromise was out of compulsion or
      coercion on the part of the police during enquiry of the
      complaint preferred by the landlady. In that case, the Court
      which recorded the compromise would have dealt with that
      issue. That is not the case here. When that is not the case, it is
      far fetched for the appellate court to come to a conclusion that
      the tenants might have been put into coercion or force before
      entering into the compromise. It is equally probable that in
      order to get the closure of complaint, the tenants would have
      opted to enter into a compromise and thereafter, the tenants are
      put forth an allegation of invalidity of compromise. Even if the
      tenants had some difficulty in expressing themselves before the
      trial court, the appeal would have been filed immediately after
      the compromise decree, if there had been any vitiating factors
8
while entering into the compromise. But, the appeal had not
      been filed in time. Therefore, the conduct of the tenants would
      only indicate the procrastinating approach in dealing with their
      case.”
9.    The appellants preferred a review petition which was rejected by the

High Court on 02.12.2016. This appeal challenges the correctness of both

the orders passed by the High Court. We heard Mr. Ratnakar Dash, learned

Senior Advocate for the appellants and Mr. S. Thananjayan, learned

Advocate appearing for the respondent.
10.   The order passed by the appellate court shows that compromise

Exh.P-11 was brought about on 29.01.2014 that is even before the eviction

petition was filed by the respondent. Further, said compromise Exh.P-11

was addressed to the Inspector of Police, City Crime Branch. The appellate

court had further observed that complaint Exh.P-10 and compromise Exh.P-
11 were not disputed by the respondent and no document in rebuttal was

filed. The complaint (Exh.P-10) proceeds on a premise that the lease deed

dated 22.02.2012 was a forged document and there was no relationship of

landlord-tenant between the parties. Yet an eviction petition was filed,

seeking eviction of the appellants under the concerned
Rent Act
. There is an

inherent contradiction in the stand adopted by the Respondent.           In the
9
circumstances, the assertion made by the appellants that pressure was

exerted through the police and they were compelled to enter into

compromise is prima facie acceptable.
In
Ajad Singh v. Chatra and

Others1
, compromise recorded in Police Station inter alia was not found to

be acceptable by this Court and the matter was remanded. It was observed,

“…..the appellate court ought to have taken note of the fact that the said

compromise was recorded in the Police Station and during the pendency of

the suit.” It is true that there was a delay of 604 days in filing the appeal, but

in cases where there is reasonable doubt that police may have forced a party

to enter into compromise, the process of Court ought to weigh in favour of a

party who alleges to be victim of such pressure. It may be pertinent to note

that the order passed by the High Court does not even deal with this aspect

nor was any submission made that the assessment made by the appellate

court was in any way incorrect or imperfect.
11.      Further, eviction petition was filed seeking eviction of the appellants

under
Section 10(2)(ii)(a)
,
10(3)(c)
of Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and

Rent Control) Act, 1960. Said Sections are as under:
1
(2005) 2 SCC 567 (para 8)
10
“10(2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to
      the Controller for a direction in that behalf. If the Controller,
      after giving the tenant a reasonable opportunity of showing
      cause against the application, is satisfied-
…….
(ii) that the tenant has after the 23rd October 1945
      without the written consent of the landlord-
(a) transferred his right under the lease or sublet the
                entire building or any portion thereof, if the lease
                does not confer on him any right to do so, or
                …..
.….
(3) …….
(c) A landlord who is occupying only a part of a
                building, whether residential or non-residential, may,
                notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a),
                apply to the Controller for an order directing any
                tenant occupying the whole or any portion of the
                remaining part of the building to put the landlord in
                possession thereof, if he requires additional
                accommodation for residential purposes or for
                purposes of a business which he is carrying on, as the
                case may be.”
12.   The eviction in terms of the aforesaid provisions can be ordered only

if the concerned Rent Controller or Court is satisfied that the ground seeking

eviction is made out. It has been held by this Court that unless and until

ground seeking eviction in terms of the concerned contract is not made out,
11
no eviction of a tenant can be ordered, even if the parties had entered into a

compromise. For example, in
K.K. Chari v. R.M. Seshadri2
this Court

considered its earlier decisions in three cases as under:-
“20. There are three decisions of this Court which require to be
         considered.
In
Bahadur Singh v. Muni Subrat Dass3
a decree
         for eviction passed on the basis of a compromise between the
         parties, was held, by this Court, to be a nullity as contravening
Section 13(1)
of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952.
         The facts therein were as follows:
“The tenant and the son of the landlord referred the
            disputes between them to arbitration. The landlord was
            not a party to this agreement. The arbitrators passed an
            award whereunder the tenant was to give vacant
            possession of the premises in favour of the landlord
            within a particular time. This award was made a decree
            of court. The landlord, who was neither a party to the
            award nor to the proceedings, which resulted in the
            award being made a decree of court, applied for eviction
            of the tenant on the basis of the award. The tenant
            resisted execution by raising various objections under
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure. One of the
            objections was that the decree for eviction based upon the
            award was a nullity as being opposed to the
Delhi and
            Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952
. This Court held that the
            decree directing the tenant to deliver possession of the
            premises to the landlord was a nullity, as it was passed in
            contravention of
Section 13(1)
of the relevant statute.
            After quoting the sub-section, this
Court further held
that
            the decree for eviction passed according to an award, in a
            proceeding to which the landlord was not a party and
            without the court satisfying itself that a statutory ground
            of eviction existed, was a nullity and cannot be enforced
2
(1973) 1 SCC 761
3
(1969) 2 SCR 432
12
in execution. It will be seen from this decision that the
            decree was held to be a nullity because the landlord was
            not a party thereto, and also because the court had not
            satisfied itself that a ground for eviction, as required by
            the statute, existed. This decision is certainly an authority
            for the proposition that a court ordering eviction has to
            satisfy itself that a statutory ground of eviction has been
            made out by a landlord. How exactly that satisfaction is
            to be expressed by the court or gathered from the
            materials, has not been
laid down in
this decision, as this
            court was not faced with such a problem.”
21.
In
Kaushalya Devi v. Shri K.L. Bansal4
the question again
         rose under the same Delhi statute regarding the validity of a
         decree passed for eviction on compromise. The plaintiff therein
         filed a suit for eviction of the tenant on two grounds—
(a) the premises were required for their own use; and
(b)the tenant had committed default in payment of
                    rent.
22. The tenant filed a written statement denying both these
         allegations. He disputed the claim of the landlord regarding his
         requiring the premises for his own use bona fide and also the
         fact of his being in arrears. When the pleadings of the landlord
         and the tenant were in this state, both parties filed a
         compromise memo in and by which they agreed to the passing
         of a decree of eviction against the tenant. Representations to the
         same effect were also made by the counsel for both parties. The
         court passed the following order:
“In view of the statement of the parties’ counsel
                      and the written compromise, a decree is passed in
                      favour of the plaintiff against the defendant.”

               The tenant did not vacate the premises within the time
         mentioned as per the compromise memo. On the other hand,
4
(1969) 1 SCC 59
13
he filed an application under Section 47 of the Civil
         Procedure Code pleading that the decree is void as being in
         contravention of
Section 13
of the Delhi statute. The High
         Court held that the decree was a nullity, as the order was
         passed solely on the basis of the compromise without
         indicating that any of the statutory grounds mentioned in
Section 13
existed. Following the decision in Bahadur
         Singh this Court upheld the order of the High Court. Here
         again, it will be seen that the manner in which the court’s
         satisfaction is to be expressed or gathered has not been dealt
         with.
23. A similar question came up again before this Court in
Ferozi Lal Jain v. Man Mal5
. The landlord filed an application
         for eviction of the tenant on the ground that he had sublet the
         premises without obtaining his consent in writing. Subletting,
         without the consent of the landlord in writing, was one of the
         grounds, under
Section 13(1)
of the Delhi statute entitling a
         landlord to ask for eviction. The tenant denied the allegation
         that he had sublet the premises. Both the landlord and the tenant
         entered into a compromise and the court, after recording the
         same, passed the following order:
“As per compromise, decree for ejectment and for Rs
               165 with proportionate costs is passed in favour of the
               plaintiff and against the defendant. The parties shall
               be bound by the terms of the compromise. The terms
               of the compromise be incorporated in the decree-
sheet....”
24. As the tenant did not surrender possession of the properties
         within the time mentioned in the compromise memo, the
         landlord levied execution. It was resisted by the tenant on
         various grounds one of which was that the decree for eviction
         was a nullity, being in contravention of
Section 13
of the Delhi
         Statute. This contention was accepted by the execution court, as
         well as by the High Court. This Court, after a reference to the
5
(1970) 3 SCC 181
14
provisions of
Section 13
, held that a decree for recovery of
         possession can be passed only if the court concerned is satisfied
         that one or other of the grounds mentioned in the section is
         established. This Court, further observed:
“From the facts mentioned earlier, it is seen that at no
               stage, the Court was called upon to apply its mind to
               the question whether the alleged subletting is true or
               not. Order made by it does not show that it was
               satisfied that the subletting complained of has taken
               place, nor is there any other material on record to
               show that it was so satisfied. It is clear from the
               record that the court had proceeded solely on the basis
               of the compromise arrived at between the parties. That
               being so there can be hardly any doubt that the court
               was not competent to pass the impugned decree.
Hence the decree under execution must be held to be a
               nullity.”
13.
In
Nagindas Ramdas v. Dalpatram Ichharam
alias Brijram and

Others6 it was stated:-
“17. It will thus be seen that the
Delhi Rent Act and the
         Madras Rent Act
expressly forbid the Rent Court or the
         Tribunal from passing a decree or order of eviction on a ground
         which is not any of the grounds mentioned in the relevant
         Sections of those statutes. Nevertheless, such a prohibitory
         mandate to the Rent Court that it shall not travel beyond the
         statutory grounds mentioned in
Sections 12
and
13
, and to the
         parties that they shall not contract out of those statutory
         grounds, is inherent in the public policy built into the statute
         (Bombay Rent Act).
6
(1974) 1 SCC 242
15
18. In Rasiklal Chunilal case, a Division Bench of the Gujarat
High Court has taken the view that in spite of the fact that there
is no express provision in the Bombay Rent Act prohibiting
contracting out, such a prohibition would have to be read by
implication consistently with the public policy underlying this
welfare measure. If we may say so with respect, this is a correct
approach to the problem.
19. Construing the provisions of Sections 12, 13 and 28 of the
Bombay Rent Act in the light of the public policy which
permeates the entire scheme and structure of the Act, there is no
escape from the conclusion that the Rent Court under this Act is
not competent to pass a decree for possession either in invitum
or with the consent of the parties on a ground which is de hors
the Act or ultra vires the Act. The existence of one of the
statutory grounds mentioned in
Sections 12
and
13
is a sine qua
non to the exercise of jurisdiction by the Rent Court under these
provisions. Even parties cannot by their consent confer such
jurisdiction on the Rent Court to do something which,
according to the legislative mandate, it could not do.
….
22. The mere fact that Order 23 Rule 3,
of the Code of Civil
Procedure
is applicable to the proceedings in a suit under the
Bombay Rent Act, does not remove that fetter on the Rent
Court or empower it to make a decree for eviction de hors the
statute. Even under that provision of the Code, the Court, before
ordering that the compromise be recorded, is required to satisfy
itself about the lawfulness of the agreement. Such lawfulness or
otherwise of the agreement is to be judged, also on the ground
whether the terms of the compromise are consistent with the
provisions of the
Rent Act
.
….
27. From a conspectus of the cases cited at the bar, the principle
that emerges is, that if at the time of the passing of the decree,
there was some material before the Court, on the basis of
which, the Court could be prima facie satisfied, about the
16
existence of a statutory ground for eviction, it will be presumed
      that the Court was so satisfied and the decree for eviction
      though apparently passed on the basis of a compromise, would
      be valid. Such material may take the shape either of evidence
      recorded or produced in the case, or, it may partly or wholly be
      in the shape of an express or implied admission made in the
      compromise agreement, itself. Admissions, if true and clear, are
      by far the best proof of the facts admitted. Admissions in
      pleadings or judicial admissions, admissible under
Section 58
of the Evidence Act, made by the parties or their agents at or
      before the hearing of the case, stand on a higher footing than
      evidentiary admissions. The former class of admissions are
      fully binding on the party that makes them and constitute a
      waiver of proof. They by themselves can be made the
      foundation of the rights of the parties. On the other hand,
      evidentiary admissions which are receivable at the trial as
      evidence, are by themselves, not conclusive. They can be
      shown to be wrong.”
14.   The common thread that runs through the aforesaid pronouncements

of this Court is – in cases where protection under a
Rent Act
is available, no

eviction can be ordered unless ground seeking eviction is made out, even if

parties had entered into a compromise. Moreover, the invalidity on that

count can even be raised in execution. In the present case, the order dated

28.03.2014 did not remotely note that any particular ground under the
Rent

Act
was made out.
15.   In the circumstances, in our considered view, the order passed by the

appellate court was absolutely correct and did not call for any interference
17
on part of the High Court. We, therefore, allow the present appeals and

restore the order dated 19.01.2016 passed by the appellate court in IA

No.465 of 2015. The appeal shall now be heard on merits and disposed of in

accordance with law. Since there was delay of more than 600 days on part

of the appellants, we direct that the appellants shall pay costs of Rs.50,000/-

to the respondent which shall be over and above that already imposed by the

appellant court and shall be made over within six weeks from this Judgment.

The appeals stand allowed in the aforesaid terms.
..………………………J.
                                                    (Abhay Manohar Sapre)


                                                      ..………………………
                                                    J.
                                                    (Uday Umesh Lalit)

New Delhi,
August 14, 2018.