[Cites
8
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Joydeep Mukharjee vs State Of West Bengal & Ors on 3 February, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 1169, 2011 (2) SCC 706, 2011 AIR SCW 1306, 2011 (3) AIR JHAR R 318, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 545, (2011) 2 PAT LJR 59, (2011) 85 ALL LR 505, (2011) 4 ALLMR 879 (SC), (2011) 99 ALLINDCAS 58 (SC), (2011) 2 GUJ LR 1600, (2011) 1 LANDLR 632, (2011) 2 SCALE 172, 2011 (2) KCCR SN 165 (SC)
Bench:
Swatanter Kumar
,
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan
,
S.H. Kapadia
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.43 OF 2006



Joydeep Mukharjee                                 ... Petitioner

                                  Versus

State of West Bengal & Ors.                       ... Respondents



                                ORDER
Petitioner, who claims to be a public spirited person from the

State of West Bengal and a member of the All India Legal Aid Forum,

which is an organisation stated to be working for upliftment of the

downtrodden, has filed the present Public Interest Litigation claiming

the following relief:
a)     allow this writ petition and appoint a
                    committee functioning under direct
                    supervision of the court to scrutinize all
                    the cases of discretionary allotments
                    after due notice to the allottees and
                    based upon this committee's report
                    issue a writ of and/or direction in the
                    nature of mandamus quashing all the
                    allotments of Government lands in Salt
                    Lake City made unconstitutionally,
                    illegally,    arbitrarily,   whimsically,
                    capriciously with mala fide motive and in
                    clandestine manner in colourable and
2
arrogant     exercise    of    so-called
                "Discretionary     Power"     by     the
                respondent; and
b)   pass an order directing the Calcutta
                High Court to send the case record of
                CO No.7553(W) of 1986, Bidhannagar
                (Salt Lake) Welfare Association vs.
                State of West Bengal to furnish the
                same to this Hon'ble Court with notice to
                the petitioner therein and to hear and
                dispose of the said CO No.7553(W) of
                1986 on its merit after setting aside the
                order dated 2.9.2003.
c)   direct the respondents herein to produce
                the Master Plan as originally framed
                from the original records of the Salt
                Lake City.
d)   impose      exemplary     damages      of
                substantially high amount on the
                respondent No.2 to 6 to set a deterrent
                example and also to compensate the
                public exchequer for the loss caused to
                the general public for reasons of
                discretionary allotment of valuable plots
                by the Respondents to suit their
                personal, political, nepotistic and
                financial ends; and
e)   pass any other order further order/s as
                this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
                proper."
Above prayers are claimed on the averment that even after

pronouncement of judgment of this Court in
Dipak K. Ghosh v. State

of West Bengal
[(2006) 3 SCC 765], there has been violation of the

original Master Plan of the Salt Lake City against which several
3
demonstrations were taken out. The petitioner also submits that the

issues raised in Writ Petition No. 7553 filed in the Calcutta High Court

have not been settled by that Court or even by this Court. In his

submissions, these issues require consideration being questions of

great importance.
According to the petitioner, the Salt Lake City was the result of

dream of the late Chief Minister Dr. B.C. Roy of establishing a new

township for the lower and middle income groups on the eastern side

of Calcutta (now Kolkata) and the land to be used for that purpose

was the reclaimed land of the Salt Lake. In the year 1967, a Master

Plan was prepared under the Government instructions and the

Government was expected to develop the area in accordance with

that Master Plan which had, inter alia, made the following provisions:
"a)   60% plots are earmarked as residential
                 plots.
b)    Separate drainage and sewerage system.
           c) Open space to the tune of 12%
           d)    Location of commercial plots in one zone.
           e)    Location of few shop allowable plots meant
                 to cater to the local needs of each
                 residential plots.
           f)    Roads on different types.
           g)    Open space and other amenities such as
                 Park.
4
h)    Separate area to reserve for co-operative
                  or different organisations like CMDA Union
                  Government Departments, Administrative
                  building local centres, play ground,
                  education institutions and also suitable
                  allocation of Parks in each block."


      The   development      scheme      contained   various   restrictions
regarding user of plots, construction of buildings, transfer and/or

partition of plots and buildings.
The West Bengal Government Township (Extension of Civic

Amenities) Ordinance, 1975, was promulgated to provide for an

extension of civic amenities of Government Township in West Bengal

and for the matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. This

Ordinance was replaced by the
West Bengal Government Township

(Extension of Civic Amenities) Act, 1975
(hereinafter referred to as

`the Act').
Section 2(b)
of the Act enumerated different civic amenities

like drainage, sewerage, sanitation, roads, maintenance, public

health, parks etc. Till about 1977, according to the petitioner, there

was great transparency in functioning of the Administrator, appointed

under
Section 4
of the Act, who was responsible for implementation

of the provisions of the Act and except 500 plots, out of nearly 6000

plots, rest have been distributed.
5
It is alleged that the Chief Minister's discretionary quota was

created by unlawful and confidential executive orders without even

informing the Cabinet and illegally usurping the statutory powers of

the Administrator. Further that the State Government formed a Salt

Lake Advisory Committee which started distributing the plots

clandestinely. Certain deviations were also made from the Master

Plan. The Government started carving out new residential plots from

the land originally earmarked for civic amenities, ecological balance,

maintenance, public facilities etc. in violation of the approved Master

Plan. Sometime in the year 1985, in view of the serious public protest,

the Government dissolved the Salt Lake Advisory Committee and

amended the Act by West Bengal Government Township (Extension

of Civic Amenities) (Amendment) Act, 1985 (for short, the `1985

Amendment Act'). The amendment also validated the allotments

which had been made since October 1, 1976.
As already noticed, Writ Petition No.7553 of 1986 was filed

before the Calcutta High Court praying for issuance of an appropriate

direction to the authorities not to deviate from the Master Plan and to

declare the 1985 Amendment Act as ultra vires. Still another writ

petition being Writ Petition No.17306 of 1997 was filed before that

Court challenging the exercise of discretionary powers by the Chief
6
Minister in regard to allotment of plots in the Salt Lake City.

Challenge was also raised against the deviation from the Master Plan

and various instances of the same were given in that writ petition. The

writ petition, particularly, referred to Sectors 1, 2 and 3 of the City. As

alleged by the petitioner herein, Writ Petition No. 7553 of 1986 came

to be dismissed for default without deciding the case on merits vide

order dated September 2, 2003.
Writ Petition No. 17306 of 1997 also came to be dismissed by

the judgment of the Calcutta High Court dated February 5, 1999,

primarily, on the ground that there was non-joinder of necessary

parties, i.e. the persons to whom the allotments have been made

under the discretionary quota and whose names had been disclosed

in the reply affidavit filed in those proceedings have not been made

parties in that petition. The learned Single Judge further observed

that an interim order dated June 11, 1987 passed by another Bench

of that Court in Writ Petition No.7553 of 1986 had allowed the Chief

Minister to make allotment of plots from his discretionary quota and

that order was still subsisting.        As that order was passed in

independent proceedings no directions in that regard were issued.

But, however, the Court cautioned the Chief Minister that discretion

in allotment of plots should be exercised in accordance with the
7
criteria stated by the Supreme Court in the case of
Common Cause,

A Registered Society v. Union of India
[(1996) 6 SCC 530].
The petitioner
in that case
filed a Special Leave Petition before

this Court wherein leave was granted and it came to be registered as

Civil Appeal No.6707 of 1999.
This Court, vide its judgment dated

November 19, 2004 titled as
Tarak Singh v. Jyoti Basu
[(2005) 1 SCC

201], dismissed this Civil Appeal along with one writ petition, being

Writ Petition No. 216 of 1999 titled as
Dipak K. Ghosh v. State of

West Bengal
, which was directly filed as a Public Interest Litigation

before this Court raising similar challenges. In these proceedings,

vide order dated November 13, 2003, this Court allowed the

impleadment of Respondent No. 24 (to be read as Respondent No. 8

vide order of that Bench dated December 17, 2004), Mr. B.P.

Banerjee, former Judge of the Calcutta High Court and passed the

final order/judgment dated November 19, 2004 quashing the

allotment made in favour of that Respondent despite the fact that he

had raised construction on that plot. This writ petition was dismissed

qua all the respondents except against Respondent No. 24. The writ

petition was allowed qua that Respondent on the ground that the

learned Judge had compromised his divine duty with his personal

interest during the hearing of Writ Petition No.7553 of 1986. It is
8
further the allegation of the petitioner that the plots from the

discretionary   quota    were   allotted   on   political   and   financial

consideration and in lieu of favourable services rendered and that

there was a complete abuse of the discretionary quota by the

authorities concerned and even the change in land use from

commercial to residential and vice-versa on the will of the allottees

was in arbitrary manner.
Petitioner further prays that this Court should appoint a

Committee to scrutinize all those cases where allotments have been

made from the discretionary quota and quash all the allotments made

thereunder. The challenge of the petitioner is primarily based upon

the ground that discretionary quota for distribution of plots in the Salt

Lake City was arbitrary, illegal and in violation of the Master Plan.

Resultantly, it was in violation of equality and right to life as enshrined

in
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India. Further, by allotting

lands earmarked for civic amenities, the State has violated its

promise extended in the Master Plan on the basis of which people

have purchased plots in the scheme and, as such, these allotments

tantamount to undue enrichment of the State at the cost of the

allottees and, therefore, such allotments are in violation of the law
9
stated by the Supreme Court in the case of
Common Cause, A

Registered Society
(supra).
Before we proceed to discuss the merits of the challenge made

by the petitioner to the discretionary allotment, we would like to

complete the factual matrix of the case by referring to the facts which

appeared from the record and/or the reported judgments dealing with

the same subject matter. As already noticed, Civil Appeal No. 6707

of 1999 was heard along with Writ Petition No. 216 of 1999 by this

Court. During the pendency of these proceedings, Mr. B.P. Banerjee

was ordered to be impleaded as Respondent No. 24 and thereafter

he appeared before this Court and contested the matter.               The

direction with regard to cancellation of the plot in his favour was finally

passed by this Court. While allowing the appeal limited to that extent,

the writ petition as well as the appeal was dismissed against all other

respondents and the Court held as under:
"20. It is also contended by Mr Ganguli that a
            large number of Judges of the High Court and
            the Supreme Court have also been allotted plots
            in Salt Lake City under the discretionary quota of
            the Chief Minister and it will be unfair to single
            out Respondent 24 for meting out a different
            treatment. At the time of hearing of this writ
            petition, we requested the learned Senior
            Counsel to inform us whether any other Judge or
            Judges obtained the allotment order from the
10
discretionary quota of the Chief Minister by
           compromising his judicial duties, we would also
           proceed against such allottee. He, however, was
           unable to receive any instructions in this behalf. It
           is trite, unequals cannot be treated equally.
24. In the backdrop of the facts and
           circumstances, as recited above, we are of the
           view that the conduct of the learned Judge is
           beyond condonable limits. We are aware that the
           order, we propose to pass, no doubt is painful,
           but we have to perform a painful duty to instil
           public confidence in the judiciary. It is a case
           where a private interest is pitted against the
           public interest. It is now a well-settled principle of
           law that in such cases the latter must prevail over
           the former. Consequently, the order dated 24-7-
           1987 passed by the Chief Minister and the formal
           allotment order dated 16-10-1987 allotting Plot
           No. FD-429 measuring 4 cottahs in Salt Lake
           City in favour of Respondent 24 Justice B.P.
           Banerjee are hereby quashed and cancelled.
           The plot shall stand vested with the Government.
27. The net result is that Writ Petition No. 216 of
           1999 against Respondent 24 is allowed and is
           dismissed qua other respondents. CA No. 6707
           of 1999 is dismissed. Rule is discharged.
28. We clarify that dismissal of the writ petition
           against other respondents should not be
           misunderstood as approval of the policy decision
           of the Government with regard to the allotment of
           land by the Chief Minister from his discretionary
           quota."
As the directions contained in the case of
Tarak Singh
(Supra)

were not being properly implemented by the State Government and

the concerned authorities, Mr. Dipak Ghosh, the petitioner in Writ
11
Petition No. 216 of 1999, filed another application for strict

implementation and compliance of the above order passed by this

Court. In those proceedings, applications were also filed by Mr. B.P.

Banerjee stating that the order of the Supreme Court in Tarak Singh's

case (supra) is a nullity, void and non est against him.
In its

judgment in the case of
Dipak Ghosh
(supra), this Court dismissed

the applications filed by Mr. B.P. Banerjee and directed that the order

of the Court in
Tarak Singh
's case (supra) be complied with. The

Court also specifically directed that no application filed by either of

the parties in this case shall be accepted by the Registry without

leave of the Court. Since then, no application appears to have been

filed in either of these proceedings.
The above prolonged history of this case clearly shows that in

proceedings before the Calcutta High Court, the merit or otherwise of

the discretionary allotments made by the Chief Minister was not

decided in accordance with law. One writ petition, being W.P. No.

7553 of 1986, came to be dismissed for default vide order dated

September 2, 2003 which order attained finality as no further

proceedings were taken by the petitioners therein. Thereafter, WP

No. 17306 of 1997 came to be dismissed, primarily, on the ground of

non-joinder of necessary parties and the allotments under the
12
discretionary quota of the Chief Minister were not set aside. On the

contrary, while referring to the order dated June 11, 1987 of the other

Bench in Writ Petition No. 7553 of 1986 that was still subsisting, it

was observed that the Chief Minister was permitted to make

allotments from the discretionary quota, however, in accordance with

the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Common Cause, A

Registered Society
(supra). A Civil Appeal No. 6707 of 1999 against

that judgment also came to be dismissed by this Court along with Writ

Petition No.216 of 1999 which had also questioned the discretionary

allotments.   In other words, the allotment of large number of plots in

Salt Lake City, Kolkata had been the subject matter of different writ

petitions and/or appeal before the Calcutta High Court as well as this

Court and for one reason or the other the allotments in favour of the

private parties had not been set aside, though there were doubts

raised by the Calcutta High Court as well as this Court regarding

allotments under the discretionary quota of Chief Minister and the

manner in which they were made. However, as all these judgments

have attained finality, they cannot be permitted to be agitated over

and over again including in the present writ petition. The principles of

finality as well as fairness demand that there should be an end to the

litigation and it is in the interest of public that the issues settled by the
13
judgments of courts, including this Court, which have attained finality

should not be permitted to be re-agitated all over again, interest rei

publicf ut sit finis litium.
We are unable to appreciate that para 28 of the judgment of this

Court in the case of
Tarak Singh
(supra) leaves the questions open

for a fresh adjudication. All that the Bench has said
in that case
was

that the Court had not approved the policy decision of the

Government with regard to allotment of land by the Chief Minister

from his discretionary quota, but at the same time what is of

significance is that none of the allotments made except that in favour

of Respondent No. 24, was set aside by the Court. The Court then

clarified that it had not granted approval to the action of the State

Government of making discretionary allotments in the manner in

which they had been made. This is further substantiated by the fact

that allotment in favour of Respondent No. 24 was specifically set

aside. Thus, the arguments advanced on behalf of the petitioner that

para 28 of that judgment leaves all issues open for future

determination in this proceeding or like cases, is legally unsustainable

and misconceived.
The jurisdiction of this Court, in a Public Interest Litigation,

cannot be pressed into service where the matters have already been
14
completely and effectively adjudicated upon not only in the individual

petitions but even in the writ petitions raising larger question as was

raised in Writ Petition No. 216 of 1999 before this Court.
Another important aspect of this case which has persuaded us

not to interfere with settled rights and grant the prayers in this Public

Interest Litigation is that an affidavit on behalf of the State of West

Bengal has been filed recently on December 3, 2010 revealing certain

pertinent facts for proper adjudication of this case.        The affidavit,

sworn by Mr. Abanindranath Palodhi, Joint Secretary, Urban

Development Department, Government of West Bengal, has stated

that    guidelines for allotment of both individual and co-operative

residential plots in Salt Lake were issued by a Government order on

December 7, 1999 on the strength of the Cabinet decision taken on

November 10, 1999. The then Chief Minister, Late Mr. Jyoti Basu,

had already allotted 276 plots out of 290 plots from his discretionary

quota which were available at that point of time and presently only 14

plots are left in that discretionary quota. This affidavit further states

as under:
"Subsequently, on 7th December, 1999 four
            orders were issued with regard to allotment of
            residential plots, non-residential plots for
            educational institutions and for allotment of plots
            for cultural, institutional, industrial, commercial
15
etc. purposes       at Salt Lake.      All these
            notifications    required    advertisement      in
            newspapers and invitation of application. But
            what is significant is that no guidelines had in
            fact been framed for allotment of plots from the
            discretionary quota of the Chief Minister, as a
            result of which all the 14 plots belonging to the
            discretionary quota, which were in existence in
            February, 1999, still continue to remain
            unallotted. As a result, these 14 plots will no
            more be treated as part of the discretionary
            quota.
(Emphasis supplied by us)


      From the above specific averments made in the affidavit, it is

clear that there are very few plots presently left for allotment under

the discretionary quota.       The State Government has taken a

conscious decision not to make further allotments under the

discretionary quota even qua those plots. As far as already allotted

plots are concerned, the rights of the parties appear to have been

settled and attained finality, as in none of the writ petitions/appeals
referred above
any of these allotments was set aside by the Courts of

competent jurisdiction. The petitioners in those cases, in fact, did not

even care to take further proceedings to have the matters adjudicated

before the higher Courts and in accordance with law.             In these

circumstances it will be a futile exercise of jurisdiction of this Court to

reopen the whole controversy once again. The questions raised in the

present petition have become merely academic as the rights of the
16
parties have been finally settled and further the parties have acted

thereupon to their respective prejudices. Without intending to state

any law in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case

we find no merit in this Public Interest Litigation which is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
.............................................CJI.
                                       (S.H. Kapadia)



                                       ................................................J.
                                       (K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan)



                                        ................................................J.
                                       (Swatanter Kumar)
New Delhi
February 3, 2011.