[Cites
19
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of West Bengal & Ors vs Prafulla Churan Law & Ors on 4 February, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 2173, 2011 (4) SCC 537, 2011 (3) AIR JHAR R 812, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 522, (2011) 2 RECCIVR 737, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 753, (2011) 4 ALLMR 491 (SC), (2011) 1 CLR 683 (SC), (2011) 3 CIVLJ 502, (2011) 3 ALL WC 2269, (2011) 3 MPLJ 285, (2011) 7 MAD LJ 395, (2011) 2 LANDLR 337, (2011) 3 KCCR 327, (2011) 4 MAH LJ 113, (2011) 3 SCALE 58, (2011) 2 KER LT 8, (2011) 3 CALLT 1
Bench:
Asok Kumar Ganguly
,
G.S. Singhvi
NON-REPORTABLE


                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1182 OF 2003 





State of West Bengal and others                                      .......Appellants


                                        Versus


Prafulla Churan Law and others                                        ......Respondents 


                                       WITH 


                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1183 OF 2003 





                                 J U D G M E N T
The appellants are aggrieved by the order of the Calcutta High Court, 


which   annulled   the   invoking   of
Section   17
of   the   Land   Acquisition   Act, 


1894 (for short, "the Act") by the State Government for the acquisition of 


premises No. 14 and 12/1, Hare Street, Calcutta.
There  is  no dispute  between  the  parties  that  possession   of  the 


premises in question was taken by the Government before independence in 


March, 1944 by invoking the provisions of the
Defence of India Act
.   After 


15 years, the State Government issued order dated 30.9.1959 under
Section 


3(1)
of   the   West   Bengal   Premises   Requisition   and   Control   (Temporary
2
Provisions)   Act,   1947   (for   short,   "the   1947   Act")   for   requisition   of   the 


premises.
After 31 years, the respondents filed Writ Petition No.3601 of 


1990 questioning the continued possession of the premises by the appellants.
The   learned   Single   Judge   of  the   High  Court   allowed  the   writ   petition   and 


issued   a   mandamus   for   restoration   of   the   premises   to   the   respondents.
Notification dated 27.8.1990, issued by the State Government under
Section 


4(1)
of   the   Act   for   acquisition   of   the   premises,   was   quashed   by   the   High 


Court in Writ Petition No. 1382 of 1991.   Thereafter, the respondents filed 


Writ Petition No. 3790 of 1993 and reiterated their prayer for restoration of 


possession.  The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and directed 


that the possession of the premises be delivered to the writ petitioners within 


four months.   At the same time, he made it clear that during this period the 


concerned authorities may acquire the property in accordance with law and 


observed that if the property is acquired within that period, the question of 


handing over the possession will not arise.   The respondents challenged the 


latter part of the order of the learned Single Judge in Appeal No. 35 of 1994, 


which was disposed of by the Division Bench vide order dated 18.4.1994, 


the relevant portions of which are extracted below:
"We are conscious of the contentions raised by the appellants in 

        this   regard,   but   we   think   that   we   cannot   prevent   the   State 

        authorities   to   acquire   the   premises   in   question   in   accordance
3
with   the   law   after   ad-hearing   to   the   proper   formulates   as 

       delineated in the statute.  Some steps have already been taken in 

       this   regard   in   the   meantime.     Till   such   time   the   acquisition 

       proceedings are complete, the respondents cannot however take 

       advantage   of   the   situation   and   continue   at   the   old   rate   of 

       compensation  which was fixed  amount 40 to 50 years  before. 

       In one case the requisition was made in 1944 and in other case 

       it was in 1956.
We would, accordingly, direct the respondent authorities to pay 

       by  way   of  ad-interim  measure  a  monthly  compensation  at  the 

       rate of Rs.10/- per sq.ft. confirming to the market rate for their 

       occupation with a further direction upon the State respondents 

       to   complete   the   acquisition   proceeding   within   a   period   of   six 

       months from this date.   If this proceeding are not complete by 

       that   date,   the   mandate   as   passed   by   the   learned   trial   Judge 

       should   definitely   be   operative   and   the   writ   petitioners,   the 

       present appellants, would be entitled to get back the possession 

       of the disputed premises in accordance with law."
Special   Leave   Petition   (C)   No.   4899   of   1996   filed   by   the 


respondents was dismissed by this Court on 28.2.1996 with liberty to them 


to claim damages for the occupation of the premises for the period between 


the  date  on  which  the  term   of  requisition  came  to  an  end  and  the  date   on 


which the acquisition proceedings were initiated.
In   the   meanwhile,   the   State   Government   issued   notification 


dated 19.7.1994 under
Section 4(1)
read with
Section 17(4)
of the Act for 


acquisition   of   the   premises   in   question   for   the   purpose   of   providing 


permanent accommodation to the unit of Cottage and Small Scale Industries, 


Bangasree   and   also   for   West   Bengal   Ceramic   Development   Corporation.
4
This was followed by notification under
Section 6
, which was published on 


18.7.1995.
The respondents challenged the aforementioned notifications in 


Writ   Petition   No.   870   of   1996   on   several   grounds   including   the   one   that 


there   was   no   valid   ground   for   invoking
Section   17(4)
of   the   Act,   which 


resulted in depriving them of the right to file objection under Section 5-A.  It 


was pleaded that the purpose of acquisition was not such which could justify 


dispensing with the inquiry envisaged under Section 5-A.




               The   learned   Single   Judge   dismissed   the   writ   petition   by 


observing that the decision of the State Government to invoke
Section 17(4)
was legally correct and justified and the power of judicial review cannot be 


exercised to interfere with the subjective satisfaction on the issue of urgency.
The Division Bench allowed the appeal filed by the respondents and quashed 


the acquisition by recording the following observations:
"The virtue of a public enquiry case not be overstressed.  It is 

          the   very   heart   and   soul   of   the   rule   of   law.     It   stops   high 

          handed   action.     It   stops   mere   repetition   or   words   found   in 

          Act,   when   such   repetition   lacks   substance,   in   the   facts   and 

          circumstances   of   a   particular   case.     This   is   the   reason   why 

          such a hearing is usually compartmentalized as an important 

          compartment of the rules of natural justice.  Had there been a 

          public   enquiry,   in   a   usual   manner,   the   parties   would   know, 

          what is the reason for their losing their right to their property; 

          in that event, the court would also be in the know of far more 

          facts.     When   approving   or   disapproving   of   acquisition
5
proceedings,   the   details   and   the   facts   are   necessary   and 

          important, not only for the parties, but also for the court.  


          Here we know nothing.  Everything has been short - circuited 

          by preliminary notifications doing away with public enquiry 

          without   ever   even   trying   to   put   it   afoot.     The   Government 

          proceeded   with   a   closed   mind,   in   an   authoritarian   way, 

          paying   attention   only   to   words   being   repeated   in   the 

          Notifications, exactly as those appear in the
L.A. Act
.


          We   are   thus   of   the   opinion   that   both   the   notifications   in 

          regard to both the premises issued in a combined way under
section   4
and
17(4)
were   the   products   of   a   closed   mind, 

          which   was   already   made   up,   that   the   premises   being   in   the 

          possession of the government undertakings, would be kept by 

          such government undertakings, and a compensation would be 

          awarded to the public parties.   The whole proceedings show 

          such a closed mind.  The appellants had lost their property as 

          soon   as  the   combined  notice  under
section  4
and
17(4)
had 

          been published.
In   our   opinion,   this   manner   of   proceeding   to   acquire   land 

          vitiates   the   entire   acquisition   proceedings.   Dispensing   with 

          hearing  of  objections,  when   there  was  no  real   urgency,   is  a 

          fatal infirmity."
Shri   Avijit   Bhattacharjee,   learned   counsel   for   the   appellants 


submitted that the premises were needed for a public purpose i.e., providing 


permanent accommodation to the unit of Cottage and Small Scale Industries, 


Bangasree and also for West Bengal Ceramic Development Corporation and, 


as   such,   no   exception   could   be   taken   to   the   procedure   adopted   by   the 


appellants.   Learned   counsel   emphasized   that   Section   17(4)   was   invoked 


because in terms of order dated 18.4.1994 passed by the Division Bench of 


the   High   Court,   the   State   Government   was   obliged   to   complete   the
6
acquisition   proceedings   within   six   months   and   this   could   not   have   been 


possible if objections were invited and opportunity of hearing was given to 


the   respondents   as   per   requirement   of   Section   5-A.     In   support   of   his 


argument,   Shri   Bhattacharjee   relied   upon   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in 


Chameli   Singh   and   others   v.   State   of   U.P.   and   another  (1996)   2   SCC
549.  




               Shri   Shyam   Divan,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 


respondents   supported   the   impugned   order   and   argued   that   the   Division 


Bench   of   the   High   Court   did   not   commit   any   error   by   quashing   the 


acquisition.     He   relied   upon   the   recent   judgment   in
Anand   Singh   and 


another   v.   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   and   others
(2010)   11   SCC   242,   and 


submitted   that   the   High   Court   has   rightly   nullified   the   acquisition 


proceedings   on   the   ground   that   there   was   no   such   urgency   which   could 


justify   short  circuiting  the  rule   of  hearing  enshrined   in
Section   5-A
of  the 


Act.
We have considered the respective submissions and carefully perused 


the record.   The applicability of
Section 17
of the Act has been considered 


in several cases, but it is not necessary to burden the judgment with large 


number of precedents and it will be sufficient to notice the two judgments 


which have direct bearing on the issue arising in these appeals.
In
Narayan 


Govind Gavate v. State of Maharashtra
(1977) 1 SCC 133, a three-Judge
7
Bench   of   this   Court   considered   various   facets   of   the   issue   relating   to 


invoking of urgency clause for the acquisition of land for development and 


utilization as a residential-cum-industrial area.  The Bombay High Court had 


allowed the writ petitions filed by the land owners and quashed the invoking 


of
Section   17(4)
of   the   Act.
This   Court   first   considered   the   question   of 


burden of proof in matters in which inquiry under Section 5A is dispensed 


with,   referred   to   Phipson   on   Evidence   (11th  Edition),   the   judgment   in 


Woolmington  v.   Director   of   Public   Prosecutions  1935   AC   462,   noticed 


the provisions of
Sections 101
,
102
,
103
,
106
and
114
of the Evidence Act 


and held:
"Our   conclusion   therefore   is   that   where   certain   conditions 

        precedent   have   to   be   satisfied   before   a   subordinate   authority 

        can   pass   an   order,   (be   it   executive   or   of   the   character   of 

        subordinate legislation), it is not necessary that the satisfaction 

        of those conditions must be recited in the order itself, unless the 

        statute   requires   it,   though,   as   we   have   already   remarked,   it   is 

        most   desirable   that   it   should   be   so,   for   in   that   case   the 

        presumption   that   the   conditions   were   satisfied   would 

        immediately   arise   and burden  would be  thrown  on the  person 

        challenging the fact of satisfaction to show that what is recited 

        is not correct. But even where the recital is not there on the face 

        of the order, the order will not become illegal ab initio and only 

        a further burden is thrown on the authority passing the order to 

        satisfy  the  court  by  other  means  that  the  conditions  precedent 

        were complied with. In the present case this has been done by 

        the filing of an affidavit before us.
It is also clear that, even a technically correct recital in an order 

        or   notification   stating   that   the   conditions   precedent   to   the 

        exercise of a power have been fulfilled may not debar the court 

        in a given case from considering the question whether, in fact, 

        those  conditions have  been fulfilled.  And, a fortiori,  the court
8
may  consider  and decide whether  the authority  concerned has 

       applied its mind to really relevant facts of a case with a view to 

       determining   that   a   condition   precedent   to   the   exercise   of   a 

       power has been fulfilled. If it appears, upon an examination of 

       the   totality   of   facts   in   the   case,   that   the   power   conferred   has 

       been  exercised  for  an  extraneous   or  irrelevant   purpose  or that 

       the mind has not been applied at all to the real object or purpose 

       of a power, so that the result is that the exercise of power could 

       only   serve   some   other   or   collateral   object,   the   court   will 

       interfere."
(emphasis supplied)




       The   Court   then   considered   whether   there   was   any   justification   for 


invoking   the   urgency   clause   for   acquisition   of   land   for   residential   and 


industrial purposes and observed:
"In   the   case   before   us,   the   public   purpose   indicated   is   the 

       development of an area for industrial and residential purposes. 

       This,   in   itself,   on   the   face   of   it,   does   not   call   for   any   such 

       action,   barring   exceptional   circumstances,   as   to   make 

       immediate   possession,   without   holding   even   a   summary 

       enquiry under
Section 5-A
of the Act, imperative. On the other 

       hand, such schemes generally take sufficient period of time to 

       enable at least summary inquiries under
Section 5-A
of the Act 

       to   be   completed   without   any   impediment   whatsoever   to   the 

       execution  of the  scheme.  Therefore,  the  very  statement  of  the 

       public purpose for which the land was to be acquired indicated 

       the absence of such urgency, on the apparent facts of the case, 

       as to require the elimination of an enquiry under
Section 5-A
of 

       the Act.
All   schemes   relating   to   development   of   industrial   and 

       residential areas must be urgent in the context of the country's 

       need   for   increased   production   and   more   residential 

       accommodation.   Yet,   the   very   nature   of   such   schemes   of 

       development does not appear to demand such emergent action 

       as   to   eliminate   summary   enquiries   under
Section   5-A
of   the 

       Act. There is no indication whatsoever in the affidavit filed on 

       behalf   of   the   State   that   the   mind   of   the   Commissioner   was
9
applied at all to the question whether it was a case necessitating 

       the   elimination   of   the   enquiry   under
Section   5-A
of   the   Act. 

       The recitals in the notifications, on the other hand, indicate that 

       elimination   of   the   enquiry   under
Section   5-A
of   the   Act   was 

       treated as an automatic consequence of the opinion formed on 

       other   matters.  The   recital   does  not  say   at  all  that  any  opinion 

       was   formed   on   the   need   to   dispense   with   the   enquiry   under
Section 5-A
of the Act. It is certainly a ease in which the recital 

       was   at   least   defective.   The   burden,   therefore,   rested   upon   the 

       State to remove the defect, if possible, by evidence to show that 

       some   exceptional   circumstances   which   necessitated   the 

       elimination of an enquiry under
Section 5-A
of the Act and that 

       the   mind   of   the   Commissioner   was   applied   to   this   essential 

       question.  It  seems  to us  that  the  High Court correctly  applied 

       the provisions of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act to place the 

       burden   upon   the   State   to   prove   those   special   circumstances, 

       although it also appears to us that the High Court was not quite 

       correct in stating its view in such a manner as to make it appear 

       that   some   part   of   the   initial   burden   of   the   petitioners   under
Sections 101
and
102
of the Evidence Act had been displaced 

       by  the failure  of the  State  to  discharge  its  duty  under
Section 

       106
of the Act. The correct way of putting it would have been 

       to  say   that the  failure  of  the State   to produce  the evidence  of 

       facts   especially   within   the   knowledge   of   its   officials,   which 

       rested   upon   it   under
Section   106
of   the   Evidence   Act,   taken 

       together   with   the   attendant   facts   and   circumstances,   including 

       the contents of recitals, had enabled the petitioners to discharge 

       their burden under
Sections 101
and
102
of the Evidence Act."
(emphasis supplied)





               In
Anand   Singh
's   case  (supra),   the   two-Judge   Bench 


considered   the   question   whether   the   State   Government   was   justified   in 


invoking
Section   17(4)
for   acquisition   of  land   for  residential   colony   to  be 


constructed by Gorakhpur  Development  Authority, Gorakhpur.    The Court 


noted that notifications under
Section 4(1)
read with
Section 17(1)
and (4) 


were issued on November 23, 2003 and February 20, 2004 and declaration
10
under
Section  6
was issued on December 24, 2004, referred to 16 judicial 


precedents including those noticed hereinabove and held:
"The exceptional and extraordinary power of doing away with 

      an enquiry under Section 5-A in a case where possession of the 

      land   is   required   urgently   or   in   an   unforeseen   emergency   is 

      provided in
Section 17
of the Act. Such power is not a routine 

      power   and   save   circumstances   warranting   immediate 

      possession   it   should   not   be   lightly   invoked.   The   guideline   is 

      inbuilt in
Section 17
itself for exercise of the exceptional power 

      in dispensing with enquiry under Section 5-A. Exceptional the 

      power,   the   more   circumspect   the   Government   must   be   in   its 

      exercise. The Government obviously, therefore, has to apply its 

      mind before it dispenses with enquiry under Section 5-A on the 

      aspect   whether   the   urgency   is   of   such   a   nature   that   justifies 

      elimination of summary enquiry under Section 5-A.


      A repetition of the statutory phrase in the notification that the 

      State   Government   is   satisfied   that   the   land   specified   in   the 

      notification   is   urgently   needed   and   the   provision   contained   in 

      Section   5-A   shall   not   apply,   though   may   initially   raise   a 

      presumption   in   favour   of   the   Government   that   prerequisite 

      conditions for exercise of such power have been satisfied, but 

      such   presumption   may   be   displaced   by   the   circumstances 

      themselves   having   no   reasonable   nexus   with   the   purpose   for 

      which   the   power   has   been   exercised.   Upon   challenge   being 

      made   to   the   use   of   power   under   Section   17,   the   Government 

      must   produce   appropriate   material   before   the   Court   that   the 

      opinion for dispensing with the enquiry under Section 5-A has 

      been formed by the Government after due application of mind 

      on the material placed before it.
It   is   true   that   power   conferred   upon   the   Government   under
Section   17
is   administrative   and   its   opinion   is   entitled   to   due 

      weight, but in a case where the opinion is formed regarding the 

      urgency   based   on   considerations   not   germane   to   the   purpose, 

      the judicial review of such administrative decision may become 

      necessary.
As   to   in   what   circumstances   the   power   of   emergency   can   be 

      invoked   are   specified   in
Section   17(2)
but   circumstances
11
necessitating invocation of urgency under
Section 17(1)
are not 

stated   in   the   provision   itself.   Generally   speaking,   the 

development of an area (for residential purposes) or a planned 

development   of   city,   takes   many   years   if   not   decades   and, 

therefore,   there   is   no   reason   why   summary   enquiry   as 

contemplated under Section 5-A may not be held and objections 

of   landowners/persons   interested   may   not   be   considered.   In 

many cases, on general assumption likely delay in completion 

of   enquiry   under   Section   5-A   is   set   up   as   a   reason   for 

invocation   of   extraordinary   power   in   dispensing   with   the 

enquiry   little   realising   that  an  important  and   valuable  right  of 

the person interested in the land is being taken away and with 

some effort enquiry could always be completed expeditiously.


The special provision has been made in
Section 17
to eliminate 

enquiry   under   Section   5-A   in   deserving   and   cases   of   real 

urgency. The Government has to apply its mind on the aspect 

that urgency is of such nature that necessitates dispensation of 

enquiry   under   Section   5-A.   We   have   already   noticed   a   few 

decisions of this Court. There is a conflict of view in the two 

decisions  of this Court viz.  Narayan Govind Gavate  and  Pista 

Devi. In  Om Prakash  this Court held that the decision in  Pista 

Devi  must be confined to the fact situation in those days when 

it  was  rendered  and  the two-Judge  Bench  could  not have  laid 

down a proposition contrary to the decision in Narayan Govind 

Gavate. We agree.
As   regards   the   issue   whether   pre-notification   and   post-

notification   delay   would   render   the   invocation   of   urgency 

power void, again the case  law is not consistent. The view of 

this   Court   has   differed   on   this   aspect   due   to   different   fact 

situation   prevailing   in   those   cases.   In   our   opinion   such   delay 

will   have   material   bearing   on   the   question   of   invocation   of 

urgency power, particularly in a situation where no material has 

been   placed   by   the   appropriate   Government   before   the   Court 

justifying   that   urgency   was   of   such   nature   that   necessitated 

elimination of enquiry under Section 5-A."
(emphasis supplied)
12
We may now revert to the case in hand.  A brief recapitulation of the 


facts shows that possession  of the premises in question was taken in 1944 


under the
Defence of India Act
.   After 46 years, an attempt was made by the 


appellants to acquire the premises but could not achieve their object because 


notification dated 27.8.1990 issued under
Section 4(1)
was quashed by the 


High Court.  Thereafter, no action was taken for acquisition of the premises 


till   after   the   disposal   of   Appeal   No.35   of   1994.     The   appellants   have   not 


explained as to why appropriate steps could not be taken for acquisition of 


the premises by complying with the requirement of
Section 5-A
of the Act.
The time gap of 3 years between the quashing of first notification and issue 


of the second notification was too long to justify invoking of urgency clause 


which resulted in depriving the respondents of their right to raise objection 


against  acquisition  of the  premises.    If  the  appellants  felt  that six  month's 


time   was   not   sufficient   for   completing   the   acquisition   proceedings,   they 


could have filed an application in Appeal No.34 of 1994 for extension of the 


time.    However, the fact  of the matter  is that no such  effort was made by 


them and the urgency clause was invoked on the pretext of completion of the 


acquisition   in   terms   of   the   direction   given   by   the   High   Court   in   Appeal 


No.35   of   1994.       In   our   view,   this   was   clearly   impermissible   and   the 


respondents could not be deprived of their legitimate right to raise objection 


and to be heard against the proposed acquisition of the premises.
13
As a sequel to the above discussion, we hold that the Division Bench 


of the High Court did not commit  any error by quashing the Notifications 


issued under
Section 4(1)
read with
Section 17
and
Section 6
of the Act.
In the result, the appeals  are dismissed.    The  parties are left to bear 


their own costs.
.............................J.

                                                         [G.S. Singhvi]





                                                      .............................J.

                                                         [Asok Kumar Ganguly]

New Delhi;
February 4, 2011
14