[Cites
7
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Gayatri Project Ltd vs M/S. Sai Krishna Construction on 12 November, 2013
Author:
Ranjana Prakash Desai
Bench:
Ranjana Prakash Desai
REPORTABLE




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.1854 OF 2007






M/s. Gayatri Project Ltd.                             ….Appellant(s)


                                  Versus



M/s. Sai Krishna Construction                         .…Respondent(s)





                                  O R D E R
This appeal is filed against the order passed by the  High  Court
in an application under Section 11(5) and (6) of  the
Arbitration  and
Conciliation Act, 1996
(for short the ‘Act’) directing that the  matter
be referred to arbitration by a former Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court.
The respondent moved the aforesaid application on the basis  that
it is a partnership firm, carrying on business of civil works  relating
to irrigation structures. The Irrigation Department  of  Government  of
Andhra Pradesh had given the work to the appellant  herein.  Thus,  the
appellant was the main contractor and respondent was the sub-contractor
working under the appellant. The works involved earth  work  excavation
and cohesive non-swelling soil filling in KC Canal including CC  lining
and structures form KMs 156.650 to KMs 170-00  of  Package  ICB-10’  in
Kurnool District  of  Andhra  Pradesh.  The  appellant  identified  the
respondent as a suitable agency for execution of the work and entrusted
the work to the respondent as a sub-contractor. After due negotiations,
an agreement dated 29.1.2001 was entered into between the parties.  The
agreement inter alia provides various terms  and  conditions  including
the nature of work to be executed by the respondent, security deposits,
penalties leviable, commission to which the appellant would be entitled
to, method of payment for the work  undertaken,  taxes  and  Government
levies. The agreement also contained an arbitration clause which  reads
as under:-
“All disputes relating  to  the  original  contract  shall  be
      properly referred and correspond by the  work  contractor.  However,
      the settlement of disputes and consequential awards shall be to  the
      account of principal contractor and work  contractor.  All  disputes
      relating to the work contract under this agreement shall be mutually
      settled between the work contractor and the principal contractor. In
      case of any  differences,  the  same  will  be  decided  by  a  sole
      arbitrator  appointed  by  the   principal   contractor   and   work
      contractor.”

      Clause 6 of the agreement provides that the measurements shall  be
taken for the work done once in a month. Payment shall be  released  as
and when principal contractor received  payment  from  the  Department,
duly deducting the commission and  other  recoveries  as  mentioned  in
         Clause  6  above.  Final  payment  shall  be  released   after
completion of the work satisfactorily. Clause 5 provided that the  work
contractor (sub-contractor) shall be  paid  the  balance  amount  after
deducting certain amounts from the  gross  amount  of  running  account
bills. Relevant part of clause 5 is as under:-
"The  work  contractor  shall  be  paid  the  balance  amount  after
      deducting the following from the gross  amount  of  running  account
      bills.
i. a. Earth work excavation in bed and slopes  including  sectioning
      and leveling @ 14% (Fourteen percent only) of Agreement rate.
b. Filling bed and slopes with CNS soils  as  directed  and  as  per
      specifications @ 17% (Seventeen percent only) of Agreement rates.
ii.    Sales Tax/Turnover Tax

      iii. Income Tax in the running account bills.
iv. Value of materials etc., if any, supplied by the  department  or
      by the principal contractor and hire charges of machinery given.
v. Any other recoveries affected by the department in the account
      bills.
The agreement further provided that the  final  payment  shall  be
released after completion of the work satisfactorily.
The respondent claims  that  it  has  executed  the  work  to  the
satisfaction of the appellant and the State Government.  The  appellant
having received all the amounts from the Government of  Andhra  Pradesh
failed to make corresponding payments to the respondent after deducting
commission  as  stipulated  under  the   agreement.   The   respondent,
therefore, approached and tried to persuade the appellant to  make  the
payment of the outstanding amount after the completion  of  the  entire
work. However, the appellant failed to pay. Since the amounts were  not
paid by the appellant, the respondent served a Claim Notice on 6.5.2004
demanding the payment of Rs.1,01,27,776/-. On 17.8.2004, the  Appellant
sent a reply to the aforesaid notice not  only  disputing  the  various
claims but also raising a counter claim in the amount of Rs.32,12,950/-
. The appellant claimed that the  accounts  had  been  reconciled.  The
parties had signed a full and final settlement  document  on  6.6.2003,
under which the respondent acknowledged the receipt of certain amounts.
The  balance  of  Rs.17,32,843/-  was  to  be  paid  in  two  or  three
instalments before 30.6.2003. After receiving the entire  payment,  the
respondent  was  falsely  claiming  further  amounts  with  mala   fide
intentions. On  receipt  of  the  reply  with  the  counter-claim,  the
respondent  sent  a  further  reply  reiterating  its  claim  and  also
disputing the counter claim of the appellant  as  being  frivolous  and
false. The respondent in the aforesaid reply also  stated  that  unless
the entire claim is satisfied, it  will  seek  the  remedy  by  way  of
arbitration. In spite of the above, the appellant still made efforts to
settle the entire dispute but without any useful results.
Instead of accepting the full and final settlement dated 6.6.2003,
the respondent, in fact, raised a  further  claim  for  the  amount  of
Rs.25,50,048/- towards the value of HSD oil  supply  and  exemption  of
excise duties and sales tax which had been availed by the appellant.  A
claim in this regard was sent to the appellant on 30-5-2006.  According
to the respondent, the total claim finally  comes  to  Rs.1,26,77,824/-
with interest accrued thereon at 18%  per  annum  from  6-5-2004.   The
appellant on 24.6.2004 denied the  aforesaid  claim.  The  dispute  not
having been resolved, the respondent  served  a  legal  notice  on  the
appellant dated 19.6.2006. The appellant again denied  the  claim.  The
respondent thereafter moved the application under
Section 11(5)
and (6)
of the
Arbitration Act
. The appellant filed a reply to the  application
disputing and denying the claims of the appellant. The appellant stated
that the application for appointment of  Arbitrator  is  liable  to  be
dismissed.  It  was  pleaded  that  Agreement  dated,  29.1.2001  which
contains the arbitration clause has been superseded  by  the  full  and
final settlement agreement dated 6.6.2003. It was further the  case  of
the appellant that the respondent having received the entire amount  in
terms of the "full  and  final  settlement"         dated  6-6-2003  is
estopped from filing the application under
Section 11 (5)
and  (6)  of
the
Arbitration Act
.   According to the  Appellant,  since  the  entire
dispute had been settled, no reference could be  made  to  arbitration.
The appellant had also  pleaded  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
disclose that the parties had entered into a full and final  settlement
on 6-6-2003. The plea was also raised to the effect that invocation  of
the arbitration on 9-6-2006 is time barred as the cause of  action  for
filing the application arose on  6-6-2003  when  the  "full  and  final
settlement" was entered into between the parties.
It was also the case of the appellant that the works  executed  by
the respondent not being of the required standard  and  specifications,
were rejected by the Government. Consequently,  the  appellant  had  to
rectify the defects and incur extra expenses. These were liable to  the
deducted from the amount claimed by the  respondent.  It  is  also  the
claim of the appellant that since the works had not been satisfactorily
completed, the agreement  itself  was  terminated  on  16-11-2001.  The
appellant had also pleaded that pursuant to the Settlement  dated  6-6-
2003, the respondent had received a sum of    Rs.16  lakhs.  Therefore,
there is no arbitrable dispute which can be referred to arbitration. It
is also the case of the appellant that he has actually suffered a  loss
as it has incurred an expenditure of Rs.32,13,950/- in rectification of
the works which were unsatisfactorily performed by the respondent.  The
appellant also claims that in order to maintain cordial  relations,  it
had entered into a "full and final settlement" with the respondent with
regard to the entire claims of the sub-contractor.
Upon examination of the  entire  factual  as  well  as  the  legal
position, the High Court has allowed the application under
Section  11
(5)
and (6) of  the  Act.  This  Appeal  has  been  filed  against  the
aforesaid Judgment of the High Court.
We have heard learned Counsel for the parties.
Mr. Arun Kathpalia, learned Advocate appearing for  the  appellant
relied heavily on the "full and final settlement"  and  submitted  that
the settlement  has  been  duly  signed  by  a  representative  of  the
respondent. Therefore, the respondent cannot now be permitted to submit
that there was no "full and final  settlement".  He  further  submitted
that once there was "full and final settlement", no arbitrable  dispute
remains which could have been referred to the Arbitrator. To make  good
his submissions, Mr. Kathpalia submitted that the respondent  had  been
negligent in the performance of the works which were entrusted  to  the
sub-contractor. This had ultimately  led  to  the  termination  of  the
Agreement on 16-11-2001. In  fact,  the  appellant  had  incurred  huge
amount of expenses in rectifying the defects in the works  executed  by
the respondent. Mr.  Kathpalia  relied  on  clauses  5  and  6  of  the
Agreement  and  submitted  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to   be
compensated for the rectification work which had to be performed to the
satisfaction of the Andhra Pradesh  Government.  Learned  counsel  also
submitted that the respondent would be entitled to  the  final  payment
only upon satisfactory completion of the work  entrusted  to  the  sub-
contractor.   In order to settle the dispute between the parties and to
maintain a cordial  relationship,  the  parties  have  entered  into  a
voluntary  settlement     on  6-6-2003  which  is  evidenced   by   the
signatures appended on the same by the Manager of the  respondent  sub-
contractor. In such circumstances, learned counsel submitted that there
was no arbitrable dispute which could have been left to the  Arbitrator
and, therefore, the judgment of the High Court allowing the application
under
Section 11 (5)
and (6)  of  the  Act  is  erroneous.  He  further
submitted that in case the respondent intend to challenge the  validity
of the binding nature of the settlement, the dispute cannot be left  to
the Arbitrator. The settlement would form an independent contract which
can only be nullified in appropriate proceedings  being  taken  by  the
respondent.
In support of the  submissions,  the  learned  counsel  relied  on
Nathani Steels Ltd. vs.  Associated  Constructions[1].   Mr.  Kathpalia
relied on the observations made in paragraph 3  of  the  judgment.  The
learned Counsel  submits  that  the  judgment  of  the  High  Court  is
erroneous and has to be set aside.
On the other hand, Mr. K. Swami, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent submits that there is no "full and final settlement" of  the
amounts which were due to the respondent from the appellant. He further
submits that the respondent had  executed  all  the  works  which  were
entrusted to his client to the full satisfaction of the appellant.  The
claim and counter claim now made by the appellant is totally false  and
without any basis. The respondent is disputing  each  and  every  claim
made by the appellant.  Learned  counsel  further  submitted  that  the
alleged settlement dated 6-6-2003 is a unilateral document. There is no
agreement between the parties for a final settlement. The document  has
been only received and the Manager has signed only to indicate that the
letter has been received. There have been no negotiations  between  the
parties prior to the issuance of letter dated 6-6-2003. He submits that
the judgment relied upon by Mr. Kathpalia  is  not  applicable  in  the
facts of this case.
In fact, according to him, the matter  is  squarely
covered by the judgment of this Court  in
National  Insurance  Company
Limited vs. Boghara Polyfab Private  Limited
[2].  Learned  counsel  has
relied on paragraphs 33, 34 and 35 of the judgment.
It is  pointed  out
that in paragraph 33, this  Court  has  considered  the  ratio  of  the
judgment in Nathani Steels (supra) and distinguished the same.  Relying
upon the aforesaid judgment,  the  learned  counsel  submits  that  the
appeal deserves to be dismissed.
Learned counsel further submitted that the receipt  of  a  sum  of
Rs.16 lakhs subsequent to the letter dated 6-6-2003  does  not  signify
the acceptance by the respondent of the aforesaid letter as a "full and
final settlement". According to the learned counsel, in fact, the claim
of the respondent was  for  over  Rs.10,00,000/-  and,  therefore,  the
amounts which were received by the respondent were only in part payment
of the amount due.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned Counsel for
the parties.
In our opinion, the question as to whether letter  dated  6-6-2003
would constitute a  "full  and  final  settlement"  would  have  to  be
determined on proper appreciation of the evidence led by  the  parties.
It is, in our opinion, open to two interpretations. Which  of  the  two
interpretations is ultimately accepted will have to be decided  by  the
appropriate forum. We are also not inclined to accept  the  submissions
of Mr. Kathpalia that if the alleged settlement is to  be  doubted,  it
cannot be doubted before the Arbitrator. It must be remembered that the
appellant is relying on the alleged settlement by way of  defence.  The
respondent has not accepted the same. Nor has the respondent denied the
execution of the document. The respondent has also not claimed that the
full and final settlement was signed under coercion,  undue  influence,
fraud, misrepresentation or mistake. Furthermore, the appellant had not
made a claim on the  basis  of  the  settlement.  It  would  have  been
different, if the appellant had made a claim on the basis of settlement
which was denied by the respondent by one or more of the  defences,  as
noticed  above.  In  such  circumstances,  following  the  judgment  in
Nathani's case (supra), it would have to be held  that  the  settlement
can only be challenged in "proper proceedings". But these  observations
would be applicable only if there was a clear  cut  acceptance  by  the
parties that there was a "full and final settlement".
In  fact,  the  matter  would  be  squarely  covered  against  the
appellant by the ratio of the judgment in
National  Insurance  Company
Limited
(supra) wherein this Court has considered the cases which  were
earlier considered in Nathani's Steel (supra) and observed as follows:-
"33. Nathani  Steels  related  to  a  dispute  on  account  of  non-
      completion of the contract. The Court found that  the  said  dispute
      was settled by and between the parties as per deed dated  20.12.1980
      signed by both parties. The deed referred to the  prior  discussions
      between the parties and recorded  the  amicable  settlement  of  the
      disputes and differences between the parties in the presence of  the
      Architect on the terms and conditions set out  in  clauses  1  to  8
      thereof. In view of it, the Court rejected  the  contention  of  the
      contractor that the settlement was liable to be  set  aside  on  the
      ground  of  mistake.  A  three-Judge  Bench  of  this  Court,  after
      referring to the decisions in P.K. Ramaiah and Nay Bharat  Builders,
      held thus: (SCC p.326, para 3)


      “3…….. that once the parties  have  arrived  at  a  settlement  in
      respect of any dispute or difference arising under a contract  and
      that dispute or the difference is amicable settled  by  way  of  a
      final  settlement  by  and  between  the  parties,   unless   that
      settlement is set aside in proper proceedings, it  cannot  lie  in
      the mouth of one of the parties to the settlement to spurn  it  on
      the ground that it  was  a  mistake  and  proceed  to  invoke  the
      Arbitration clause. If this is permitted the sanctity of contract,
      the settlement also being a contract, would be wholly lost and  it
      would be  open  to  one  party  to  take  the  benefit  under  the
      settlement and then to question the same on the ground of  mistake
      without having the settlement set aside. In the circumstances,  we
      think that in the instant case since the dispute or difference was
      finally settled and payments were made as per the  settlement,  it
      was  not  open  to  the  respondent  unilaterally  to  treat   the
      settlement as non  est  and  proceed  to  invoke  the  Arbitration
      clause."
34. What requires to be noticed is that in Nav Bharat Builders and
      Nathani Steels, this Court on examination of facts, was  satisfied
      that there were  negotiations  and  voluntary  settlement  of  all
      pending disputes, and the contract was discharged  by  accord  and
      satisfaction. In P.K. Ramaiah, the Court was satisfied that  there
      was a voluntary acceptance of the measurements and full and  final
      payment of the amount found due, resulting  in  discharge  of  the
      contract, leaving no outstanding  claim  or  pending  dispute.  In
      those circumstances, this Court held  that  after  such  voluntary
      accord and satisfaction or discharge of the contract, there  could
      be no arbitrable disputes.
36.   In Damodar Valley Corporation, the question that arose for
      consideration of this Court was as follows: (SCC p. 144 para 4)


           ''where one of the parties refers  a  dispute  or  disputes  to
           arbitration and the other party takes a plea that there  was  a
           final settlement of all claims, is the Court, on an application
           under
Sections 9(b)
and
33
of the Act, entitled to enquire into
           the truth and validity of the averment as to whether there  was
           or was not a final settlement on the ground that  if  that  was
           proved it would bar a reference to the arbitration inasmuch  as
           the arbitration clause itself would perish."
In that case the question arose with reference to  a  claim  by
      the supplier. The purchaser required the supplier to furnish a  full
      and final receipt. But the supplier did not  give  such  a  receipt.
      Even though there was no discharge voucher, the purchaser  contended
      that the payments made by it were in full and  final  settlement  of
      the bills. This Court rejected that contention  and  held  that  the
      question whether there has been  a  settlement  of  all  the  claims
      arising  in  connection  with  the  contract  also  postulates   the
      existence of the contract which  would  mean  that  the  arbitration
      clause operates. This Court held that the question whether there has
      been a full and final settlement of a claim under  the  contract  is
      itself a dispute arising 'upon' or in relation to' or 'in connection
      with' the contract; and where there is an arbitration  clause  in  a
      contract, notwithstanding the plea that there was a full  and  final
      settlement between the parties, that  dispute  can  be  referred  to
      arbitration. It was also observed that  mere  claim  of  accord  and
      satisfaction may not put an end to the  arbitration  clause.  It  is
      significant that neither P.K. Ramaiah nor Nathani  Steels  disagreed
      with  the  decision  in  Damodar   Valley   Corporation   but   only
      distinguished it on the ground that there  was  no  full  and  final
      discharge voucher showing accord and satisfaction in that case."
      In our opinion, since there is no acceptance of the full and final
settlement by  the  Respondent  which  has  been  relied  upon  by  the
appellant, the issue clearly had to be left to  the  Arbitrator  to  be
adjudicated.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the appeal and the  same
is accordingly dismissed.
Before we part with this matter,  we  would  request  the  learned
Arbitrator to conclude the Arbitration Proceedings as expeditiously  as
possible since the matter was referred long back as this  would  be  in
the interest of justice.
..….….…………………………..J.
                                                     (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)










                                                          …...…………………………………J
                                                     (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)






NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 28, 2013.
-----------------------
[1]1995 Supp (3) SCC 324
[2] (2009) 1 SCC 267