[Cites
43
, Cited by
103
]
Supreme Court of India
Hanuman Laxman Aroskar vs Union Of India on 29 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 318
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE
                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   Civil Appeal No 12251 of 2018



          Hanuman Laxman Aroskar                                     ...Appellant

                                              Versus


          Union of India                                            ...Respondent
WITH


                                   Civil Appeal No 1053 of 2019



          Federation of Rainbow Warriors                             ...Appellant



                                              Versus


          Union of India and Ors                                   ...Respondents
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2019.03.29
17:29:46 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT



Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


Index

A       Introduction

B       Submissions

C       Scheme of the 2006 notification and the Guidance manual for Airports

        C.1   EIA process
        C.2   Guidance manual for airports

D       Forests

E       Ecologically Sensitive Zones (ESZs)

F       Sampling Points

        F.1   Air Quality
        F.2   Water Quality
        F.3   Noise Quality
        F.4   Flora and Fauna
        F.5   Felling of Trees

G       Public Consultation

H       Appraisal by the EAC

I       The appellate jurisdiction of the NGT: the requirement of a merits review

J       Environmental Rule of Law

K       Directions
2
PART A
A         Introduction


1         An appeal was filed before the Principal Bench of the National Green Tribunal1

at New Delhi challenging the grant of an Environmental Clearance2 for the

development of a greenfield international airport at Mopa in Goa. The NGT, by its

judgment dated 21 August 2018 came to the conclusion that the present case “is not

a case where the project compromises with the environment”. While affirming the EC,

the NGT came to the conclusion that “further safeguards for environmental protection

need to be incorporated”. The NGT, accordingly, proceeded to formulate additional

conditions, while affirming the grant of the EC.
2         Village Mopa is situated in North Goa, in close proximity to the inter-state

boundary which the state shares with Maharashtra. The site of the proposed airport

lies at a distance of 35 kilometres from Panaji, the capital of Goa. The village of Mopa

is situated in Pernem taluka. The site for the development of the airport is situated on

a tabletop plateau which rises to a height of 150 to 180 meters above mean sea level

and is surrounded by steep slopes. The soil is predominantly of a laterite character.

The airport which presently serves the region is situated at Dabolim, Goa.


3         Since the airport at Dabolim is saturated in terms of its capacity for annual air

traffic, the state government initiated a process in 1997 to commission studies and

project reports for a proposed international airport, which include the following:
(i)       A project report prepared by Engineers and Management Associates, Spain in

          1997;
(ii)      A preliminary technical feasibility study prepared by the Airports Authority of

          India in May 1998;
1   NGT
2   EC
3
PART A
(iii)     A final feasibility report for the proposed airport at Goa prepared by the

          International Civil Aviation Organisation, Montreal, Canada in August 2005;
(iv)      A Goa dual airport study prepared by the International Civil Aviation

          Organisation in August 2007;
(v)       A report of a Six Member Committee chaired by the Chief Minister of Goa in

          2008 to “look into all aspects relating to construction of an international airport

          at Mopa, Goa”; and
(vi)      A document styled as the “Airport Master Plan” dated 10 February 2012,

          submitted to the Public Private Partnership3 cell of the Government of Goa by

          Ammann & Whitney, USA envisaging: “consultancy services for preparation of

          master plan, preliminary project report, tender document and project

          management       services    for   the    proposed     greenfield   airport     and

          commercial/industrial and allied development near Mopa in the State of Goa”.


4         On 1 May 2000, the Government of India communicated its approval for the

setting up of an airport at Mopa and for the closure of the existing airport for civilian

operations on the commissioning of the new airport. Subsequently, on 1 July 2010,

the earlier decision was modified to allow for the continuation of civilian aircraft

operations at Dabolim even after the commissioning of the new airport. The process

of land acquisition commenced in 2008 under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
.

Originally, the land area anticipated for the development of the project was pegged at

4,500 acres. During the pendency of project appraisals, the area required for the

proposed airport stood reduced to 2,271 acres.
3   PPP
4
PART A
5       On 14 September 2006, the Government of India in the Ministry of

Environment and Forests4 issued a notification5 mandating a prior EC for Category

‘A’ projects (specified in the Schedule) by the Union Government and for Category ‘B’

projects at the state level by the State Level Environment Impact Assessment

Authority6.     Following the 2006 notification, the MoEF placed an EIA Guidance

Manual for Airports7 in the public domain in February 2010. The stages of scoping,

public consultation and appraisal, leading up to the grant of the EC for the proposed

airport are governed by the express terms of the 2006 notification.


6       In March 2011, the State of Goa, as the project proponent submitted Form 1

as stipulated in the 2006 notification to the MoEF. On 8 March 2011, the State of Goa

applied for Terms of Reference8 to the MoEF. The ToR were finalized on 11 and 12

May 2011 by the Expert Appraisal Committee9 constituted under the 2006

notification. On 1 June 2011, the MoEF issued the ToR for the preparation of the

Environmental Impact Assessment10 report. The ToR was valid for a period of two

years until 31 May 2013. On 22 November 2012, the Government of Goa revised the

project boundary by decreasing the project area from 4,500 acres to 2,271 acres. At

its meetings on 28 and 29 January 2013, the EAC recommended an amendment to

the ToR as requested by the state government and granted an extension to the

validity of the ToR until 31 May 2014. On 19 June 2013, the MoEF communicated its

approval for the amendment of the ToR and for the extension of its validity.




4 MoEF, later renamed as MoEFCC in 2014
5 S.O. 1533 (‘2006 notification’)
6 SEIAA
7 Guidance manual
8 ToR
9 EAC
10 EIA
5
PART A
7     On 3 October 2014, the state government floated a tender for the development

of a greenfield international airport project on a PPP basis. On 20 October 2014, the

Directorate of Civil Aviation, Government of Goa submitted a draft EIA report to the

Goa State Pollution Control Board, requesting it to initiate steps to conduct a public

hearing. A public hearing was conducted at the project site on 1 February 2015. The

EAC, at its meetings held on 9-11 March 2015, recommended an extension of the

validity of the ToR for another year ending on 31 May 2015.


8     On 20 May 2015, the State of Goa submitted a final EIA report to the

MoEFCC, seeking the grant of an EC for the project. On 29 May 2015, the MoEFCC

communicated its approval for extending the validity of the ToR until 31 May 2015.

Between 24 and 26 June 2015, the EAC, at its 149th meeting, deliberated on the EIA

report and sought additional information from the project proponent, inter alia, on:
•   “10 years data regarding rainfall in the area;
                •   Drawing of traffic circulation plan for smooth
                    circulation of Traffic in the area;
•   Minimum 20% energy conservation measures should
                    be adopted in incorporating provisions for use of LED,
                    star rated AC’s, and a revised energy conservation
                    plan to be submitted;
•   Measures taken to comply with
the CPC
B guidelines
                    formulated for noise pollution control in Airport area to
                    be submitted.”




In the meantime, a representation was submitted by the Federation of Rainbow

Warriors, one of the appellants before this Court to the EAC. The EAC, at its 151st

meeting held on 7-9 September 2015, deliberated upon the representation and

sought a clarification from the project proponent on the issues raised.          On 28

September 2015, the project proponent submitted its reply to the representation. The

EAC, at its 152nd meeting on 20 October 2015, sought a further clarification from the
6
PART A
project proponent on the reply submitted by the Federation of Rainbow Warriors. At

that meeting, the EAC recommended the grant of an EC for the project.
9       On 28 October 2015, the MoEFCC, as the regulatory authority under the 2006

notification for Category ‘A’ projects, communicated its approval for the grant of an

EC. Following the grant of the EC, the tender process which had been initiated on 3

October 2014 was concluded on 26 August 2016. Consequent to the opening of the

final bids, a technical scrutiny, evaluation coupled with pre-bid meetings,

deliberations on the draft concession agreement and other required steps, GMR Goa

International Airport Limited11 was awarded the contract on a revenue sharing of

36.99 percent to the State of Goa. On 8 November 2016, the concession agreement

was executed between the Government of Goa and GGIAL for the development and

operation of the airport with the concession period of 40 years.      Upon financial

closure, the three-year period for the construction of the airport commenced on 4

September 2017. The target date for the commissioning of the first phase of the

project is 3 September 2020.
10      The grant of the EC was challenged before the Western Zonal Bench of the

NGT12 by the Federation of Rainbow Warriors. Hanuman Laxman Aroskar also filed

an appeal13 before the Western Zonal Bench of the NGT. These appeals were

subsequently renumbered14 before the Principal Bench of the NGT at New Delhi. On

7 November 2017, the NGT issued an ad-interim order restraining the cutting or

felling of trees in the area designated as the site of the proposed airport. On 22

November 2017, the order of restraint was modified on the statement of the Advocate


11 GGIAL
12 Appeal No. 61 of 2015
13 Appeal No. 1 of 2016
14 Appeal Nos. 5 and 6 of 2018
7
PART A
General of Goa that the state shall not cut or fell any trees, nor allow it to take place

without valid permission from the lawful authority for a fortnight thereafter in order to

enable the appellants to pursue their remedies. On 6 February 2018, the Deputy

Conservator of Forests granted permission for felling 21,703 trees at the airport site.

The appellate authority under the
Goa, Daman and Diu Preservation of Trees Act
198415 dismissed the appeal on 7 March 2018.
11         On 8 March 2018, the High Court of Judicature at Bombay at its seat at Goa

set aside the order of the Deputy Conservator of Forests and remanded the matter to

be heard by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests. On 2 April 2018, the Principal

Chief Conservator of Forests stipulated several conditions for the cutting and the

felling of trees at the site of the airport including: (i) enumeration of trees; and (ii) the

plantation of ten times the number of trees felled. Upon being moved in a Public

Interest Litigation16, the High Court by its order dated 25 April 2018 allowed the

exercise of enumeration to be carried out. As a result, 54,676 trees were

enumerated, including the 1,548 trees which had been felled earlier in terms of the

order dated 6 February 2018 of the Deputy Conservator of Forests. On 13 January

2018, the High Court issued final directions in the PIL directing the State of Goa to

approach the NGT seeking permission for felling and cutting trees. The state was

directed to carry out the cutting and felling of trees only after prior permission was

granted by the NGT.
15   Act 6 of 1984
16   PIL
8
PART B
17
12      A Miscellaneous Application        was filed by the State of Goa before the NGT on

2 July 2018 seeking permission for the felling of trees. By its judgment dated 21

August 2018, the NGT disposed of both the appeals and the Miscellaneous

Application filed by the State of Goa, upholding the EC and imposing additional

conditions to safeguard the environment. This Court has been informed that the

felling of trees was initiated on 3 September 2018 and completed on 14 January

2019. Assailing the judgment of the NGT, two appeals have been filed before this

Court: one by Hanuman Laxman Aroskar18 and the other by the Federation of

Rainbow Warriors19.
13      On 18 January 2019, notice was issued in the appeals and an order of status

quo was passed by this Court. The appeals were admitted for hearing and final

disposal.
B       Submissions


14      We have heard Ms Anitha Shenoy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants. Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General20 for India appeared on

behalf of the State of Goa. Mr Atmaram S Nadkarni, learned Additional Solicitor

General21 of India appeared on behalf of the MoEFCC. Mr Parag P Tripathi, learned

Senior Counsel and Ms Aastha Mehta, learned counsel appeared on behalf of the

Concessionaire.
15      Ms Anitha Shenoy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants

urged that the EIA report which is carried out under the terms of the 2006 notification
17 MA No. 975 of 2018
18 Civil Appeal No. 12251 of 2018
19 Civil Appeal No. 1053 of 2019
20 AG
21 ASG
9
PART B
is a tool to evaluate the environmental consequences of a proposed activity. The

proposed international airport, being a Category ‘A’ project, is governed by the

second, third and fourth stages of scoping, public consultation and appraisal

respectively envisaged under the 2006 notification. In addition to the 2006

notification, the Guidance manual furnishes a significant sign post in the procedure

envisaged prior to the grant of an EC. The project proponent is required to submit

Form 1 complete with relevant details of the proposed project and the status of the

environment. The ToR which is finalized by the EAC is founded on the disclosures

which are made by the project proponent. In this backdrop, the principal submissions

urged by the appellants before the Court are as follows:
(i)   There were material concealments by the project proponent in failing to

      disclose that as many as 54,676 trees were required to be felled. Form 1,

      which was submitted by the project proponent, was silent in regard to the

      number of trees required to be felled. The final EIA report, while dealing with

      the biological environment in clause 2.1.5 contains the following statement:
“2.1.5 Biological environment
             Construction phase
             Impacts (Significance-Medium)
             The area acquired for proposed airport has only few trees,
             mainly bushes.         These will be cleared during site
             preparation.”



      Contrary to the above assertion is the statement contained in the counter

      affidavit filed by the State of Goa:
“..I say that the permissions which have been obtained for
             cutting of 54,676 trees have been granted by the concerned
             authorities in terms of the relevant statutory provisions and
             after laying down various conditions. I say that the context in
             which it was mentioned as sparse trees has to be seen from
             the huge area of the land. The land being 2133 acres, it
             would proportionally work out to about 25 trees in an area of 1
             acre, i.e. 4000 sq. metres., which is one tree in an area of
             about 160 sq. metres.”
10
PART B

           The submission urged by the appellants is that the purpose of the EIA report is

           to form an assessment of the state of environment as it exists in reality. The

           project proponent is duty bound to make a proper disclosure and the highest

           level of transparency is required. Accompanying Form 1 is a declaration of the

           project proponent that the EC will be liable to be rejected in the event of a

           suppression or mis-statement of material facts. The State of Goa filed a

           Miscellaneous Application before the NGT seeking permission to fell around

           55,000 trees. This is a clear indicator that the original statement by the project

           proponent in Form 1 as well as in clause 2.1.5 of the EIA report that only a few

           trees were required to be felled is factually incorrect;
(ii)       There was a concealment of Ecologically Sensitive Zones22 in the State of

           Maharashtra. In terms of the Guidance manual, primary data through

           measures and full surveys; and secondary data from secondary sources have

           to be collected. Primary data includes the study area within 10 kilometres

           radius from the Aerodrome Reference Point23 and covers one season other

           than the monsoon. Secondary data includes data collected within an aerial

           distance of 15 kilometres for the parameters which are specifically mentioned

           in column 9 (III) of Form 1 of the 2006 notification and covers one full year. In

           the present case, while furnishing details of ESZs falling within an aerial

           distance of 15 kilometres, the EIA report stipulates that there were none in the

           State of Maharashtra. The State of Goa has also averred in its counter that

           there are no ESZs within a radius of 15 kilometres from the ARP and that there

           are no reserve forests in that radius. After hearings had begun before the
22   ESZ
23   ARP
11
PART B
         NGT, a letter was addressed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests on

         12 February 2018 to the Director of Civil Aviation stating that a list of reserved

         forests had been notified under
Section 20
of the Indian Forest Act 1927 in

         Sawantwadi Forest Division of Sindhudurg district in Maharashtra which was

         obtained from the working plan of Sawantwadi Forest Division (2014-15 to

         2023-24). The letter stated that there was no reserved forest notified under
Section 20
of the Indian Forest Act 1927 in the Sawantwadi Forest Division,

         within a radius of 15 kilometres from the ARP. On this aspect, it was urged on

         behalf of the appellants that restrictions come into force as soon as a

         notification under
Section 4
of the Indian Forest Act 1927 is issued.
Under the

         Forest Conservation Act
1980, any use of forest land for non-forest purposes

         requires prior permission of the Union Government, as elaborated in the

         judgment of this Court in TN Godavarman Thirumalpad v Union of India24

         (“Godavarman”). The purpose of elucidating forest areas which fall within an

         aerial distance of 15 kilometres from the project site is to enable an

         assessment to be made of the impact of the project on forested areas. Failure

         to mention forests in the State of Maharashtra was a significant omission in the

         EIA report;
(iii)    Form 1 requires a disclosure of the details of ESZs within an aerial distance of

         15 kilometres of the project boundary. The EIA report rests content in stating

         that Pernem taluka is not included in an ESZ by the High Level Working

         Group25 constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr K Kasturirangan, Member

         (Science), Planning Commission26. The project proponent, in response to the


24 (1997) 2 SCC 267
25 HLWG
26 Kasturirangan report
12
PART B
       disclosures required for areas which are important or sensitive for ecological

       reasons – wet lands, water sources or other water bodies, costal zone,

       biospheres, mountains and forests, left the required details blank.         In this

       context, it was urged by the appellants that the purpose of the EIA report was

       not only to make an assessment of the project site but also of an area

       surrounding the project site within an aerial distance of 15 kilometres. The

       HLWG recognized that there were ESZs. In the present case, several villages

       are situated at a bare distance of 1.5 kilometres from the project site in

       Maharashtra. Yet, there was no disclosure of this fact and the EIA report

       merely recorded that Pernem taluka is not included in an ESZ;
(iv)   The State of Maharashtra comprises nearly 40 per cent of the study area. Yet,

       there was no sampling of soil, air and water in Maharashtra. Sampling was

       carried out in 2011 and 2014-15 in Goa but no sampling site is situated in

       Maharashtra.     In the absence of baseline data generated with regard to

       environmental parameters in the State of Maharashtra surrounding the project

       site, the EIA report suffers from a gross deficiency; and
(v)    The EIA report is grossly deficient in failing to notice wildlife in the surrounding

       forests.   On the contrary, the appellants have relied on a rapid survey

       conducted to assess the presence of various mammals in the study area.

       Moreover, no avi-faunal study was done.
16     Apart from the above submissions, Ms Shenoy has urged that the stages of

public consultation and appraisal under the 2006 notification are crucial to the

assessment process. As far as the public consultation is concerned, the draft EIA is

given before the hearing. During the course of the public consultation, as many as 70
13
PART B
persons spoke, 1,150 representations were received and 1,586 persons are stated to

have participated. The range of concerns expressed during the course of the public

consultation covered a variety of environmental issues. Amongst them was the

presence of perennial springs, the porous nature of the laterite plateau where

permeation is a source of drainage for water collection and the existence of cashew

plantations on which the livelihood of the local residents depends. Under the 2006

notification, the State Pollution Control Board27 was required to collate the issues

raised and the response of the project proponent, before submitting required

documents to the EAC. Before the EAC, the project proponent in its presentation,

indicated that the objections were only about employment opportunities. The project

proponent clearly failed in its duty to appraise the EAC about serious environmental

concerns which were raised during the course of the public consultation.


17          On the aspect of appraisal, it has been urged that the minutes of the EAC

meeting recommending the grant of an EC contain, as learned counsel for the

appellants submitted, “not a line on the EIA report”. The EAC was required to state

its reasons for recommending the grant of an EC in terms of the 2006 notification.

The reasons must indicate that there was an appraisal by the EAC. In the present

case, the recommendations of the EAC are based on vague considerations such as:
(i) larger public interest; (ii) non-concealment of the facts by the project proponent;
and (iii) the delay which had occurred in the process. The submission urged is that

the EAC, as an expert body, has failed to furnish reasons; acted on the basis of

considerations which are not germane to the exercise of its functions and failed to

apply its mind to relevant considerations including the environmental consequences

of the project.
27   SPCB
14
PART B


18        Finally, it has been submitted that under
Section 16(h)
of the National Green

Tribunal Act 2010,28 an appellate remedy is provided against the order granting EC.

By virtue of the provisions of
Section 20
, the NGT is under a mandate to apply the

principles of sustainable development, the precautionary principle and the polluter

pays principle while passing any order, decision or making the award. An appeal lies

before this Court under
Section 22
from an order, decision or award of the Tribunal

on a substantial question of law as specified in
Section 100
of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908. The NGT, by virtue of its adjudicatory authority under
Section

16(h)
, is entrusted with a duty to conduct a merits review. The failure to consider

materials on a vital issue constitutes a substantial question of law as does the failure

to consider vital issues in the proceedings before it. In the present case, the Tribunal

has merely relied on the process conducted by the EAC and its recommendations,

abdicating its own jurisdiction to conduct a merits review.


19        Mr ANS Nadkarni, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the MoEFCC urged

that the EIA report, besides dealing with environmental concerns, addresses the

impact of the project during both the phases of construction and operation. The EAC

is sourced from experts from outside the government. The airport project was

conceived in 1996; consultants were appointed and three sites were initially short-

listed. It was in 2011 that the ToR were sought by and given to the project proponent

by the EAC. The draft EIA was placed for public consultation in 2014 and the final

EIA report came to be submitted in 2015. The EAC deferred consideration of the EIA

report on three occasions, including among them to consider the representation filed

by the Federation of Rainbow Warriors.
28
NGT Act
2010
15
PART B


20        Countering the submission of the appellants on the non-disclosure of reserved

forests in Form 1, the learned ASG urged the following submissions:
(i)       The submission of the appellants was not raised either in the public hearing or

          in the grounds urged before the NGT, but was addressed in the written

          submissions filed before the NGT and when a map of the Surveyor General of

          India was produced;
(ii)      Table 2.1.5 of the EIA report states that there is no reserved forest in the State

          of Maharashtra while delineating ESZs within 15 kilometres from the project

          boundary. The report proceeded on the plain meaning of the
Indian Forest Act
1927 according to which it is only upon the issuance of a notification under
Section 20
that a reserved forest is declared;
(iii)     As a matter of fact, within the area of 15 kilometres from the project boundary

          in the State of Maharashtra, no reserved forest stands declared under
Section

          20(2)
of the Indian Forest Act 1927;
(iv)      The decision in Godavarman (supra) which adopts the ordinary meaning of

          the expression ‘forest’ is site specific: the MoEFCC follows it scrupulously even

          if there is a notification under
Section 4
while considering the diversion of

          forest land for non-forest uses. The decision in Godavarman (supra) has also

          been explained in the decision of this Court in Construction of Park at Noida

          near Okhla Bird Sanctuary Anand Arya v Union of India29 (‘Okhla Bird

          Sanctuary’);
(v)       The Guidance manual notices that environmental facets which have to be

          considered in relation to airport development are categorized into seven

          groups: (a) land use; (b) water quality; (c) air quality; (d) noise pollution; (e)

29   2011(1) SCC 744
16
PART B
       biological environment; (f) socio-economic changes and occupational health;
and (g) solid waste management. Baseline data of these environmental facets

       is ascertained through primary data extending to one season while secondary

       data extending to a year is gathered in terms of the Guidance manual and the

       distance specified in paragraph 4.1; and
(vi)   The EIA report records that the surrounding land use of the airport site is

       predominantly forest land. Land use and land cover specifically for a 10

       kilometre radius from the airport site in Maharashtra is also set out in Chapter

       II of the EIA report, which indicates a reference to the forest area. Annexure IX

       of the EIA report incorporates land use with land cover maps, both for Goa and

       Maharashtra in the 10 kilometre radius, which includes forested areas within

       the State of Maharashtra; Annexure X of the EIA report elucidates surface

       water bodies both in Maharashtra and in Goa in the radius of 10 kilometres

       while Annexure XI provides a hydro-geo-morphological map of Goa and

       Maharashtra. In other words, it was urged that: (i) a legally designated forest

       under the
Indian Forest Act
1927 requires a notification under
Section 20
;

       however, at the same time, (i?i) the EIA report contains a clear disclosure of

       the presence of forest areas in both the States of Goa and Maharashtra within

       a radius of 10 kilometres including areas of dense forest.


21     As regards the lack of sampling points in Maharashtra, the learned ASG

urged that while all the six sampling points for ambient air quality within 10 kilometres

of the study area were in Goa, the air quality which was being tracked was within the

stipulated radius and was not confined to the State of Goa. Similarly, in studying the

water environment, the ground water quality was measured at four locations in Goa

within 10 kilometres of the study area. As regards the monitoring of noise, nine
17
PART B
sampling points were chosen within the State of Goa in accordance with the Central

Pollution Control Board30 guidelines. The monitoring of noise environment, both at

the construction and operational phases, has similarly been dealt with in the EIA

report. The learned ASG urged that the choice of the sampling locations was not

arbitrary: though the sampling points were not in Maharashtra, data required was

tracked across a radius of 10 kilometres from the ARP which also included the State

of Maharashtra.
22         Dealing with the submission that no avi-faunal study was carried out, it was

urged that the EIA report specifically deals with this aspect in paragraph 4.6 of

Chapter II which elucidates that 385 species of plants belonging to 88 plant families

were documented and identified in the 10 kilometres radial distance of the proposed

project site. The study similarly dealt with faunal diversity. As many as 86 species of

birds were observed in the course of the avi-faunal study, which has been elucidated

in table 4.17 of the EIA report.
23         On the issue of ESZs, the learned ASG urged that there is a specific reference

to the Kasturirangan report, under the heading of ‘Environmentally Sensitive Zones’

in Chapter IV of the EIA report. The EIA report notices that the proposed airport site

falls in Pernem taluka of North Goa which has not been included in the ESZs mapped

by the HLWG. Annexure XVI of the EIA report is a notification dated 13 November

201331 of the MoEF, which contains a list of villages (state, district and taluk-wise)

identified by the HLWG. Paragraph 9 of the 2013 notification which has been issued

under
Section 5
of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 specifies the categories of

new and expansion projects which are prohibited in the ESZ. The proposed airport


30
CPC
B
31   2013 notification
18
PART B
project does not fall within the prohibited category. Moreover, since the site of the

proposed airport was not included in an ESZ, the prohibition imposed by the 2013

notification had no application.
24      The learned ASG has also urged that the report of the HLWG on Western

Ghats, submitted on 15 April 2013, stipulates certain development restrictions in

ESZs which are as follows:
(i)     A complete ban on mining, quarrying and sand mining;
(ii)    A complete ban on thermal power projects while hydro power projects may be

        permitted subjected to conditions;
(iii)   A strict prohibition on ‘red category’ industries;
(iv)    A prohibition on building and construction projects of 20,000 square metres;
(v)     All other infrastructure and development projects/schemes would be subject to

        the grant of an EC as Category ‘A’ projects under the 2006 notification; and
(vi)    All development projects within 10 kilometres of the Western Ghats ESZ and

        requiring ECs shall be regulated in accordance with the 2006 notification.
Based on the above recommendation of the HLWG, it was submitted that the

proposed airport project, which falls under Category ‘A’ projects as delineated by the

2006 notification, is regulated by it and does not attract a blanket prohibition.


25      The submission that the EAC had failed to apprise the environmental

consequences of the project and should have applied its mind to environmental

concerns has been countered by relying on the Minutes of the meetings conducted

by the EAC:
19
PART B
                      th
(i)      At its 149        meeting held on 26 June 2015, the EAC sought additional

         information on six distinct aspects upon receiving the presentation by the

         project proponent;
(ii)     At its 151st meeting held on 7-9 September 2015, the EAC took note of a

         representation filed by the Federation of Rainbow Warriors and deferred

         further consideration of proposal for the grant of EC. The project proponent

         was called upon to submit a response to the issues raised in the

         representation; and
(iii)    At its 152nd meeting held on 20 October 2015, the EAC dealt with clarifications

         issued by the project proponent to the concerns raised by Rainbow Warriors

         and proceeded to recommend the project for the grant of an EC subject to the

         stipulated conditions.
On 28 October 2015, the EC was granted by the Union Government. On the basis of

the procedure which was followed by the EAC, the following submissions have been

urged:
(i)      The application of mind by the EAC can be inferred and seen from the record;
(ii)     Where considered necessary, the EAC sought information outside the EIA

         report;
(iii)    Having appraised the EIA report, the EAC imposed site specific conditions;
and
(iv)     The EAC consists of experts in the field and once it has been shown that all

         relevant considerations were borne in mind, this Court must give due

         deference to their view.
20
PART B
26      Mr K K Venugopal, learned Attorney General, appearing on behalf of the State

of Goa, urged the following submissions:
(i)     The proposed project for setting up an international airport at Mopa has been

        on the drawing board for nearly two decades. Successive studies were

        commissioned to assess the feasibility of the project from diverse sources,

        both within and outside government. This includes studies by private

        organisations as well as reports by the Airports Authority of India, the

        International Civil Aviation Organisation and the six member Committee

        constituted by the state government under the auspices of the Chief Minister;
(ii)    The setting up of an airport is an imminent need, since the existing airport at

        Dabolim has reached a saturation point and is unable to cater to the growing

        volume of passenger traffic into Goa;
(iii)   Tourism, it has been urged, is a major source of revenue for the state, with the

        banning of mining activities. A balance must be drawn between development

        and the environment. A distinction needs to be drawn between overwhelming

        environmental objections which are not reversible and incapable of

        amelioration, and cases such as the present where the environmental

        consequences of project are capable of being countered by suitable measures;
and
(iv)    Objections primarily based on a defect in procedure should not be sufficient to

        quash a project conceived in public interest with vast benefits for the

        development of the state and for the members of the travelling public. It was

        urged that there was no major environmental objection and the challenge to

        the EIA report is not substantial enough to overcome the interests of three
21
PART B
       million passengers. The expected inflow is anticipated to reach 30 million in

       2030.
27     On the aspect of the felling of trees, the learned AG submitted that following

the order of the Bombay High Court, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests

passed an order on 2 April 2018 providing for: (i) enumeration of all trees covered by

the project site; (ii) issuance of tree felling permission by the Deputy Chief

Conservator of Forests; and (iii) plantation of ten times the number of trees felled

under the supervision of the forest department. Thereafter, when the High Court was

moved in a PIL, an order was passed on 13 June 2018 that the grant of permission

for felling trees and the actual felling of trees will be carried out only after the NGT

granted permission in the pending proceedings.           A Miscellaneous Application

seeking permission for the felling of trees was instituted before the NGT. In its final

order dated 21 August 2018, the NGT disposed of both the appeals as well as the

Miscellaneous Application. Moreover, the NGT has specifically dealt with the felling of

trees in the course of its distinction.
28     On behalf of the concessionaire, Mr Parag P Tripathi, learned Senior Counsel

and Ms Astha Mehta, learned counsel urged that upon the grant of an EC, a

concession agreement was executed by it with the State of Goa on 8 November

2016. Possession of the project site was handed over on 4 September 2017 and

work commenced on 3 March 2018. The indicative capital for Phase 1 of the

development is Rs 1,900 crores while the cost of the entire project is likely to be Rs

3,000 crores. The State of Goa has incurred a total expenditure of Rs 240 crores for

land acquisition, rehabilitation, road widening, consultancy and other related aspects

while the concessionaire has thus far incurred an expenditure of Rs 230 crores as on
22
PART C
18 January 2019. 14.06 per cent of the project work has been completed and a

manpower consisting of 1500 persons has been mobilized at the site together with

plant and machinery.
29     The concessionaire has stated that it has tied up with a consortium of banks

and the servicing of the loans is linked to project milestones. As on 18 January 2019,

the major works in progress include: (i) site preparation and earth works such as

excavation and filling up of runways, taxiways, aprons and parking bays; (ii) PTB-

foundations and column works; and (iii) excavation of the foundations for the ATC

building. The concessionaire has submitted that apart from the plantation of ten trees

for every single tree which has been felled, the forest department identified about 500

trees for transplantation, which process is being carried out. In this background, it has

been submitted that the project should not be interdicted. The concessionaire, it has

been urged, is committed to the completion of the project which accords with all the

approvals that have been received.
30     The rival submissions now fall for our consideration.


C      Scheme of the 2006 notification and the Guidance manual for Airports


C. 1   EIA Process


31     The objective of the EIA process is to ensure that environmental and

developmental concerns are appropriately balanced on the basis of the most

accurate information available.
32
The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act
1976, which came into force

with effect from 3 January 1977, inserted
Article 48A
to the Constitution which
23
PART C
mandates that the State shall endeavor to protect and improve the environment and

safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country.
Article 51A(g)
of the Constitution

places a corresponding duty on every citizen to protect and improve the natural

environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for

living creatures. Following the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference on

the Human Environment held at Stockholm32 in June 1972 in which India participated,

Parliament enacted the
Environment Protection Act
1986 to protect and improve the

environment and prevent hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and

property.
33       On 27 January 1994, the MoEF, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-

section (1) and clause (v) of sub-section (2) of
Section 3
of the 1986 Act read with

clause (d) of sub-rule 3 of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, issued

a notification33 imposing restrictions and prohibitions on the expansion and

modernisation of any activity or new project unless an EC was granted under the

procedure stipulated in the notification. Under the notification, any person

undertaking a new project or expanding and modernizing an existing project was

required to submit an application to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and

Forests, New Delhi.
34       The application, which was to be made in accordance with the Schedule

provided in the notification was to be submitted with a project report which included

with it an EIA Report, an Environment Management Plan34 and the details of a public

hearing which had been carried out in accordance with guidelines issued by the



32 Stockholm Conference
33 S.O. 60(E) (‘1994 notification’)
34 EMP
24
PART C
Central Government from time to time. Limited exceptions to the public hearing

process and the submission of an EIA were provided.
35       MoEF as the Impact Assessment Agency35 would then evaluate the application

and reports submitted. The IAA was empowered to constitute a committee of experts,

if necessary, which would have a right of entry into and inspection of the site during

or after the commencement of the preparations relating to the project. The IAA would

prepare a set of recommendations based on the documents furnished by an

applicant within 90 days from the receipt of the documents and a decision would be

conveyed to the applicant within 30 days thereafter. The EC granted was valid for a

period of five years and a successful applicant was required to submit half-yearly

reports to the IAA. Concealing factual data or submitting false or misleading

information would make the application liable for rejection and would lead to the

cancellation of any EC36 granted on that basis.
36       The 1994 notification was amended to reflect the growing protection accorded

to the environment.
37       On 14 September 2006, MoEF released another notification37 in supersession

of the previous notification.
38       The 2006 notification directed thus:
“…on and from the date of its publication the required
                   construction of new projects or activities or the expansion or
                   modernization of existing projects or activities listed in the
                   Schedule to this notification entailing capacity addition with
                   change in process and or technology shall be undertaken in
                   any part of India only after the prior environmental clearance
                   from the Central Government or as the case may be, by the


35 IAA
36 EC
37 S.O. 1533 (‘2006 notification’)
25
PART C
              State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority, duly
              constituted by the Central Government under sub-section (3)
              of
section 3
of the said Act, in accordance with the procedure
              specified hereinafter in this notification.”
39      There are significant differences between the 1994 notification and the 2006

notification. They are:
(i)     The 2006 notification categorically states that an EC must be granted by the

        regulatory authority prior to the commencement of any construction work or

        preparation of land;
(ii)    The 2006 notification divides all projects into Category ‘A’ and Category ‘B’

        projects. The MoEFCC continues to regulate projects of a large scale

        (Category ‘A’), while the SEIAA regulate comparatively smaller projects

        (Category ‘B’);
(iii)   Under the 1994 notification, an applicant was required to submit an application

        along with all reports including the EIA report at the time of the application.
Under the 2006 notification, prior to the preparation of the EIA report by the

        applicant, the concerned authority formulates comprehensive ToR on the basis

        of the information furnished by the applicant addressing all relevant

        environmental concerns. This forms the basis for the preparation of the EIA

        report. A pre-feasibility report must also be submitted with the application

        unless exempted in the notification. Under the 2006 notification, a draft EIA is

        first prepared and it is only after the public consultation process that a final EIA

        report must be prepared addressing all the concerns raised during public

        consultation;
26
PART C
(iv)    The 2006 notification stipulates the creation of a regulatory body at the state

        level – SEIAA comprising members with expertise in the field of environmental

        laws which is charged with granting ECs for Category ‘B’ projects;
(v)     Under the 1994 notification, the final approval was granted by the IAA. Under

        the 2006 notification, though the final regulatory approval is granted by the

        MoEFCC or the SEIAA, as the case may be, the approval is to be based on

        the recommendations of the EAC functioning in the MoEFCC or the State

        Expert Appraisal Committees38 which are constituted for that specific purpose;
(vi)    Under the 2006 notification, the application can be rejected by the regulatory

        authority on the basis of the recommendation of the EAC or the SEAC, as the

        case may be, at the preliminary stage itself, prior to public consultation; and
(vii)   Under the 1994 notification, the public hearing process was overseen by the

        State Pollution Control Boards39 which would constitute a public hearing panel

        for the purpose. Under the 2006 notification, the public consultation process is

        expanded to include the receipt of written comments from concerned persons.

        The public hearing component was to be overseen by the SPCBs or the Union

        Territory Pollution Control Committee40.
40      The salient objective which underlies the 2006 notification is the protection,

preservation and continued sustenance of the environment when the execution of

new projects or the expansion or modernization of existing projects is envisaged. It

imposes certain restrictions and prohibitions based on the potential environmental

impact of projects unless prior EC has been granted by the concerned authority. The

EC is required before any construction work, or preparation of land (except for

38 SEAC
39 SPCB
40 UTPCC
27
PART C
securing the land) is started on the project or activity listed in the Schedule to the

notification. The process stipulated under the 2006 notification is illustrated by the

following flow-chart:
28
PART C
41      Based on the spatial extent of the potential impact and the potential impacts on

human health and natural and man-made resources, the 2006 notification

categorizes all projects into Category ‘A’ and Category ‘B’ projects. The MoEFCC in

the Central Government and the SEIAA at the state level constitute the regulatory

authorities for the purposes of the notification. Category ‘A’ projects require prior

environmental clearance from the MoEFCC, based on the recommendation of the

EAC constituted by the Central Government for this purpose. Category ‘B’ projects

will require prior environmental clearance from the SEIAA, based on the

recommendations of the SEAC. Where no SEIAA or SEAC has been constituted,

Category ‘B’ projects are treated as Category ‘A’ projects.



42      Once a prospective site has been identified by the applicant for the proposed

project, all applications seeking an EC shall be made in the prescribed Form 1 and

Supplementary Form 1A41, if applicable. The application must be submitted prior to

the commencement of any construction activity, or preparation of the land at the site.

A pre-feasibility report must also be submitted with the application except in the

cases of construction projects in item 8 of the Schedule, for which a conceptual plan

must be submitted. The significance of the information furnished by the applicant in

Form 1 shall be explored shortly.
43      The process to obtain environmental clearance as stipulated by the notification

for new projects42 comprises a maximum of four stages, all of which may not apply

depending on the specific case stipulated under the notification:
1) Screening;
41 Only for construction projects listed under item 8 of the Schedule
42 Applications for EC for expansions or modernization of existing units as stipulated under the notification are made
in Form 1 and shall be considered by the EAC or the SEAC within 60 days, which will decide on the due diligence
necessary including the preparation of the EIA and public consultations and the application shall be appraised
accordingly for the grant of environmental clearance.
29
PART C
2) Scoping;
3) Public Consultation; and
4) Appraisal.
44    SCREENING – This step is restricted only to Category ‘B’ projects. This stage

entails an examination of whether the proposed project or activity requires further

environmental studies for the preparation of an EIA for its appraisal prior to the grant

of an EC. Those projects requiring an EIA are further categorized as Category ‘B1’

projects and remaining projects are categorized as Category ‘B2’ projects. Category

‘B2’ projects do not require an EIA. The categorization is in accordance with the

guidelines issued in this regard by the MoEFCC from time to time.


45    SCOPING – At this stage, the EAC or the SEAC, as the case may be,

formulates detailed and comprehensive Terms of Reference which address all

relevant environmental concerns for the preparation of the EIA. Amongst other

things, the information furnished by the applicant in Form 1/Form 1A along with the

proposed ToR by the applicant form the basis for the preparation of the ToR. The

ToR must be conveyed to the applicant within 60 days of the receipt of Form 1, failing

which, the ToR proposed by the applicant shall be deemed as approved.

Significantly, applications for EC may be rejected by the regulatory authority at this

stage itself on the recommendation of the EAC or the SEAC, as the case may be,

and the decision along with reasons is to be communicated to the applicant within 60

days of receipt of application.
46    PUBLIC CONSULTATION – Prior to this stage, a Summary EIA is prepared in the

format given in Appendix IIIA on the basis of the ToR furnished to the applicant. This

stage involves the process “by which the concerns of local affected persons and
30
PART C
others who have plausible stake in the environmental impacts of the project or activity

are ascertained with a view of taking into account all the material concerns in the

project or activity design as appropriate.” The detailed procedure is stipulated in

Appendix IV. Subject to the exceptions provided in the 2006 notification, all Category

‘A’ and Category ‘B1’ projects shall undertake the public consultation process.

This stage comprises two components:
(i)      A public hearing at the site or in its close proximity – district-wise to be carried

         out in the manner prescribed in Appendix IV; and
(ii)     Procurement of written responses from concerned persons having a plausible

         stake in the environmental aspects surrounding the project.
47       The State Pollution Control Board43 or the Union Territory Pollution Control

Committee44 is charged with conducting the public hearing in the manner stipulated in

Appendix IV and forwarding the proceedings to the regulatory authority within 45

days of a request from the applicant. The regulatory authority is empowered to

engage another public agency or authority to carry out the process within a further

period of forty-five days in case the SPCB or the UTPCC does not adhere to the

prescribed time period stipulated in the notification. The public hearing should be

arranged in a “systematic, time bound and transparent manner” to ensure the “widest

possible public participation at the project site(s) or in its close proximity District-

wise”. The public hearing proceeding is filmed and a copy of the video is submitted to

the concerned regulatory authority.
43   SPCB
44   UTPCC
31
PART C
48      Within seven days of receiving a written request to initiate the public

consultation process, the SPCB or the UTPCC shall place the Summary EIA and the

application on their website and invite responses. The concerned authority may also

make use of other appropriate media in addition to publication on their website to

ensure wide publicity of the project. On a written request from any concerned person,

the authority will make available a hard copy of the Draft EIA for inspection at a

notified place during office hours till the date of the public hearing. A duty is placed

on the authority to forward all responses and comments received at this stage to the

applicant through the quickest available means.
49      After the public consultation process, the applicant is duty bound to address all

the material environmental concerns expressed during the process and make

appropriate changes to the Draft EIA and EMP. The applicant shall then forward the

final EIA report to the regulatory authority to initiate the next stage. Alternatively, the

applicant may submit a supplementary report to the Summary EIA and EMP.


50      APPRAISAL - This stage involves detailed scrutiny by the EAC or the SEAC of

all the documents submitted by the applicant for the grant of EC. The appraisal is

carried out in a transparent manner in a process to which the applicant shall be

invited for furnishing clarification in person or through an authorized representative.

Appendix V stipulates that the following documents are also submitted to the

regulatory authority:
(i)     Final EIA Report

(ii)    A copy of the video tape or CD of the public hearing proceedings

(iii)   A copy of the final layout plan

(iv)    A copy of the project feasibility report.
32
PART C
51    The regulatory authority must examine the documents “strictly with reference
to the ToR” and communicate any inadequacy to the EAC or the SEAC, as the case

may be, within 30 days of receipt of the documents. Within sixty days of the receipt of

all the documents, the EAC or the SEAC, as the case may be, shall complete the

appraisal process as prescribed in Appendix V. Within the next fifteen days, the EAC

or the SEAC shall make categorical recommendations to the concerned regulatory

authority to either grant the EC on the stipulated terms and conditions or reject the

application, together with reasons. The appraisal of projects which are not required to

undergo the public consultation process or the submission of an EIA is to be carried

out on the basis of the prescribed application Form 1 or Form 1A, as applicable.


52    The MoEFCC or the SEIAA shall thereafter consider the recommendations of

the EAC or the SEAC and convey its decision to the applicant within 45 days of

receipt of the recommendations. The regulatory authorities shall normally accept the

recommendations of the EAC or the SEAC, as the case may be. Where there is a

disagreement, the regulatory authority shall ask for a reconsideration of the

recommendation within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations. This decision

shall be conveyed to the applicant. The EAC or the SEAC shall then reconsider its

recommendation within a further period of 60 days and make its recommendations to

the regulatory authority. The regulatory authorities shall then take a decision after

considering the views communicated to it and convey the decision to the applicant

within the next 30 days.
53    If no decision is communicated to the applicant within the time prescribed, the

applicant may proceed according to the recommendation of the EAC or the SEAC

recommending either the grant or rejection of the EC. The decision of the regulatory
33
PART C
authority and the final recommendations of the EAC or the SEAC shall be public

documents on the expiry of the prescribed timelines. Deliberate concealment and/or

the submission of false or misleading information material to the steps involved in the

grant of an EC make the application liable for rejection and cancellation of any EC

granted on that basis.
54    The 2006 notification embodies the notion that the development agenda of the

nation must be carried out in compliance with norms stipulated for the protection of

the environment and its complexities. It serves as a balance between development

and protection of the environment: there is no trade-off between the two. The

protection of the environment is an essential facet of development. It cannot be

reduced to a technical formula. The notification demonstrates an increasing

awareness of the complexities of the environment and the heightened scrutiny

required to ensure its continued sustenance, for today and for generations to come. It

embodies a commitment to sustainable development. In laying down a detailed

procedure for the grant of an EC, the 2006 notification attempts to bridge the

perceived gap between the environment and development.


55    It is for this reason that the EAC and SEAC comprise experts in the field of

environmental law. The Chairperson of the EAC shall be a person who is an

“outstanding and experienced environmental policy expert or expert in management

or public administration with wide experience in the relevant development sector”.

Appendix VI to the 2006 notification stipulates that the EAC and the SEAC comprise

15 members who are either ‘experts’ or ‘professionals’. Experts must have atleast 15

years of relevant experience in the field or an advanced degree (PhD) with 10 years
34
PART C
of relevant experience. Where experts are not available, professionals may be

appointed to the EAC.
56     The EAC and the SEAC are charged with evaluating the information submitted

by the applicant in Form 1/Form 1A and preparing comprehensive ToR which guide

the preparation of the EIA reports. Given that these bodies comprise experts in the

field of environmental law, the recommendation of the EAC or the SEAC to grant EC

to an applicant or reject the application is normally accepted by the regulatory

authority.
57     The regulatory authority at the state level (SEIAA) which is charged with the

approval or rejection of an application for EC comprises three members who possess

the qualifications in the field as prescribed in Appendix VI. Significantly, sub clause

(7) of paragraph 3 of the 2006 notification stipulates that all decisions of the SEIAA

shall be unanimous and taken in a meeting. Given the environmental consequences

of a proposed project, no difference of opinion is provided for in the grant of an EC at

the state level. It is further mandated that the project management submit half-yearly

compliance reports to the regulatory authority in respect of the EC and conditions.


58     Under the 2006 notification, the process of obtaining an EC commences from

the production of the information stipulated in Form 1/Form 1A. Crucial information

regarding the particulars of the proposed project is sought to enable the EAC or the

SEAC to prepare comprehensive ToR which the applicant is required to address

during the course of the preparation of the EIA. Some of the information sought is

produced thus:
35
PART C
(i)          Construction, operation or decommissioning of the project involving actions,

             which will cause physical changes in the locality (topography, land use,

             changes in water bodies, etc.);
(ii)         Use of natural resources for construction or operation of the Project (such as

             land, water, materials or energy, especially any resources which are non-
renewable or in short supply);
(iii)        Use, storage, transport, handling or production of substances or materials,

             which could be harmful to human health or the environment or raise concerns

             about the actual or perceived risks to human health;
(iv)         Production of solid wastes during construction, operation or decommissioning;
(v)          Release of pollutants or any hazardous, toxic or noxious substances to air;
(vi)         Generation of noise and vibration, and emissions of light and heat;
(vii)        Risks of contamination of land or water from releases of pollutants into the

             ground or into sewers, surface waters, groundwater, coastal waters or the sea;
(viii)       Risk of accidents during construction or operation of the project, which could

             affect human health or the environment; and
(ix)         Environment sensitivity which includes, amongst other things, the furnishing of

             the following details:
a.      Areas protected under international and national legislation;
b.      Ecologically sensitive areas; and

        c.      Areas used by protected, important or sensitive species of flora or fauna.



59           Under the 2006 notification, the EC process is based on the information
provided by the applicant in Form 1. That the information provided in Form 1 is

crucial can be borne from the following circumstances:
36
PART C
(i)     The EAC or the SEAC, as the case may be, formulates comprehensive ToRs

        on the basis of the information furnished in Form 1 which addresses all

        possible environmental concerns. It is on the basis of the ToR, that further

        studies and the EIA are carried out on the impact of the proposed project on

        the environment;
(ii)    At the appraisal stage, the regulatory authority examines the documents

        submitted by the applicant “strictly with reference to the ToR” and

        communicates any inadequacy to the EAC or the SEAC;
(iii)   Category B2 projects, which do not require scoping, are evaluated by the

        SEAC on the basis of the information furnished by the applicant in Form 1

        alone;
(iv)    The appraisal of all projects or activities which are not required to undergo

        public consultation, or submit an EIA report, shall be carried out on the basis of

        the prescribed application Form 1 and Form 1A as applicable; and
(v)     An application for extension of the validity of the EC for certain projects is to be

        made by submitting a revised Form 1 within the validity period.
60      The information provided in Form 1 serves as a base upon which the process

stipulated under the 2006 notification rests. An applicant is required to provide all

material information stipulated in the form to enable the authorities to formulate

comprehensive ToR and enable concerned persons to provide comments and

representations at the public consultation stage. The depth of information sought in

Form 1 is to enable the authorities to evaluate all possible impacts of the proposed

project and provide the applicant an opportunity to address these concerns in the

subsequent study. Missing or misleading information in Form 1 significantly impedes

the functioning of the authorities and the process stipulated under the notification. For
37
PART C
this reason, any application made or EC granted on the basis of a defective Form 1 is

liable to be rejected immediately. Clause (vi) of paragraph 8 of the notification

provides thus:
“Deliberate concealment and/or submission of false or
             misleading information or data which is material to screening
             or scoping or appraisal or decision on the application shall
             make the application liable for rejection, and cancellation of
             prior environmental clearance granted on that basis.
             Rejection of an application or cancellation of a prior
             environmental clearance already granted, on such ground,
             shall be decided by the regulatory authority, after giving a
             personal hearing to the applicant, and following the principles
             of natural justice.”



C.2   Guidance manual for airports
61    In February 2010, the MoEF brought out its Guidance manual for airports. The

need for a sector specific manual arose because the 2006 notification “re-engineered

the entire EC process” under its earlier avatar of 1994 and new sectors were

incorporated into the ambit of the EC process. The 2006 notification noted that as

many as 39 developmental sectors require prior ECs. Sector specific manuals, it was

hoped, would bring about standardisation in the quality of appraisal and obviate

potential inconsistencies between the work performed by SEIAAs and SEACs.

Chapter IV of the Guidance manual, which is titled ‘Description of Environment’,

prescribes the study area for carrying out an EIA:
“Primary data through measurements and field surveys; and
             secondary data from secondary sources are to be collected in
             the study area within 10 km radius from Aerodrome
             Reference Point (ARP). Primary data should cover one
             season other than monsoon and secondary data is to cover
             one full year. The basis for selection of these criteria is that
             the aircraft gains a height of 1000ft in this area below which
             noise and air pollution are generated maximum during its take
             off stage. Secondary data should be collected within 15 km
             aerial distance for the parameters as specifically mentioned at
             column 9 (III) of Form I of EIA Notification, 2006. Details of
             secondary data, the method of collection of secondary data,
38
PART C
             should be furnished. Similarly, the proposed locations of
             monitoring stations of water, air, soil and noise etc should be
             shown on the study area map.”
62     Baseline data of environmental parameters which may be affected by airport

activities is collected through primary monitoring in the study area and through

secondary sources. The baseline data facilitates the evaluation of the predicted

impact on environmental attributes in the study area by using scientific analysis and

EIA methodologies. The object is to also aid in the preparation of an EMP that would

outline measures for improving environmental quality as well as retain the scope for

future expansions in a sustainable manner. The Guidance manual specifically

requires collection of baseline data on the following: (i) land environment; (ii) water

environment; (iii) air environment; (iv) noise environment; (v) biological environment;
(iv) socio-economic environment and (vii) solid waste.



The importance of collecting data on land environment is emphasised in the following

extract:
“The terrain and hill slope, general slope and elevation of the
             area, the flow direction of streams and rivers, the water
             bodies and wet lands and the vegetation which together
             describe the physiography of the land, will control the
             drainage pattern in the region. Land farms, terrain, may get
             affected due to construction of airport. It may require large
             scale quarrying, dredging and reclamation, which may cause
             changes in the topography. This in turn may affect the
             drainage pattern of the land / terrain. Baseline data pertaining
             to existing land at the proposed project area including the
             description of terrain hill slopes, terrain features, slope and
             elevation are to be collected. Study of land use pattern,
             habitation, cropping pattern, forest cover, environmentally
             sensitive places etc., is to be undertaken by employing
             remote sensing techniques and ground truthing. Ecological
             features of forest area; agricultural land; grazing land; wildlife
             sanctuary land & national parks; migratory routes of fauna;
             water bodies; and drainage pattern including the orders of the
             drain and water sheds are to be described. Settlements in the
             study area may be delineated with respect to ARP on the site
39
PART C
             map. High rise buildings, industrial areas and zones,
             slaughter houses and other features of flight safety
             importance may also be marked on the map. Secondary data
             from Central Water Board GOI; State ground water
             department, State Irrigation Department is to be obtained.
             Geomorphology of the region is to be clearly delineated.
             Study of land use patterns, habitation, cropping pattern, and
             forest cover data is undertaken. Information on the location of
             water bodies, drainage, forests, surface travel routes with
             respect to the project site is obtained within the study area
             and plotted on a map. This map will show the natural slopes
             and the drainage patterns, which give a guideline while
             planning the drains in the airport project. The drains help in
             discharge of storm water from the airport to avoid flooding
             and water logging in the project area.”



The study of the water environment is necessitated for the following reasons:
“Ground water quality is important, as change in its chemical
             parameters will affect the water quality. Airport activities
             during construction / operation may have impact on ground
             water quality. Due to airport construction existing low areas
             may be reclaimed with dredged spoil. The pollutants from
             dredged spoil are likely to enter into the ground water. This is
             likely to increase sedimentation of pollutants in airport area,
             which may migrate in time to the neighbouring ground water.
             Also runoff from solid waste if any, may percolate into the
             ground and may contaminate the ground water. Hence, they
             need to be studied through primary surveys and secondary
             sources. Monitoring locations are to be finalized as per
CPC
B
             norms which can represent the baseline conditions.”

On the aspect of air environment, the Guidance manual emphasises that:
“Aircraft engines produce emissions that are similar to other
             emissions resulting from any oil-based fuel combustion.
             These, like any exhaust emissions, can affect local air quality
             at ground level. It is emissions from aircraft below 1,000ft,
             above the ground (typically around 3km from departure or, for
             arrivals, around 6km from touchdown) that are chiefly
             involved in influencing local air quality. These emissions
             disperse with the wind and blend with emissions from other
             sources such as emissions from domestic sources, emissions
             from industries and from surface transport.”
40
PART C
Local emissions attributed to aircraft operations at airports include Oxides of

Nitrogen45, Carbon Monoxide46, Hydrocarbons47, Sulphur Dioxide48, and particulate

matter (PM 10 and PM 2.5).
63       The Guidance manual brings into focus the biological environment. It

acknowledges that airport operations may alter eco-systems, threaten endangered

species and disturb the movement and breeding patterns of wildlife. In this context,

the collection of baseline data on sensitive habitats and wild or endangered species

in the project area is contemplated. The Guidance manual stipulates thus:
“Airport operations may cause change in local ecosystems,
              threaten endangered species, and disturb movements and
              breeding patterns of local wildlife. Airports are located within
              a variety of settings (both urban and rural), which support
              habitats and species of their own, some of which will have
              direct interaction with those located on the airport and vice
              versa. Some local areas will also be designated for their
              nature conservation value. The biological environment of the
              airport should hence be seen as an integral component of the
              wider landscape scale ecological network. To accomplish
              this,
                    • Baseline data from field observations for various
                       terrestrial and aquatic systems are to be generated.
                    • Comparison of the data with authentic past records to
                       understand changes is undertaken.
• Environmental components like land, water, flora and
                       fauna are characterized and,
                    • The impact of airport development on vegetation
                       structure in and around project site is to be
                       understood.
Data on sensitive habitats, wild or endangered species in the
               project area also is to be collected from Zoological Survey of
               India (ZSI), Botanical Survey of India (BSI), Wildlife Institute
               of India (WII) and Ministry of Earth Sciences. Wildlife
               symbolizes the functioning efficiency of the entire eco
               system. Just as wild flora needs special treatment for
               preservation and growth, wild fauna as well deserves
               specific conservatory pursuits for posterity. As per Wildlife
               Act (1972), the various wild animals are enlisted in the
               schedules of wildlife Act based on the intensity of threat to

45 NOx
46 CO
47 HC
48 SO
2
41
PART D
               them as rare, endangered, threatened, vulnerable etc.
               Primary data on survey of the wild animals and birds in the
               study area is collected and identified with the classification
               into various schedules taken from secondary data.”
64     It is in the backdrop of the 2006 notification and the Guidance manual that it

becomes necessary to assess the process that was adopted in the present case and

its outcome.
D      Forests


65     The essence of the challenge to the EC is two-fold:

(i)    Form 1, which was filed by the project proponent, did not contain any
disclosure of the name or identity of forests within an aerial distance of 15

       kilometres. Item 2 under the heading of ‘Environmental Sensitivity’ requires a

       clear disclosure of “areas which are important or sensitive for ecological

       reasons – wet lands, water sources or other water bodies, coastal zone,

       biospheres, mountains and forests”; and
(ii)   Table 2.1 of Chapter II of the EIA report delineates ESZs within an aerial

       distance 15 kilometres from the project boundary. For the State of Goa, the

       table indicates the presence of forests but not of protected forests. For the

       State of Maharashtra, Table 2.1 indicates that there were neither reserved nor

       protected forests within 15 kilometres from the project boundary.


66     The learned ASG made an earnest effort to support this by urging that a

reserved forest is one which is notified under
Section 20
of the Indian Forest Act

1927. The issuance of a notification under
Section 4
, it was urged, is indicative only

of an intent and a forest stands reserved under sub-section (2) of
Section 20
only

upon the issuance of a notification. The ASG submitted that the reliance which the
42
PART D
appellants placed on the Survey of India map is misplaced as, in the absence of a

notification under
Section 20
, a forest cannot be regarded as being reserved.

In the alternative, it was urged that as a matter of fact, the EIA report (save and

except Table 2.1) takes into account the forest cover surrounding the site and within

the prescribed aerial distance. As regards Form 1, the learned ASG submitted that at

that stage, the project proponent may not be expected to be aware of all the features

of the environment and hence the omission to refer to forests and other areas which

are sensitive ecologically should be discountenanced.


67    We cannot gloss over the patent and abject failure of the State of Goa as the

project proponent in failing to disclose wet lands, water sources, water bodies,

biospheres, mountains and forests within an aerial distance of 15 kilometres as

required by Form 1. The disclosure in Form 1 constitutes the very foundation of the

process which is initiated on the basis of the information supplied by the project

proponent. Following the disclosure in Form 1, ToR are formulated, and this leads to

the preparation of the EIA report. A duty is cast upon the project proponent to make a

full, complete and candid disclosure of all aspects bearing upon the environment in

the area of study. The project proponent cannot profess an ignorance about the

environment in the study area. The project proponent is bound by the highest duty of

transparency and rectitude in making the disclosures in Form 1.


68    There can be no manner of doubt that Form 1 is an important ingredient in the

entire process envisaged under the 2006 notification. Hence, clause (vi) of para 8 of

the 2006 notification provides that deliberate concealment or submission of false or

misleading information or data which is material to screening or scoping or appraisal

or decision on the application shall make the application liable for rejection and lead
43
PART D
to the cancellation of a prior EC granted on that basis. The declaration which is

required of the project proponent is to a similar effect.


69      We are unable to accept the submission that the disclosure required was of

reserved forests comprehended within a notification under sub-section (2) of
Section

20
of the Indian Forest Act 1927. Form 1 requires a disclosure of areas which are

important or sensitive for ecological reasons, among them, being “forests”.          The

expression “forests” is used without reference to a statutory or artificial definition and

must hence incorporate a meaning which bears upon the ordinary description of the

term. The expression “forests”, means a forest as commonly understood, without

reference to a notification under the
Indian Forest Act
1927 or any other statutory

enactment. Such an interpretation will subserve the purpose of an EIA. The purpose

is to ensure that all relevant facets of the environment are noticed, that base-lines are

documented, and that the potential impact of a project or activity on the environment

is assessed. Forests are forests without reference to recognition in a statutory form

devised for a specific purpose.
70      The need to construe the expression ‘forests’ in a broad and generic sense

was emphasized in the decision of this Court in Godavarman (supra). This Court

held:
“4.
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
was enacted with a
              view to check further deforestation which ultimately results in
              ecological imbalance; and therefore, the provisions made
              therein for the conservation of forests and for matters
              connected therewith, must apply to all forests irrespective of
              the nature of ownership or classification thereof. The word
              ‘forest’ must be understood according to its dictionary
              meaning. This description covers all statutorily recognised
              forests, whether designated as reserved, protected or
              otherwise for the purpose of
Section 2(i)
of the Forest
              (Conservation) Act. The term ‘forest land’, occurring in
Section 2
, will not only include ‘forest’ as understood in the
44
PART D
             dictionary sense, but also any area recorded as forest in the
             government record irrespective of the ownership.”
71    Subsequently, in Okhla Bird Sanctuary (supra), this Court explained the

position:
“Almost all the orders and judgments of this Court defining
             “forest” and “forest land” for the purpose of the
FC Act
were
             rendered in the context of mining or illegal felling of trees for
             timber or illegal removal of other forest produce or the
             protection of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries.”



In Okhla Bird Sanctuary (supra), trees had been planted with an intent to set up an

urban park. This Court found it “inconceivable” that those trees would turn into a

forest “within a span of ten to twelve years and the land, which was for agricultural

use would be converted into forest land”. Hence, the decision was based on a

factually distinguishable situation. The decision emphasises that in construing the

term forest, courts must have due regard both to text and to context.
72    In the context of the 2006 notification and the underlying purpose of facilitating

an EIA report, the expression ‘forests’ must receive its ordinary and natural

connotation. The effort must not be o overlook and destroy forests but to notice and

protect them.
73    Having said this, we must delve into the alternate submission that the EIA

report does, as a matter of fact, consider the prevalence of forested areas both in

Goa and in Maharashtra within the study area. In this context, para 2 of the Executive

Summary introducing the EIA report acknowledges that the “surrounding land use of

the airport site is predominantly forest land”. In the context of land environment, the

EIA report records that “forest is the predominant land use in the study area”. The
45
PART D
EIA report acknowledges that territories in Maharashtra fall within one kilometre from

the proposed greenfield airport. Villages falling in Goa and Maharashtra within the 10

kilometre radius were considered for assessment. Para 2.3.1 of Chapter II deals with

land use. Land use/land cover statistics for a 10 kilometre radius from the Mopa

airport in the State of Maharashtra have been tabulated. Among them is the

following:
Sr.No.              Description            Area (Sq.M.)      Area
                                                                              (Ha)
                 5                   Forest-Tree Clad       66341913.84       6634.19
                                     Area- Dense
Similarly para 4.4 in Chapter IV, which is titled ‘description of environment

statistically’, provides thus:
“Surrounding land use of the airport site is predominantly
              forest land. The northern and eastern side of site is reserve
              forest areas, whereas western side is barren and village
              cultivated land. The existing land use plan is attached as
              Annexure IX.”
74     The presence of a “diverse system set as dense and open forest, cultivated

lands, sand dune vegetation, wet lands and human habitation” is noticed in para 4.6

dealing with the biological environment. Annexure IX to the EIA report provides land

use/land cover maps for both Goa and Maharashtra in the study area. The maps in

Annexure IX cover forested areas in Maharashtra and Goa within an aerial boundary

of 10 kilometres from the project site. Annexure XI contains the hydro-geo-

morphological maps for Goa and Maharashtra.
75     Though the EIA report adverts to the presence of forests within the study area

in Goa and Maharashtra, we have to consider whether this by itself warrants the

grant of an EC inspite of the fact that there has been a patent failure on part of the
46
PART D
project proponent to make a transparent and candid disclosure of material facts in

Form 1. Information furnished in Form 1 is crucial to the preparation of the ToR by

the EAC. The EAC comprises of experts. It is constituted, among other reasons, for

the specific purpose of assessing the information furnished in Form 1 and preparing

comprehensive ToR. There is an intrinsic link between the disclosures in Form 1

which constitute the basis for formulating the ToR and between the ambit of the EIA

report required by the ToR and the final EIA report. The ToR guide the preparation of

the EIA report. A failure to disclose information in Form 1 impairs the functioning of

the EAC in the preparation of the ToR and in consequence, leads to preparation of a

deficient EIA report.
76    The submission that the EIA report deals with the prevalence of forested areas

and warrants the grant of an EC cannot be accepted for yet another reason. EACs

and SEACs are conferred with the authority to reject applications for the grant of an

EC at the stage of scoping itself, prior to the preparation of the ToR. The application

may be rejected on the basis of the information furnished by the project proponent in

Form 1. Claiming an EC as a matter of right merely because the EIA report has

assessed parameters that were omitted in Form 1, bypasses the authority of the EAC

and SEAC to reject an application at the preliminary stage and cannot be

countenanced. The regulatory authority is required to assess the final documents

submitted to it “strictly with reference to the ToR” and communicate to the EAC and

SEAC any discrepancies between the EIA report and the ToR. A deficient ToR on the

basis of the non-disclosure of material information in Form 1 impedes this process.


77    The failure on part of a project proponent to disclose material information in

Form 1 as stipulated under the 2006 notification has a cascading effect on the salient
47
PART E
objective which underlies the 2006 notification. The 2006 notification represents an

independent code with the avowed objective of balancing the development agenda

with the protection of the environment. An applicant cannot claim an EC, under the

2006 notification, based on substantial or proportionate compliance with the terms

stipulated in the notification. The terms of the notification lay down strict standards

that must be complied with by an applicant seeking an EC for a proposed project.

The burden of establishing environmental compliance rests on a project proponent

who intends to bring about a change in the existing state of the environment.

Whereas, in the present case, there has thus been a patent failure on part of the

project proponent to make mandatory disclosures stipulated in Form 1 under the

2006 notification, that must have consequences in law. There can be no gambles

with the environment: a ‘heads I win, tails you lose’ approach is simply unacceptable;

unacceptable if we are to preserve environmental governance under the rule of law.
E     Ecologically Sensitive Zones (ESZs)


78    The substratum of the case of the appellants is based on the following extract

contained in the EIA report:
“Ecologically Sensitive Zones Ministry of Environment and
             Forests had constituted a High Level Working Group (HLWG)
             under the Chairmanship of Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Member
             (Science), Planning Commission vide office order dated
             17.08.2012 to study the preservation of the ecology,
             environmental integrity and holistic development of the
             Western Ghats in view of their rich and unique biodiversity.
             HLWG submitted its report to the MoEF on 15th April 2013.
HLWG identified 37% of natural landscape having high
             biological richness, low forest fragmentation, low population
             density and containing Protected Areas, World Heritage Sites
             and Tiger and Elephant corridors as an Ecologically Sensitive
             Areas (ESA). The present proposed airport site is falling
             under Pernem taluka of North Goa district. The Pernem
             taluka has not been included in the Ecologically Sensitive
             Areas submitted by HLWG. The MoEF order on ESA is
             attached as Annexure XVI.”
48
PART E
According to Ms Shenoy, the EIA report notices the Kasturirangan report submitted

on 15 April 2013. The submission is that the EIA report has conveniently glossed

over the areas adverted to by the Kasturirangan report as an ESZ. This includes

those areas which fall within the study area on the ground that Pernem taluka, where

the project site is situated, has not been included as an ESZ. In this context, reliance

is placed on a draft notification dated 3 October 2018 issued by MoEFCC under

which the Union Government has proposed to notify 56,825 square metres spread

across six states – Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu as

the Western Ghats ESZ. The preamble to the draft notification adverts to the steps

taken by the Union Government between 2013 and 2016 in pursuance of the report

of the HLWG. This includes draft notifications issued on 10 March 2014 and 4

September 2015. The draft notification dated 3 October 2018 emphasises the

importance of the Western Ghats as a global biodiversity hot spot:
“WHEREAS, Western Ghats is an important geological
             landform on the fringe of the west coast of India and it is the
             origin of Godavari, Krishna, Cauvery and a number of other
             rivers and extends over a distance of approximately 1500
             kilometres from Tapti river in the north to Kanyakumari in the
             south with an average elevation of more than 600 metres and
             traverses through six States namely, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
             Goa, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu;
AND WHEREAS, Western Ghats is a global biodiversity
             hotspot and a treasure trove of biological diversity and it
             harbours many endemic species of flowering plants, endemic
             fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals and
             invertebrates and it is also an important center of evolution of
             economically important domesticated plant species such as
             pepper, cardamom, cinnamom, mango and jackfruit;

             AND WHEREAS, Western Ghats has many unique habitats
             which are home to a variety of endemic species of flora and
             fauna such as Myristica swamps, the flat-topped lateritic
             plateaus, the Sholas and wetland and riverine Eco-systems;

             AND WHEREAS, UNESCO has included certain identified
             parts of Western Ghats in the UNESCO World Natural
             Heritage List because Western Ghats is a Centre of origin of
49
PART E
             many species as also home for rich endemic biodiversity and
             hence a cradle for biological evolution;”


79    Ms Shenoy has emphasised that sixteen villages in the Taluka of Sawantwadi

of the district of Sindhudurg which fall within the study area have been mapped as an

ESZ in the annexure to the draft notification dated 3 October 2018. They are:
“State                District        Taluk        Village Name

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Tamboli

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Kumbhavade

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Degave

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Banda

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Padve
                                                                 Majgaon

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Ronapal

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Padve

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Dandeli

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Madura

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Dingne

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Aros

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Galel

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Kondure

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Satarda

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Dongarpal

              Maharashtra           Sindhudurg      Sawantwadi   Sateli   Tarf
                                                                 Soundal”




80    A comparison of the above villages with Annexure IX of the EIA report
indicates that several of the above villages which have been mapped as ESZs in the
50
PART E
draft notification fall within the 10 kilometre buffer from the project site. Hence, the

submission of Ms Shenoy merits a close analysis.


81    The EIA report has rested content with the observation that Pernem taluka,

where the project site is situated, is not an ESZ. That is not sufficient or adequate,

since the purpose of the EIA report is to make an assessment of ESZs which fall

within the study area. Mr Nadkarni’s response to the above submission is that: (i)

neither the Mopa plateau nor Pernem taluka constitute a part of the Western Ghats;
(ii) the HLWG chaired by Dr Kasturirangan recommended a prohibition of specified

activities while for other activities, the 2006 notification was required to be followed;
(iii) the EIA report, while considering the project, has also adverted to the

Kasturirangan report; and (iv) infrastructure projects except in the prohibited category

are permissible, subject to an EIA.
82    The report of the HLWG dated 15 April 2013 recommends that there should be

a complete ban on mining, quarrying and sand mining activity in the ESZ. Similarly, it

recommends that no thermal power project should be allowed in ESZs and that all

‘red category’ industries should be strictly banned. Building and construction projects

of 20,000 square metres and above should not be allowed. However, all other

infrastructure and development projects, which have been recommended, should be

subject to the grant of ECs under Category ‘A’ projects of the 2006 notification.


83    The Union Government issued a notification on 13 November 2013 in

pursuance of
Section 5
of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 to the effect that

from the date of the issuance of those directions, no pending case or fresh case shall

be considered by the EACs/MOEF or SEACs/SEIAAs covering the following

industries:
51
PART E
(a) Mining, quarrying and sand mining;
(b) Thermal power plants;
(c)   Building and construction projects of 20,000 square metres area and above;
(d) Township and area development projects with an area of 50 hectares and above

      and/or with a built-up area of 1,50,000 square metres and above; and
(e) ‘Red category’ industries.
84     The submission of the ASG is that there is no prohibition on setting up a

Category ‘A’ project in an ESZ. An infrastructure project such as an airport does not

fall within the range of prohibited activities. What is necessary is that the project must

be assessed in terms of the 2006 notification.
85     The glaring deficiency which emerges from the EIA report is its failure to notice

the existence of ESZs within a buffer distance of 10 kilometres of the project site. On

one hand, the EIA report takes note of the HLWG report dated 15 April 2013. But, on

the other hand, the EIA report ignores the existence of ESZs within the study area on

the ground that the project site is not situated in an ESZ. That, as we have seen,

can never be accepted as an adequate response. The purpose and object of the EIA

report is to map areas, understand their vulnerabilities, and conduct a study on a

scientific basis of the impact of the proposed project on an ecologically sensitive

terrain. The EIA report fails to meet a classical requirement of administrative law: to

take into account a relevant consideration namely, that within the study area which

has to be considered, there is the presence of ESZs.
86     In deducing the impact of a proposed activity on an ESZ, it is not sufficient to

take recourse to a generic assessment of a proposed activity on the ecology of the
52
PART F
study area. The EIA report must factor in those specific features which make an area

ecologically sensitive. These would encompass all aspects of environmental concern

which render the area ecologically sensitive. This would include wet lands, water

sources, water bodies, costal zones, biospheres, mountains and forests. The

vulnerabilities of each of them must be studied as distinctive components together

with a holistic analysis of their existence in a chain of bio-diversity. Where an area is

ecologically sensitive because of the presence of flora or fauna requiring protection,

that must be specifically adverted to and studied. The deficiency of the EIA report

emanates from its failure to notice that the purpose of the study was not only to

determine whether the project site is ecologically sensitive. Confining itself to this

aspect, the EIA report failed to consider a crucial and relevant consideration.
F     Sampling Points


87    The submission of the appellants is that the Guidance manual requires the
collection of primary data through measures and field studies in the study area within

10 kilometres radius from the ARP. Secondary data has to be collected within a 15

kilometres aerial distance for the parameters mentioned in Colum 9(III) of Form 1 of

the 2006 notification. In the present case, it was urged that not a single sampling

station with reference to any of the parameters is situated in Maharashtra. As a

result, no sampling sites for any of the parameters fall within 40% of the study area.

Consequently, no primary data collection was done despite the carrying out of two

samples in 2011 and 2014 respectively. In response to this submission, it has been

urged that all sampling points were based on para 4.1 of the Guidance manual. As a

result, it was submitted that areas within Goa and Maharashtra were studied along
53
PART F
with impact studies. In order to assess the submission, it is necessary to refer to

relevant aspects of the EIA report:
F.1   Air quality


88    In order to study the ambient air quality in terms of Suspended Particulate

Matter, Respirable Particulate Matter, SO2, NOX, CO and HC, Ambient Air Quality

monitoring stations were set up at six locations. They are at Sinechaadvin, Katwal,

Mopa village, Pernem, Nagzor and Patradevi. All are in Goa. The location at

Patradevi was on the border shared by Goa with Maharashtra. The study area

extended to a radial distance of 10 kilometres from the ARP. We accept the

submission of the ASG that they would hence cover areas falling within both Goa and

Maharashtra. Para 4.1.2 of Chapter IV of the EIA report sets out the baseline data

collected at the monitoring stations. Since the entire study area within a radius of 10

kilometres was considered for monitoring air quality, we accept the submission that

the location of the sampling points within Goa did not preclude the monitoring of air

quality within the study area.
F.2   Water quality


89    Para 4.2 of the EIA report states that ground water quality was measured at

four locations: Mopa village, Pernem, Dargal and Patradevi marked within 10

kilometres of the study area. The surface water quality was measured at three

locations: Chapora river, Tiraikol river and Nala near Mopa village within 10

kilometres of the study area. The impact assessment is contained in the EIA report.

The Mopa plateau is at a height of 155 metres above mean sea level and water from

the plateau flows down to the rivers in the State of Goa. The laterite plateau is an
54
PART F
important source of drainage by providing natural channels for water. The impact of a

greenfield airport on the closing of natural channels which feed the water bodies has

not been scientifically mapped or studied.
F.3        Noise quality


90         While monitoring the noise quality, the EIA report covered a radius of 10
kilometres. In order to obtain baseline data of noise quality, nine monitoring stations

were chosen in the study area. While it is true that all nine locations were situated in

the State of Goa, one (Patradevi) was situated on the border shared between Goa

and Maharashtra.              The EIA report contains an impact study and the study area

covered includes both the states.
F.4        Flora and fauna


91         The EIA report indicates that the area surrounding the site for the proposed
airport has dense forests49. These total up to nearly 6,634.19 hectares50. Ms Shenoy

has urged that it is impossible that the fauna found by the project proponent through

both primary sampling and secondary sources was only limited to animals such as:
domestic dog, cat and cattle, common house mouse, rat and mongoose, jackal and

the three striped palm squirrel. This, in her submission, is a clear indication that the

EIA report is faulty and clearly incorrect.
92         While dealing with the above submissions, it is necessary to note that the

Guidance manual contains a specific reference to the collection of data of sensitive




49   See for instance para 2.0 of the executive summary and para 2.3.1 of Chapter I
50   See Para 2.3.1, Chapter II
55
PART F
habitats and wild/endangered species in the project area. The Guidance manual

stipulates thus:
“Data on sensitive habitats, wild or endangered species in the
             project area also is to be collected from Zoological Survey of
             India (ZSI), Botanical Survey of India (BSI), Wildlife Institute
             of India (WII) and Ministry of Earth Sciences. Wildlife
             symbolizes the functioning efficiency of the entire eco system.
             Just as wild flora needs special treatment for preservation
             and growth, wild fauna as well deserves specific conservatory
             pursuits for posterity”.
93    The grievance is that no data has been collected from the State of

Maharashtra and all secondary data collected by the project proponent related only

to the State of Goa. There is substance in the submission which has been urged on

behalf of the appellant. A reading of the counter affidavit filed by the State of Goa

would seem to support the appellant’s submission. It is stated:
“I say that several recognised publications and research
             papers were referred to in order to verify and assess the data
             collected, to name a few of the publications:
i.     Birds of Goa by Heinz Lainer & Rahul Alvares;
             ii.    The Goan Jungle Book by Nirmal Kulkarni;
iii.   A photographic guide to Butterflies of Goa by Parag
                    Ragnekar;
iv.    Flora of Goa, Diu, Daman, Dadra and Nagarhaveli
                    (Vol.1) by RS Rao;
             v.     Flora of Goa, Diu, Daman, Dadra and Nagarhaveli
                    (Vol.2) by RS Rao;
             vi.    Red data book published by Botanical Survey of
                    India;
vii.   Study materials published in Goa ENVIS Centre were
                    also referred.”


The appellant, on the other hand, has sought to rely upon several independent

studies including the following:
“a. A rapid survey to assess mammal presence at Barazan
             Plateau, Mopa, Goa, India conducted by Girish Punjabi
             (Wildlife Biologist) and Atul S Borker (Full Member of
             IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group) that Schedule I species
             such as gaur, leopard and Indian Pangolin; Schedule II
56
PART F
             species such as giant squirrel, common palm civet; Schedule
             III species such as sambar, wild pig and Schedule IV species
             such as Indian hare, Indian porcupine.
The report also mentions the presence of the Sawantwadi –
             Dodamarg wildlife corridor within the 10 km proposed project
             site.
b. Report on one day survey conducted to find evidence of
             Otter presence at Mopa, Goa conducted by Atul Borker (Full
             Member of IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group) that found that
             a perennial stream on the plateau had presence of the
             smooth coated otter, that falls within Schedule II of the
             Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
c. Report on two days survey to find evidence of plant and
             bird species at Mopa Plateau conducted by Aparna Watve
             (Ecologist) and Sanjay Thakur (Wildlife Biologist) that found
             Schedule I species such as the Indian peafowl and the
             Dipcadi concanese which is critically endangered. The study
             clearly mentions that the EIA study is entire deficit as it does
             not accurately consider the flora and fauna of the area as well
             as the number of trees to be cut.”



94    We find that the collection of both primary and secondary data of fauna in the

EIA report was perfunctory. The primary study is not based on data collected from

acknowledged sources such as the Zoological Survey of India, Wildlife Institute of

India and Ministry of Earth Sciences as required under the Guidance manual.
Similarly, as regard avi-faunal studies, the EIA report lists 385 plant species in table

4.15 of Chapter IV, titled ‘Description on Environment’. It also states that 86 species

of birds were observed during the survey in the 10 kilometre study area from the

proposed site. Column 9 (III) of Form 1 refers to “areas” in the following terms:
“areas which are used by protected, important or sensitive
             species of flora or fauna for breeding, foraging, nesting,
             resting, over wintering or migration”.
The above column was left blank by the project proponent in Form 1. According to

the Guidance manual, secondary data has to be collected within an aerial distance of
57
PART F
15 kilometres for the parameters specifically specified in column 9(III) of Form 1 of

the 2006 notification. This was evidently not done. A careful avi-faunal study was

necessary, having due regard to the fact that the proposed project is an airport site.
Bearing in mind the profile of airport operations, foraging or nesting by bird species in

and around the airport must not be discarded. It must be accepted that in a project

involving the setting up of an airport, the EIA report must deal with the impact of the

airport on birds and likewise the impact of birds on aircraft operations.


F.5   Felling of Trees


95    Para 2.1.5 of the executive summary to the EIA report deals with the biological

environment. Para 2.1.5 stipulates thus:
“The area required for proposed airport has only few
             trees, mainly bushes. These will be cleared during site
             preparation.”                      (Emphasis supplied)



Similarly, Chapter II which deals with project description specifies in para 2.3.1 that

“vegetation and trees are sparse at the site”. That the trees which were required to

be felled were far from “few” is evident from the reply filed by the State of Goa in the

present proceedings where it has been stated that permissions were granted for the

felling of 54,676 trees. The EIA report ignored them. The submission in the EIA

report that there were only sparse trees is sought to be explained by the state from

the perspective of the large area of the land proposed for the project. It is sought to

be explained that since the total area is 2,133 acres, the number of trees would

proportionately work out to about 25 trees in an area of one acre (about one tree in

an area of 160 square metres). In terms of the order passed by the Bombay High

Court in the PIL, to which we have adverted earlier, the Principal Chief Conservator

of Forests, Goa passed an order on 2 April 2018 providing for (i) the enumeration of
58
PART F
all trees; (ii) exploring the possibility of transplanting existing trees which could be

safely transplanted into ground areas; (iii) issuance of tree cutting permission by the

Deputy Conservator of Forests; and (iv) planting of ten times the number of trees

felled by the concessionaire under the supervision of the Forest Department.
96         On 6 February 2018, the Deputy Conservator of Forests had granted

permission for felling of 21,703 trees. Following the dismissal of an appeal under
Section 15
of the Goa, Daman and Diu Preservation of Trees Act 1984 filed by the

Federation of Rainbow Warriors, a Writ Petition was filed before the Bombay High

Court51. The High Court set aside the order of the Deputy Conservator of Forests and

remanded the proceedings to the Principal Chief Conservator who passed the order

which has been noted above. Following the order of the Principal Chief Conservator,

54,676 trees were enumerated. The competent authority granted permission for the

felling of trees thereafter on the following dates: (i) 1,422 trees by an order dated 20

April 2018; (ii) 18,408 trees by an order dated 24 July 2018 and (iii) 33,298 trees by

an order dated 1 October 2018. Following this exercise, the felling of trees was

completed on 18 January 2019. The Bombay High Court having directed that the

order of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests shall be subject to the specific

permission of the NGT in the pending proceedings, a Miscellaneous Application was

moved before the NGT. While disposing of the main appeal, the NGT also disposed

of the Miscellaneous Application and under the head of ‘Biological Environment’, the

following directions have been issued:
“E. Biological Environment
1. Efforts be made to transplant the trees to other locations
                      in the same vicinity by using appropriate mechanical
                      devices which are available these days.
51   WP No. 1 of 2018
59
PART F
2. Efforts be made to plant indigenous species which are tall
                in size rather than small saplings.
3. Concerns have been raised by appellants with regard to
                plant species ‘Dipcadi concanense’ which has been
                claimed to be a threatened plant. This claim of the
                appellants have been negated by the respondent by
                producing a documentation of Botanical Survey of India,
                Western Regional Centre, Pune, Maharashtra titled as “A
                Note on Occurrence and Distribution of Dipcadi
                concanense”. By invoking Precautionary Principle, we
                direct the Project Proponent to draw up a Conservancy by
                Plan/Scheme for ‘Dipcadi concanense’ in collaboration
                with Forest Department, State of Goa and Botanical
                Survey of India and ensure its implementation.”
97    We express our serious displeasure with the manner in which the EIA report

made an attempt to gloss over the existence of trees. The EIA report prevaricated by

recording that the area required for the proposed airport has only a few trees, mostly

bushes. The EIA report states that vegetation and trees are sparse at the site. A

photograph and a google map image are put forth as illustrations in figure 2.3 of

Chapter II. To realise later that the project involved the felling of 54,676 trees is

indicative of the cavalier approach to the issue and a process of fact finding which is

parsimonious with the truth. Post facto explanations are inadequate to deal with a

failure of due process in the field of environmental governance. The State of Goa

would have us gloss over the felling of trees by submitting that 54,676 trees over a

project area of 2,133 acres averages out to 25 trees per acre or one tree over an

area of 160 square metres. This is a fallacious approach to the issue. Mathematical

averages cannot displace factual data about the actual number of trees which were

affected by the project. The EIA report ought to have scrutinized the number of trees,

their nature and longevity. Issues such as the extent to which the trees or some of

them were capable of being transplanted had to be considered in the EIA report. The

location of the trees is also significant. In a given case, if the trees appear in clusters
60
PART F
or in a dense formation in segments of the project site, it would be necessary to

determine whether felling all of them was necessary for the project to be

implemented.
98    In the written submissions which have been filed by the State of Goa, it has

been submitted that of the 54,676 tees which were felled: (i) 32,193 trees

representing 59% had a girth of 30 to 50 centimeters; (ii) 19,903 trees representing

36% had a girth of 50 to 100 centimeters; and (iii) ‘only 2,580 trees’ had a girth

exceeding 100 centimeters.
The Goa, Daman and Diu Preservation of Trees Act,

1984
defines the expression “tree” in
Section 2(j)
in the following terms:
“
S. 2(j)
- “tree” means any woody plant whose branches
              spring from and are supported upon the trunk or the body and
              whose trunk or body is not less than ten centimeters in
              diameter at a height of one meter from the ground level and
              includes coconut palm.”



This definition has been highlighted to indicate that it incorporates a stringent

meaning of the expression ‘trees’. The point, however, is simple: there was a glaring

omission of the factual existence of as many as 54,676 trees in the EIA report. For

project proponents, the environment may not possess a human voice. But the

purpose of prescribing an EIA report is precisely to undertake a baseline study on all

aspects of the environment and to anticipate the impact of a projected activity on the

environment. Ignoring any component of the environment amounts to a serious

dereliction of duty which detracts from the rule of law in matters of environmental

governance.
99    The order of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests mandating

transplantation, where possible, and the plantation of ten trees for every tree felled

provides a measure of rectification. But there is a reason why issues pertaining to
61
PART G
vegetational cover must be taken seriously in the EIA process. The formula of

planting a set number of trees for every existing tree felled must be alive to the fact

that the survival of new plantations is replete with uncertainty. The survival of

transplanted trees is equally a matter of uncertainty. Though the development of

infrastructure may necessitate the felling of trees, the process stipulated under the

2006 notification must be transparent, candid and robust. A regulatory regime for

environmental governance is based on the hypothesis that all stakeholders will act

with rectitude. Hiding significant components of the environment from scrutiny is not

an acceptable modality to secure project approvals. There was a serious lacuna in

regard to disclosures and appraisal on this aspect of the controversy.
G     Public Consultation


100   The importance of public consultation is underscored by the 2006 notification.

Public consultation, as it states, is “the process by which the concerns of local

affected persons and others who have a plausible stake in the environmental impacts

of the project or activity are ascertained with a view to take into account all the

material concerns in the project or activity design as appropriate”. This postulates two

elements. They have both, an intrinsic and an instrumental character. The intrinsic

character of public consultation is that there is a value in seeking the views of those

in the local area as well as beyond, who have a plausible stake in the project or

activity. Public consultation is a process which is designed to hear the voices of those

communities which would be affected by the activity. They may be affected in terms

of the air which they breathe, the water which they drink or use to irrigate their lands,

the disruption of local habitats, and the denudation of environmental eco-systems

which define their existence and sustain their livelihoods.
62
PART G
101     Public consultation involves a process of confidence building by giving an

important role to those who have a plausible stake. It also recognizes that apart from

the knowledge which is provided by science and technology, local communities have

an innate knowledge of the environment. The knowledge of local communities is

transmitted by aural and visual traditions through generations. By recognizing that

they are significant stakeholders, the consultation process seeks to preserve

participation as an important facet of governance based on the rule of law.

Participation protects the intrinsic value of inclusion.


102     The 2006 notification postulates:
(i)     A public hearing at or in close proximity to the project site to ascertain the

        views of “locally affected persons”;
(ii)    Obtaining written responses from “other concerned” individuals having a

        “plausible stake” in the environmental aspects of the project or the activity;
(iii)   The duty of the SPCB to conduct hearings and to forward the proceedings to

        the regulatory authority within the stipulated time;
(iv)    Placing on the website of the Pollution Control Board a summary of the EIA

        report in the prescribed format and the making available of the draft EIA report

        by the regulatory authority on a written request by any person concerned, for

        inspection;
(v)     The duty of the applicant to address all material concerns expressed during

        the process of public consultation;
(vi)    The making of appropriate changes in the draft EIA and EMP; and
(vii)   The submission of the final EIA report by the applicant to the regulatory

        authority for appraisal.
63
PART G
Each of these features is crucial to the success of a public consultation process.

Public consultation cannot be reduced to a mere incantation or a procedural formality

which has to be completed to move on to the next stage. Underlying public

consultation is the important constitutional value that decisions which affect the lives

of individuals must, in a system of democratic governance, factor in their concerns

which have been expressed after obtaining full knowledge of a project and its

potential environmental effects.
103   Apart from the intrinsic value of public consultation, it serves an instrumental

function as well. The purpose of ascertaining the views of stakeholders, is to account

for all the material concerns in the design of the proposed project or activity. For this

reason, the process of public consultation involves several important stages. The

Pollution Control Board is under a mandate to forward the proceedings to the

regulatory authority. The project proponent must address all material environmental

concerns and make appropriate changes in the draft EIA and EMP. The project

proponent may even submit a supplementary report to the draft EIA. Each of these

elements is crucial to the design features of the 2006 notification. A breach will

render the process vulnerable to challenge on the ground that: (i) significant

environmental concerns have not been taken into account; (ii) there was an absence

of a full disclosure when the EIA report was put up for consultation; and (iii) concerns

which have been expressed by persons affected by the project have not been

adequately dealt with or analysed.
104   The public consultation was held on 1 February 2015 at Mopa. Nearly 70

persons spoke on the occasion and 1,586 persons signed the attendance sheet.
64
PART G
1,150 representations were received. Some of the environmental concerns

expressed during the public hearing are catalogued below:
(i)      Mopa plateau has multiple water sheds and the discharge of water goes down

         to the rivers;
(ii)     Nearly forty springs would be affected along with flora and fauna;
(iii)    The public hearing had been conducted in an area where the land was barren

         and with no plantation;
(iv)     The impact on river Chapora, which is within a 10 kilometre radius from the

         project, has not been adequately analysed;
(v)      Mopa plateau has a natural mechanism for ground water recharge;
(vi)     Protection of the Western Ghats is necessary, particularly with the view to not

         disturb flora and fauna;
(vii)    The EIA report has not been made available to the affected areas and Gram

         Panchayats in the buffer zone;
(viii)   Local plantations would be affected;
(ix)     The number of trees to be felled by the project proponent has not been

         specified in the EIA report;
(x)      The Dodamarg Wildlife Sanctuary had been ‘sanitized’ by the High Court;
(xi)     Forest clearance had not been obtained;

(xii)    The sacred groves of the area have not been described, including the Barazan

         which will be lost;
(xiii)   The slopes sustain cashew plantations with nearly forty lakh cashew trees

         resulting in an annual income of Rs Fifty crores; and
(xiv)    No study has been carried out in the 10 kilometre radius falling in Maharashtra.
65
PART G
105        These concerns are at the forefront of the debate in the present case. What is

significant, is the manner in which they were projected before the EAC at its 149th

meeting on 26 June 2015 where the project proponent made a presentation. The

Minutes of the meeting recorded the following observations of the project proponent:
“x. Public Hearing was conducted on 01.02.2015 at Simechen
                   Adven, Mopa, Goa. The major issues raised during public
                   hearing and responses sought from the project
                   proponent related to employment opportunities.”

                                                            (Emphasis supplied)



On the basis of a factual analysis, Ms Shenoy has submitted that only seven out of

the 68 objections dealt with the issue of employment. Evidently, the project

proponent failed to address the other significant concerns in the manner which is

required by the 2006 notification.
106        In
Utkarsh Mandal v Union of India52
, the Delhi High Court has succinctly

summarized the duty of the EAC to apply its mind to the objections raised in the

course of public hearings:
“It is that body that has to apply its collective mind to the
                   objections and not merely the MoEF which has to consider
                   such objections at the second stage. We therefore hold that
                   in the context of the EIA Notification dated 14th September
                   2006 and the mandatory requirement of holding public
                   hearings to invite objections it is the duty of the EAC, to whom
                   the task of evaluating such objections has been delegated, to
                   indicate in its decision the fact that such objections, and the
                   response thereto of the project proponent, were considered
                   and the reasons why any or all of such objections were
                   accepted or negatived. The failure to give such reasons
                   would render the decision vulnerable to attack on the ground
                   of being vitiated due to non-application of mind to relevant
                   materials and therefore arbitrary.”




52   (2009) SCC Online Del 3836
66
PART H
107   Crucial objections and environmental concerns which were raised during the

consultative process were reduced to a single issue by the project proponent before

the EAC: the need for employment opportunities. The project proponent failed in its

duty to inform the EAC. The record does not indicate a critical appraisal or analysis

by the EAC. The EAC was duty bound to apply its mind to the environmental

concerns raised by stakeholders. The duty of the project proponent to place fairly all

the environmental concerns raised during the public hearing is the crucial link in the

appraisal by the EAC. The Minutes of the meeting indicate that there was no fair and

complete disclosure of the objections which were raised during the public hearing

before the EAC. There is evidently a failure in the process of applying and

implementing the norms
laid down in
the 2006 notification in this regard.
H     Appraisal by the EAC


108   Appraisal by the EAC is structured and defined by the 2006 notification. The

process of appraisal is defined to mean “a detailed scrutiny” by the EAC of the

application and other documents like the EIA report and the outcome of the public

consultation, including the public hearing proceedings, submitted by the applicant to

the regulatory authority for the grant of an EC. The EAC is under a mandate to

conduct the process of appraisal in “a transparent manner”. On the conclusion of

these proceedings, the EAC has to make “categorical recommendations” to the

regulatory authority either for: (i) the grant of a prior environmental clearance on

stipulated terms and conditions; or (ii) the rejection of the application. The

recommendations made by the EAC to the regulatory authority must be based on

“reasons”.
67
PART H
                              th
109   The EAC, at its 149 meeting held on 26 June 2015, considered the EIA report

and sought a clarification from the project proponent on the following six aspects:
“i. There is a need to superimpose the layout plan showing
             the drainage pattern including natural drainage, construction
             in the area on superimposed map showing clear topography
             of the region;
ii. 10 year data regarding rain fall in the area;

             iii. Justification on sustainability of existing traffic and
             transportation arrangements especially at inter-section points
             of the approach road to the airport needs to be submitted;

             iv. A traffic circulation plan needs to be evolved for smooth
             running of traffic in the area;
v. Measures taken to comply with
the CPC
B guidelines
             formulated for noise pollution control in airport areas to be
             submitted; and

             vi. Minimum 20% energy conservation measures should be
             adopted incorporating provisions for use of LED, star rated
             ACs etc. Revised Energy Conservation Plan to be submitted.”
110   A representation was received from the Federation of Rainbow Warriors,

consequent to which the consideration was deferred and the project proponent was

requested to submit a “point-wise reply to the issues raised” in the representation.

The EAC, at its 152nd meeting held on 20 October 2015, observed that the project

proponent had provided “pointwise clarifications to the concerns raised by the

‘NGO’”. The EAC noted thus:
•   “The EIA report has been updated by the PP after taking
                 into account the issues raised in the public hearing and
                 the same has been put in public domain.
•   The project is outside the ESZ delineated by the Dr
                 Kasturirangan Committee and TERI.
•   The project envisages construction of rain water
                 harvesting pits within the plot area, which would
                 contribute to ground water recharge.          Hence, the
                 objection of NGO in this regard does not hold.
•   The biological data in respect of flora and fauna was
                 collected by the functional area experts of M/s Engineers
                 India Limited and not by M/s Pragati Labs stationed at
68
PART H
                Goa during November, 2014 to January, 2015 for
                collection of ambient air quality, noise, water quality, soil,
                socio-economics.”



Following the above statement, the EAC recommended the grant of an EC subject to

certain conditions. Para 3.1.2 of the Minutes of the EAC is as follows:
“The Committee noted the peculiar circumstances of the case
             and the difficulties in land acquisition which led to delay in
             preparation of the EIA report, and the larger public interest
             involved.
Keeping in view the fact that the project proponent has not
             concealed facts and circumstances of the case and the
             project is in the public interest, the Ministry may take an
             appropriate view on the objection that the public hearing
             could not have been held, in the absence of valid TOR,
             though the validity has been extended twice and regularized
             subsequently. The Committee also noted that the public
             hearing was attended by about 3000 people and hence there
             is substantive and active public participation as required
             under the law for public consultation.
The PP further provided their reply to the rebuttal by the said
             NGO on various issues.
The EAC, after deliberations, recommended the project for
             grant of EC subject to the above and the following:-
•   The project proponent shall ensure availability of
                     adequate land at the junction of the Mopa Airport
                     road and Mumbai/Goa NH 17 for traffic circulation/
                     management and to provide for all the traffic
                     interchanges and proposed clover.
•   The approach and exit roads to the airport would be
                     approved from the NHAI and should be according to
                     IRC norms.
•   A perusal of the Topo sheet superimposed on the
                     runway area indicates that the extreme end of the
                     runway is covering the drainage area partly. The
                     drainage area which is under the runway needs to be
                     channelized. The area between the parallel taxi way
                     and run way needs to be handled carefully to drain
                     the water from the area in the outfall.”
69
PART H
111     The above explanation must be assessed with reference to the norm that the

EAC is required to submit reasons for its recommendation. The above extract

indicates that the EAC has adverted to the following circumstances:
(i)     The “peculiar circumstances” of the case;

(ii)    The difficulties in land acquisition which led to a delay in the preparation of the

        EIA report;

(iii)   The “larger public interest” involved;

(iv)    The project proponent had not concealed facts and circumstances of the case;

(v)     The project is in the public interest; and

(vi)    The project proponent had provided a reply to the rebuttal by Rainbow

        Warriors on various issues.
This analysis of the EIA report is, to say the least, sketchy and perfunctory and

discloses an abdication of its functions by the EAC. The requirement that the EAC

must record reasons, besides being mandatory under the 2006 notification, is of

significance for two reasons:
(i)     The EAC makes a recommendation to the regulatory authority in terms of the

        2006 notification. The regulatory authority has to consider the recommendation

        and convey its decision to the project proponent. The regulatory authority, as

        para 8(ii) provides, shall normally accept the recommendations of the EAC.
Where it disagrees, it would request reconsideration, stating the reasons for its

        disagreement. In turn, the EAC will consider the observations of the regulatory

        authority and furnish its views within a stipulated period; and
(ii)    The grant of an EC is subject to an appeal before the NGT under
Section 16
of

        the NGT Act 2010.
70
PART H
The reasons furnished by the EAC for its recommendation are a basic link in the

ultimate decision of the regulatory authority. They constitute substantive material

which will be considered by the Tribunal when it considers a challenge to the grant of

an EC.
112   What, then, do the reasons which have been furnished by the EAC tell us?

The EAC relies on the “peculiar circumstances of the case” as the basis of its

recommendation. What the peculiar circumstances are, is left for pure guess work or

surmise. The EAC refers to the delay in acquisition proceedings, a larger public

interest and the fact that the project proponent “has not concealed facts and

circumstances”. Each one of the reasons which has weighed with the EAC betrays a

lack of comprehension of the true nature of its function under the 2006 notification.

The EAC has failed to consider relevant circumstances bearing on the environmental

impact of the project and has instead considered circumstances extraneous to its

function. That the project proponent, according to the EAC, has not concealed facts

and circumstances is not reason enough to warrant a grant of an EC. Moreover, even

this hypothesis (as we have seen earlier) is incorrect. There is no analysis of the EIA

report. The EAC has failed to answer to the call to its expertise.


113   Clause (vi) of para 8 of the 2006 notification stipulates thus:
“(vi) Deliberate concealment and/or submission of false or
             misleading information or data which is material to screening
             or scoping or appraisal or decision on the application shall
             make the application liable for rejection, and cancellation of
             prior environmental clearance granted on that basis.
             Rejection of an application or cancellation of a prior
             environmental clearance already granted, on such ground,
             shall be decided by the regulatory authority, after giving a
             personal hearing to the applicant, and following the principles
             of natural justice.”
71
PART H
Deliberate concealment or the submission of false or misleading information or data

material for screening, scoping, appraisal or decision on the application makes it

liable for rejection. That the project proponent must submit all information and data

without concealing relevant features is a basic hypothesis and expectation of the

2006 notification. The EAC has, in the brief reasons which are contained in para

3.1.2, not applied its mind at all to the environmental concerns raised in relation to

the project nor do its reasons indicate an appraisal of those concerns by evaluating

the impact of the project.
114   The EAC is an expert body. It must speak in the manner of an expert. Its remit

is to apply itself to every relevant aspect of the project bearing upon the environment.

It is not bound by the analysis which is conducted in the EIA report. It is duty bound

to analyse the EIA report. Where it finds it deficient it can adopt such modalities

which, in its expert decision-making capacity, are required. The reasons which are

furnished by the EAC constitute a live link between its processes and the outomce of

its adjudicatory function. In the absence of cogent reasons, the process by its very

nature, together with the outcome stands vitiated.
115   Mr ANS Nadkarni, learned ASG urged that the EAC had, in its 149th meeting,

sought additional information on six issues. Subsequently, at its 151st meeting, it

deferred consideration upon the representation filed by the Federation of Rainbow

Warriors and at its 152nd meeting, it analysed the response of the project proponent

to the representation. Hence, the EAC must be deemed to have applied its mind.

This approach is completely flawed. At its 149th meeting, the EAC specifically called

for a clarification on six issues. The next meeting was deferred. The Minutes of the

152nd meeting contain no assessment of whether the clarifications which were sought
72
PART I
by the EAC had been replied to its satisfaction by the project proponent.           The

objection to the modalities adopted by the EAC, however, are more fundamental. The

Minutes of the 152nd meeting indicate that the EAC primarily, if not exclusively, dealt

with the “pointwise clarifications” of the project proponent to the representation by the

Federation of Rainbow Warriors. Dealing with a representation is not exhaustive of

the function of the EAC.      Arguably, if no representation was received, or if a

representation submitted by an individual objector is found to be incorrect, that by

itself is no ground to recommend an EC.
116   The EAC, as an expert body, has to scrutinize all relevant aspects of the

project or activity proposed, including its impact on the environment. In taking that

decision, the EIA report is an input for its analysis. The scrutiny and appraisal has to

be undertaken by the EAC as an expert body and its reasons must reflect that this

has been done. As the Minutes indicate, the non-application of mind by the EAC is

evident with reference to the presence of 15 ESZs in the study area. The EAC notes

that the project is outside the ESZ delineated by the Kasturirangan Committee. In the

absence of a critical analysis, the EAC failed in discharging its duties under the 2006

notification. The recommendations of the EAC furnish a guide for the MoEFCC.

Indeed, the 2006 notification stipulates that the recommendations of the EAC would

normally be accepted. Consequently, a failure of due process before the EAC, as in

the present case, must lead to the invalidation of the EC.


I     The appellate jurisdiction of the NGT: the requirement of a merits
      review

117   The NGT is entrusted with appellate jurisdiction under
Section 16
of the NGT

Act 2010.
Section 16(h)
provides thus:
73
PART I
               “16 Tribunal to have appellate jurisdiction. - Any person
               aggrieved by,-
…
(h) an order made, on or after the commencement of the
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
, granting environmental
               clearance in the area in which any industries, operations or
               processes or class of industries, operations and processes
               shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to
               certain safeguards under the
Environment (Protection) Act,
               1986
(29 of 1986);”
Section 20
mandates that the Tribunal shall, while passing any order, decision or

award, apply the principles of sustainable development, the precautionary principle

and the polluter pays principle. Several decisions of this Court have given meaning to

these principles53.
118    The decision of the NGT indicates that several significant submissions were

urged before it. The entire analysis by the NGT is contained in one paragraph of its

judgment dated 21 August 2018 which is extracted below:
“27. We find that the Expert Appraisal Committee had before
               it point wise reply of the project proponent which we have
               already quoted above. Therein delay in land acquisition
               process and collection of fresh baseline data are mentioned.
               It is also mentioned that data for Maharashtra was also
               considered. Other issues duly explained are hydro-geological
               features and data with regard to flora and fauna, socio-
               economic profile, topography, vegetation, observance of due
               procedure in public hearing, relevance of study with regard to
               ecosensitive areas of Western Ghats, feasibility of proposed
               airport in terms of cost benefit analysis as well as
               environmental cost benefit analysis. EAC also considered the
               data compiled by various offices. Mere fact that different
               opinions have been expressed by other experts is not enough
               to hold that EAC did not apply its mind. The rehabilitation
               programme was also produced before the EAC”.
53Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v Union Of India
, (1996) 5 SCC 647;
M C Mehta v Kamal Nath
, (1997) 1 SCC
388;
M C Mehta v Union of India
, (1997) 2 SCC 353;
A P Pollution Control Board v Prof M V Nayudu (Retd
.
),
(1999) 2 SCC 718;
Narmada Bachao Andolan v Union of India
, (2000) 10 SCC 664; Indian Council for
Enviro
Legal Action v Union of India
, (2011) 8 SCC 161
74
PART I
The next paragraph contains a brief reference to the fact that the requirement of a

study over a distance of 15 kilometres is in regard to the collection of secondary data.
The above paragraph, in our view, does not fulfil the requirement of a merits review

by an expert adjudicatory body vested with appellate jurisdiction.


119
The NGT Act
provides for the constitution of a Tribunal consisting both of

judicial and expert members. The mix of judicial and technical members envisaged

by the statute is for the reason that the Tribunal is called upon to consider questions

which involve the application and assessment of science and its interface with the

environment. In order to be eligible for appointment as an expert member, a person

must fulfill the following qualifications prescribed in
Section 5(2)
:
“(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an
                    Expert Member, unless he,
(a)     has a degree in Master of Science (in physical
                    sciences or life sciences) with a Doctorate degree or Master
                    of Engineering or Master of Technology and has an
                    experience of fifteen years in the relevant field including five
                    years practical experience in the field of environment and
                    forests (including pollution control, hazardous substance
                    management, environment impact assessment, climate
                    change management, biological diversity management and
                    forest conservation) in a reputed National level institution; or
(b) has administrative experience of fifteen years including
                    experience of five years in dealing with environmental matters
                    in the Central or a State Government or in a reputed National
                    or State level institution.”



The NGT is an expert adjudicatory body on the environment.
120        In two of its previous decisions, the NGT has shown the path along with which

it must traverse in arriving at its decisions.
In
Save Mon Region Federation v Union

of India54
, the grant of an EC to a 780 Megawatts Hydroelectric Project in Tawang


54   2013 (1) All India NGT Reporter 1
75
PART I
district of Arunachal Pradesh was challenged. The NGT framed the question before it

in broad terms:
“…the material issue, therefore, that needs to be answered in
                    the present Appeal is as to whether the process of grant of
                    prior EC to the project in question suffers from vice of faulty
                    scoping process or not.”



Having reviewed the information furnished in Form 1 by the project proponent as well

as the multiple reports on record on the bird species involved in the site for the

proposed project, the NGT held that facts material to the case were not present

before the EAC and the consequent ‘vacuum in the EIA report’ lead to aberrations in

the appraisal process conducted by it. Suspending the EC granted to the project, the

NGT accepted the contention which was urged before it that the NGT has the

‘authority to take an appropriate decision on the facts placed before it’ and ‘set aside

or suspend the EC’.
Similarly, in
Shreeranganathan K P v Union of India55
, the grant of an EC to the

KGS Aranmula International Airport Project was challenged. The NGT found fault

with the process leading to up to the grant of the EC since sector specific issues had

not been dealt with. The NGT extensively reviewed the information submitted by the

project proponent in Form 1, the deficiencies in the EIA report, the process of

appraisal conducted by the EAC and the sector specific guidelines laid down with

regard to the constructions of airports and held thus:
“182. … a duty is cast upon the EAC or SEAC as the case
                    may be to apply the cardinal principle of Sustainable
                    Development and Principle of Precaution while screening,
                    scoping, and appraisal of the projects or activities. While so, it
                    is evident in the instant case that the EAC has miserably
                    failed in the performance of its duty not only as mandated by
                    the EIA Notification, 2006, but has also disappointed the legal
55   2014 ALL (I) NGT Reporter (1) (SZ) 1
76
PART I
                  expectations from the same. For a huge project as the one in
                  the instant case, the consideration for approval has been
                  done in such a cursory and arbitrary manner without taking
                  note of the implication and importance of environmental
                  issues. …Thus, the EAC has not conducted itself as
                  mandated by the EIA Notification, 2006 since it has not made
                  proper appraisal by considering the available materials and
                  objections in order to make proper evaluation of the project
                  before making a recommendation for grant of EC.
187…the Tribunal is of the considered opinion that there is no
                  option but to scrap the impugned EC granted by the MoEF to
                  the 3rd respondent/project proponent for setting up the
                  Aranmula airport”



121       The failure to consider materials on a vital issue and indeed the non-

consideration of vital issues raises a substantial question of law leading to the

invoking of the jurisdiction of this Court under
Section 22
of the NGT Act 2010. The

failure of process in the present case has been compounded by the absence of a

merits review by the NGT.
122       The learned ASG has placed reliance on the decision of this Court in
Lafarge

Umiam Mining Private Limited v Union of India56 (“Lafarge”
) to contend that the

failure to disclose the presence of trees should not lead to the invalidation of the EC.

In that case, an application was made under the 1994 notification for the grant of an

EC to a proposed limestone mining project at Nongtrai Village, East Khasi Hills

District, Meghalaya. EC was granted for the project in 2001. Pursuant to a letter by

the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests to the MoEF drawing attention to the non-

disclosure of forests, the project proponent applied for a revised EC and forest

clearance under the
Forest (Conservation) Act
1980. An ex post facto EC along with

forest clearance was granted in 2010. Challenging the grant of the EC, it was urged




56   (2011) 7 SCC 338
77
PART I
that there was a failing on part of the project proponent to disclose the presence of

forests on the proposed project site.
123   A three judge Bench of this Court rejected the challenge and upheld the grant

of the EC to the proposed project. This Court relied, among other factors, on the

following: (i) the mining of limestone in the Khasi Hills dates back to 1763 and is an

integral part of the culture of the Nongtrai Village; (ii) the site was cleared after

thorough consultation with the custodian of the land, who decided to lease the land

for the mining project following the loss of revenue caused due to mining by the

unorganized sector; (iii) the Headman of the Nongtrai and the village durbar, who

participated at the public hearing and filed written submissions before this Court,

supported the project and certified that no damage would be caused to adjacent

lands; (iv) at the stage of site clearance, the MoEF had before it certificates by the

Executive Committee, Khasi Hills Autonomous District Council and the DFO, Khasi

Hill Division, Shillong, certifying that there were no forests in the proposed project

site; (v) the DFO certified that that the proposed mining site was not a forest as

defined in Godavarman (supra); (vi) the 2006 notification was not applicable; and
(vii) the MoEF had, at multiple stages, sought clarifications from the project

proponent and had undertaken requisite care and caution to protect the environment.

Upholding the grant of the EC and the forest clearance, this Court held thus:
“120…The word “development” is a relative term. One
             cannot assume that the tribals are not aware of principles of
             conservation of forest. In the present case, we are satisfied
             that limestone mining has been going on for centuries in
             the area and that it is an activity which is intertwined with
             the culture and the unique landholding and tenure
             system of Nongtrai Village. On the facts of this case, we are
             satisfied with the due diligence exercise undertaken by MoEF
             in the matter of forest diversion. Thus, our order herein is
             confined to the facts of this case.”     (Emphasis supplied)
78
PART I
124       The decision of this Court in
Lafarge
(supra), was based on the facts

summarized above.
Significantly, the standard of judicial review which must be

applied in cases relating to the environment has been formulated by the three judge

Bench in
Lafarge
(supra). Chief Justice S H Kapadia noted that the doctrine of

proportionality must be applied to matters concerning the environment as part of

judicial review. The principles of judicial review in environmental matters have been

enunciated thus:
“In the circumstances, barring exceptions, decisions relating
                   to utilisation of natural resources have to be tested on the
                   anvil of the well-recognised principles of judicial review. Have
                   all the relevant factors been taken into account? Have any
                   extraneous factors influenced the decision? Is the decision
                   strictly in accordance with the legislative policy underlying the
                   law (if any) that governs the field? Is the decision consistent
                   with the principles of sustainable development in the sense
                   that has the decision-maker taken into account the said
                   principle and, on the basis of relevant considerations, arrived
                   at a balanced decision? Thus, the Court should review the
                   decision-making process to ensure that the decision of MoEF
                   is fair and fully informed, based on the correct principles, and
                   free from any bias or restraint.”
125       In a recent three judge Bench decision of this Court in
Mantri Techzone Pvt.

Ltd. v Forward Foundation57
, this Court had the occasion to construe the provisions

of
Section 22
of the NGT Act 2010.
Speaking for the Bench, Justice Abdul Nazeer

held that the test to determine whether a substantial question of law arises (within the

meaning of
Section 100
of CPC) was formulated in the decision of a Constitution

Bench in
Sir Chunilal v Mehta
and
Sons, Ltd. v Century Spinning and

Manufacturing58
, where it was held thus:
“The proper test for determining whether a question of law
                   raised in the case is substantial would, in our opinion, be
                   whether it is of general public importance or whether it directly

57   (2019) 4 SCALE 218
58   1962 Supp. (3) SCR 549
79
PART J
             and substantially affects the rights of the parties and if so
             whether it is either an open question in the sense that it is not
             finally settled by this Court or by the Privy Council or by the
             Federal Court or is not free from difficulty or calls for
             discussion of alternative views. If the question is settled by
             the highest court or the general principles to be applied in
             determining the question are well settled and there is a mere
             question of applying those principles or that the plea raised is
             palpably absurd the question would not be a substantial
             question of law.”



Re-appreciation of the ‘factual matrix’ has been held to be distinct from a substantial

question of law. In the present case, we have indicated the basis for the invocation of

the jurisdiction of this Court under
Section 22
. There was a failure to follow binding

norms under the 2006 notification. There were serious flaws in the decision-making

process. Relevant material has been excluded from consideration and extraneous

circumstances were borne in mind. The EAC as an expert body abdicated its

obligations to make an expert determination based on reasons. The NGT as an

adjudicatory body failed to exercise the jurisdiction entrusted to it under
Section 16(h)
read with
Section 20
of the NGT Act 2010 by merely deferring to the decision to

recommend and grant an EC. The parameters in regard to the existence of

substantial questions of law have hence been established in the classical or

conventional sense of that expression.
J     Environmental Rule of Law


126   Fundamental to the outcome of this case is a quest for environmental

governance within a rule of law paradigm. Environmental governance is founded on

the need to promote environmental sustainability as a crucial enabling factor which

ensures the health of our eco system.
80
PART J
127     Since the Stockholm Conference, there has been a dramatic expansion in

environmental laws and institutions across the globe. In many instances, these laws

and institutions have helped to slow down or reverse environmental degradation.
However, this progress is also accompanied, by a growing understanding that there

is a considerable implementation gap between the requirements of environmental

laws and their implementation and enforcement – both in developed and developing

countries alike.59 The environmental rule of law seeks to address this gap.


128     The environmental rule of law provides an essential platform underpinning the

four pillars of sustainable development— economic, social, environmental, and

peace.60 It imbues environmental objectives with the essentials of rule of law and

underpins the reform of environmental law and governance. 61 The environmental rule

of law becomes a priority particularly when we acknowledge that the benefits of

environmental rule of law extend far beyond the environmental sector. While the most

direct effects are on protection of the environment, it also strengthens rule of law

more broadly, supports sustainable economic and social development, protects

public health, contributes to peace and security by avoiding and defusing conflict,

and protects human and constitutional rights.62 Similarly, the rule of law in

environmental matters is indispensable “for equity in terms of the advancement of

the Sustainable Development Goals63, the provision of fair access by assuring a




59   United Nations Environment Programme, First Environmental Rule of Law Report. Available at
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27279/Environmental_rule_of_law.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowe
d=y
60 Ibid
61 Ibid
62 Ibid
63 SDGs
81
PART J
rights-based approach, and the promotion and protection of environmental and other

socio-economic rights.”64


129     Amartya Sen argues for a broadening of the notion of sustainable development

which is the most dominant theme of environmental literature, from a need-based

standard65 to a standard based on freedoms.66 Thus recharacterized, it encompasses

the preservation, and when possible even the expansion of the substantive freedoms

and capabilities of people today without compromising the capability of future

generations to have similar - or more - freedoms. The intertwined concepts of

environmental rule of law thus further intragenerational as well as intergenerational

equity.
130     Decision 27/9 which was adopted by the United Nations Environment

Programme’s67 Governing Body at its first universal session in 2013 on ‘Advancing

Justice, Governance and Law for Environmental Sustainability’ was the first

internationally negotiated document to establish the term ‘environmental rule of

law.’ It declared that “the violation of environmental law has the potential to

undermine       sustainable       development         and     the    implementation         of    agreed

environmental goals and objectives at all levels and that the rule of law and good

governance play an essential role in reducing such violations”. It thus urged

governments and organisations to reinforce cooperation to combat noncompliance

with environmental laws towards achieving sustainable development. It also called

upon the Executive Director to assist with the “development and implementation of

environmental rule of law with attention at all levels to mutually supporting

64   UN Environment, Environmental Rule of Law. Available at https://www.unenvironment.org/explore-
topics/environmental-rights-and-governance/what-we-do/promoting-environmental-rule-law-0
65 Bruntdland definition of Sustainable Development
66      Amartya       Sen,     Sustainable     Development   and      our    responsibilities. Available at
http://www.comitatoscientifico.org/temi%20SD/documents/SEN%20Responsibility&SD%2010.pdf
67 UNEP
82
PART J
governance        features,     including     information       disclosure,      public    participation,

implementable and enforceable laws, and implementation and accountability

mechanisms including coordination of roles as well as environmental auditing and

criminal, civil and administrative enforcement with timely, impartial and independent

dispute resolution.” Similarly, the first United Nations Environment Assembly in 2014

adopted resolution 1/13, which calls upon countries “to work for the strengthening of

environmental rule of law at the international, regional and national levels.”


131      In 2016, the First World Environmental Law Congress, cosponsored by the

International Union for Conservation of Nature and UN Environment, adopted the

IUCN World Declaration on the Environmental Rule of Law68 which outlines 13

principles for developing and implementing solutions for ecologically sustainable

development:
(i)      Obligation to Protect Nature

(ii)     Right to Nature and Rights of Nature

(iii)    Right to Environment.

(iv)     Ecological Sustainability and Resilience

(v)      In Dubio Pro Natura

(vi)     Ecological Functions of Property

(vii)    Intragenerational Equity

(viii)   Intergenerational Equity

(ix)     Gender Equality

(x)      Participation of Minority and Vulnerable Groups

(xi)     Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
68 IUCN, Environmental Rule of Law. Available at ://www.iucn.org/commissions/world-commission-environmental-
law/wcel-resources/environmental-rule-law
83
PART J
(xii)    Non-regression

(xiii)   Progression


132      Dhvani Mehta’s doctoral thesis69 explores this idea of environmental rule of law
in the Indian context by analysing the functioning of the three institutions of the

government with regard to environmental law. It develops a framework to assess

whether the environmental rule of law in India is being strengthened or weakened,

through an analysis of the legal instruments of each of the institutions of

government—statutes, executive orders, and judicial decisions. The indicators on the

basis of which this is done are: a) the capacity of statutes to guide behaviour (one of

the organising principles of the rule of law) by clearly articulating goals or balancing

competing interests; b) the ability of the executive to take flexible but reasoned

decisions grounded in primary legislation; and c) the ability of the judiciary to apply

statutory interpretation and consistent standards of judicial review to give effect to

environmental rights and principles.
133      In 2015, the International community adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

Development and its 17 SDGs70. These 17 goals are:
(i)      Eradication of poverty;

(ii)     Eradication of hunger;

(iii)    Good health and well-being;

(iv)     Quality education;

(v)      Gender equality;

(vi)     Clean water and sanitation;

(vii)    Affordable and clean energy;
69  Dhvani Mehta, The Environmental Rule of Law in India, University of Oxford, 2017. Available at
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:730202ce-f2c4-4d2f-9575-938a728fe82a
70 SDGs
84
PART J
(viii)   Decent work and economic growth;
(ix)     Industry, innovation and infrastructure;

(x)      Reduced inequalities;

(xi)     Sustainable cities and communities;

(xii)    Sustainable consumption and production;

(xiii)   Climate action;

(xiv)    Protecting life below water;

(xv)     Life on land;

(xvi)    Peace, justice and strong institutions; and

(xvii) Partnerships to achieve the goals.


134      Each of these goals has a vital connection to the others. Together, they
provide an agenda for human development: development in a manner which accords

adequate protection to the environment. The UNEP recognises that the natural

environment – forests, soils and wet lands – contributes to the management and

regulation of water availability and water quality, strengthening the resilience of water

sheds and complements investments in physical infrastructure and institutional and

regulatory arrangements for water access and disaster preparedness.


135      SDG 13 emphasises the urgent action required to combat climate change and

its impacts. This is based on the recognition that extreme weather events such as

heat waves, droughts, floods and tropical cyclones have aggravated the need for

water management, pose a threat to food security, increase health risks, damage

critical infrastructure and interrupt the provision of basic civil services.


136      The statistics on climate change indicate that:
85
PART J
(i)        Between 1880 and 2012, average global temperatures have increased by 0.85

           degrees Celsius;
(ii)       Between 1901 and 2010, as ocean expanded, the global average sea level

           has risen by 19 centimeters;
(iii)      Since 1990, global emissions of CO2 increased by almost 50 per cent; and
(iv)       Between 2000 and 2010, emissions grew at a more rapid rate than each of the

           three decades preceding it.
137        In this backdrop, SDG 16 emphasises the need to protect, restore and

promote sustainable use and management of terrestrial eco systems and forests,

combat desertification of river lands, prevent land degradation and halt the loss of

biodiversity. Terrestrial eco systems provide a range of eco system services including

the capture of carbon, maintenance of soil quality, provision of habitat for biodiversity,

maintenance of water quality and regulation of water flow together with control over

erosion. Maintenance of eco systems is hence crucial to efforts to combat climate

change, mitigate and reduce the risks of natural disasters including floods and

landslides. In this backdrop, promoting environmental justice and ensuring strong

institutions is quintessential to promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for

sustainable development. SDG 16 therefore construes the promotion of the rule of

law as intrinsic towards implementing multilateral environmental agreements and

progressing towards internationally agreed environmental goals.


138        On 2 October 2016, India ratified the Paris Agreement 71 on climate change

which reaffirmed the goal of ‘limiting global temperature increase to well below 2

degrees Celsius, while pursuing efforts to limit the increase to 1.5 degrees above


71   Entered into force on 4 November 2016
86
PART J
pre-industrial levels’.
Article 5
of the Agreement encourages parties to conserve

and enhance sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases, which includes forests.

Under its Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement, India

made the following three commitments 72:
(i)     Greenhouse gas emission intensity of its Gross Domestic Product will be

        reduced by 33-35% below 2005 levels by 2030;
(ii)    40% of India’s power capacity would be based on non-fossil fuel sources;
and
(iii)   An additional ‘carbon sink’ of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO 2 equivalent

        through additional forest and tree cover will be created by 2030.


139     In March 2019, UNEP released the Global Environment Outlook themed

‘Healthy Planet, Healthy People’.73 Noting clear ‘links between human health and the

state of the environment’, the report concludes that clean-up and efficiency

improvements are not adequate to pursue the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs and

achieve the internationally agreed environmental goals on pollution control. Instead,

‘transformative change’ which reconfigures basic social and production systems and

structures is needed. This includes well-designed policies on institutional frameworks,

social practices, cultural norms and values along with their implementation,

compliance and enforcement. In this view, a systemic and integrated policy action74

would ensure that a “healthy environment is a prerequisite and foundation for

economic prosperity, human health and well-being”75




72 India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution: Working Towards Climate Justice at P. 29, submitted to the
UNFCCC secretariat
73 Global Environment Outlook 6, UNEP, 4 March 2019
74 Global Environment Outlook 6, UNEP, 4 March 2019
75 Ibid
87
PART J
140   The rule of law requires a regime which has effective, accountable and

transparent institutions. Responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative

decision making are key ingredients to the rule of law. Public access to information is,

in similar terms, fundamental to the preservation of the rule of law. In a domestic

context, environmental governance that is founded on the rule of law emerges from

the values of our Constitution. The health of the environment is key to preserving the

right to life as a constitutionally recognized value under
Article 21
of the Constitution.

Proper structures for environmental decision making find expression in the guarantee

against arbitrary action and the affirmative duty of fair treatment under
Article 14
of

the Constitution.
141   The 2006 notification must hence be construed as a significant link in India’s

quest to pursue the SDGs. Many of those goals, besides being accepted by the

international community of which India is a part, constitute a basic expression of our

own constitutional value system. Our interface with the norms which the international

community has adopted in the sphere of environmental governance is hence as

much a reflection of our own responsibility in a context which travels beyond our

borders as much as it is a reflection of the aspirations of our own Constitution. The

fundamental principle which emerges from our interpretation of the 2006 notification

is that in the area of environmental governance, the means are as significant as the

ends. The processes of decision are as crucial as the ultimate decision. The basic

postulate of the 2006 notification is that the path which is prescribed for disclosures,

studies, gathering data, consultation and appraisal is designed in a manner that

would secure decision making which is transparent, responsive and inclusive.
88
PART J
142   Repeatedly, it has been urged on behalf of the State of Goa, MoEFCC and the

concessionaire that the need for a new airport is paramount with an increasing

volume of passengers and consequently the flaws in the EIA process should be

disregarded. The need for setting up a new airport is a matter of policy. The role of

the decision makers entrusted with authority over the EIA process is to ensure that

every important facet of the environment is adequately studied and that the impact of

the proposed activity is carefully assessed. This assessment is integral to the project

design because it is on that basis that a considered decision can be arrived at as to

whether necessary steps to mitigate adverse consequences to the environment can

be strengthened.
143   In the present case, as our analysis has indicated, there has been a failure of

due process commencing from the non-disclosure of vital information by the project

proponent in Form 1. Disclosures in Form 1 are the underpinning for the preparation

of the ToR. The EIA report, based on incomplete information has suffered from

deficiencies which have been noticed in the earlier part of this judgment including the

failure to acknowledge that within the study area contemplated by the Guidance

manual, there is a presence of ESZs.
144   The EAC, as an expert body abdicated its role and function by taking into

account circumstances which were extraneous to the exercise of its power and failed

to notice facets of the environment that were crucial to its decision making. The 2006

notification postulates that normally, the MoEFCC would accept the recommendation

of the EAC. This makes the role of the EAC even more significant. The NGT is an

adjudicatory body which is vested with appellate jurisdiction over the grant of an EC.

The NGT dealt with the submissions which were urged before it in essentially one
89
PART J
paragraph. It failed to comprehend the true nature of its role and power under
Section 16(h)
and
Section 20
of the NGT Act 2010. In failing to carry out a merits

review, the NGT has not discharged an adjudicatory function which properly belongs

to it.
145      In this view of the matter, neither the process of decision making nor the

decision itself can pass legal muster. Equally, as an area requiring balance between

development of infrastructure and the environment, we are of the view that

appropriate directions should be issued by this Court, which would ensure that while

the need for a public project as significant as an international airport is duly factored

into the decision making calculus, such development proceeds on a considered view

of the importance of the prevailing state of the environment. Bearing in mind the need

to bring about a wholesome balance between the development of infrastructure of an

airport and the preservation of the environment, we have come to the conclusion that

time bound directions should be issued.
146      Bearing in view the necessity to maintain a balance between the need for an

airport and environmental concerns, we are of the view that it would be appropriate if

the EAC is directed to revisit the conditions subject to which it granted its EC on the

basis of the specific concerns which have been highlighted in this judgment. Such an

exercise primarily is for the EAC to carry out in its expert decision making capacity.

The EAC is entrusted with that function as an expert body. The role of judicial review

is to ensure that the rule of law is observed. Hence, we propose by the directions

which we will issue under
Article 142
of the Constitution, to direct the EAC to revisit

the conditions for the grant of an EC. While doing so, it would be open to the EAC to

have due regard to the conditions which were incorporated in the order of the NGT
90
PART K
and to suitably modulate those conditions in pursuance of the liberty which we have

preserved to it. To facilitate an expeditious decision, we propose to direct the EAC to

carry out this exercise in a prescribed time schedule during which period, the EC

shall remain suspended. We propose to direct that after the EAC has formulated its

views, they shall be placed before this Court in a Miscellaneous Application in the

present proceedings, so as to enable the Court to pass final orders.                 The

Miscellaneous Application may be filed either by the State of Goa as the project

proponent or by the MoEFCC.           We clarify that no other Court or Tribunal shall

entertain any challenge to the ultimate decision of the EAC and final orders thereon

shall be passed by this Court in the present proceedings.
K       Directions


147     We accordingly issue the following directions:


(i)     The EAC shall revisit the recommendations made by it for the grant of an EC,
including the conditions which it has formulated, having regard to the specific

        concerns which have been highlighted in this judgment;
(ii)    The EAC shall carry out the exercise under (i) above within a period of one

        month of the receipt of a certified copy of this order;
(iii)   Until the EAC carries out the fresh exercise as directed above, the EC granted

        by the MoEFCC on 28 October 2015 shall remain suspended;
(iv)    Upon reconsidering the matter in terms of the present directions, the EAC, if it

        allows the construction to proceed will impose such additional conditions which

        in its expert view will adequately protect the concerns about the terrestrial eco

        systems noticed in this judgment. The EAC would be at liberty to lay down
91
PART K
        appropriate conditions concerning air, water, noise, land, biological and socio-

        economic environment;
(v)     The EAC shall have due regard to the assurance furnished by the

        concessionaire to this Court that it is willing to adopt and implement necessary

        safeguards bearing in mind international best practices governing greenfield

        airports;
(vi)    We grant liberty to the State of Goa as the project proponent and the

        MoEFCC, as the case may be, to file the report of the EAC before this Court in

        the form of a Miscellaneous Application so as to facilitate the passing of

        appropriate orders in the proceedings; and
(vii)   No other Court or Tribunal shall entertain any challenge to the report that is to

        be submitted before this Court by the EAC in compliance with the present

        order.
148     Before we part with the present case, we consider it appropriate to record a

finding on the bona fides of the appellants before this Court. It was briefly urged by

the respondents that the appellants have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court based

on a personal agenda and consequently, the present appeal is liable to be dismissed.

This argument cannot be accepted. We accept the submission of Ms Shenoy,

learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, that the non-consideration of

vital issues by the EAC has led to the invocation of the statutory remedy available to

them under
Section 22
of the NGT Act 2010. Vague aspersions on the intention of

public-spirited individuals does not constitute an adequate response to those

interested in the protection of the environment. If a court comes to the finding that the

appeal before it was lacking bona fides, it may issue directions which it thinks
92
PART K
appropriate
in that case
. In cases concerning environmental governance, it is a duty

of courts to assess the case on its merits based on the materials present before it.

Matters concerning environmental governance concern not just the living, but

generations to come. The protection of the environment, as an essential facet of

human development, ensures sustainable development for today and tomorrow.



149   The learned Attorney General for India has presented the submissions before

this Court with his characteristic sense of objectivity and candour. We wish to record

our appreciation for the able assistance rendered to this Court by Ms Anitha Shenoy,

learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr ANS Nadkarni, learned Additional Solicitor

General for the MoEF, Mr Parag P Tripathi, learned senior counsel and Ms Aastha

Mehta, learned counsel for the concessionaire.
150   The appeal is allowed in the above terms. There shall be no order as to costs.


Civil Appeal No 1053 of 2019


151   This appeal is also disposed of in the same terms, conditions, directions and

observations as in Civil Appeal No 12251 of 2018.
…………...…...….......………………........J.
                                         [Dr DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                         …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                          [HEMANT GUPTA]


New Delhi;
March 29, 2019
93