[Cites
35
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Sreesanth vs The Board Of Control For Cricket In India on 15 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 200
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
K.M.Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
1


                                                                REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.2424 OF 2019
                           (arising out of SLP(C) No.3551 of 2018)

         S. SREESANTH                                    .... APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

         THE BOARD OF CONTROL FOR
         CRICKET IN INDIA & ORS                          .... RESPONDENT(S)




                                       J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
The sports occupy a prominent place in life of a

         man/woman and also in the life of a nation. It not only

         gives physical or moral strength to a personality but

         spread the message of goodwill and friendship. In the

         21st Century the countries have come closer and nearer

         to each other and sports have become a medium of bonds.

         United Nations Educational and Cultural Organisation

         adopted in the General Conference at the twentieth
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
session, Paris, 21st November, 1978 an International
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.15
15:59:30 IST
Reason:
Charter of physical education and sports. The Charter
2
contains following:
“…….
Convinced that to preserve and develop the physical. intellectual and
     moral powers of the human being improves the quality of life at the national
     and the international levels,

            Believing that physical education and sport should make a more
     effective contribution to the inculcation of fundamental human values
     underlying the full development of peoples,

           Stressing accordingly that physical education and sport should seek to
     promote closer communion between peoples and between individuals.
     together with disinterested emulation, solidarity and fraternity, mutual respect
     and understanding, and full respect for the integrity and dignity of human
     beings, ………”
2.
Article 10
of the Charter recognizes the importance

of National institutions in sports.
Article 10
states:
“Article 10. National institutions play a major role in physical education
     and sport

     10.1. It is essential that public authorities at all levels and specialized non-
governmental bodies encourage those physical education and sport activities
     whose educational value is most evident. Their action shall consist in
     enforcing legislation and regulations, providing material assistance and
     adopting all other measures of encouragement. stimulation and control. The
     public authorities will also ensure that such fiscal measures are adopted as
     may encourage these activities.
10.2. It is incumbent on all institutions responsible for physical education .and
     sport to promote a consistent, overall and decentralized plan of action in the
     framework of lifelong education so as to allow for continuity and co-
     ordination between compulsory physical activities and those practised freely
     and spontaneously.”
3.   Cricket,          it       is       said,         is       a      synonym           for

gentlemanliness           which       means        discipline,            fair       play,

modest    and      high      standard          of      morality.              The        ever

increasing interest in the game of Cricket in our
3
country has raised issues of its regulation, control

and management.
In our country the Board of Control for

Cricket in India (BCCI), a registered Society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
, exercises sufficient

control on all aspects of game of Cricket and has framed

various Code of Conduct for all who are associated with

it. Highlighting the importance of BCCI, Justice T.S.

Thakur, as he then was, in Board of Control for Cricket

in
India vs. Cricket Association of Bihar and others
,

(2015) 3 SCC 251, stated following:
“103. BCCI is a very important institution
     that discharges important public functions.
     Demands of institutional integrity are,
     therefore, heavy and need to be met suitably
     in larger public interest. Individuals are
     birds of passage while institutions are
     forever. The expectations of the millions of
     cricket lovers in particular and public at
     large in general, have lowered considerably
     the threshold of tolerance for any mischief,
     wrongdoing or corrupt practices which ought
     to be weeded out of the system.”
4.   The present is an appeal filed by an acclaimed

cricketer of India against whom proceedings were drawn

by BCCI and a life ban was imposed on the appellant by

the BCCI which was unsuccessfully challenged before

the Kerala High Court and aggrieved by the Division
4
Bench judgment of the High Court the appellant has

filed this appeal.
5.    Background facts giving rise to this appeal need

to be noted now:
The appellant, a registered player with Kerala

Cricket Association affiliated to BCCI                  participated

in an IPL match held at Mohali, Punjab on 09.05.2013.
The appellant represented Rajasthan Royals against

Kings XI Punjab. The case Crime No.20 of 2013 dated

09.05.2013 was registered in the Special Cell of Delhi

Police    on    a   suo   moto    information     provided      by   an

Inspector of Special Cell. Information was received by

the Police regarding involvement of various persons in

some sort of fixing in the on going Cricket matches of

IPL     with    active     participation        of   un-identified

conduits based in Delhi. The appellant was arrested by

Delhi    Police      on    allegation     of     spot    fixing      on

16.05.2013. By order dated 17.05.2013 BCCI suspended

the appellant.
In the
Writ Petition (C) No.318 of 2013

Sulaxsha       Awasthi    vs.    Union   of    India
,    this   Court

directed the oneman Commission constituted by the BCCI

to submit its report to the Board within a period of
5
15 days indicated about the irregularities that is

noticed      during        the        IPL    matches.         Oneman       inquiry

Commission         submitted            Preliminary            Report       dated

05.06.2013      on    the         basis       of   video        clipping         and

recordings      of    telephone             conversation        opining         that

there are sufficient evidence against the appellant to

prove     him   guilty           of     various       articles        of    Anti-
corruption Code. Preliminary Report further stated

that the Commissioner had no access to the appellant

who was in police custody. It opined that there are

sufficient      evidence         available         to   proceed        with      the

disciplinary         proceedings              against         the      suspended

players. The appellant after being released from the

custody appeared before oneman Commission and gave his

statement dated 24.06.2013. He denied any spot fixing

done by his friend Jiju, if at all, and he reiterated

that    he   did     not    under           perform     the    game.       In    his

statement he further stated that he confessed certain

things    before      the    Delhi           Police     which       was    due    to

continuous torture and pressure. After receiving the

statement dated 24.06.2013, Supplementary Report dated

08.07.2013 was submitted by oneman Commission. The
6
Supplementary Report relied on the audio conversations

between   Sreesanth    and   Jiju   Janardhan   recorded   on

06.05.2013 at 1740 hrs. and 2032 hrs. and on the basis

of   audio   tapes   and   transcripts   oneman   Commission

concluded that the appellant was part of the spot

fixing and earlier findings given by the Preliminary

Report are confirmed. After receipt of the report

disciplinary    proceedings     were     initiated   by    the

disciplinary committee of BCCI against the appellant.

Show-cause notice dated 04.09.2013 was given to the

appellant. Following allegations in show-cause notice

were made against the appellant in paragraphs 3, 4 and

5:
”3. On the morning of 16th May, 2013, it came
          to be widely reported in the media that
          the Delhi Police, Special Cell had
          arrested you along with other fellow
          players on suspicion of having indulged
          in spot fixing during certain matches of
          Rajasthan Royals with whom you are
          contracted to play for in the IPL.
          Reportedly at the time of your arrest,
          you were allegedly in the company of one
          Mr. Jiju Janardhan who according to Delhi
          Police is ad bookie.
4. It also came to be reported that the Delhi
         Police had also arrested a number of
         bookies on the same day, who were
         allegedly involved in conspiring with you
         and the other players to fix spots for
7
personal financial gain.
5. Acting on the information that was
           provided by the police authorities to the
           media which was in turn reported across
           the country, the BCCI on 17th May, 2013,
           suspended   you   from   all   cricketing
           activities pending an inquiry into your
           actions by the BCCI. The BCCI appointed a
           Commissioner, Mr. Ravi Sawani, the head
           of the BCCI Anti-Corruption Unit, to
           conduct a preliminary inquiry and submit
           a report to the BCCI as to his findings.”
6.   The     appellant   was   accused    of    offences   under

Articles 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3, 2.2.3, 2.4.1. and

2.4.2 of Anti-Corruption Code of BCCI. The appellant

was asked to show-cause as to why action should not be

taken against him under the Rules. Date, 13.09.2013

was fixed for hearing and appellant was asked to submit

his written statement within a week. Reply to show-
cause    notice    was   submitted   by   the    appellant    on

11.09.2013. In his reply the appellant denied his

involvement in spot fixing. In his reply apart from

stating other facts following was stated:
i)   Fixing – There is absolutely no reliable
             material even to find out a charge of
             fixing against me. What is relied upon
             is the alleged conversation between my
             friend Shri Jiju Janardhan a follow
             cricketer and some others. Shri Jiju
             Janardhan is very much familiar with my
8
mannerism and habit in the cricket field
    as he knows me from the age of 18. It is
    not uncommon to use a towel in afternoon
    matches particularly in a place like
    Mohali in the month of April-May. Enough
    photographs are there to show that in
    many of the earlier matches I played,
    white colour towel had been used by me.
In fact even other well known cricketers
    use white towel as a matter of habit.
Even in the very same match towels were
    used by other players. Apart from a sheer
    coincidence nothing culpable can be
    attributed to me by reason of using a
    towel. The allegation that in the first
    over no towel was used cannot be correct.
ii) What is alleged as warming up against me
    is not really warming up but a manner of
    play which I did in other plays also.
iii) As regards conceding of 14 runs I may
     respectfully point out there was no
     guarantee that the Captain will ask me
     to bowl in a particular over and if so,
     depending on the field, the pitch,
     batsman etc. the bowler will have to
     bowl. It may be stated here that my
     bowling is considered pace bowling
     estimated at an average of 135 kms. per
     hour and there is no guarantee for a
     bowler regarding the runs he is likely
     to concede unless deliberately either a
     no ball or wide is bowled. Conceding runs
     therefore, cannot be manipulated as
     alleged. There is no allegation that in
     the concerned second over any wide or no
     ball was bowled.
iv) As regards seeking, accepting, offering
    or agreeing to accept any bribe there is
    no trace of evidence pointing out to any
    such incident at all.
9
v)    There had been no failure or refusal on
           my part to perform my abilities in the
           Matches as all the balls bowled by me
           will show that I have done my best in
           bowling on that day also.”
7.   The   appellant   appeared     on    13.09.2013     and   was

heard, the disciplinary committee communicated its

decision    dated      13.09.2013        vide   letter     dated

03.10.2013, with regard to appellant in paragraph 9 to

14 following was held:
“9. We have considered the inquiry Report of
         the Commissioner, his written statement
         before the Inquiry Commissioner, his
         written reply to the Show Cause Notice
         and his oral defence before us.
10. The   evidence   against    Sreesanth   in
         relation to the charge comprises to two
         audio recordings which are recorded by
         the Delhi Police. The first of these audio
         recordings is a conversation between Jiju
         Janardhan, his close friend, and a bookie
         called CP (Chandresh Patel). Both have
         been arrested by the Delhi Police. In the
         said conversation Jiju Janardhan is said
         to be promising that in the second over
         to be bowled by Sreesanth 14 or more runs
         would    be   conceded    by    him.   The
         consideration to be paid for such fixing
         would be Rs.10 Lacs.
11. In his written reply before us Sreesanth
         has admitted the factum of the alleged
         conversation with Jiju Janardhan. The
         Delhi Police along with the charge sheet
         has given him a copy of the recorded
         transcripts. He states that he is a
10
superstitious person and the use of the
   towel is due to the same. He, however,
   could not officer and explanation with
   regard to the content of the conversation
   which deals with conceding of 14 runs for
   a consideration. On the contrary, he
   argues that how many runs would be
   conceded would depend upon a large number
   of variable factors and not merely on the
   desire or the will of the bowler.
12. Even if Sreesanth wants to distance
    himself from the said audio recording
    which he was not privy, there is a cross
    reference to this conversation on record
    at 17.40 hours on 6.5.2013 between Jiju
    Janardhan and Sreesanth. In the said
    conversation, Jiju Janardhan admits being
    in possession of Sreesanth’s money Jiju
    Janardhan is head referring to receipt of
    Rs. 10 Lacs of which he would give 7 lacs
    to Sreesanth and retain 3 lacs for
    himself. Jiju Janardhan further proposes
    to use some money of Sreesanth for
    purchase    of   mobile    phones.    The
    circumstantial evidence clearly indicates
    that this Rs. 10 Lacs is part of the
    amount deposited with Jiju Janardhan for
    influencing Sreesanth for underperforming
    in the second over of the match.
13. The third piece of evidence is the actual
    conduct during the match itself where
    Sreesanth conceded 13 runs. The two tape
    recordings reveal facts which reasonably
    match with the actual developments in the
    second over on the field. The number of
    runs conceded is only one less than
    promised. The sum of Rs.10 Lacs being
    promised as a part of the transaction
    fixed by Jiju Janardhan is confirmed in
    the second audio recording. On being
    asked to explain about this Rs.10 Lacs
    lying with Jiju Janardhan as mentioned in
11
the second audio recording, Sreesanth
          gave a vague explanation stating that
          this may be reference by way of a charity
          to an orphanage which he intended to be
          visiting. We are not inclined to accept
          the said explanation.
14. In view of the above, we are of the
         opinion that Sreesanth is guilty of
         corruption under Article 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and
         2.1.3 of the Code. We also find him guilty
         under Article 2.2.3 for betting and
         Article 2.3.1 and Article 2.4.2 of the
         Code for bringing disrepute to the game
         of Cricket and failure to disclose to the
         ACU BCCI full details of any approaches
         or invitations to engage in conduct that
         would amount to breach of the Code. We
         also hold him guilty of misconduct under
Article 32
, of the BCCI Memorandum Rules
         and Regulations.”
8.   On quantum of punishment following was directed:
“Sh. Shreesanth – In view of the allegations
     of match fixing and non-reporting of the
     offences, he is banned from playing or
     representing for life. He shall during this
     period not be entitled to be associated with
     any   activities   of   the  BCCI   or   its
     affiliates.”
9.   In   the   criminal    case   chargesheet   against     the

appellant and the other accused was submitted. The

appellant   filed     an   application   for   discharge.    The

application for discharge was heard and by order dated

25.07.2015,     the   appellant    was   discharged   from   the
12
offences. Against the order of discharge an appeal has

been filed which is pending, at present, before the

Delhi   High   Court.   After   passing     of    the   order    of

discharge,     appellant    made   a   request      before      the

disciplinary committee of BCCI to review its order. On

18.10.2015 disciplinary committee refused to review

its earlier decision. The appellant through Kerala

Cricket   Association      addressed   an    e-mail     to   BCCI

requesting to issue No Objection Certificate to him to

enable him to participate in the Scotland Premier

League. The BCCI by the communication dated 12.01.2017

refused to issue No Object Certificate. Another e-mail

was sent by the appellant on 11.02.2017 praying to

revoke the ban imposed on him and issue No Objection

Certificate to him to participate in the Scotland

Premier League. The BCCI reiterated its earlier stand.
10. An Advocate’s notice was given by the appellant

on 16.02.2017 to BCCI and thereafter a Writ Petition

No. 6925 of 2017 was filed before the Kerala High

Court. In the writ petition, the petitioner has prayed

for   quashing   the    proceedings    of   the    disciplinary

committee communicated by letter dated 03.10.2013 and
13
also prayed for a mandamus or other writ or order

commanding the BCCI and its Chairman to lift the ban

imposed by the BCCI Committee by order dated 03.10.2013

so as to enable the appellant to participate in the

Cricket matches both in national and international

level. The appellant has also sought declaration that

reports are illegal and they were prepared without due

compliance of law.
11. The BCCI filed a counter-affidavit in the writ

petition. The writ petition was heard and the learned

Single Judge by order dated 07.08.2017 allowed the

writ     petition       quashing    the   life        ban   and    other

punishment imposed on the appellant pursuant to the

disciplinary      committee        proceedings.       Learned     Single

Judge had observed that the appellant has suffered ban

almost for four years and nothing more is required in

the matter. Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned

Single    Judge     a   writ     appeal   was    filed      before   the

Division Bench by the BCCI. The Division Bench of the

High Court vide judgment dated 17.10.2017 allowed the

writ appeal of the BCCI. The Division Bench held that

the    High   Court      under
Article      226
exercises     the
14
jurisdiction of judicial review and does not sit in

appellate jurisdiction. It is held that there cannot

be reappraisal of the evidence. Learned Single Judge

being of the opinion that the appellant was guilty,

the appellant cannot escape the punishment and it is

not open for the High Court to substitute its own

notion of justice. Aggrieved by the Division Bench

judgment the appellant has filed this appeal in this

Court.
12. We have heard Shri Salman Khurshid, learned senior

counsel, appearing for the appellant. Shri Parag P.

Tripathi, learned senior counsel has appeared for the

BCCI.
13. Shri     Salman   Khurshid    submits    that    in   the

disciplinary    enquiry   held    against   the     appellant

principles of natural justice have been breached. It

is submitted that the disciplinary committee never

confronted     the    appellant    with     the     telephone

conversation relied by it for proving the charge. The

appellant never agreed and was not part of spot fixing

nor ever received amount of Rs.10 lakh as alleged. In

the match played on 09.05.2013, the appellant played
15
his normal game. There were no loose bowls which is

clear from cricket commentary broadcasted on that day.
It was alleged against the appellant that he fixed for

conceding 14 runs in the second over, which never

happened. There are no evidence to prove against the

appellant something which never happened. In the event

any money was received by the appellant there has to

be some evidence of asking to return the money.    The

Preliminary Report was prepared ex parte which ought

not to have been relied. Copies of the transcripts

relied in the Supplementary Report as well as by the

disciplinary committee were never made available to

the appellant nor he at any stage was confronted with

the aforesaid transcripts so as to give his version.

The burden of proof was wrongly placed on the appellant

where as per Article 3.1. of the Anti-Corruption Code,

the burden of proof shall be on the designated Anti-

Corruption Official and for serious offences proof

beyond reasonable doubt was required. The allegation

that the appellant conceded 14 runs in the second over

having not been proved the entire charge has to fall.

The bowler cannot always control the runs which can be
16
taken by a batsman more so when batsman of a calibre,

Gilchrist was playing. The telephone conversation of

06.05.2013 at 1740 hrs. and 2032 hrs with Jiju does

not indicate that the appellant was part of any spot

fixing.    Shri     Khurshid   has     also     challenged   the

constitution       of   disciplinary      committee.    It    is

submitted that Shri Srinivasan had stepped down as the

President of the BCCI on 13.06.2013 and thereafter

Shri    Jagmohan    Dalmia   took    as   the   President.   The

disciplinary committee not being properly constituted,

the entire proceeding is vitiated.
14. Shri Parag P. Tripathi, learned senior counsel

appearing for the BCCI submits that the appellant was

given   full   opportunity     by    disciplinary    committee.

Show-cause notice contained the detail of charges and

the appellant was asked to reply. The allegations which

were made against the appellant that he was part of

the spot fixing, that in second over, the appellant

was to concede 14 runs and under the deal he shall

tuck white towel in his visible pocket which actually

he did in his second over is ample proof of his

complicity. The conversation dated 06.05.2013 which is
17
brought by the appellant between Jiju Janardhan and

Chandresh Patel @ Chand clearly proves that deal was

made for spot fixing which was fixed. The appellant in

his reply to show-cause has not explained the amount

of Rs. 10 lakh as referred to conversation dated

06.05.2013   at    1740   hrs    between   himself    and   Jiju

Janardhan.
15. When the specific allegation was made against the

appellant it was his duty to speak and he having not

satisfactorily explained the allegations, disciplinary

authority    was     fully      entitled   to    confirm    the

proceedings. No proper answer has been given with

regard to the tucking of towel in the second over. His

answer that he is superstitious was not there in

original reply. Answer relating to amount of Rs.10

lakh to charity is not a complete answer to dispel the

charge. The disciplinary proceedings are in the nature

of departmental inquiry against a public servant. The

decision of disciplinary authority on proof of charge

is not to be interfered in exercise of judicial review

by the constitutional courts. The judicial review of

the   disciplinary    proceedings     is   not   an   appellate
18
jurisdiction so as to enable the Court to substitute

its opinion.       The para meters of judicial review are

well settled. The interference with the disciplinary

proceedings by the High Court under
Article 226
and

this Court under
Article 32
cannot be on the basis of

reappreciation of evidence. The Court cannot go on the

sufficiency and reliability of the evidence. The Court

shall not interfere if there are some legal findings.
16. Shri Parag Tripathi further submitted that the

Discharge Order has no bearing on the disciplinary

proceedings which are subject matter of the present

petition.     It   is   trite   law   that   proceedings   by   a

disciplinary committee must be treated differently

from a trial in a criminal case. It is submitted that

there is vast distinction in the scope of inquiry

between   a   criminal     proceeding    and   a   departmental

inquiry. The question before the Sessions Court was

whether appellant is guilty of offences under the

aforementioned criminal statutes. On appreciation of

the evidence, it may have been open for the Sessions

Court to discharge the appellant under those specific
19
statutes. The Sessions Court, however, did not deal

with the question whether the appellant is guilty of

violating the BCCI Code. In contrast, the scope of

inquiry in the disciplinary proceedings initiated by

respondent No.1 against the petitioner was entirely

different as it was restricted to an examination of

whether the appellant had breached the BCCI Code. The

clauses which the appellant breached under the BCCI

Code are entirely different from the offences under

which   the    appellant      had    been       charged    before    the

Sessions Court. The ingredients required to establish

a   breach    of     the   BCCI   Code    are    also     distinct   and

separate      from    the    ingredients        required      to   prove

offences     under     the   aforementioned         penal     statutes.

Furthermore, in a criminal case, a defendant has a

right to remain silent. However, on issuance of the

SCN, the appellant had a duty to appear before the

disciplinary         committee      and    answer       all    relevant

questions, to the satisfaction of the disciplinary

committee.
17. Respondent No.1 further submits that the standard

of proof in recording a finding of conviction in a
20
criminal proceeding is distinct and different from a

departmental proceeding.
18. It is submitted that the appellant has raised the

issue of jurisdiction of the disciplinary committee

alleging that Shri Srinivasan could not be a member of

the disciplinary committee at the relevant time. AT

the outset, it is submitted that this argument a being

raised for the very first time before this Court at

the stage of the appellant filing a rejoinder to

respondent No.1’s counter affidavit and the same ought

not be allowed by this Court. The appellant had the

option   of    challenging    the     constitution     of    the

disciplinary     committee    before      the   disciplinary

committee itself, or at the least at the stage of

filing the writ petition/writ appeal or even at the

stage of filing SLP. However, the fact that the said

argument is being raised for the first time at such a

belated stage of the proceedings only goes to prove

that the argument is a mere afterthought.
19. Without    prejudice     to     the   aforesaid,    it    is

submitted that the minutes of the Emergent Working
21
Committee meeting held on July 28, 2013 clearly record

that the probe committee had submitted its report and

Shri Srinivasan could resume charge as the President

of   respondent     No.1.   Further,    the    minutes       of   the

Emergent Working Committee meeting held September 01,

2013 prove that Shri Srinivasan attended the said

meeting as the President of respondent No.1.
20. It   is    submitted    that   even      the    orders    dated

September 27, 2013 and October 8, 2013 placed on record

and relied upon by the appellant do not suggest that

this Court removed Shri Srinivasan from the post of

President     of   respondent   No.1.   By    the    order    dated

September 27, 2013, this Court only ordered that the

AGM of respondent No.1 scheduled on September 29, 2013

and the scheduled election can proceed. With respect

to Shri Srinivasan, this Court held that if he is

elected as President (in the election to be conducted)

he will not take charge until further orders. The same

was reiterated in the order dated October 8, 2013

passed by this Court. Both these orders were admittedly

passed after the disciplinary committee passed its
22
order on September 13, 2013 and, therefore, contrary

to the appellant’s submissions the composition of the

disciplinary committee was in accordance with the BCCI

Code.
21. Shri Salman Khurshid, learned senior counsel for

the   appellant      in   his    rejoinder      submits   that     till

29.09.2013, Shri Srinivasan was not the President and

he    could   not    function     as   President.     Replying     the

submission of Shri Tripathi that charge has been proved

against the appellant it is submitted that BCCI placed

wrong burden of proof on the appellant. The appellant

has answered the allegations and burden was on the

BCCI to prove the charges. In any view of the matter,

at best, the appellant could have been charged with

not disclosing to the BCCI of any information. Shri

Khurshid      submits     that   punishment      of   life   ban   was

excessive and maximum, the punishment which could have

been imposed on the appellant was upto five years. The

appellant has always given due respect and regard to

the    BCCI    and   always      obeyed   its    instructions      and

commands. The appellant has been acclaimed cricket

player, whose bright career has been cut short. The
23
present is not the case where life ban ought to have

been imposed. This Court may exercise its equitable

jurisdiction   in    interfering      with     the    punishment

awarded to the appellant.
22. From the submissions made by the learned counsel

for the parties and the materials on records following

issues arise for consideration in this appeal:
(1) Whether the disciplinary committee of the BCCI

        in passing the order dated 13.09.2013 violated

        the    principles      of   natural    justice     in   not

        providing        the   transcripts       of    telephone

        conversation relied by it and further in not

        confronting the appellant with transcript of

        the telephone conversations relied on by it?
(2) Whether the disciplinary committee was right

        in its conclusion that there are sufficient

        materials on the record to hold the appellant

        guilty      of    offences    of      corruption    under

        Articles 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3 of betting, under

        Article 2.2.3 and Article 2.4.1, 2.4.2 of the
24
Anti-Corruption Code for bringing disrepute to

   the game and failure to disclose to the ACU

   BCCI   full    details       of   any    approaches         and

   invitations to engage in conduct that would

   amount to breach of the Code?
(3) Whether there were sufficient grounds for the

   High Court while exercising judicial review

   jurisdiction under
Article 226
to hold that

   charges against the appellant were established

   and proved on the basis of materials on record?
(4) Whether the disciplinary committee has rightly

   placed burden of proof on the appellant whereas

   according     to      Anti-Corruption          Code     under

   Article 3.1. the burden of proof was on the

   designated    Anti-Corruption           Official      and   by

   wrongly     placing    the    burden      of    proof       the

   disciplinary committee has erred in recording

   its conclusion?
(5) Whether the discharge order dated 25.07.2015

   has any effect on the disciplinary proceeding
25
of BCCI under Anti-Corruption Code culminating

          in order dated 13.09.2013?
(6) Whether      the     constitution       of    disciplinary

          committee    was     vitiated     by    including       Shri

          Srinivasan     as    President     who      had   already

          stepped     down    on    02.06.2013        resulting    in

          vitiation of entire proceedings?
(7) Whether disciplinary committee while imposing

          sanction under
Article 6
has considered the

          relevant para meters as
laid down in
paragraphs

          6.1.1. and 6.1.2?
(8) Whether the disciplinary committee erred in

          imposing maximum sanction of life time ban on

          charges under Article 2.1.1 to 2.1.4 of the

          Anti-Corruption Code?
(9) The relief to which, if any, the appellant may

          be entitled.
ISSUE NO.1
23. The      Supplementary         Report    dated       08.07.2013

submitted by Commissioner of Inquiry, BCCI refers to
26
two audio conversations between Sreesanth and Jiju

Janardhan recorded on 06.05.2017 at 1740 hrs. and 2032

hrs. The Commissioner in his Report has referred to

transcripts of two audio conversations received from

Delhi Police copy of which was annexed to the Report.

along with the show-cause notice both Preliminary as

well as Supplementary Reports were enclosed. As noted

above, the Supplementary Report has referred to two

conversations   between   Sreesanth   and   Jiju   Janardhan

dated 06.05.2013. Reference of telephonic conversation

between Jiju and Chandresh Patel was also made in

paragraph 8(1) of the show-cause notice. Reply to the

said show-cause notice was submitted by the appellant

on 11.09.2013. It is relevant to note that in the reply

appellant did not complaint of not providing copy of

transcripts of telephone conversations. Violation of

principles of natural justice by the Commissioner while

submitting the Preliminary Report was alleged on behalf

of the appellant. The Commissioner in the Preliminary

Inquiry Report has clearly mentioned that he has not

been able to question the appellant since he was in the

Police Custody and when the appellant was released from
27
the Police Custody his statement was taken by the

Commissioner on 24.06.2013 and after considering the

statement of the appellant, Supplementary Report was

submitted by the Commissioner on 08.07.2013. Before us

additional documents have been filed by the appellant

as Annexure A1 by which the transcripts of telephone

conversation     between   Sreesanth    and   Jiju        dated

06.05.2013 at 1740 hrs. and 2032 hrs. has been brought

on the record. Another conversation dated 09.05.2013

at 12.30 p.m. with Jiju Janardhan and Chandresh Patel

has also been taken on the record. The appellant does

not deny that the above transcripts of the telephone

conversations were given to the appellant by the Police

when chargesheet was submitted in the criminal case in

FIR No.20 of 2013. The present is not a case where

telephone conversations have been referred without they

not being available to the appellant. The transcripts

of   telephone   conversations   were   received     by     the

appellant from the Police much before issuance of the

show-cause notice issued by the disciplinary committee.

The appellant in his reply has not made any complaint

of non-receipt of transcripts.
28
24. Learned Single Judge in paragraphs 3 and 24 of his

judgment has made following observations:
“3. The decision of BCCI was rendered
       after affording an opportunity of hearing to
       Sreesanth   by  a   disciplinary   committee
       constituted to enter into the allegations……”

           “24……However, Sreesanth cannot pretend
       ignorance to the contents of the telephonic
       conversation, as the contents of it have been
       exhaustively considered in a discharge
       application filed by him before the Patiala
       House Courts, New Delhi (MCOCO court)…………”
25. The    submission      of    Preliminary         Report       without

taking    statement      of     the     appellant        was     in     the

circumstances that the appellant was in the Police

custody    and   under     the       order    of    this      Court     the

Commissioner had to submit report within 15 days. The

Commissioner     himself      has     noted    that      he      has    not

confronted the appellant because of the above fact.

When the appellant was released from the custody, his

statement was taken and after considering his statement

further Supplementary Report was submitted. In the

show-cause notice with respect to the material relied

by the disciplinary committee, the appellant was given

full   opportunity    to      have    his    say.   We     are    not   in
29
agreement with the submission of the appellant that

there   was   any   violation   of   principles   of   natural

justice by the disciplinary committee of the BCCI.
ISSUE NOS. 2 AND 3
26. Both the issues being inter-related, are taken

together.
27. In the show-cause notice the charge which was

levelled on the appellant of spot fixing and other

allegations have been noticed. The allegations made

against the appellant as contained in paragraph 8 has

already been extracted above. In the substance, the

allegation was that in the match played on 09.05.2013

between Rajasthan Royals and Kings XI Punjab at Mohali

in exchange of sum of Rs.10 lakh, the appellant agreed

to concede 14 or more runs in the second over of bowling

spell and in order to confirm the fix, appellant was

required to place a hand towel in his visible pocket

while ensuring there was no such towel during the first

over. In support of this, audio conversation between

Jiju Janardhan and Chandresh Patel was referred to in

the Preliminary and Supplementary Reports. It is on the
30
basis of the conversations between Jiju Janardhan and

Sreesanth dated 06.05.2013 at 1740 hrs. and 2032 hrs.,

the allegation of charge of receipt of Rs. 10 lakh was

sought to be proved. The conversation between Sreesanth

and Jiju which took place on 06.05.2013 where Jiju on

telephone informed that Rs.10 lakh was available out

of which Rs.7 lakh will be given to the appellant, has

not been satisfactorily explained by the appellant

before the disciplinary committee. The disciplinary

committee in its order has relied on the telephone

conversation between Jiju Janardhan and Sreesanth dated

06.05.2013. It was also noted that Delhi Police along

with the charges had given copy of the transcripts to

the   appellant.   In   paragraph    12    of   the   order   the

disciplinary   committee    has     come   to   the   following

conclusion:
“12. Even if Sreesanth wants to distance
           himself from the said audio recording
           which he was not privy, there is a cross
           reference to this conversation on record
           at 17.40 hours on 6.5.2013 between Jiju
           Janardhan and Sreesanth. In the said
           conversation, Jiju Janardhan admits
           being in possession of Sreesanth’s money
           Jiju Janardhan is head referring to
           receipt of Rs. 10 Lacs of which he would
           give 7 lacs to Sreesanth and retain 3
           lacs for himself. Jiju Janardhan further
31
proposes to use some money of Sreesanth
             for purchase of mobile phones. The
             circumstantial     evidence     clearly
             indicates that this Rs. 10 Lacs is part
             of the amount deposited with Jiju
             Janardhan for influencing Sreesanth for
             underperforming in the second over of
             the match.”
28. The explanation given by the appellant with regard

to Rs. 10 lakh laying with Jiju Janardhan was found to

be vague and     was not acceptable. The            disciplinary

committee on the basis of the evidence available before

it was entitled to draw its own conclusion.
29. The    disciplinary    committee,    under    the     relevant

Anti-Corruption Code, is primarily entrusted with the

duty, after considering the reply of show-cause notice

and   hearing   the   appellant    was   entitled    to    give   a

decision   on   various    allegations     made     against    the

appellant.
30. The disciplinary inquiry conducted by disciplinary

committee of     BCCI is    akin   to disciplinary inquiry

conducted against a public servant under the relevant

statutory rules except few distinctions which we shall
32
notice later. This Court has time and again considered

the    scope    of    judicial   review     in   reference    to

departmental     inquiry   conducted      against   the   public

servant. This Court in
State of Andhra Pradesh vs.

Chitra Venkata Rao
, (1975) 2 SCC 557, had laid down the

para   meters    of   judicial   review.    In   paragraph    21

following has been laid down:
“21. The scope of
Article 226
in dealing with
       departmental inquiries has come up before
       this Court. Two propositions were
laid down
       by
this Court in
State of A.P. v. S. Sree
       Rama Rao
. First, there is no warrant for the
       view that in considering whether a public
       officer is guilty of misconduct charged
       against him, the rule followed in criminal
       trials that an offence is not established
       unless proved by evidence beyond reasonable
       doubt to the satisfaction of the Court must
       be applied. If that rule be not applied by a
       domestic tribunal of inquiry the High Court
       in a petition under
Article 226
of the
       Constitution is not competent to declare the
       order   of   the   authorities    holding   a
       departmental enquiry invalid. The High Court
       is not a court of appeal under
Article 226
over the decision of the authorities holding
       a departmental enquiry against a public
       servant. The Court is concerned to determine
       whether the enquiry is held by an authority
       competent in that behalf and according to the
       procedure prescribed in that behalf, and
       whether the rules of natural justice are not
       violated. Second, where there is some
       evidence which the authority entrusted with
       the duty to hold the enquiry has accepted and
       which evidence may reasonably support the
       conclusion that the delinquent officer is
33
guilty of the charge, it is not the function
       of the High Court to review the evidence and
       to arrive at an independent finding on the
       evidence. The High Court may interfere where
       the departmental authorities have held the
       proceedings against the delinquent in a
       manner inconsistent with the rules of natural
       justice or in violation of the statutory
       rules prescribing the mode of enquiry or
       where    the   authorities    have    disabled
       themselves from reaching a fair decision by
       some   considerations   extraneous    to   the
       evidence and the merits of the case or by
       allowing themselves to be influenced by
       irrelevant considerations or where the
       conclusion on the very face of it is so wholly
       arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable
       person could ever have arrived at that
       conclusion. The departmental authorities
       are, if the enquiry is otherwise properly
       held, the sole judges of facts and if there
       is some legal evidence on which their
       findings can be based, the adequacy or
       reliability of that evidence is not a matter
       which can be permitted to be canvassed before
       the High Court in a proceeding for a writ
       under Article 226.”
31. This
Court further held
that jurisdiction of the

High    Court     under
Article   226
is    a   supervisory

jurisdiction and the High Court does not exercise a

jurisdiction of an appellate court. The findings of the

fact    reached     by    a   tribunal    as    result   of   the

appreciation of the evidence cannot be questioned in

the writ proceedings. In paragraph 23 of the judgment

following has been laid down:
34
“23. The jurisdiction to issue a writ of
     certiorari under
Article 226
is a supervisory
     jurisdiction. The Court exercises it not as
     an appellate court. The findings of fact
     reached by an inferior court or tribunal as
     a result of the appreciation of evidence are
     not   reopened    or   questioned    in   writ
     proceedings. An error of law which is
     apparent on the face of the record can be
     corrected by a writ, but not an error of fact,
     however grave it may appear to be. In regard
     to a finding of fact recorded by a tribunal,
     a writ can be issued if it is shown that in
     recording the said finding, the tribunal had
     erroneously refused to admit admissible and
     material   evidence,    or  had    erroneously
     admitted inadmissible evidence which has
     influenced the impugned finding. Again if a
     finding of fact is based on no evidence, that
     would be regarded as an error of law which
     can be corrected by a writ of certiorari. A
     finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal
     cannot be challenged on the ground that the
     relevant and material evidence adduced before
     the Tribunal is insufficient or inadequate
     to sustain a finding. The adequacy or
     sufficiency of evidence led on a point and
     the inference of fact to be drawn from the
     said finding are within the exclusive
     jurisdiction of the Tribunal. See
Syed Yakoob
     v. K.S. Radhakrishnan.”
32. This Court again in
Union of India and others vs.

P. Gunasekaran
, (2015) 2 SCC 610, reiterated the same

principles regarding judicial review of disciplinary

proceedings. In paragraphs 12 and 13 following has been

laid down:
35
“12. Despite the well-settled position, it
is painfully disturbing to note that the High
Court has acted as an appellate authority in
the disciplinary proceedings, reappreciating
even the evidence before the enquiry officer.
The finding on Charge I was accepted by the
disciplinary authority and was also endorsed
by the Central Administrative Tribunal. In
disciplinary proceedings, the High Court is
not and cannot act as a second court of first
appeal. The High Court, in exercise of its
powers   under   Articles  226/227   of   the
Constitution of India, shall not venture into
reappreciation of the evidence. The High
Court can only see whether:
(a) the enquiry is held by a competent
      authority;
(b) the enquiry is held according to the
      procedure prescribed in that behalf;
(c) there is violation of the principles
      of natural justice in conducting the
      proceedings;
(d) the    authorities   have    disabled
      themselves from reaching a fair
      conclusion by some considerations
      extraneous to the evidence and merits
      of the case;
(e) the    authorities     have    allowed
      themselves   to   be   influenced   by
      irrelevant        or        extraneous
      considerations;
(f) the conclusion, on the very face of
      it, is so wholly arbitrary and
      capricious that no reasonable person
      could ever have arrived at such
      conclusion;
36
(g) the   disciplinary    authority   had
           erroneously   failed  to   admit  the
           admissible and material evidence;
(h) the   disciplinary    authority    had
           erroneously   admitted    inadmissible
           evidence which influenced the finding;
(i) the finding of fact is based on no
           evidence.
13.   Under   Articles   226/227   of   the
     Constitution of India, the High Court shall
     not:
(i) reappreciate the evidence;
(ii) interfere with the conclusions in
                the enquiry, in case the same has
                been conducted in accordance with
                law;
(iii) go   into     the    adequacy     of     the
                 evidence;

           (iv) go into the          reliability   of     the
                evidence;

           (v)     interfere, if there be some legal
                   evidence on which findings can be
                   based.
(vi) correct the error of fact however
                grave it may appear to be;
(vii)     go into the proportionality of
                   punishment unless it shocks its
                   conscience.”
33. To the same effect is the decision of this Court

reported    in
Central   Industrial   Security      Force   and
37
others vs. Abrar Ali
, (2017) 4 SCC 507. In paragraphs

13 and 14 following has been laid down:
“13. Contrary to findings of the disciplinary
     authority, the High Court accepted the
     version of the respondent that he fell ill
     and was being treated by a local doctor
     without assigning any reasons. It was held
     by the disciplinary authority that the unit
     had better medical facilities which could
     have been availed by the respondent if he was
     really suffering from illness. It was further
     held that the delinquent did not produce any
     evidence of treatment by a local doctor. The
     High Court should not have entered into the
     arena   of   facts   which   tantamounts   to
     reappreciation of evidence. It is settled law
     that reappreciation of evidence is not
     permissible in the exercise of jurisdiction
     under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
     India.
14.
In
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur v. Nemi
     Chand Nalwaya
, this Court held as follows:
(SCC p. 587, para 7)

        “7. It is now well settled that the
        courts will not act as an appellate
        court and reassess the evidence led in
        the domestic enquiry, nor interfere on
        the ground that another view is
        possible on the material on record. If
        the enquiry has been fairly and
        properly held and the findings are
        based on evidence, the question of
        adequacy of the evidence or the
        reliable nature of the evidence will
        not be grounds for interfering with
        the    findings     in    departmental
        enquiries. Therefore, courts will not
        interfere   with  findings   of   fact
        recorded in departmental enquiries,
        except where such findings are based
38
on no evidence or where they are
          clearly perverse. The test to find out
          perversity is to see whether a
          tribunal acting reasonably could have
          arrived at such conclusion or finding,
          on the material on record. The courts
          will   however   interfere   with   the
          findings in disciplinary matters, if
          principles of natural justice or
          statutory    regulations   have    been
          violated or if the order is found to
          be arbitrary, capricious, mala fide or
          based on extraneous considerations.
(
Vide B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
          India
,
Union   of   India    v.   G.
          Ganayutham
,
Bank of India v. Degala
          Suryanarayana
and   High   Court   of
          Judicature at
Bombay v. Shashikant S.
          Patil
.)””
34. There being specific allegations made against the

appellant in the show-cause notice as noticed above it

was incumbent on the appellant to have explained the

evidence and circumstances which were sought to be

relied    against   the   appellant.    In   the   disciplinary

proceedings a delinquent has to explain circumstances

and evidence relied against him. It is true that the

charges have to be proved by the BCCI for taking any

action under the Anti-Corruption Code. The disciplinary

committee of the BCCI had jurisdiction to form its own

opinion    after    considering   the   evidence     on   record

including the telephone conversation between Sreesanth
39
and Jiju Janardhan and other evidence on the record.
The conclusion drawn by the disciplinary committee on

the   basis    of    the   material     which    is   recorded      in

paragraphs 12 and 13 as noted above cannot be said to

be suffering        from any infirmity which may warrant

judicial    review    by    the     constitutional      courts.   The

learned Single Judge held that “If the evidence as a

whole is appreciated, it can easily be concluded that

Sreesanth     had    no    direct    link   in   spot    fixing     or

betting”.     Further,     learned     Single    Judge    held    that

“Assuming that Sreesanth had knowledge of such betting,

this Court is of the view that the punishment already

suffered by him of 4 years of the ban from all format

of the cricket, nationally and internationally, is

sufficient to meet ends of justice”. As noted above

constitutional court in exercise of jurisdiction of

judicial review of disciplinary proceedings conducted

under the Code of Conduct framed by the BCCI will

interfere only when conclusions of the disciplinary

committee are perverse or based on no evidence. On

appreciation of evidence, it is not open for the High

Court or this Court to substitute its own opinion based
40
on   the   appreciation    of   material   on   record   on   the

charges proved.
35. We, thus, are of the opinion that for the decision

of the disciplinary committee holding charges under

Articles 2.1.1., 2.1.2, 2.1.3 and 2.2.3 and Article

2.4.1. and 2.4.2 proved, there are no grounds for this

Court to take a different view. Issue Nos. 2 and 3 are

answered accordingly.
ISSUE NO. 4
36. One of the submissions which has been made by the

learned    counsel   for    the    appellant    is   that     the

disciplinary committee has wrongly placed the burden

of proof on the appellant. Learned counsel for the

appellant has relied on
Article 3.1
in this context.
Article 3.1
is as follows:
“STANDARD OF PROOF AND EVIDENCE
      3.1 Unless otherwise described herein the
      Designated    Anti-Corruption    Official(or
      his/her designee) and the standard of proof
      in all cases brought under this Anti-
corruption Code shall be whether the BCCI
      Disciplinary   Committee    is   comfortably
      satisfied, bearing in mind the seriousness
      of the allegation that is being made, that
      the alleged offence has been committed. This
41
standard of proof in all cases shall be
     determined on a sliding scale from, at a
     minimum, a mere balance of probability (for
     the least serious offences) up to proof
     beyond a reasonable doubt (for the most
     serious offences).”
37.
Article 3.1
deals with burden of proof and standard

of proof. The initial burden of proof shall be on the

Designated Anti-Corruption Official i.e. disciplinary

committee which has to form its opinion about the

commission of Designated Offences by the delinquent.

Before taking the decision when show-cause notice is

served   on     the   appellant    making    allegations       and

referring to relevant materials in support of the said

allegation, it was incumbent on the appellant to have

satisfactorily explained each and every circumstances

or   evidence     referred    to   and    relied.     When     the

explanation submitted by the appellant was not found

satisfactory, he having not been able to satisfactorily

explain the allegations which were noticed from the

telephone conversation between the appellant and Jiju

Janardhan, it cannot be said that the burden of proof

has wrongly been       placed on    the   appellant.    Initial

burden   as   referred   to   in
Article   3.1
shall    stand
42
discharged when the allegation referring to materials

and evidence are communicated to delinquent. Standard

of proof as referred to in
Article 3.1
is that the BCCI

disciplinary committee is to be comfortably satisfied,

bearing in mind the seriousness of the allegation that

is   being    made,    that   the   alleged     offence    has   been

committed. Of course, on mere doubt the disciplinary

committee cannot hold offences proved there has to be

a positive evidence and finding regarding the proof of

offences. We are, thus, not persuaded to accept the

submission of the learned counsel for the appellant

that   burden    of    proof    was   wrongly     placed    on    the

appellant.
ISSUE NO.5
38. There is a vast distinction in the scope of inquiry

between a criminal trial on one hand and disciplinary

inquiry      against   a   public     servant    or   disciplinary

inquiry under Anti-Corruption Code of BCCI on other

hand. We find substance in the submission of Shri Parag

P. Tripathi that question before the Sessions Court was

whether the appellant is guilty of offences under the

criminal statutes and on appreciation of evidence, it
43
may have been open for the Sessions Court to discharge

the appellant under the specific statutes. The Sessions

Court had not to deal with the question whether the

appellant is guilty of violating Anti-Corruption Code

of BCCI. The clauses which the appellant breached under

the Anti-Corruption Code of BCCI are entirely different

from the offences under which the appellant had been

charged before the Sessions Court. The ingredients

required to establish a breach of the BCCI Code are

also    distinct     and      separate    from    the     ingredients

required to prove offences under the penal statutes in

question. We record our agreement to the abovenoted

submissions.
39. The standard of proof in a disciplinary inquiry

and    in   a   trial    of    a    criminal    case     are   entirely

different. In a criminal case it is essential to prove

a   charge      beyond   all       reasonable    doubt    wherein    in

departmental inquiry preponderance of probability is

to serve the purpose. This Court in
Commissioner of

Police, New Delhi vs. Narender Singh
, (2006) 4 SCC 265,

following has been stated in paragraph 12:
44
“12. It is not in dispute that the standard
      of proof required in recording a finding of
      conviction in a criminal case and in a
      departmental proceeding are distinct and
      different. Whereas in a criminal case, it is
      essential to prove a charge beyond all
      reasonable    doubt,   in   a    departmental
      proceeding   preponderance   of   probability
      would serve the purpose. (See
Kamaladevi
      Agarwal v. State of W.B.
, 2002 (1) SCC 555.)”
40. A caveat needs to be put to whatever has been said

above. We have upheld the decision of disciplinary

committee   of   the   BCCI   on   proof   of    charges    which

upholding of the decision of the disciplinary committee

shall have no effect in the criminal appeal which is

pending against the appellant against the discharge

order. The conclusions and observations as recorded in

the   disciplinary     proceedings    under     Anti-Corruption

Code are entirely different from proof of criminal

charges which are on higher yardstick to prove. It is

a well settled principle that criminal charge must be

proved beyond reasonable doubt which is not applicable

in    disciplinary      proceedings     initiated      by    the

disciplinary committee of the BCCI. We, thus, clarify

that any observation in this judgment shall have no

effect on the criminal appeal which is pending against
45
the appellant pertaining to discharge order.
ISSUE NO. 6
41. The argument pertaining to proper constitution of

disciplinary committee was not raised before the High

Court by the appellant at any stage neither in his

reply to show-cause nor before the High Court any

ground    was    taken    that    disciplinary    committee     was

illegally constituted. In this context, we, however,

have noted submission made by the appellant regarding

Constitution of the disciplinary committee and reply

given by the learned counsel for the BCCI regarding

constitution        of      disciplinary        committee.     The

appellant’s case is that on 02.06.2013, Shri Srinivasan

stepped down from the office of President, BCCI and one

Shri     Jag    Mohan    Dalmia   took   over    as   the    Acting

President. Shri Parag Tripathi replying his submission

submitted that although Shri Srinivasan stepped down

on 02.06.2013 but the working committee meeting held

on 28.07.2013 clearly record that the probe committee

has submitted its report that Shri Srinivasan could

resume charge as the President of BCCI, Shri Srinivasan
46
was again re-elected on 29.09.2013 as President. We are

satisfied that there was no legal impediment in Shri

Srinivasan participating in the disciplinary committee

in   the   meeting      of   13.09.2013    as    President.       The

appellant having not taken this ground even in the

grounds    of   this    appeal,   he   cannot    be     allowed   to

question the constitution of disciplinary committee at

this stage. Issue No.5 is answered accordingly.
ISSUE NOS.7,8 AND 9
42. All    these       issues   are    being    taken    together.
Article 2(Offences Under this Anti-Corruption Code)
,

of the Anti-Corruption Code provides for different

offences which are as follows:-
“ARTICLE 2
     OFFENCES UNDER THIS ANTI-CORRUPTION CODE
     The conduct described in
Articles 2.1
– 2.4,
     if committed by a Participant, shall amount
     to an offence by such Participant under this
     Anti-Corruption Code:
2.1 CORRUPTION:
2.1.1 Fixing or contriving in any way or
           otherwise influencing improperly, or
           being a party to any effort to fix or
           contrive in any way or otherwise
           influence improperly, the result,
           progress, conduct or any other aspect
           of any Match or Event.
47
2.1.2   Seeking,   accepting,   offering   or
        agreeing to accept any bribe or other
        Reward to fix or to contrive in any
        way   or   otherwise   to   influence
        improperly   the  result,   progress,
        conduct or any other aspect of any
        Match or Event.
2.1.3 Failing or refusing, for Reward, to
      perform to one’s abilities in a Match.
2.1.4   Soliciting,    inducing,     enticing,
        instructing, persuading, encouraging
        or facilitating (a) any Participant to
        commit an offence under any of the
        foregoing provisions of this
Article
        2.1
and/or (b) any other person to do
        any act that would be an offence if
        that person were a Participant.
2.2 BETTING:
2.2.1   Placing,    accepting,   laying     or
        otherwise entering into any Bet with
        any other party (whether individual,
        company or otherwise) in relation to
        the result, progress, conduct or any
        other aspect of any Match or Event.
2.2.2   Soliciting,    inducing,     enticing,
        instructing, persuading, encouraging,
        facilitating or authorising any other
        party to enter into a Bet for the
        direct or indirect benefit of the
        Participant in relation to the result,
        progress, conduct or any other aspect
        of any Match or Event.
2.2.3   Ensuring   the    occurrence    of   a
        particular incident in a Match or
        Event, which occurrence is to the
        Participant’s knowledge the subject of
        a Bet and for which he/she expects to
48
receive or has received any Reward.
2.3 MISUSE OF INSIDE INFORMATION:
2.3.1   Using, for Betting     purposes,   any
        Inside Information.
2.3.2   Disclosing Inside Information to any
        person (with or without Reward) before
        or during any Match or Event where the
        Participant   might    reasonably   be
        expected to know that disclosure of
        such information in such circumstances
        could be used in relation to Betting.
NOTE:   Any potential offence under this
        Article will be considered on its own
        set of facts and the particular
        circumstances      surrounding      any
        relevant disclosure. For Example, it
        may be an offence under this clause to
        disclose inside information. (a) to
        journalists or other members of the
        media; and/or (b) on social networking
        websites where the Participant might
        reasonably be expected to know that
        disclosure of such information in such
        circumstances    could   be   used   in
        relation to Betting. However, nothing
        in this Article is intended to
        prohibit any such disclosure made
        within a personal relationship (such
        as a member of the Participant’s
        family) where it is reasonable for the
        Participant   to   expect   that   such
        information   can   be   disclosed   in
        confidence without being subsequently
        used for Betting.
2.3.3   Soliciting,    inducing,     enticing,
        persuading,       encouraging       or
facilitating (a) any Participant to
        commit an offence under any of the
        foregoing provisions of this
Article
49
2.3
and/or (b) any other person to do
        any act that would be an offence if
        that   person  were   a  Participant.
2.4 GENERAL:
2.4.1   Providing or receiving any gift,
        payment or other benefit (whether of
        a monetary value or otherwise) in
        circumstances that the Participant
        might reasonably have expected could
        bring him/her or the sport of cricket
        into                       disrepute.
NOTE:   This Article is only intended to catch
        ‘disrepute’ that when considered in
        all relevant circumstances, relates
        (directly or indirectly) to any of the
        underlying imperatives of and conduct
        prohibited by this Anti-Corruption
        Code   (including  as   described   in
Article 1.1
)

    Where any substantial gift payment or
other benefit is received by any Participant
from an unknown person or organization and/or
for no apparent reason, such Participant is
advised to report such receipt to the
Designated   Anti-Corruption    Official   (or
his/her designee). Where such Participant
does not make such a report, then it is likely
to   constitute   strong   evidence   of   the
commission of this offence.
2.4.2   Failing or refusing to disclose to the
        ACU BCCI (without undue delay) full
        details   of    any   approaches    or
        invitations     received    by     the
        Participant to engage in conduct that
        would amount to a breach of this Anti-
Corruption Code.
2.4.3   Failing or refusing to disclose to the
50
ACU BCCI (without undue delay) full
             details of any incident, fact, or
             matter that comes to the attention of
             a Participant that may evidence an
             offence under this Anti-Corruption
             Code by a third party, including
             (without limitation) approaches or
             invitations that have been received by
             any other party to engage in conduct
             that would amount to a breach of this
             Anti-Corruption Code.
NOTE:   All   Participants   shall   have   a
             continuing obligation to report any
             new incident fact, or matter that may
             evidence an offence under this Anti-
Corruption Code to the ACU BCCI even
             if the Participants’ prior knowledge
             has already been reported.
2.4.4   Failing     or     refusing,    without
             compelling       justification,       to
             cooperate     with     any   reasonable
             investigation carried out by the
Designated Anti-Corruption Official
             (or his/her designee) in relation to
             possible offences under this Anti-
Corruption Code, including failure to
             provide    any     information    and/or
             documentation     requested    by    the
             Designated Anti-Corruption Official
             (or his/her designee) (whether as part
             of a formal Demand pursuant to
Article
             4.3
or otherwise) that may be relevant
             to such investigation.”
43. The Anti-Corruption Code uses the word “offences”

and offences are enumerated under the Code for which

sanction   is provided in
Article 6.
Sanction under
Article 6
is nothing but punishment on commission of
51
the offences and akin to sentencing in the criminal

jurisprudence.         The     principles     of    sentencing      as

applicable in offence under
Indian Penal Code
may not

be strictly applicable to one of punishment/sanction

under    the    Anti-Corruption       Code    but    principles      of

sentencing as applicable in the criminal jurisprudence

may     be   relevant     for    imposing     sanction     in    Anti-

Corruption Code. In the
Criminal Procedure Code
, 1973,

there    are   no     structured     sentencing     guidelines.     In

March, 2003,        the Committee on Reforms             of Criminal

Justice      System     (the    Malimath     Committee),     a     body

established by the Ministry of Home Affairs, issued a

report that emphasized the need to introduce sentencing

guidelines in order to minimise uncertainty in awarding

sentences.
The
Indian Penal Code
prescribe offences

and punishments for the same. For many offences only

the maximum punishment is             prescribed and for some

offences the minimum punishment is also prescribed.

Various jurists and writers have tried to enumerate

circumstances       which      may   mitigate      the   gravity    of

offences.      The Constitution Bench of this Court in
Jagmohan Singh vs. The State of U.P.
, (1973) 1 SCC 20
52
held that law gives very wide discretion in the matter

of punishment to the Judge. In paragraph 24 following

has been laid down:
“24. The policy of the law in giving a very
     wide discretion in the matter of punishment
     to the Judge has its origin in the
     impossibility of laying down standards. Take,
     for example, the offence of Criminal Breach
     of Trust punishable under
Section 409
of the
     Indian Penal Code. The maximum punishment
     prescribed for the offence is imprisonment
     for life. The minimum could be as low as one
     day’s imprisonment and fine. It is obvious
     that if any standards were to be laid down
     with regard to several kinds of breaches of
     trust by the persons referred in that
     section, that would be an impossible task.
     All that could be reasonably done by the
     Legislature is to tell the Judges that
     between the maximum and minimum prescribed
     for an offence, they should, on balancing the
     aggravating and mitigating circumstances as
     disclosed in the case, judicially decide what
     would be the appropriate sentence. Take the
     other case of the offence of causing hurt.
     Broadly, that offence is divided into two
     categories—simple hurt and grievous hurt.
     Simple hurt is again sub-divided—simple hurt
     caused by a lethal weapon is made punishable
     by a higher maximum sentence—Section 324.
     Where grievous hurt is caused by a lethal
     weapon, it is punishable under Section 326
     and is a more aggravating form of causing
     grievous hurt than the one punishable under
     Section 325. Under Section 326 the maximum
     punishment is imprisonment for life and the
     minimum can be one day’s imprisonment and
     fine. Where a person by a lethal weapon
     causes a slight fracture of one of the un-
     important bones of the human body, he would
     be as much punishable under Section 326 of
53
the
Indian Penal Code
as a person who with a
        knife scoops out the eyes of his victim. It
        will be absurd to say that both of them,
        because they are liable under the same
        section   should    be   given    the   same
        punishment………”
44. On    principles   of   sentencing   Constitution   Bench

judgment of this Court in
Bachan Singh vs. State of

Punjab
, (1980) 2 SCC 684, is a locus classicus. The

Constitution Bench speaking through Sarkaria, J. in

paragraph 163 laid down following:
“163………The   present    legislative    policy
        discernible from Section 235(2) read with
        Section 354(3) is that in fixing the degree
        of punishment or making the choice of
        sentence for various offences, including one
        under Section 302 of the Penal Code, the
        court should not confine its consideration
        “principally” or merely to the circumstances
        connected with the particular crime, but also
        give due consideration to the circumstances
        of the criminal.”
45. Further the Constitution Bench in Bachan Singh has

emphasized that the sentencing principle may not only

confine to the nature of the crime but may also focus

on the criminal. In paragraph 201 following was laid

down:
“201………As we read Sections 354(3) and 235(2)
        and other related provisions of the Code of
54
1973, it is quite clear to us that for making
     the choice of punishment or for ascertaining
     the existence or absence of “special reasons”
     in that context, the court must pay due
     regard both to the crime and the criminal.
     What is the relative weight to be given to
     the aggravating and mitigating factors,
     depends on the facts and circumstances of the
     particular case. More often than not, these
     two aspects are so intertwined that it is
     difficult to give a separate treatment to
     each of them. This is so because ‘style is
     the man’………”
46. Before the Constitution Bench various mitigating

factors were suggested. After noticing the various

mitigating     factors   suggested   by   the   counsel   the

Constitution Bench laid down following in paragraphs

207 and 209:
“207. We will do no more than to say that
     these are undoubtedly relevant circumstances
     and must be given great weight in the
     determination of sentence. Some of these
     factors like extreme youth can instead be of
     compelling importance. In several States of
     India, there are in force special enactments,
     according to which a “child”, that is, “a
     person who at the date of murder was less
     than 16 years of age”, cannot be tried,
     convicted   and   sentenced   to   death   or
     imprisonment for life for murder, nor dealt
     with according to the same criminal procedure
     as an adult. The special Acts provide for a
     reformatory procedure for such juvenile
     offenders or children.
209. There are numerous other circumstances
     justifying the passing of the lighter
55
sentence;   as   there   are   countervailing
     circumstances of aggravation. “We cannot
     obviously feed into a judicial computer all
     such situations since they are astrological
     imponderables in an imperfect and undulating
     society.” Nonetheless, it cannot be over-
emphasised that the scope and concept of
     mitigating factors in the area of death
     penalty must receive a liberal and expansive
     construction by the courts in accord with the
     sentencing policy writ large in Section
     354(3)…………”
47. Justice Arijit Pasayat speaking for this Court in
Shailesh Jasvantbhai and another vs. State of Gujarat

and others
, (2006) 2 SCC 359, held that the practice

of punishing all serious crimes with equal severity is

now unknown in civilized societies. This
Court further

held
that disproportionate punishment has some very

undesirable practical consequences. In paragraph 10

following has been laid down:
“10. Proportion between crime and punishment
     is a goal respected in principle, and in spite
     of errant notions, it remains a strong
     influence in the determination of sentences.
     The practice of punishing all serious crimes
     with equal severity is now unknown in
     civilised societies, but such a radical
     departure     from     the    principle     of
     proportionality has disappeared from the law
     only in recent times. Even now for a single
     grave infraction, drastic sentences are
     imposed. Anything less than a penalty of
     greatest severity for any serious crime is
     thought then to be a measure of toleration
56
that is unwarranted and unwise. But in fact,
        quite apart from those considerations that
        make punishment unjustifiable when it is out
        of proportion to the crime, uniformly
        disproportionate punishment has some very
        undesirable practical consequences.”
48. This Court in
Gopal Singh vs. State of Uttarakhand
,

(2013) 7 SCC 545, laid down that principle of just

punishment is the bedrock of sentencing in respect of

a criminal offence. In paragraph 18 following was laid

down:
“18. Just punishment is the collective cry
        of the society. While the collective cry has
        to   be   kept   uppermost    in  the    mind,
        simultaneously      the      principle      of
        proportionality   between   the    crime   and
        punishment cannot be totally brushed aside.
        The principle of just punishment is the
        bedrock of sentencing in respect of a
        criminal offence. A punishment should not be
        disproportionately excessive. The concept of
        proportionality    allows     a   significant
        discretion to the Judge but the same has to
        be guided by certain principles. In certain
        cases, the nature of culpability, the
        antecedents of the     accused, the factum of
        age, the potentiality of the convict to
        become a criminal in future, capability of
        his reformation and to lead an acceptable
        life in the prevalent milieu, the effect —
        propensity to become a social threat or
        nuisance, and sometimes lapse of time in the
        commission of the crime and his conduct in
        the interregnum bearing in mind the nature
        of the offence, the relationship between the
        parties and attractability of the doctrine
57
of bringing the convict to the value-based
     social mainstream may be the guiding factors.
     Needless to emphasise, these are certain
     illustrative aspects put forth in a condensed
     manner. We may hasten to add that there can
     neither be a straitjacket formula nor a
     solvable theory in mathematical exactitude.
     It would be dependent on the facts of the
     case and rationalised judicial discretion.
     Neither the personal perception of a Judge
     nor self-adhered moralistic vision nor
     hypothetical apprehensions should be allowed
     to have any play. For every offence, a
     drastic measure cannot be thought of.
     Similarly, an offender cannot be allowed to
     be treated with leniency solely on the ground
     of discretion vested in a court. The real
     requisite is to weigh the circumstances in
     which the crime has been committed and other
     concomitant factors which we have indicated
     hereinbefore and also have been stated in a
     number of pronouncements by this Court. On
     such touchstone, the sentences are to be
     imposed. The discretion should not be in the
     realm of fancy. It should be embedded in the
     conceptual essence of just punishment.”
49. A three-Judge Bench in
Mukesh and another vs. State

(NCT of Delhi)and others
, (2017) 6 SCC 1, to which one

of us, (Ashok Bhushan, J.) was also a member, has

reviewed the principle of sentencing as was noticed and

elaborated   in   different   judgments   of   this   Court.
Justice Dipak Misra, as he then was, speaking for the

Bench referred to the aggravating circumstances and

mitigating circumstances as noted by the Constitution
58
Bench in
Bachan Singh
(supra). Referring to Bachan

Singh following was held in paragraph 343:
“343.
In
Bachan Singh
case, the Court has
     also held thus: (SCC p. 751, para 209)

        “209. … It is, therefore, imperative
        to voice the concern that courts,
        aided   by   the   broad   illustrative
        guidelines indicated by us, will
        discharge the onerous function with
        evermore scrupulous care and humane
        concern, directed along the highroad
        of legislative policy outlined in
        Section 354(3) viz. that for persons
        convicted of murder, life imprisonment
        is the rule and death sentence an
        exception. A real and abiding concern
        for   the   dignity   of   human   life
        postulates resistance to taking a life
        through law’s instrumentality. That
        ought not to be done save in the rarest
        of rare cases when the alternative
        option         is        unquestionably
        foreclosed.””
50. Justice   R.   Banumathi   delivering   her   concurring

opinion in paragraph 486 has laid down following:
“486. Question of awarding sentence is a
     matter of discretion and has to be exercised
     on     consideration     of     circumstances
     aggravating or mitigating in the individual
     cases. The courts are consistently faced with
     the situation where they are required to
     answer the new challenges and mould the
     sentence to meet those challenges. Protection
     of society and deterring the criminal is the
     avowed object of law. It is expected of the
     courts to operate the sentencing system as
59
to impose such sentence which reflects the
     social conscience of the society. While
     determining sentence in heinous crimes,
     Judges ought to weigh its impact on the
     society   and   impose   adequate   sentence
     considering the collective conscience or
     society’s cry for justice. While considering
     the imposition of appropriate punishment,
     courts should not only keep in view the
     rights of the criminal but also the rights
     of the victim and the society at large.”
51. In the above noted cases this Court has laid down

that awarding sentence is a matter of discretion of the

Judge which has to be exercised on consideration of

circumstances   aggravating   or   mitigating   in   the

individual cases. As observed above, the principle of

sentencing as applicable in the criminal cases may not

be strictly applicable for considering the issue of

punishment/sanction under the Anti-Corruption Code but

the principles noticed pertaining to sentencing serve

a safe guideline for exercise on jurisdiction under
Article 6
of the Anti-Corruption Code.
52. We may notice that this Court in Board of Control

for Cricket in
India(BCCI
) (supra) has held that a zero

tolerance towards any wrong-doing alone can satisfy the
60
cry of clinching the Cricket. The Division Bench of the

Kerala High Court while allowing the writ petition

filed    by    the      BCCI    has     also    observed   that    Anti-

Corruption         Code    of     BCCI    clearly    envisaged       zero

tolerance to corruption. There cannot be any quarrel

to the proposition as
laid down by
this Court as noted

above. What was meant by the zero tolerance is that any

offence committed within the meaning of Anti-Corruption

Code cannot be ignored or to be leniently dealt with.

Zero    tolerance         emphasis     taking    cognizance   of     such

offences and awarding suitable punishment. However,

zero tolerance approach cannot dilute consideration of

relevant       factors         while     imposing    sanction      under
Article       6.
In     Board    of    Control    for    Cricket     in
India(BCCI
) (supra) this Court has laid down that the

quantum of sanction/punishment can vary depending upon

the gravity of the misconduct of the persons committing

the same. In paragraph 116 following has been laid

down:
“116…………We have also while answering those
        questions held that the misconduct against
        these two individuals is actionable as per
        the relevant rules to which we have referred
        in detail. Not only that, we have held that
        action under the Rules can also be taken
61
against the franchisees concerned. We have
      noticed     that      the     quantum     of
      sanction/punishment can vary depending upon
      the gravity of the misconduct of the persons
      committing the same.”
53. Further, in paragraph 63 this Court has clearly

laid down that disciplinary committee of the BCCI is

empowered to impose an appropriate sanction in terms

of
Article 6
of the Code upon consideration of relevant

factors. Paragraph 63 of the judgment is as follows:
“63. In terms of
Article 6
of the Code, upon
      consideration   of   relevant   factors   the
      Disciplinary Committee of BCCI is empowered
      to impose an appropriate sanction upon the
      delinquent having regard to the provisions
      of
Article 6.2
and the Table appearing
      thereunder. There is, therefore, no manner
      of doubt that even under the Anti-Corruption
      Code for Participants, any act like betting
      can attract sanctions not only for the person
      who indulges in such conduct but also for all
      those who authorise, cause, knowingly assist,
      encourage, aid, abet, cover up or are
      otherwise complicit in any act of omission
      or commission relating to such activity.”
54. We, thus, have to look into
Article 6
to find out

the     manner    and     procedure     for    imposing

punishment/sanction by disciplinary committee of the

BCCI. We have    noticed that   various mitigating and
62
aggravating circumstances have been noticed by this

Court in different judgments while considering the

sentencing policy under criminal jurisprudence. If we

look    into
Article   6
,   Article   itself   enumerates

aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
Article 6
contains a heading ‘Sanctions’. Para 6.1 provides that

in order to determine the appropriate sanction that is

to be imposed in each case, the disciplinary committee

must first determine the relative seriousness of the

offence, including identifying all relevant factors

that it deems to.
Article 6.1
is as follows:
“6.1 Where it is determined that an offence
       under this Anti-Corruption Code has been
       committed, the BCCI Disciplinary Committee
       will be required to impose an appropriate
       sanction upon the participant from the range
       of permissible sanctions described in
Article
       6.2.
In order to determine the appropriate
       sanction that is to be imposed in each case,
       the BCCI Disciplinary Committee must first
       determine the relative seriousness of the
       offence, including identifying all relevant
       factors that it deems to:
6.1.1 aggravate the nature of the offence
       under this Anti-Corruption Code, namely

       6.1.1.1 a lack of remorse on the part of
       the Participant;
6.1.1.2   whether   the   Participant   has
       previously been found guilty of any similar
       offence under this Anti-Corruption Code
63
and/or any predecessor regulations of the
     BCCI and/or the ICC Anti-Corruption Code
     and/or   anti-corruption  rules of   other
     National Cricket Federation;
6.1.1.3 where the amount of any profits,
     winnings or other Reward, directly or
     indirectly received by the Participant as a
     result of the offence(s), is substantial
     and/or where the sums of money otherwise
     involved in the offence(s) are substantial;
6.1.1.4 where the offence substantially
     damaged (or had the potential to damage
     substantially) the commercial value and/or
     the public interest in the relevant match(es)
     or event(s);
6.1.1.5 where the offence affected (or had
     the potential to affect) the result of the
     relevant match(es) or event(s);
6.1.1.6 where the welfare of a participant
     or any other person has been endangered as a
     result of the offence;
6.1.1.7 where the offence involved more than
     one participant or other persons; and/or

     6.1.1.8 any other aggravating factor(s) that
     the BCCI Disciplinary Committee considers
     relevant and appropriate.”
55. Further, Article 6.1.2 enumerates the mitigating

circumstances. Articles 6.1.2, 6.1.2.1 to 6.1.2.9 are

as follows:
“6.1.2 mitigate the nature of the offence
     under the Anti-Corruption Code, namely:
6.1.2.1 any   admission   of    guilt   (the
64
mitigating value of which may depend upon its
timing);
6.1.2.2 the participant’s     good   previous
disciplinary record;
6.1.2.3 the young age and/or         lack   of
experience of the participant;
6.1.2.4 where the participant has cooperated
with the Designated Anti-Corruption Official
(or his/her designee) and any investigation
or demand carried out by him/her;
6.1.2.5   where    the   offence    did   not
substantially damage (or have the potential
to substantially damage) the commercial value
and/or the public interest in the relevant
match(es) or event(s);
6.1.2.6 where the offence did not affect (or
have the potential to affect) the result of
the relevant match(es) or event(s);
6.1.2.7 where the Participant provides
Substantial Assistance to the Designated
Anti-Corruption    Official    (or    his/her
designee), that result in the Designated
Anti-Corruption    Official    (or    his/her
designee) discovering or establishing an
offence under this Anti-Corruption Code by
another Participant or another cricket
Participant bound by such regulations or that
results in a criminal or disciplinary body
discovering or establishing a criminal
offence or the breach of professional rules
by another Participant or other third party;
6.1.2.8 where the participant has already
suffered penalties under other laws and/or
regulations for the same offence; and/or

6.1.2.9 any other mitigating factor(s) that
the BCCI Disciplinary Committee considers
65
relevant and appropriate.”
56. The   Anti-Corruption      Code    which   has     articles

containing   mitigating    and aggravating     circumstances

are necessarily to be taken into consideration while

imposing punishment/sanction under
Article 6.
Article

6.2
contains   table    in   three   columns,      (i)   Anti-

Corruption Code of Offence; (ii) Range of permissible

period or ineligibility and (iii) additional discretion

to impose a fine. It is useful to extract entire
Article

6.2
to the following effect:
6.2 Having considered all of the factors
      described in Articles 6.1.1 and 6.1.2, the
      BCCI Disciplinary Committee shall then
      determine, in accordance with the following
      table, what the appropriate sanction(s)
      should be:
ANTI-               RANGE       OF      ADDITIONAL
       CORRUPTION          PERMISSIBLE         DISCRETION
       CODE         OF     PERIOD     OF       TO IMPOSE A
       OFFENCE             INELIGIBILITY       FINE
       Articles            A minimum of
       2.1.1, 2.1.2,       five      (5)       AND, IN ALL
       2.1.3       and     years     and       CASES:
       2.1.4               maximum of a
       (Corruption)        life time           the     BCCI
       Articles            A minimum of        Disciplinary
       2.2.1,    2.2.2     two (2) years       Committee
       and       2.2.3     and a maximum       shall   have
       (Betting)           of five (5)         the
                           years               discretion
       Articles 2.3.1      A minimum of        to
       and 2.3.3 (as       two(2) years        Impose     a
       it relates to       and a maximum       fine on the
66
an     offence    of    five(5)    Participant
      under Article     years            upto        a
      2.3.1) Misuse                      maximum    of
      of      inside                     the value of
      information)                       any Reward
      Articles 2.3.2    A minimum of     Received by
      and 2.3.3 (as     six       (6)    the
      it relates to     months and a     Participant
      an     offence    maximum    of    directly or
      under Article     five      (5)    indirectly,
      2.3.2) (Misuse    years            out of or in
      of      inside                     relation
      information)                       to        the
      Articles 2.4.1    A minimum of     offence
      and       2.4.2   one (1) year     committed
      (General)         and a maximum    under this
                        of five (5)      Anti-
                        years            Corruption
      Articles 2.4.3    A minimum of     Code.
      and       2.4.4   six       (6)
      (General)         months and a
                        maximum    of
                        two (2) years
57. In the present case life ban has been imposed on

the appellant on offences under Article 2.1.1., 2.1.2,

2.1.3 and 2.14(corruption), for which as per second

column a minimum of five years and maximum of life time

ineligibility is provided for. Whether in case where

offence under Article 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.3 and 2.1.4 is

proved, the disciplinary committee is obliged to award

a life time ban. The answer has to be that life ban

cannot be imposed in all cases where such offences are
67
proved. When range of ineligibility which is minimum

five years, maximum life ban is provided for, the

discretion to choose either minimum or maximum or in

between has to be exercised on relevant factors and

circumstances.
58. The       disciplinary      committee’s          order      dated

13.09.2013 does not advert            to the aggravating and

mitigating factors as enumerated in Article 6.1.1. and

6.1.2. Without considering the relevant provisions of

Anti-Corruption Code the disciplinary committee has

imposed life time ban which sanction cannot be held to

be in accordance with the Anti-Corruption Code itself.
The disciplinary committee had not even adverted to

Article      6.1.1    and    6.1.2     which       enumerates     the

aggravating     and   mitigating     circumstances.        When   the

Anti-Corruption Code itself mandates consideration of

relevant factors and this Court in Board of Control for

Cricket   in
India
(supra)      had    laid   down    that   the

disciplinary committee of the BCCI is empowered to

impose appropriate sanction in terms of
Article 6
of

the   Code     upon   consideration        of   relevant     factors,
68
without considering the relevant factors imposition of

maximum punishment cannot be sustained. Apart from

factors as noted above the subsequent conduct of the

appellant also shows obedience to BCCI. Initially when

the life time ban was imposed on 13.09.2013, appellant

has not even challenged the said order, it was only

after the appellant was discharged from the criminal

case   on    25.07.2015       and     when    the   appellant       got

opportunity to play and participate in the Scotland

Premier     League    on    e-mail    was    sent   through      Kerala

Cricket     Association       on     11.01.2017.     It    was    only

thereafter     when    No    Objection       Certificate    was     not

granted to the appellant and the BCCI refused to modify

the ban, writ petition was filed in February 28, 2017

in the Kerala High Court.
59.    In so far as charges proved under Article 2.2.3,

2.4.1 and 2.4.2 the maximum sanction is of 5 years, the

award of punishment of five years shall also satisfy

the requirement under Code, which need no separate

consideration for the purposes of this case. As per

Article 6.3.2 all sanction imposed on appellant shall
69
run concurrently. As on date the period of 5 years

sanction has come to an end.
60. In view of the foregoing discussion we arrive on

the following conclusions:
(1)   In the disciplinary proceedings held against

           the appellant under the Anti-Corruption Code

           of BCCI the principles of natural justice

           were not violated.
(2)   The conclusions drawn by the disciplinary

           committee       of   the   BCCI       on   the    basis    of

           materials as referred to in paragraphs 12 and

           13   of   the    order     cannot       be   said     to    be

           suffering       from    any    infirmity         which     may

           warrant         judicial         review          by        the

           constitutional         courts.    The      constitutional

           courts     in    exercise        of    jurisdiction         of

           judicial    review      will     interfere       only    when

           conclusions of the disciplinary committee

           are perverse or based on no evidence. It is
70
not open for the High Court or this Court to

      substitute    its       own   opinion         based   on   the

      materials on record on the proof of charges.
(3)   The   standard     of    proof      in    a    disciplinary

      inquiry and in a trial of a criminal case are

      entirely different. In a criminal case it is

      essential     to    prove     a     charge      beyond     all

      reasonable    doubt       wherein        in    disciplinary

      inquiry under Anti-Corruption Code of BCCI

      the preponderance of probability is to serve

      the purpose.
(4)   We although have upheld the decision of the

      disciplinary committee of the BCCI on proof

      of charges, which upholding of the decision

      of the disciplinary committee shall have no

      effect   on   the       criminal      appeal      which     is

      pending against the appellant against the

      discharge     order.          The    conclusions           and

      observations as recorded in the disciplinary

      committee     under      Anti-Corruption          Code     are
71
entirely different from proof of criminal

      charges which require higher yardstick to

      prove.
(5)   There    was   no     legal     impediment    in    Shri

      Srinivasan participating in the disciplinary

      committee proceedings dated 13.09.2013 as

      President.      The       appellant     having       not

      questioned the constitution of disciplinary

      committee even in the grounds of this appeal

      he   cannot    be     allowed    to   challenge      the

      constitution of disciplinary committee at

      this stage.
(6)   Sanction under
Article 6
of Anti-Corruption

      Code of BCCI is nothing but punishment on

      commission     of   the    offences    and    akin    to

      sentencing in criminal jurisprudence. The

      principles of sentencing as applicable in

      offence under the
Indian Penal Code
may not

      be      strictly      applicable      to      one      of

      punishment/sanction           under     the         Anti-

      Corruption Code but principles of sentencing
72
as applicable in the criminal jurisprudence

      may be relevant for imposing sanction under

      the Anti-Corruption Code.
(7)   In cases where offences under Article 2.1.1,

      2.1.2,   2.1.3      and   2.1.4      are     proved,     the

      disciplinary     committee      is     not    obliged    to

      award a life time ban in all cases where such

      offences     are     proved.         When      range      of

      ineligibility which is minimum five years,

      maximum life time ban is provided for, the

      discretion     to    which,     either        minimum    or

      maximum or in between has to be exercised on

      relevant facts and circumstances.
(8)   The   disciplinary        committee          order    dated

      13.09.2013 does not advert to the aggravating

      and   mitigating     factors      as    enumerated        in

      Articles     6.1.1        and        6.1.2.          Without

      considering the relevant provisions of Anti-

      Corruption Code, the disciplinary committee

      has imposed a life time ban on the appellant
73
which    sanction       cannot    be   held   to      be    in

           accordance       with    the     Anti-Corruption        Code

           itself.
(9)   Due to subsequent events also, we are of the

           view that the disciplinary committee of BCCI

           should       revisit           the       quantum            of

           punishment/sanction         to    be   imposed     on      the

           appellant.
61. In view of the foregoing discussion, we partly

allow the appeal in the following manner:
(i)    The      order     dated         13.09.2013      of        the

           disciplinary committee only to the extent

           of imposing sanction of life time ban is set

           aside.
(ii)   The disciplinary committee of the BCCI may

           reconsider               the           quantum             of

           punishment/sanction which may be imposed on

           the appellant as per
Article 6
of the Anti-
74
Corruption Code. The appellant may be given

            one   opportunity      to    have    his   say    on    the

            question of quantum of punishment/sanction.
(iii)   The     disciplinary         committee      may        take

            decision as indicated above on the quantum

            of    punishment/sanction       at    an   early       date

            preferably within a period of three months

            from today.
(iv)    Appellant shall await the decision of the

            disciplinary committee and future course of

            action    shall   be    in    accordance     with      the

            decision of the disciplinary committee so

            taken. Parties shall bear their own costs.
...............................J.
                              ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )



                        ...............................J.
                                ( K.M.JOSEPH)
NEW DELHI,
MARCH 15, 2019.