[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Modern ... vs C.P.F. Commr. Thr. Commr. E.P.F. ... on 26 March, 2019
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7698 OF 2009



         MODERN TRANSPORTATION CONSULTATION
         SERVICES PVT. LTD. & ANR.                                           ..... APPELLANT(S)

                                                          VS.

         CENTRAL PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER
         EMPLOYEES PROVIDENT FUND
         ORGANISATION & ORS.                                                 ..... RESPONDENT(S)



                                                   JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
1.              In this appeal by special leave, the appellants (writ petitioners) have called

         in question the judgment and order dated 07.05.2008 in FMA No. 537 of 2007

         whereby, the Division Bench of High Court at Calcutta has reversed the order

         dated 07.04.2006, as passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P. No. 2982(W) of

         2005.
1.1.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
By the aforesaid order dated 07.04.2006, the learned Single Judge of High
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.03.26
17:53:37 IST
Reason:
Court allowed the writ petition filed by the appellants while upholding their

         contentions that the employees of Railways, who had withdrawn full amount of
1
provident fund while retiring and who were engaged by them on lump sum

honorarium basis, should be treated as “excluded employees" for the purpose of

the
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'/'the Act of 1952') and the Employees'

Provident Funds Scheme, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Scheme of 1952').

However, in the Letters Patent appeal preferred by the Central Provident Fund

Commissioner and the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, the Division

Bench of High Court totally disagreed with the learned Single Judge; and

dismissed the writ petition while holding that the said employees, who retired

after serving an exempted employer, would not fall within the category of

excluded employees on re-employment and would be covered by the Act and the

Scheme of 1952.
2.    The basic question arising for determination in this appeal is as to whether

the retired employees of Railways, who had withdrawn all the superannuation

benefits, including full amount of accumulations in their provident fund accounts,

are to be treated as "excluded employees" in terms of Paragraph 2(f) of the

Scheme of 1952? If to be treated as "excluded employees", the said retired

employees of Railways, on being re-employed by the appellants, may not be

required to join the Fund created under the said Scheme of 1952 and

consequently, the appellants may not be obliged to make any contribution in that

regard.
2
3.     The relevant factual aspects leading to the question aforesaid are not of

much controversy and could be briefly summarised as follows:
3.1.   The appellant No. 1, a Private Limited Company, had been engaged in

manning the Captive Railway System of the respondent No. 4-Damodar Valley

Corporation ('DVC'). The appellant No. 2 is said to be a Director of the appellant

No. 1-company. The appellants would submit that their only connection with DVC

had been a contract to supply the personnel for manning the cabins and gates on

the railway-road; and they were receiving the remuneration for supplying the

aforesaid personnel, who were retired employees of the Indian Railways and

were engaged on a lump sum honorarium basis.
3.2.   By   his   letter   dated   18.02.2002,   the   Assistant   Provident   Fund

Commissioner Circle-IV, Calcutta informed the appellant-company that the

number of employees of its establishment being twenty-eight in the month of

May, 1999, the establishment came within the purview of the Act of 1952 with

effect from 01.05.1999. In reply, the Director of the appellant-company stated in

his letter dated 05.03.2002 that all the persons engaged by the company, except

two of them, were the retired Railway employees above 58 years of age; that all

of them were working only on retainer basis; and that they were not covered

under the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme. The said Assistant Provident

Fund Commissioner, in his letter dated 03.05.2002, refuted the contentions of the

appellants while referring to Paragraph 26 of the Scheme of 1952 and while
3
asserting, inter alia, that on and from 01.11.1990, an employee is eligible for

enrolment as a member of the Scheme of 1952 from the date of joining an

establishment covered under the Act of 1952; that there was no age bar for an

employee to become a member of the Scheme of 1952; and that the employees

in question were not excluded employees in terms of the Scheme of 1952.


3.3.   It appears that the appellant-company applied for exemption under
Section

17
of the Act and Paragraph 27 of the Scheme of 1952 on the ground that the

persons concerned were retired Railway employees but then, no decision was

taken on such representations. On the other hand, by yet another letter dated

22.05.2002, the appellant-company elaborated on its contentions that the

employees in question, being retired employees of Railways, did not come within

the purview of the Act of 1952 and were to be treated as "excluded employees"
under Paragraph 26 of the Scheme of 1952. It was stated that these employees,

whilst in the service of Railways, were not covered under the Scheme of 1952

but were covered under the General Provident Fund (‘GPF’) Scheme and had

withdrawn all the superannuation benefits including Provident Fund (‘PF’) and

pension and hence, they were not covered under the Act of 1952. It was also

claimed that these employees were in receipt of more favourable benefits than

those available under the Scheme of 1952 and had expressed their unwillingness

to become the members of the Scheme of 1952. However, the authorities related

with the Employees' Provident Fund Organisation (the contesting respondents
4
herein) maintained that the employees of an establishment were eligible for

enrolment as members of the Scheme of 1952 irrespective of age; and the

employees of the appellant company were not "excluded employees", as defined

in the Scheme of 1952.
3.4.   The appellant-company having failed to remit the requisite contribution in

relation to the employees concerned, the competent authority under the Act of

1952 commenced proceedings under
Section 7A
thereof, for determination of the

money due from the appellants. By its order dated 31.12.2004, the competent

authority, after having heard the appellants, determined the amount payable by

the appellant-company under various heads while holding, inter alia, that the

provisions of the Act of 1952 were not repugnant to the GPF Scheme; that a

person was entitled to draw double or multiple pension/s; and that the retirement

of the employees from Railways would not take them within the definition of

"excluded employees". Aggrieved, the appellants preferred the writ petition

before the High Court at Calcutta [W.P. No. 2982(W) of 2005].
4.     In the impugned order dated 07.04.2006, the learned Single Judge of High

Court, though held that the Act was applicable to the establishment of appellants

but, thereafter, concluded that on superannuation, the retired employees of the

Railways would fall within the definition of “excluded employees”. The learned

Single Judge observed that an employee, who had withdrawn full amount of his

accumulation in the fund, on re-employment with any establishment not
5
exempted under
Section 17
of the Act, would not be again treated as an

employee to be covered under the Act. The learned Single Judge further

observed that accepting the submissions of the authorities would create a

situation where an employee, after being employed in any establishment and

working for some time, may voluntarily retire from service and join another

establishment and keep on doing so successively and get the benefit of various

provisions of the Act of 1952. According to the learned Single Judge, even

though the Act of 1952 is a piece of social benefit legislation, and its provisions

are intended to protect the employees, who are considered to be the weaker

section of society, yet, the enactment is not intended to create a largesse in

favour of the employees at the cost of the employer. In the opinion of learned

Single Judge, the retired employees of Railways cannot be compelled to become

members of the Fund and else, the object and purpose of the expression

“excluded employees” in the Scheme of 1952 would be rendered nugatory. The

learned Single Judge also observed that when an employee earning more than

Rs. 6,500/- was treated as an “excluded employee” because of the scale of pay

as per Paragraph 2(f)(ii) of the Scheme of 1952, there was no reason as to why

Paragraph 2(f)(i) would not apply in case of an employee who had withdrawn the

full amount of his accumulations. The learned Single Judge further observed that

in order to decide as to whether the provisions of the Act do not apply in respect

of some of the employees, the provisions contained in Paragraph 2(f) of the

Scheme of 1952 must be strictly construed; and having taken the benefit of one
6
Scheme, the employees cannot compel the employer to comply with the

provisions of the Act. With these observations, the learned Single Judge allowed

the writ petition and remanded the matter to the authorities for re-determination

of the amount of provident fund payable by the appellants, after treating the

retired employees as “excluded employees”, but after taking into account those

employees who were seeking to be included under the Act voluntarily.
5.     Aggrieved by the order so passed by the learned Single Judge, the Central

Provident Fund Commissioner and the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner

preferred the Letters Patent appeal that has been considered and allowed by the

Division Bench of High Court at Calcutta by way of the impugned judgment and

order dated 07.05.2008.
5.1.   The Division Bench took note of the meaning assigned to the expressions

“Fund” and “Scheme” in the Act of 1952 as also the definition of “excluded

employee” in Paragraph 2(f) of the Scheme of 1952 and rejected the contentions

of the writ petitioners that the employees in question were to be treated as

excluded employees while observing as under:
“We are unable to accept the submission of Mr. Sengupta that the
       receipt of GPF and the Pension by the retired railway employees would
       be as if full payment has been received under paragraph 69(1). There
       can be no addition to the term “Fund” as defined under
Section 2(h)
. It is
       also not possible to accept that since the Railway Employees have
       retired on superannuation and are beyond the age of 55 years, they
       would be on par with the “excluded employees”. There is no maximum
       age limit prescribed in any of the provisions of the Act or the 1952
       Scheme for an employee to become a member of the Fund or the
       Scheme. It is claimed that the term “Scheme” refers only to the
7
Employees Provident Fund Scheme framed under
Section 5
. The term
“excluded employee” therefore has to be co-related to the employee who
was a member of the “fund” as defined under
Section 2(h)
of the Act.
Such an employee would be an “excluded employee” when the full
amount has been withdrawn by him on retirement from service after
attaining the age of 55 years i.e., in terms of Paragraph 69(1)(a). The
provision being crystal clear does not admit of any other interpretation.
Paragraph 69(1)(c) deals with an employee who withdraws the full
amount standing to his credit immediately after migration from India for
permanent settlement abroad and for taking employment abroad.
In our opinion, there can be no dissections of these provisions as
proposed by Mr. Sengupta. Under paragraph 2(f)(i) a retired employee
would be an excluded employee. Under Paragraph 2(f)(ii) an employee
who is otherwise entitled to become a Member of the fund becomes an
excluded employee as he is earning beyond the stipulated minimum that
is required for an employee to become a Member of the Scheme. This
provision clearly demonstrates the underlying principle of the
Provident
Fund Act
is to provide social security for those employees who otherwise
would not be in a position to save any money from their wages.
Paragraph 2(f)(iv) again provides that an apprentice shall be an excluded
employee till he becomes a fullfledged employee. There is a qualitative
difference between Paragraph 2(f)(i) on the one hand and Paragraph 2(f)
(ii) & (iv) on the other. Paragraph 2(f) 1(i) provides exclusion only to the
employees who have already received retirement benefits. On the other
hand, under Clause 2(f)(ii) and 2(f)(iv) an employee may be an excluded
employee at one point and may not be at a subsequent point. But benefit
of these provisions cannot be extended to any employees who are not
erstwhile members of a fund administered by the Central Board, under
Section 5A
of the Act

       The ‘Fund’ created by the exempted establishment under
Section
17(1)(a)
cannot be equated with the Fund which is established by the
Central Board under
Section 5(1)
. Nor can it be added to the definition of
Fund under
Section 2(h)
of the Act. It is for this reason that the
appropriate Government can only exempt an establishment from the
operation of the scheme under
Section 17(1)
upon forming an opinion
that the employees of such an establishment enjoyed benefits which are
not less favourable to the employee than the benefits available under the
Act or any Scheme made under the Act. In fact, the exemption can only
be granted on consultation with the Central Board. This provision is
made only to give supervisory control to the Appropriate Government
over individual employers seeking exemption. But this provision cannot
be put on the same pedestal as
Section 5(1)
of the Act. It is admitted
position that employees of the Railways are not members of the 1952
Scheme. Therefore, these retired employees cannot be treated as
excluded employees covered under Paragraphs 69(1)(a) and 26 of the
8
1952 Scheme. There is a clear distinction between a fund which is
       created by the Central Government and is administered by the Central
       Board under
Section 5(1)(a)
and a fund created by a private employer,
       exempted under
Section 17(1)
and administered by Board of Trustees
       under
Section 17(1A)
and (b). There can be no intermingling of the two
       provisions. ”

5.2.   In view of the above, the Division Bench concluded on the matter in the

following:
“In view of the above, we find that the judgment of the learned
       Single Judge is not sustainable in law. We are unable to hold that retired
       employees of the Railways can be treated as excluded employees. We
       are also unable to hold that, not including the retired employees in the
       category of excluded employees would in any manner contravene the
       provisions of the Act or the Scheme. We are unable to accept that
       bringing the Railway employees within the purview of the Act and the
       Scheme would result in unjust enrichment of the retired employees. We
       are of the opinion that an employee who retires after serving an
       exempted employer would not fall within the category of excluded
       employees on re-employment and would be covered by the Act and the
       1952 Scheme. We are also unable to accept that since the employees
       covered under Paragraph 2(f)(i) and (ii) are excluded employees, all
       employees who had drawn the full amount from any other Provident
       Fund should also be treated as excluded employees.
In view of the above, we allow this appeal and set aside the order
       passed by the learned Single Judge.
Consequently, the writ petition being W.P. No. 2982(W) of 2005
       shall be dismissed.”
6.     Assailing the judgment aforesaid, learned counsel for the appellant has

strenuously argued that the Division Bench of High Court has erred in

interpreting the term “excluded employee” and in holding that the retired

employees of the Railways, even when they had withdrawn the full amount from

their provident fund, cannot be treated as excluded employees. The learned

counsel emphasised on the submissions that the retired Railway employees, who
9
were covered under GPF Scheme while in service, who had drawn all the

superannuation benefits including the PF, and who were also receiving pension

under the CPG rules, would fall within the definition of "excluded employees" as

contained in clause (i) of Paragraph 2(f) of the Scheme of 1952. Learned counsel

submitted that as per Paragraph 26 thereof, the Scheme of 1952 shall apply to all

the employees other than excluded employees; and, as per Paragraph 2(f)(i), an

excluded employee is the one who, having been a member of a provident fund,

had withdrawn the full amount of his accumulations in the fund under clause (a)

or (c) of sub-paragraph (1) of Paragraph 69. Therefore, according to the learned

counsel, the employees concerned in the present case ought to be treated as

“excluded employees”, for having withdrawn their PF accumulated with the Indian

Railways after having reached the age of superannuation. Further, according to

the learned counsel, if these employees are not treated as “excluded

employees”, it would amount to their unjust enrichment, which has never been

the intention of the Act of 1952 or the Scheme thereunder. The learned counsel

contended that the Division Bench of High Court has erred in holding that

Paragraph 69 of the said Scheme does not apply to the case of retired Railway

employees and such retired employees, though not covered under the Act, came

to be so covered on their re-employment in an establishment covered under the

said Act. According to the learned counsel, the Division Bench has erred in

interpreting the definitions of ‘Fund’ and ‘Scheme’ and in restricting the definition

of ‘Fund’ under
Section 2(h)
of the Act by holding that even after retiring from the
10
Railways and receiving the benefits under GPF Scheme, the said employees are

not "excluded employees" as the said employer is not covered under the Scheme

of 1952.
7.    Per contra, learned counsel for the contesting respondents has referred to

the object as also the arrangement of the Act of 1952 and has particularly

submitted that two different sets of provident fund Schemes are envisioned: on

one hand is the Scheme contemplated by
Section 5
of the Act, the Scheme of

1952 being that Scheme; and on the other hand, there could be other Scheme/s,

as permissible under
Section 17
of the Act of 1952. According to the learned

counsel, coverage of the employees referable to the Act of 1952 by one of the

Schemes of provident fund is the rule and generally, such employees would be

covered by the Scheme of 1952 with the exception that such coverage may not

be necessary when the employees receive the benefits under some other

Scheme, which are not less than those available under the Scheme of 1952.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the framework of the

Scheme of 1952, only some specific classes of employees are treated as

“excluded employees”, as defined in Paragraph 2(f) thereof; and, as per clause
(i) of Paragraph 2(f), only such an employee would be excluded who was earlier

the member of the Fund under the Scheme of 1952 and had withdrawn all the

benefits thereunder. According to the learned counsel, the present appeal is

devoid of merits for the reason that the Railway employees, who were not
11
covered under the Scheme of 1952, do not fall within the definition of “excluded

employees” as per Paragraph 2(f) of the Scheme of 1952, even if they had

withdrawn the amount standing to their credit in any provident fund created under

any other Scheme.
8.     We have bestowed thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions and

have examined the record of the case with reference to the law applicable.
9.     For determination of the question involved in this matter, appropriate it

would be to briefly take note of the objects and reasons behind the Act of 1952

as also the relevant provisions thereof and the relevant stipulations in the

Scheme framed thereunder i.e., the Scheme of 1952.
9.1.   The background aspects had been that, taking note of the need to provide

for the institution of contributory provident funds for the purpose of financial

security of industrial workers, the Government of India promulgated the

Employees' Provident Fund Ordinance with effect from 15.11.1951, which was

later on replaced by the Act of 19521. Thus, the concept underlying the

enactment had been of providing for compulsory contributory provident funds for

safeguarding the future of industrial workers. Elaborate provisions have been

made in the Act for creation of a Fund, to be settled in accordance with a

Scheme to be framed by the Central Government. However, the Act also

1
The Act
was originally enacted on 04.03.1952 as "
The Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952
" (No. 19
of 1952); its nomenclature was changed to "
The Employees' Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund
Act, 1952
" w.e.f. 23.04.1971; and its nomenclature was again changed to the present one i.e., "
The
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
" w.e.f. 01.08.1976.
12
provides for continuation of such of the other provident funds, which are offering

equal or more advantageous terms to the employees concerned and are

operating efficiently.
9.1.1.
In the Act
of 1952, the expression “employee” is defined in clause (f) of
Section 2
as under:
“(f)   “employee” means any person who is employed for wages in any
       kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an
       establishment, and who gets, his wages directly or indirectly from the
       employer, and includes any person,-
(i) employed by or through a contractor in or in connection with the work
       of the establishment;
(ii) engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under
       the
Apprentices Act, 1961
(52 of 1961), or under the standing orders of
       the establishment;”
9.1.2. The concepts of “exempted employee” and “exempted establishment” are

defined in clauses (ff) and (fff) of
Section 2
of the Act of 1952 as under:
“(ff) “exempted employee” means an employee to whom a Scheme or
       the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be, would, but for the exemption
       granted under
section 17
, have applied;
(fff)  “exempted establishment” means an establishment in respect of
       which an exemption has been granted under
section 17
from the
       operation of all or any of the provisions of any Scheme or the Insurance
       Scheme, as the case may be, whether such exemption has been granted
       to the establishment as such or to any person or class of persons
       employed therein;”



9.1.3. The expression “Fund” is defined in clause (h) of
Section 2
of the Act of

1952 as under:
“(h)   “Fund” means the provident fund established under a Scheme;”
13
9.1.4. The expression “Scheme” means the one framed under
Section 5
of the

Act of 1952 and is defined in clause (l) of
Section 2
as under:
“(l)  “Scheme” means the Employees Provident Fund Scheme framed
      under
section 5
;”

9.1.5.
Section 5
of the Act of 1952, providing for the Employees’ Provident Fund

Scheme, reads as under2:
"5. Employees’ Provident Funds Scheme. – (1) The Central
      Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme
      to be called the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme for the
      establishment of provident funds under this Act for employees or for any
      class of employees and specify the establishments or class of
      establishments to which the said Scheme shall apply and there shall be
      established, as soon as may be after the framing of the Scheme, a Fund
      in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Scheme.
(1A) The Fund shall vest in, and be administered by, the Central
      Board constituted under
section 5A
.
(1B) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Scheme framed under
      sub-section 1 may provide for all or any of the matters specified in
      Schedule II.
(2) A Scheme framed under sub-
section 1
may provide that any of
       its provisions shall take effect either prospectively or retrospectively on
       such date as may be specified in this behalf in the Scheme."
9.1.6. For the purpose of the question at hand, sub-section (1) and sub-section

(1-A) of
Section 17
of the Act of 1952, relating to the powers of the appropriate




2 The original
Section 5
has undergone several changes by way of amendments. The
relevant amendments to be noticed for the present purpose are that by Act No. 37 of 1953,
original
Section 5
was re-numbered as sub-section (1), the expressions for establishment of
Fund soon after framing of Scheme were added, and sub-section (2) was also inserted.
Moreover, by Act No. 28 of 1963, Sub-section (1A) to
Section 5
(providing for vesting and
administration of Fund in and by the Central Board) was inserted. The provisions relating to
Central and State Boards and co-related aspects were also inserted as
Sections 5A
to
5E
by
the said Act No. 28 of 1963, which need not be dilated upon, for being not relevant for
present purpose.
14
Government to grant exemption and the consequence thereof, could also be

taken note of as under:
"17. Power to exempt - (1) The appropriate Government may, by
      notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may
      be specified in the notification, exempt, whether prospectively or
      retrospectively, from the operation of all or any of the provisions of any
      Scheme –
(a) any establishment to which this Act applies if, in the opinion of
      the appropriate Government, the rules of its provident fund with respect
      to the rates of contribution are not less favourable than those specified in
      section 6 and the employees are also in enjoyment of other provident
      fund benefits which on the whole are not less favourable to the
      employees than the benefits provided under this Act or any Scheme in
      relation to the employees in any other establishment of a similar
      character; or
(b) any establishment if the employees of such establishment are
      in enjoyment of benefits in the nature of provident fund, pension or
      gratuity and the appropriate Government is of opinion that such benefits,
      separately or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable to such
      employees than the benefits provided under this Act or any Scheme in
      relation to employees in any other establishment of a similar character:
Provided that no such exemption shall be made except after
      consultation with the Central Board which on such consultation shall
      forward its views on exemption to the appropriate Government within
      such time limit as may be specified in the Scheme.
(1A) Where an exemption has been granted to an establishment
      under clause (a) of sub-section (1),-
(a) the provisions of
sections 6
,
7A
,
8
and
14B
shall, so far as may
      be, apply to the employer of the exempted establishment in addition to
      such other conditions as may be specified in the notification granting
      such exemption, and where such employer contravenes, or makes
      default in complying with any of the said provisions or conditions or any
      other provision of this Act, he shall be punishable under
section 14
as if
      the said establishment had not been exempted under the said clause (a);
(b) the employer shall establish a Board of Trustees for the
      administration of the provident fund consisting of such number of
      members as may be specified in the Scheme;
(c) the terms and conditions of service of members of the Board of
      Trustees shall be such as may be specified in the Scheme;
15
(d) the Board of Trustees constituted under clause (b) shall–
(i) maintain detailed accounts to show the contributions credited,
       withdrawals made and interest accrued in respect of each employee;
(ii) submit such returns to the Regional Provident Fund
       Commissioner or any other officer as the Central Government may direct
       from time to time;
(iii) invest the provident fund monies in accordance with the
       directions issued by the Central Government from time to time;
(iv) transfer, where necessary, the provident fund account of any
       employee; and
(v) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Scheme.
***                 ***                  *** "
9.2.   After having taken note of the relevant provisions of the Act of 1952,

essential it is to take into comprehension the relevant provisions and stipulations

of the Scheme of 1952 that has been, as noticed, framed by the Central

Government under
Section 5
of the Act of 1952.
9.2.1. Noteworthy it is that there is no definition of an "excluded employee" in the

Act of 1952. In fact, this expression comes in operation for the purpose of

exclusion of certain employees from compulsion to join the Fund created under

the Scheme of 1952. Therefore, this expression is defined only in the Scheme of

1952, in clause (f) of paragraph 2 thereof, as under:
"(f)   "excluded employee" means—
(i) an employee who, having been a member of the Fund, withdrew the
       full amount of his accumulations in the Fund under clause (a) or (c) of
       sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 69;
16
(ii) an employee whose pay at the time he is otherwise entitled to
        become a member of the Fund, exceeds fifteen thousand rupees per
        month;3

        Explanation. --'Pay' includes basic wages with dearness allowance,
        retaining allowance (if any) and cash value of food concessions
        admissible thereon;
(iii) [omitted]4;
(iv) an apprentice.
Explanation.-- An apprentice means a person who, according to the
        certified standing orders applicable to the factory or establishment, is an
        apprentice, or who is declared to be an apprentice by the authority
        specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government;"
9.2.2. Paragraph 26 of the Scheme of 1952 specifies the classes of employees

entitled to, and required to, join the Fund as also the co-related aspects. Useful it

shall be to keep in view the fact that the expression "Fund", as occurring in

Paragraph 26 refers to the Fund created under the Scheme of 1952 5. This

Paragraph 26 reads as under:
"26. Classes of employees entitled and required to join the fund.-
(1) (a) Every employee employed in or in connection with the work of a
        factory or other establishment to which this Scheme applies, other than
        an excluded employee, shall be entitled and required to become a
        member of the Fund from the day this paragraph comes into force in
        such factory or other establishment.
(b) Every employee employed in or in connection with the work of a
        factory or other establishment to which this Scheme applies, other than
        an excluded employee, shall also be entitled and required to become a
        member of the fund from the day this paragraph comes into force in such
        factory or other establishment if on the date of such coming into force,
        such employee is a subscriber to a provident fund maintained in respect

3 At the relevant point of time, in sub-clause (ii) the figures had been 'six thousand and five hundred
rupees' in place of the present figures of ‘fifteen thousand rupees’
4 Sub-clause (iii) and explanation thereto were omitted by GSR 1467 dated 02.12.1960
5 The contra-distinction of this "Fund" with a "private provident fund" is noticeable in sub-paragraph (5),
where reference is made to an exempted establishment.
17
of the factory or other establishment, or in respect of any other factory or
     establishment (to which the Act applies) under the same employer:
Provided that where the Scheme applies to a factory or other
     establishment on the expiry or cancellation of an order of exemption
     under
section 17
of the Act, every employee who but for the exemption
     would have become and continued as a member of the Fund, shall
     become a member of the fund forthwith.
(2) After this paragraph comes into force in a factory or other
     establishment, every employee employed in or in connection with the
     work or that factory or establishment, other than an excluded employee,
     who has not become a member already shall also be entitled and
     required to become a member of the fund from the date of joining the
     factory or establishment.
(3) An excluded employee employed in or in connection with the work of
     a factory or other establishment to which this Scheme applies shall, on
     ceasing to be such an employee, be entitled and required to become a
     member of the fund from the date he ceased to be such employee.

     (4) On re-election of an employee or a class of employees exempted
     under paragraph 27 or paragraph 27 A to join the fund or on the expiry or
     cancellation of an order under that paragraph, every employee shall
     forthwith become a member thereof.
(5) Every employee who is a member of a private provident fund
     maintained in respect of an exempted factory or other establishment and
     who but for exemption would have become and continued as a member
     of the fund shall, on joining a factory or other establishment to which this
     Scheme applies, become a member of the fund forthwith.

     (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph an officer not
     below the rank of an Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner may, on
     the joint request in writing of any employee of a factory or other
     establishment to which this Scheme applies and his employer, enroll
     such employee as a member or allow him to contribute more than fifteen
     thousand rupees of his pay per month if he is already a member of the
     fund and thereupon such employee shall be entitled to the benefits and
     shall be subject to the conditions of the fund, provided that the employer
     gives an undertaking in writing that he shall pay the administrative
     charges payable and shall comply with all statutory provisions in respect
     of such employee."
9.2.3. For comprehension of all the relevant provisions and stipulations, a

reference to sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 69 of the Scheme of 1952 is also
18
pertinent and the same, as applicable at the relevant point of time, may be

noticed as under6:
"69. Circumstances in which accumulations in the Fund are payable
       to a member.- (1) A member may withdraw the full amount standing to
       his credit in the Fund—
(a)     on retirement from service after attaining of the age of 55 years:
Provided that a member, who has not attained the age of 55 years at the
       time of termination of his service, shall also be entitled to withdraw the
       full amount standing to his credit in the Fund if he attains the age of 55
       years before the payment is authorized;
(b)     on retirement on account of permanent and total incapacity for
       work due to bodily or mental infirmity duly certified by the medical officer
       of the establishment or where an establishment has no regular medical
       officer, by a registered medical practitioner designated by the
       establishment;
(c)   immediately before migration from India for permanent settlement
       abroad or for taking employment abroad;
(d)    on termination of service in the case of mass or individual
       retrenchment;
(dd) on termination of service under a voluntary scheme of retirement
       framed by the employer and the employees under a mutual agreement
       specifying, inter alia, that notwithstanding the provisions contained in
       sub-clause (a) of clause (oo) of
section 2
of the Industrial Disputes Act,
       1947, excluding voluntary retirements from the scope of definition of
       "retrenchment" such voluntary retirements shall for the purpose be
       treated as retrenchments by mutual consent of the parties;
(e)    in any of the following contingencies, provided the actual payment
       shall be made only after completing a continuous period of not less than
       two months immediately preceding the date on which a member makes
       the application for withdrawal:—
(i)    where a factory or other establishment is closed but certain
       employees who are not retrenched, are transferred by the employer to
       other factory or establishment, not covered under the Act;
6 This paragraph 69 and its sub-paragraphs and clauses have also undergone several amendments from
time to time; however, the contents as reproduced herein are more or less in the same form, as are
applicable to the present case.
19
(ii) where a member is transferred from a covered factory or other
      establishment to another factory or other establishment not covered
      under the Act, but is under the same employer; and
(iii) where a member is discharged and is given retrenchment
      compensation under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(14 of 1947);"
10.   Before proceeding further, we may take note of a decision of this Court

referred to by the learned counsel for the parties, being that in the case of
N.K.

Jain and Ors. v. C.K. Shah and Ors.
: (1991) 2 SCC 495. The relevant

background aspect of the said case had been that the establishment in question

was governed by the provisions of the Act of 1952 but was exempted under
Section 17
; and had its own trust in respect of the provident fund contributions.

However, the establishment failed to pay such contributions for some period

during the year 1974 and there was a default. The question was as to whether

such default would entail prosecution also, or only the exemption was to be

cancelled ? The said case, being related to a different fact situation and different

controversy may not have a direct bearing on the present matter but, the

observations of this Court, illuminative on the setup and framework of the Act

and the Scheme of 1952, could be usefully reproduced as under:
“7. On a perusal of the above extracted provisions of the Act the
       following aspects to the extent relevant to the present case can be spelt
       out. The management of an establishment has to contribute to the
       provident fund and the government under
Section 5
can frame a
       Scheme called Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme and such a Scheme
       was framed in the year 1952. The Scheme provides for the
       establishment of provident fund under the Act for employees of the
       establishments specified therein.
Section 6
is the material provision and
       deals with contributions which may be provided under the Scheme and
       also prescribes the rate of contribution to the fund and that the
       employees’ contribution should be equal to the contribution payable by
20
the employer.
Section 14
deals with the penalties and
Section 14
(1-A)
       lays down that an employer who contravenes, or makes default in
       complying with the provisions of
Section 6
shall be punishable with
       imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months but shall not be
       less than three months in case of default in payment of the employees’
       contribution which has been deducted by the employer from the
       employees’ wages. But for adequate reasons it can be less. Paragraph
       76 of the Scheme also provides for punishment for failure to pay such
       contributions to the fund. Then we have
Section 17
which provides for
       the exemption. As per the said section the appropriate government may
       by notification and subject to such conditions, as may be specified in the
       notification, exempt from the operation of all or any of the provisions of
       any Scheme (in the present case 1952 Scheme) if the appropriate
       government is satisfied that the rules of the provident fund which a
       particular establishment is following in the matter of contribution to the
       provident fund are not less favourable than those specified in
Section 6
and that the employees are also in enjoyment of other provident fund
       benefits. In other words the exemption from the operation of the Scheme
       is granted provided the particular establishment makes contribution as
       per its own rules governing the contribution to the fund, which in other
       words, can be called a provident fund scheme of its own are not less
       favourable than those specified in
Section 6
. Accordingly the exempted
       establishment has to provide for its employees the benefits which are in
       no way less favourable than the ones provided under the Act and the
       Scheme.”

10.1. In the said case, this Court finally held that the failure to make the

contributions by an exempted establishment to the provident fund as per its own

rules may also attract the penalties under sub-sections (1-A) and (2-A) of
Section

14
of the Act of 1952.
11.   In the scheme and structure of the Act of 1952, it is but clear that for the

specified establishments or class of establishments, the Central Government was

to frame a Scheme, to be called “the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme”; and

soon after framing of such Scheme, a Fund was to be established, which was to

vest in, and administered by, the Board constituted under
Section 5A
. As noticed,
21
the expression “Fund” is defined in the Act of 1952 to mean the provident fund

established under a Scheme; and the expression “Scheme” is defined to mean

the Employees Provident Fund Scheme framed under
Section 5
. Indisputably,

the Scheme of 1952 is the one framed by the Central Government in exercise of

the powers conferred by
Section 5
ibid. We shall examine the provisions of the

Scheme of 1952 a little later. At this juncture, apposite it would be to take note of

another feature of the Act of 1952 emanating from the provisions relating to

exemption, as contained in
Section 17
thereof.
12.   By virtue of sub-section (1) of
Section 17
, an establishment could be

exempted from the operation of all or any of the provisions of any Scheme if: (a)

in regard to the establishment to which the Act applies, the appropriate

Government is of opinion that the rules of its provident fund, with respect to the

rates of contributions, are not less favourable for the employees than those

specified in
Section 6
and the employees are in enjoyment of other provident

fund benefits which, on the whole, are not less favourable than the benefits

available under the Act or under the Scheme in relation to any other

establishment of similar character; and (b) in regard to any other establishment,

the appropriate Government is of opinion that benefits in the nature of provident

fund, pension or gratuity, as available to the employees of such establishment

are, on the whole, not less favourable than the benefits provided under the Act or

any Scheme in any other establishment of similar character.
22
12.1. When an exemption is granted to an establishment under clause (a) of

sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of the Act of 1952, several duties are cast upon the

employer as specified in sub-section (1-A) thereof, with penal provisions in the

event of default. We need not elaborate on various other provisions contained in
Section 17
. Suffice would be to notice for the present purpose that coverage of

the employees like the one engaged in the establishment of appellants is the

rule; and ordinarily, the employees are expected to be covered by the Scheme

framed under
Section 5
of the Act of 1952 with the exception being that in case of

availability of equivalent or more favourable benefits in an establishment, the

appropriate Government could grant exemption. As per sub-section (2) of
Section

17
, even the Scheme may make a provision for exemption but the basic

requirement being again that the persons or the class of persons to be exempted

are entitled to such benefits which are, on the whole, not less favourable than the

benefits provided under the Act and the Scheme thereunder i.e., the Scheme of

19527. All the requirements of
Section 17
make the position undoubtedly clear

that the provisions are intended to ensure optimum benefits for the employees

and even the exemption is granted only on the satisfaction of appropriate
7 Sub-section (2) of
Section 17
reads as under:
(2) Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any person or class of persons employed
in any establishment to which the Scheme applies from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in the nature of provident fund, gratuity
or old age pension and such benefits, separately or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable than the
benefits provided under this Act or the Scheme:
Provided that no such exemption shall be granted in respect of a class of persons unless the
appropriate Government is of opinion that the majority of persons constituting such class desire to
continue to be entitled to such benefits.
23
Government about existence of equivalent or more favourable provident fund

Scheme for the employees concerned.
13.     The Scheme of 1952 was framed by the Central Government on

02.09.1952 i.e., within 6 months of the enactment of the Act of 1952. The

provisions of the Scheme are generally made applicable, subject to the

provisions of
Sections 16
and
17
of the Act, to all the factories and other

establishments to which the Act applies or is applied under sub-sections (3) and

(4) of
Section 1
or under
Section 3
of the Act. The provisions of the Scheme of

1952 have been extended to various establishments from time to time under

clause (b) of sub-paragraph (3) of Paragraph 1 thereof. As per Paragraph 26 of

the Scheme of 1952, every employee employed in or in connection with the work

of the factory or other establishment to which this Scheme applies, is entitled to,

and is obliged to, become a member of the Fund from the date the Scheme

would come into force for such factory or establishment, except the “excluded

employees”. Significantly, even an "excluded employee", on ceasing to be so i.e.,

on ceasing to be an “excluded employee”, is entitled to, and is required to,

become a member of the Fund from the date of such cessation.
13.1.   In the framework of the Scheme of 1952, exclusion is provided under

clause (i) of Paragraph 2(f) thereof to an employee who had been a member of

the Fund and had withdrawn full amount of his accumulations in the Fund under

clause (a) or (c) of Paragraph 69(1). Now, clause (a) of the said Paragraph 69(1)
24
of the Scheme of 1952 refers to a member who would withdraw the full amount

standing to his credit in the Fund on retirement from service after attaining the

age of 55 years. Clause (c) is not relevant for the present purpose as the same

relates to a member who withdraws the amount before migration from India for

permanent settlement or taking employment abroad but then, a comprehensive

look at various clauses of paragraph 69(1) makes it clear that reference therein is

to a member of the Fund who withdraws full amount standing to his credit for

different eventualities like regular retirement; retirement for disablement or

incapacity; migration from the country; termination of service; accepting a

voluntary retirement scheme; closure of the factory; transfer from a covered

factory or establishment to another factory or establishment not covered under

the Act etc.
14.   It is not a matter of much debate in this case that the appellants otherwise

answer to the description of "employer" under the Act of 1952 and their

establishment is covered thereunder. The basic contention urged in this matter

on behalf of the appellants is that the persons engaged by them had been the

members of General Provident Fund while working as the employees of Railways

and had withdrawn the full amount of accumulations in GPF and are, therefore,

to be treated as “excluded employees”. This contention has fundamental

shortcomings as pointed out infra.
25
14.1. The crucial aspect to be considered in this matter is as to whether the

definition of “excluded employees” in Paragraph 2(f) as also the stipulation in

Paragraphs 26 and 69 of the Scheme of 1952 refer to any provident fund or only

to the Fund under the Scheme of 1952? As noticed above, in the setup and

structure of the Act of 1952, specific distinction is maintained between the Fund,

which is created by the Central Government under
Section 5(1)
of the Act and

any other provident fund, which is created by an employer. Significantly, clause
(f) of Paragraph 2 of the Scheme of 1952 refers to “the Fund" and not to "any

Fund”; and Paragraphs 26 and 69 also refer to “the Fund" and not to "any Fund”.

The determiner “the”, as occurring in Paragraph 2(f) as also Paragraph 69 before

the expression "Fund" makes it clear that the reference therein is only to the

Fund which is created under the Scheme of 1952 and it is not a general

reference to any Fund. The requirement of joining the Fund under Paragraph 26

ibid. is also of joining that Fund which is created under the Scheme of 1952. In

other words, obviously and undoubtedly, the Fund referred to in Paragraphs 2(f),

26 and 69 of the Scheme of 1952 is that Fund, which is created under the

Scheme of 1952 and the reference is not to any other Fund. Thus, to be covered

under the expression “excluded employee” by virtue of clause (i) of paragraph

2(f) read with clause (a) of paragraph 69(1) ibid., the employee must be such

who was a member of the Fund established under the Scheme of 1952 and who

had withdrawn full amount of his accumulations in the said Fund on retirement

from service after attaining the age of 55 years.
26
14.2. On the plain interpretation aforesaid, we have not an iota of doubt that the

retired Railway employees, who had withdrawn their accumulations in General

Provident Fund or any other Fund of which they were members, could not have

been treated as “excluded employees” for the purpose of the Scheme of 1952 for

the reason that such a withdrawal had not been from the Fund established under

the Scheme of 1952. In fact, there was no occasion for them to make any

withdrawal from the Fund established under the Scheme of 1952 because they

were never the members of the said Fund. In other words, the employees in

question were not answering to the requirements of clause (i) of paragraph 2(f)

read with clause (a) of paragraph 69(1) of the Scheme of 1952 and hence, were

not the “excluded employees”. The Division Bench of the High Court has rightly

rejected the contention of appellants that every employee, who had withdrawn

full amount from any provident fund, should be treated as an “excluded

employee”. In our view, the answer by the Division Bench of the High Court is in

accord with law and deserves to be approved.
15.   We may also take note of and deal with a few ancillary aspects. The

appellants, in their initial response to the proposition for coverage of the

employees in question under the Scheme of 1952, attempted to state that most

of the said employees were above 58 years of age and that they had expressed

unwillingness to join the Fund under the said Scheme. It does not appear from

the record if the concerned employees categorically made any such expression
27
of unwillingness. Even otherwise, as noticed, the provisions of the Act and the

stipulations of the Scheme of 1952 are mandatory in character and the

application thereof could not have been averted by the appellants or the said

employees except on certain eventualities as mentioned in
Section 17
of the Act

as also Paragraph 26 of the Scheme of 1952. Such eventualities are indeed non-

existent in the present matter. So far the aspect relating to age is concerned, the

operation and effect of the Act and the Scheme of 1952 are not restricted with

reference to any age limit of the employee. Such a suggestion relating to the age

of the employees had been entirely baseless and has rightly been disapproved.


15.1. Apart from the above, the appellants also alleged that they had applied for

exemption and no decision was taken on their representation. In this regard, it is

noticed that the appellant had not made any such submission that they had any

better and beneficial scheme for their employees.       In any case, there is no

concept of any holidaying in payment of contribution by the employer by merely

moving an application for exemption; and when there was no order of exemption

under
Section 17
by the competent authority, the appellant-company was under
the liability to make payment of its contribution.
16.   Before concluding, we may also point out that the observations by the

learned Single Judge of High Court in this matter, that clause (i) of Paragraph 2(f)

of the Scheme of 1952 has to be applied in relation to the withdrawal from any

provident fund and else, an employee may keep on successively deriving
28
benefits, remain rather unwarranted because the principle underlying the

enactment and the Scheme of 1952 is to provide financial security to the

employees. The concept of exclusion from the Scheme of 1952 is limited to the

class/es of employees mentioned in Paragraph 2(f) only; and the area of

operation of this exclusion clause cannot be expanded by way of an assumption

about the alleged extra advantage likely to be driven home by an employee. In

fact, even the assumption of the learned Single Judge does not appear apt in the

framework of the Act and the Scheme of 1952. Whatever an employee gets by

virtue of the Act of 1952 is basically the accumulation in his provident fund

account, where he and his employer do contribute. The learned Single Judge

had gone to the extent of observing that when the employees earning more than

the particular amount (Rs. 6,500/- per month at the relevant time) were excluded

under clause (ii) of Paragraph 2(f) of the Scheme of 1952, the retired employees

who had received their accumulations could also be excluded under clause (i) of

Paragraph 2(f). With respect, we are unable to find any logic in these

observations because the stipulation in clause (ii) of Paragraph 2(f) relates to an

entirely different class of employees with reference to the quantum of their pay;

and exclusion of such class of employees as per clause (ii) cannot lead to any

corollary that clause (i) be also expanded beyond its plain language. The order

passed by the learned Single Judge, being based on entirely irrelevant

considerations, has rightly been disapproved by the Division Bench of High

Court.
29
17.   To summarise, in the framework and setup of the Scheme of 1952, the

concept remains plain and clear that if a person is member of the Fund created

thereunder i.e., under the Scheme of 1952 and withdraws all his accumulations

therein, he may not be obliged to be a member of the same Fund under the

Scheme of 1952 over again and could be treated as an “excluded employees”.

However, such is not the relaxation granted in relation to an employee who was

earlier a member of any other Fund but later on joins such an establishment

where he would be entitled to membership of the Fund created under the

Scheme of 1952. This framework of the provisions and stipulations appears to be

best serving the interest of employees, while providing them with continued

financial security. Therefore, we find no reason to take any view different than the

one taken by the Division Bench of the High Court in this case.
18.   For what has been discussed hereinabove, this appeal fails and is,

therefore, dismissed.
...............................................J.
                                                     (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)




                                                    ..............................................J.
                                                     (DINESH MAHESHWARI) 1

New Delhi
Dated: 26th March, 2019.
30