[Cites
42
, Cited by
58
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Gujarat Through Principal ... vs Jayeshbhai Kanjibhai Kalathiya on 1 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1213, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 126
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10373 – 10374 OF 2010


                      STATE OF GUJARAT AND OTHERS ETC.                        .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                      JAYESHBHAI KANJIBHAI KALATHIYA ETC.                  .....RESPONDENT(S)



                                                        JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Two writ petitions were filed in the High Court of Gujarat

                                under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. One writ petition

                                was filed by a single person (respondent herein) who had been

                                awarded contract for one year to extract, collect, gather and

                                remove ordinary sand from river Tapi falling within certain area at

                                village Amboli, Taluka Kamrej, Surat. The sand being a mine and

                                mineral, it is the State Government which is empowered to grant

                                such leases. After the excavation of sand, a part there of was
Signature Not Verified
subjected to further processing by addition of fly ash and the
Digitally signed by
other part was sold as sand outside the State of Gujarat. Second
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.03.01
18:43:47 IST
Reason:
petition was filed by ten petitioners (respondents in the second
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 1 of 41
appeal). They are in the business of processing ordinary river

       sand after buying it from leaseholders.      The process involves

       washing, cleaning and mixing fly ash to convert it into IS-Zone-2-

       Sand, which is then sold in 50 kg. Bags under a brand name.
These respondents supply that sand to builders in the State of

       Maharashtra.
2)     As is clear from the aforesaid facts, sand, after processing, is sold

       outside the State of Gujarat.       The challenge laid in the writ

       petitions was against the Resolution No. GMR-102010-1-S-CHH

       dated May 04, 2010 whereby all leaseholders, stockists, traders

       and exporters were prohibited from exporting ordinary sand

       excavated from the areas in the State of Gujarat to other States

       within the country or other countries by transporting such sand

       outside the State or the country. When these writ petitions were

       pending consideration, the Government of Gujarat issued a

       Notification on June 11, 2010 thereby amending the Gujarat

       Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 by making the Gujarat Minor Mineral

       (Amendment) Rules, 2010 with the insertion of Rule 44-BB, with

       immediate effect.          This amendment was done in purported

       exercise of powers conferred under Section 15 read with Section

       23-C of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                             Page 2 of 41
Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
MMDR Act
’). By way of

       Rule 44-BB, movement of sand beyond the border of the State of

       Gujarat was prohibited. Rule 44-BB reads as under:
"No movement of sand shall be allowed beyond the border
              of the State. In case any vehicle is found transporting
              sand to the neighbouring State, even with authorized
              royalty pass or delivery challan, it shall be treated as
              violation of the Act and the Rules made thereunder and the
              penal provisions as specified therein shall be applicable.”
3)     Within two months thereafter, i.e. on August 26, 2010, the State of

       Gujarat also notified the Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules,

       2010 so as to repeal the Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966. Rule

       71 of the new Rules was to the same effect as Rule 44-BB and

       the same is as under:
"Rule 71. Prohibition to transport sand beyond border.
              – No movement of sand shall be allowed beyond the
              border of the State. In case any vehicle is found
              transporting sand to the neighbouring State even with
              authorized royalty pass or delivery challan, it shall be
              treated as violation of the Act and the rules made
              thereunder and the penal provisions, except compounding,
              as specified therein shall be applicable.”
4)     This led the respondents to amend the writ petitions thereby

       incorporating challenge to Rule 44-BB of Amendment Rules as

       well as Rule 71 of the Concession Rules. The High Court has,

       vide impugned judgment, allowed the writ petitions and struck

       down the aforesaid Rules as ultra vires on the ground that the
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                               Page 3 of 41
rule making power of the State Government does not empower

         and cannot be stretched to empower the State Government to

         make Rules directly prohibiting movement of mineral so as to

         impinge upon the freedom guaranteed by
Article 301
of the

         Constitution. It may be noted here itself that a Division Bench of

         the Andhra Pradesh High Court in C. Narayana Reddy and etc.

         v. Commissioner of Panchayat Raj and Rural Employment,

         A.P., Hyderabad and others1 had taken a contrary view.
Likewise, the Madras High Court had also decided this issue vide

         its judgment dated April 27, 2009 in
D. Sivakumar v.

         Government of Tamil Nadu2
by taking similar view as that of the

         Andhra Pradesh High Court.               In the impugned judgment, the

         Gujarat High Court has, however, differed with the Andhra

         Pradesh and Madras High Courts. Having regard to the

         conflicting opinion of the High Courts, leave was granted in this

         matter. This is how the instant appeals came to be heard finally

         by this Court.
5)       Before proceeding further, we would like to recapitulate, in broad,

         the scheme of the
MMDR Act
insofar as it relates to regulating

         minor minerals are concerned and the powers that are delegated

         by the Central Government to the State Governments in respect
1    AIR 2004 AP 234
2    Writ Petition Nos. 23317 and 24211 of 2008
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 4 of 41
of minor minerals. In this very hue, we also propose to take note

       of the relevant provisions of the
MMDR Act
.
6)
The MMDR Act
is enacted by Parliament to provide for the

       regulation of mines and development of minerals under the

       control of the Union, i.e. the Central Government.
Section 2
provides a declaration to this effect with the stipulation that it is

       expedient in the public interest that Union should take under its

       control, the regulation of mines and development of minerals, to

       the extent provided in the Act. It is for this reason the Union took

       control insofar as regulation of mines and development of

       minerals is concerned.             In order to exercise this control, no

       reconnaissance or mining operations in any area are allowed by

       any    person      except        with   the   permission   of   the     Central

       Government.          Even transportation or storage is prohibited

       otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the
MMDR

       Act
and the Rules made thereunder (
Section 4
).
7)
Section 13
of the MMDR Act empowers the Central Government

       to make rules in respect of minerals.
8)     It follows from the above that as far as minor minerals are

       concerned, limited powers are given to the State Government
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                        Page 5 of 41
inasmuch as under
Section 15
of the MMDR Act the State

       Government is authorised to make rules in respect of minor

       minerals. Relevant portions of this Section read as under:
"15. Power of State Governments to make rules in
              respect of minor minerals. – (1) The State Government
              may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
              regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases or
              other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals
              and for purposes connected therewith.
(1A) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of
              the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any
              of the following matters, namely –

                                 xx        xx           xx
(d) the terms on which, and the conditions subject to
                 which and the authority by which quarry leases,
                 mining leases or other mineral concessions may be
                 granted or renewed;
xx        xx           xx
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed.
xx       xx           xx”


9)     There was an amendment to this Act by way of Mines and
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1999

       (No. 38 of 1999) which became effective from December 18,

       1999. By this Amendment Act,
Section 4(1A)
, Section 23-A and

       Section 23-C were inserted. We would like to reproduce these

       sections along with the Statement of Objects and Reasons which

       prompted the Legislature to insert these provisions:
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 6 of 41
"
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

              The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)
              Act, 1957 provides for the regular and development of
              minerals other than petroleum and natural gas.
              Consequent upon the decisions taken in the Conference of
              the State Ministers/Secretaries of Mines and Geology held
              in December, 1996, a Committee under the Chairmanship
              of the then Secretary, Ministry of Mines was constituted in
              February, 1997 to, inter alia, make recommendations
              regarding delegation of powers to the State Governments
              relating to grant and renewal of prospecting licences and
              mining leases and other related approvals and to suggest
              measures to reduce delay in this regard, review of the
              existing laws and procedures governing the regulation and
              development of minerals to make them more compatible
              with the changed policies and measures for prevention of
              illegal mining. The Committee in his report made wide-
              ranging recommendations in the area of delegation of
              powers to the State Governments, procedural
              simplifications, etc. which will go a long way to mitigate the
              problems faced by the States and the prospective
              investors while, at the same time, keeping the interests of
              the mining industry in particular and the national interest,
              in general, in tact. After careful consideration of the
              recommendations of the Committee, the Government has
              decided to amend the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and
              Development) Act, 1946
.
2. Some of the more important amendments to be made
              are as follows:
xx         xx           xx
(iii) A new provision is proposed to be inserted in the
                  Act prohibiting transportation or storage or anything
                  causing transportation or storage of any mineral
                  except under the due provisions of the Act, with a
                  view to preventing illegal mining.
Further, the Act
is
                  proposed to be amended to cover the breach of the
                  provisions of the proposed new provision of the Act to
                  be punishable. It is also proposed to insert a new
                  provision to provide for anything seized under the Act
                  as liable for confiscation under court orders. A new
                  section is proposed to be inserted to empower the
                  State Governments to make rules for preventing
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                  Page 7 of 41
illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals
                 and for purposes connected therewith.
Section 4(1A)
No person shall transport or store or cause to be
              transported or stored any mineral otherwise than in
              accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules
              made thereunder.
Section 23-C

              (1) The State Government may, by notification in the
              Official Gazette, make rules for preventing illegal mining,
              transportation and storage of minerals and for the
              purposes connected therewith.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of
              the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any
              of the following mattes, namely:–
(a) establishment of check-posts for checking of
                 minerals under transit;
(b) establishment of weigh-bridges to measure the
                 quantity of mineral being transported;
(c) regulation of mineral being transported from the
                 area granted under a prospecting licence or a mining
                 lease or a quarrying licence or a permit, in whatever
                 name the permission to excavate minerals, has been
                 given;
(d) inspection, checking and search of minerals at
                 the place of excavation or storage or during transit;
(e) maintenance of registers and forms for the
                 purposes of these rules;
(f) the period within which and the authority to which
                 applications for revision of any order passed by any
                 authority be preferred under any rule made under
                 this section and the fees to be paid therefor and
                 powers of such authority for disposing of such
                 applications; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                Page 8 of 41
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may
                 be, prescribed for the purpose of prevention of illegal
                 mining, transportation and storage of minerals.

              (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 30
, the
              Central Government shall have no power to revise any
              order passed by a State Government or any of its
              authorised officers or any authority under the rules made
              under sub-sections (1) and (2).”
10)    As noted above, the impugned Rules are made in exercise of the

       powers conferred under
Section 23-C
of the MMDR Act. Further,

       as
Section 14
categorically states that provisions of
Section 5
to
13
are not applicable in respect of minor minerals, rule making

       power of the Central Government contained in
Section 13
does

       not extend to minor minerals. It is in this context
Section 15
gives

       power to the State Government to make rules in respect of minor

       minerals.     The State Government, thus, is given power under
Section 15
. It is also given power under Section 23-C.
11)    A perusal of Sections 15 and 23-C in relation to the aforesaid

       discussion would clearly suggest that the power of the State

       Government to make rules is restricted to:
(a) making rules for grant of quarry leases, mining leases or

       other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals and for

       the purposes connected therewith; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 9 of 41
(b) making rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and

       storage of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith.
12)    In the aforesaid context, question arose before the High Court as

       to whether in exercise of such powers delegated by the

       Legislature upon the State Government, could the State

       Government make a rule to the effect that the sand which is a

       minor mineral would not be allowed to be taken beyond the

       borders of the State of Gujarat and making such movement as

       punishable offence. According to the High Court, delegation of

       powers to the State Government under the aforesaid provisions

       does not include or envisage restriction on inter-State trade,

       commerce and intercourse which shall be free.                  Thus, the

       impugned rules are held to be ultra vires the provisions of
Section

       15
and
23-C
of the MMDR Act. They are also held to be violative

       of
Article 301
of the Constitution. Relevant discussion on this

       aspect by the Gujarat High Court in the impugned judgment runs

       as under:
"14. As seen earlier, the provisions of
section 4
(1-A) and
              section 23-C were simultaneously added by the
              amendment of 1999, with the objective of prohibiting
              transportation or storage of any mineral, except in
              accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules
              made in that behalf, with a view to preventing illegal
              mining. Prohibition or restriction of inter-State trade of any
              mineral was neither intended nor provided or envisaged
              either expressly or by necessary implication. On the other
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 10 of 41
hand, delegation of powers to make rules either in
section
              15
or in
section 23-C
of the Act is not couched in general
              terms as in
section 18
.
Section 18
exclusively empowers
              the Central Government to make such rules as it thinks fit
              for the purpose of conservation and development of
              minerals in the whole country. Apart from delegation of
              such powers couched in wider terms, the Central
              Government is specifically authorized to make rules for
              regulation of excavation or collection of minerals from any
              mine as well as for storage of minerals. As against that,
              the State Government is empowered to make rules, in
              respect of all minerals, for regulation of minerals being
              transported from the area granted under a prospecting
              licence or a mining lease or a quarry licence or a permit.
              The context and the composite scheme of the Act
              contained in the provisions of
sections 4
(1-A), 15, 18, 21
              and 23-C clearly indicate that the delegation of power to
              regulate or make rules for transportation or storage of
              minerals, including minor minerals, does not empower and
              cannot be stretched to empower the State Government to
              make rules directly prohibiting movement of minerals so as
              to impinge upon the freedom guaranteed by
Article 301
of
              the Constitution. In fact, the State Government has
              admittedly made the Gujarat Mineral (Prevention of Illegal
              Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2005 in
              exercise of the powers conferred by
section 23-C
of the
              Act for regulating transport, possession and storage of
              minerals in the State; and those rules are not under
              challenge. Although it is not significant, in light of the view
              being taken herein about validity of the impugned rules, it
              needs to be noted that the part of new Rule 71 taking
              away the facility of compounding is apparently repugnant
              to
section 23-A
of the Act. And, if validity of the impugned
              rules cannot be upheld, the impugned resolution cannot
              stand without the support of any legal, executive or
              legislative authority.”
13)    We may also, at this stage, refer to the reasoning given by the

       High Courts of Andhra Pradesh and Madras in support of their

       view, which is in conflict with the view taken by the Gujarat High
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                  Page 11 of 41
Court. The judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court proceeds

       to decide the issue in the following manner:
"27.    Sector 23-C of the Act authorises the State
              Government to make rules not only for the purpose of
              preventing illegal mining but also for transportation and
              storage of minor minerals, which power would imply that
              even after the minor mineral has been mined, the power is
              conferred on the State Government to frame Rules for
              such mined minor mineral as regards its storage and/or its
              transportation and also to frame rules to see that no illegal
              mining activity is carried on. Sub-clauses (a) to (g) of
              Clause (2) of Section 23-C are illustrative of the matters,
              which are covered under the rule making power. Sub-
              section (2) says that in particular and without prejudice to
              the generality of the powers conferred under Section 23-C,
              rules may provide for all or any of the said matters. Sub-
              clause (c) itself say that regulations can be framed of
              mineral being transported from the area granted under the
              licence or a mining lease. Rules can be framed on any of
              the matters including transportation of the excavated
              mineral. Section 23-C is the source of power under which
              Rule 9-W can be said to have been framed by the State
              Government. We have to keep in mind that the Parliament
              passed the Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No. 38 of 1999)
              thereby inserting Section 23-C in the Principal Act after the
              decision of the Supreme Court in Kavery Chetty’s case
              (supra). By the said provision, power was specifically
              conferred on the State Government to make rules for
              preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of
              minerals. The State Government has framed the Rules
              thereafter. Thus, there is ample power with the State
              Government to frame Rules regarding transportation of the
              excavated minor mineral, which would include restriction
              on the transport of the said minor mineral beyond the limits
              of the State borders. In this view of the matter, the
              challenge to Rule 9-W is without any substance.”
14)    Likewise, the Madras High Court has proceeded to discuss the

       issue as follows:
"13. Definition of the word ‘Regulation’
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                Page 12 of 41
Shri V.T. Gopalan has contended that the word ‘regulation’
              mentioned in
Section 23-C
of the Act should not be
              construed to mean prohibition. He further contended that
              a total prohibition is impermissible in law, violative of
Article
              19(1)(g)
and, therefore, the impugned rule is liable to be
              declared as bad in law. We are of the opinion that the
              word ‘regulation’ has no fixed connotation. The said word
              will have to be given wider meaning when the public
              interest is involved.
In the judgment reported in (1981) 2
              SCC 205 (
State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone
), the Hon’ble
              Supreme Court has held as follows:
“10. One of the arguments pressed before us was
                 that
Section 15
of the Mines and Minerals
                 (Regulation and Development) Act authorised the
                 making of rules for regulating the grant of mining
                 leases and not for prohibiting them as Rule 8-C
                 sought to do, and, therefore, Rule 8-C was ultra vires
Section 15
. Well-known cases on the subject right
                 from Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto v.
                 Virgo and Attorney-General for Ontario v. Attorney-
                 General for the Dominions up to
State of U.P. v.
                 Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd.
were brought
                 to our attention. We do not think that “regulation” has
                 that rigidity of meaning as never to take in
                 “prohibition”. Much depends on the context in which
                 the expression is used in the statute and the object
                 sought to be achieved by the contemplated
                 regulation.
It was observed by Mathew, J. in
G.K.
                 Krishnan v. State of Tamil Nadu
: “The word
                 ‘regulation’ has no fixed connotation. Its meaning
                 differs according to the nature of the thing to which it
                 is applied.” In modern statutes concerned as they are
                 with economic and social activities, “regulation” must,
                 of necessity, receive so wide an interpretation that in
                 certain situations, it must exclude competition to the
                 public sector from the private sector. More so in a
                 welfare State.
It was pointed out by the Privy Council
                 in Commonwealth of Australia v. Bank of New South
                 Wales — and we agree with what was stated therein
                 — that the problem whether an enactment was
                 regulatory or something more or whether a restriction
                 was direct or only remote or only incidental involved,
                 not so much legal as political, social or economic
                 consideration and that it could not be laid down that
                 in no circumstances could the exclusion of
                 competition so as to create a monopoly, either in a
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                    Page 13 of 41
State or Commonwealth agency, be justified. Each
                 case, it was said, must be judged on its own facts
                 and in its own setting of time and circumstances and
                 it might be that in regard to some economic activities
                 and at some stage of social development, prohibition
                 with a view to State monopoly was the only practical
                 and reasonable manner of regulation. The statute
                 with which we are concerned, the
Mines and
                 Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act
, is
                 aimed, as we have already said more than once, at
                 the conservation and the prudent and discriminating
                 exploitation of minerals. Surely, in the case of a
                 scarce mineral, to permit exploitation by the State or
                 its agency and to prohibit exploitation by private
                 agencies is the most effective method of
                 conservation and prudent exploitation. If you want to
                 conserve for the future, you must prohibit in the
                 present.
We have no doubt that the prohibiting of
                 leases in certain cases is part of the regulation
                 contemplated by
Section 15
of the Act.”

              Similarly, in (2000) 8 SCC 655 (
Quarry Owners’ Assocation
              v. State of Bihar
) it has been held that the word ‘regulation’
              will have to be given a wide interpretation taking into
              consideration of social, economic and political justice. We
              are of the opinion that while deciding as to whether the
              prohibition is reasonable, the Court has to take into
              consideration the greater public and social interest as
              against the fundamental right of the citizen.
In (2003) 7
              SCC 59 (
Indian Handicrafts Emporium v. Union of India
),
              the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that prohibition of
              trade in ivory does not offend
Article 19(1)(g)
and the same
              is a reasonable restriction under
Article 19(6)
of the
              Constitution. It is also to be noted only sand is prohibited
              from taking outside the State in view of the overwhelming
              public interest. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the
              definition of the word ‘regulation’ is wide enough to cover
              the prohibition and movement of minerals outside the
              State.
xx        xx           xx
16. Environmental Perspective

              The said rule has been introduced in view of the attempt
              made by the dealers of sand and contractors of building to
              transport the sand purchased from the Government
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 14 of 41
outside the State. According to the Government, the said
              rule has been made in public interest and also taking into
              consideration of the hardship that caused to the
              consumers in the State of Tamil Nadu as well as the high
              rate of urbanisation in the State. In the counter affidavit, it
              is also stated by the Government that illegal, unaccounted
              sand is also transported outside the State. It is well known
              that sand in the present form has already undergone
              various changes over thousands of years. As found by the
              Expert Committee, due to over exploitation and
              indiscriminate mining of river sand, the environment and
              the eco-system got very much affected. The Expert
              Committee has also found out that the indiscriminate
              mining has resulted in deepening of the river beds,
              widening of the rivers, damage of civil structures, depletion
              of ground water table, degradation of ground quality,
              damage to the rivers system and reduction of bio-diversity.
              Therefore, what is important is to use the barest minimum
              of sand for developmental activities. If the sand is allowed
              to be transported due to the demands in various places
              outside the State it would only increase the demand for
              more sand. This in turn would affect the environment
              seriously. Hence, one has to see the impact on the natural
              resources.
Whether it is authorized or not, legal or illegal
              what is important is the conservation and protection of the
              environment.     The right to clean environment is a
              guaranteed fundamental right under
Article 21.
Article 48-
              A
of the Constitution speaks about protection and
              improvement of environment and
Article 51(A)
of the
              Constitution deals with the fundamental duties to protect
              and improve the natural environment including forest,
              lakes, rivers and wild life. The Hon’ble Supreme has held
              in (2003) 7 SCC 589 (
Indian Handicrafts Emporium v.
              Union of India
) that the implementation of Directive
              principle is within the expression of restriction in the
              interest of general public. Hence, we hold that from the
              environmental perspective also the impugned rule has to
              be sustained.”
15)    The Court also took aid of the doctrine of public trust as

       enunciated in
State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone and Others3
3   (1981) 2 SCC 205
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                  Page 15 of 41
as well as
T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India

       and Others4
.
16)    Mr. Pritesh Kapur, learned counsel appearing for the State of

       Gujarat submitted in the first instance that scope of language

       used in
Section 15(1)
of the MMDR Act was extremely wide as

       per which the Parliament had delegated to the States entire

       power to make rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases,

       mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor

       minerals and for purposes connected therewith. According to

       him, this Court, by a series of judgments, settled the following

       propositions:
(i)     The power to regulate under
Section 15(1)
is plenary and

       the Parliament has delegated to the States complete control over

       the subject matter, namely, minor minerals, especially in view of

       the fact that power has been conferred for all purposes connected

       with the regulation of the minor minerals.
(ii)    This power is not exhausted by the grant and continues to

       control activities even post grant.
(iii)   In respect of minor minerals, Parliament has not retained

       any control under the Act. Historically as well as under the 1957

       Act, complete control over minor minerals has been delegated by

4   (2006) 1 SCC 1
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                         Page 16 of 41
Parliament to the State Government since these minerals have

       always been viewed as being important for local development.
17)    To support the above plea, he invited the attention of this Court to

       the judgment in
D.K. Trivedi & Sons and Others v. State of

       Gujarat and Others5
wherein this Court considered the power of

       the State Governments to make rules under the said
Section 15
to enable them to charge dead rent and royalty in respect of

       leases of minor minerals granted by them and to enhance the

       rates of dead rent and royalty during the subsistence of such

       leases – a power exercised by the State to govern conditions

       subsequent to the grant of the lease. After tracing the legislative

       history in respect of minor minerals, it was observed that by virtue

       of the Act the whole of the field was taken over by Parliament and

       thereafter all powers in respect of minor minerals had been

       delegated to the State Governments. The Court also observed,

       inter alia, that the power to regulate minor minerals under
Section

       15
is extremely wide; that control over minor minerals fell

       exclusively within the domain of the State Governments;          that

       minor minerals have historically been viewed by the Legislature,

       both pre and post Independence, as being for the use of local

       areas and local purposes; and it is left to the State Governments

5   1986 Supp SCC 20
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 17 of 41
to prescribe such restrictions as they think fit by rules made under
Section 15(1)
.
18)    From the above judgment, his line of action was that if the power

       of regulation permits the States to utilise the minor minerals for

       the benefit of the State through its own agency, it would

       necessarily also encompass the power to ensure that even

       private parties utilise the sand within the State as a condition of

       the lease.      Furthermore, the argument that sub-section (1) of
Section 15
is for regulating the grant of leases and other mineral

       concessions in respect of minor minerals and that rules under

       that sub-section can be made only with respect to the time when

       such leases or concessions are granted and not with respect to

       any point of time subsequent thereto, was specifically considered

       and rejected in the case of D.K. Trivedi & Sons.
19)    Mr. Kapur also argued that a three Judge Bench of this Court in
Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited v. National Thermal

       Power Corporation Limited and Others
6 has reiterated the view

       that the power of regulation conferred upon an authority is not

       spent or exhausted with the grant of permission.
He relied upon

       the judgments in Hind Stone and K. Ramanathan v. State of


6   (2009) 6 SCC 235
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 18 of 41
Tamil Nadu and Another7 wherein this Court reiterated that the

       word ‘regulate’ must be given the widest amplitude. He submitted

       that in K. Ramanathan’s case this Court was considering the

       validity of an order issued by the State Government under the
Essential Commodities Act
banning the transport of paddy

       outside the State. In that context, this Court has observed that:
"19...At the same time, the power to regulate carries with it
              full power over the thing subject to regulation and in
              absence of restrictive words, the power must be regarded
              as plenary over the entire subject...The power to regulate
              implies the power to check and may imply the power to
              prohibit under certain circumstances, as where the best or
              only efficacious regulation consists of suppression…

                                 xx        xx           xx
23...One of the ways in which such regulation or control
              over the production, supply and distribution of, and trade
              and commerce in, an essential commodity like foodstuffs
              may be exercised is by placing a ban on inter-State or
              intra-State movement of foodstuffs to ensure that the
              excess stock of foodstuffs held by a wholesale dealer,
              commission agent or retailer is not transported to places
              outside the State or from one district to another with a view
              to maximise the procurement of such foodstuffs from the
              growers in the surplus area for their equitable distribution
              at fair prices in the deficit areas. The placing of such ban
              on export of foodstuffs across the State or from one part of
              the State to another with a view to prevent outflow of
              foodstuffs from a State which is a surplus State prevents
              the spiral rise in prices of such foodstuffs by artificial
              creation of shortage by unscrupulous traders...These are
              nothing but regulatory measures.”
20)    Mr. Kapur further submitted that the above observations and the

       expansive interpretation given to the power of regulation in both

7   (1985) 2 SCC 116
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                Page 19 of 41
the aforesaid cases have been approved by a Constitution Bench

       of this Court in U.P. Cooperative Cane Unions Federations v.
West U.P. Sugar Mills Association and Others 8. In this case,

       the Constitution Bench was considering the competence of the

       State Government to fix the State advised price for purchase of

       sugarcane by an occupier of a sugar factory over and above the

       minimum price fixed by the Central Government. The relevant

       section, i.e.
Section 16
, also provided merely a power of

       regulation and the power to provide for terms and conditions and

       did not grant the power to fix prices. Discussing that aspect, it

       was observed as under:
"...”Regulate” means to control or to adjust by rule or to
              subject to governing principles. It is a word of broad
              impact having wide meaning comprehending all facets not
              only specifically enumerated in the Act, but also embraces
              within its fold the powers incidental to the regulation
              envisaged in good faith and its meaning has to be
              ascertained in the context in which it has been used and
              the purpose of the statute.”
21)    On the basis of the aforesaid judgments, submission of Mr. Kapur

       was that this Court has consistently held that power to regulate

       was of widest amplitude and, therefore, it would encompass

       power to regulate the movement of minor minerals as well,

       including the condition not to transport the excavated sand

       outside the State of Gujarat in the lease itself. He submitted that
8   (2004) 5 SCC 430
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                             Page 20 of 41
this Court in
State of Tamil Nadu v. M.P.P. Kavery Chetty9
held

       that there is no power conferred upon the State Government

       under the
MMDR Act
to exercise control over the minor minerals

       after they have been excavated. His submission was that this is

       the only judgment which has taken discordant note and while

       deciding this, the earlier judgment in D.K. Trivedi & Sons was

       not brought to the notice of the Court.
22)    Another submission of Mr. Kapur was that power to frame such a

       rule can be traced to
Section 15(1A)(d)
of the MMDR Act. This

       section empowers the State Government to impose conditions in

       a mining lease and, therefore, would include the power to impose

       all such conditions as flown from the ownership of the minerals.
Since it is the State Government which is the ‘owner of the

       minerals’ and the minerals that ‘vest’ in it, as held in
Amritlal

       Nathubhai Shah and Others v. Union Government of India

       and Another10
, while granting the licence, it can put conditions

       pertaining to movement and flow of such minerals as well.
He

       also took support from the following observations in
Monnet

       Ispat and Energy Limited v. Union of India and Others11
:
"86...The judgment of this Court in Amritlal Nathubhai
              Shah establishes the distinction between the power of

9 (1995) 2 SCC 402
10 (1976) 4 SCC 108
11 (2012) 11 SCC 1
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                          Page 21 of 41
reservation to exploit a mineral as its own property on the
              one hand and the regulation of mines and minerals
              development under the 1957 Act and the 1960 Rules on
              the other. The authority of the State Government to make
              reservation of a particular mining area within its territory for
              its own use is the offspring of ownership; and it is
              inseparable therefrom unless denied to it expressly by an
              appropriate law by the 1957 Act that has not been done by
              Parliament. Setting aside by a State of land owned by it
              for its exclusive use and under its dominance and control,
              in my view, is an incident of sovereignty and ownership.”
23)    in any case, argued Mr. Kapur, power to frame the impugned rule

       is conferred by
Section 23-C
of the MMDR Act as well. According

       to him, it would be erroneous to contend that the word ‘illegal’

       occurring      in   Section      23-C   (1)   must   qualify   the    words

       ‘transportation and storage’ as well. In any event, there are no

       such qualifying words in sub-section (2)(c) which grants a power

       ‘without prejudice’ to sub-section (1). Therefore, the two sub-
sections must be construed independently and neither can cut

       down the width of the other.
24)    He also argued that while construing a similar power to regulate

       transport of forest produce, this Court upheld a rule prohibiting

       transport beyond the borders of the State in the case of
State of

       Tripura and Others v. Sudhir Ranjan Nath12
in the following

       words:
12 (1997) 3 SCC 665
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                   Page 22 of 41
"...The object of the Act is to preserve and protect the
              forest wealth of the country and to regulate the cutting,
              removal, transport and possession of the forest produce in
              the interest of the States and their people. It is for
              achieving the above purpose that the Act provides for
              declaration of reserve forests, formation of village forests
              and declaration of protected forests. It is for achieving the
              very purpose that the Act vests, in the Government, control
              over forest and lands not being the property of the
              Government and controls even the collection and
              movement of drift and stranded timber. It is not a taxing
              enactment but an enactment designed to preserve, protect
              and promote the forest wealth in the interests of the nation.
It must necessarily take within its fold catering to the needs
              of the people of the State and that is what sub-rule (8)
              provides. In our opinion, therefore, sub-rule (8) of Rule 3
              is perfectly valid.”
25)    Last submission of Mr. Kapur was that once it becomes clear that

       power to regulate minor minerals conferred upon the State

       Government would include power to regulate its movements as

       well, there was no question of treating the same as violative of
Article 301
of the Constitution. For this purpose, he relied upon

       certain judgments of this Court. Referring to the case of Hind

       Stone, he submitted that
in that case
the Court specifically held

       that regulatory measures or measures imposing compensatory

       taxes for the use of trading facilities do not come under the

       purview of restrictions contemplated by
Article 301.
Likewise,

       according to him, in Sudhir Ranjan Nath’s case, this Court had

       held that once a provision made by the State as the delegate of

       Parliament to carry out the purposes of the Act is saved by
Article
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 23 of 41
302
, it will not be hit by
Article 301.
Such a rule, therefore, would

       not offend the principle of federalism.
26)    Having regard to the fact that it is the Union which can regulate

       and control the minerals in this country and States exercise

       power of minor minerals as delegates of the Union, this Court had

       deemed it fit to issue notice of these proceedings to Union of

       India as well in order to elicit its stand on this issue. The Union of

       India has filed its reply, taking a specific stand that there is no

       such power to frame rule like 44-BB of the 1966 Rules or Rule 71

       of the 2010 Rules.               Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned Additional

       Solicitor General, appeared for Union of India and pitched the

       case to even a higher level. Her argument was that there is no

       such power even with the Union of India to frame rules of the

       nature impugned in these proceedings as these would be

       offensive of
Article 301
of the Constitution. Therefore, under no

       circumstances,        such       a   power   can   vest   with   the   State

       Government. She argued that
Section 15
which empowers the

       State Government to make rules in respect of minor minerals

       does not extend to the regulation of already excavated minor

       minerals under the terms and conditions of a mining lease.
This

       is made clear by the three Judge Bench in M.P.P. Kavery Chetty
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                   Page 24 of 41
wherein this Court upheld the striking down of rules made by the

       State Government to fix minimum price for the sale of granite

       after its excavation. The Court emphatically held that the State

       Government had no power under
Section 15
of the MMDR Act to

       exercise to control over minor minerals after they had been

       excavated. The power under
Section 15
was restricted and did

       not empower the State to control the sale or sale price of minor

       minerals once they had been mined. The latter judgment has

       been followed in another three Judge Bench judgment in
K.T.

       Varghese & Ors. v. State of Kerala & Ors.13
. In the latter case,

       one of the impugned conditions of the license was that minerals

       could be sold only within the State of Kerala, that too for domestic

       and agricultural purposes. The same was found impermissible.

       She also submitted that there is no conflict whatsoever between

       the judgments of this Court in Amritlal Nathubhai Shah and

       D.K. Trivedi & Sons on the one hand and M.P.P. Kavery Chetty

       on the other. Her contention was that in Amritlal Nathubhai

       Shah, while it was emphatically stated that the State Government

       is the ‘owner of minerals’ within its territory and minerals vest in it,

       this was held in the context of a challenge to the reservation by

       the State Government of certain areas of exploitation of bauxite in


13 (2008) 3 SCC 735
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                              Page 25 of 41
the public sector. Private parties challenged the notification to

       that effect and the Central Government to whom they applied for

       revision held that the minerals vested in the State Government

       which was its owner and that the State Government had the

       inherent right to reserve any area for exploitation in the public

       sector. She did not quarrel with such a proposition. However, her

       caveat was that this was a matter where there were no leases in

       favour of private parties but rather the private parties were

       petitioning the government for the grant of leases.
27)    Likewise, in D.K. Trivedi & Sons, this Court held that minor

       minerals are used mostly in local areas and for local purposes

       while minerals other than minor minerals are those necessary for

       industrial development on a national scale. She submitted that it

       is totally different proposition. She also pointed out that in the

       said case the finding that the State Government could enhance

       dead rent even during the subsistence of a lease has no

       application in the present case. Such observations of this Court in

       D.K. Trivedi & Sons were in the context of enhancement of dead

       rent which is collected as a fixed amount in consideration for the

       grant of the lease by the lessor apart from royalty and is

       incidental to the regulation and development of mines and
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                          Page 26 of 41
minerals which is avowed object of the
MMDR Act
as stated in its

       Preamble. But, in the present case, what is sought is a blanket

       prohibition of the sale of minor minerals beyond the borders of the

       State of Gujarat. She argued that on the other hand, both M.P.P.

       Kavery Chetty and K.T. Varghese were matters wherein what

       was sought to be controlled post grant of lease was the sale of

       the excavated minerals.          Such restrictions were found to be

       beyond the powers granted to the State as a delegate of

       Parliament and were accordingly struck down.
28)    The learned Additional Solicitor General also rebutted the

       argument of the appellants that power to regulate would

       encompass power to restrict the movement beyond the State.

       She argued that while it is well settled that the expression

       ‘regulation’ has many shades of meaning and can refer to

       prohibition (Sudhir Ranjan Nath and Hind Stone), the issue in

       the present case is whether a prohibition on the transportation of

       legally mined materials can be imposed under the provisions of

       the
MMDR Act
.           There is no doubt that a prohibition can be

       imposed on mining under certain circumstances or on the grant of

       leases under the aforesaid Act but not on transportation de hors

       illegal mining.
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 27 of 41
29)    In this hue, the learned ASG submitted that Section 23-C was

       inserted with specific object to curb ‘illegal mining’. Therefore, the

       words ‘transportation’ and ‘storage’ occurring therein would take

       their colour from the expression ‘illegal mining’ on the principle of

       noscitur a sociis. That was clear from the Statement of Objects

       and Reasons as well.             On the aforesaid basis, Ms. Divan

       submitted that the High Court rightly concluded that there was

       lack of power with the State Government to make such a

       provision which could neither be traced to
Sections 15
,
15(1A)
or

       23 of the
MMDR Act
.
30)    The learned Additional Solicitor General additionally argued that

       there was no question of public interest as well. On this aspect,

       her contention was that Parliament was wholly conscious of the

       environmental concerns impacted on account of mining activity,

       which concern is reflected in
Section 4A
of the MMDR Act. This

       provision provides for termination of prospecting licenses or

       mining leases on account of expediency in the interest of, inter

       alia, reservation of the natural environment and conservation of

       mineral resources. Further,
Section 18
provides that it shall be the

       duty of the Central Government to take all such steps as may be

       necessary for the conservation and systematic development of
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                            Page 28 of 41
minerals in India and for the protection of environment by

       preventing or controlling any pollution which may be caused by

       prospecting mining operation.         In this regard, the Central

       Government is empowered to make rules as it thinks fit. In other

       words, there are specific provisions empowering the Central

       Government to make rules in respect of conservation of minerals

       in the interest of the environment.
31)    Ms. Divan also argued that the impugned rules are violative of
Article 301
of the Constitution as they seek to fetter the freedom

       of trade, commerce and intercourse. Highlighting the purpose

       behind Part XIII of the Constitution which starts with
Article 301
,

       she emphasised that it was to achieve economic integration.

       Further, balancing development and economic equality of the

       country is equally vital facet of economic integration, stressed the

       learned Additional Solicitor General.     She referred to various

       judgments of this Court on the aforesaid aspects and concluded

       her submissions with the submission that the conclusion of the

       High Court in the impugned judgment was correct on this aspect

       as well.
32)    Mr. D.N. Ray, Advocate, appeared on behalf of the private

       respondents and made his submissions almost on the same lines
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 29 of 41
as argued by the learned Additional Solicitor General. Therefore,

       it is not necessary to repeat the same.
33)    We have give our due consideration to the arguments advanced

       by the counsel for the parties on both sides.
34)    From the subject matter of these appeals as well as arguments

       noted above, it clearly follows that the main issues that arise for

       consideration are as under:
(a)    Whether the impugned rules framed by the State of Gujarat

       as a delegate of Parliament are beyond the powers granted to it

       under the
MMDR Act
? In other words, whether the impugned

       rules are ultra vires
Sections 15
,
15A
and
23-C
of the MMDR Act?
(b)    Whether the impugned rules are violative of Part XIII of the

       Constitution of India?
35)    The appellants have submitted that
Section 15
gives such a

       power.      Sub-section (1) of
Section 15
empowers the State

       Government to make rules for ‘regulating’ the grant of quarry

       leases, mining leases or other concessions in respect of minor

       minerals and for the purposes connected therewith. This power

       of regulation pertains to granting of leases. It is the submission of

       Mr. Kapur that the expression ‘regulating’ is of widest amplitude
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                            Page 30 of 41
and would, therefore, confer power to make the rules of the

       nature made herein. He has referred to various judgments of this

       Court wherein the expression ‘regulating’ has been explained.
He has also submitted that in any case under
Section 15(1A)
such a power is there and this provision has to be read

       independent of
Section 15(1)
.
36)    It is difficult to accept the aforesaid contention in view of the

       judgments of this Court in M.P.P. Kavery Chetty and K.T.

       Varghese. In those judgments, it has been categorically held

       that power of the State Government under
Section 15
of the

       MMDR Act does not include control over minor minerals after they

       are excavated. Following observations from
the said judgment
are extracted herein:
"19. The High Court quashed Rules 8-D and 19-B
              principally on the ground that
Section 15
of the said Act
              gave no power to the State Government to frame rules to
              regulate internal or foreign trade in granite after it had
              been quarried.
Section 15
also did not empower the State
              Government to frame rules to enable a State Government
              company or corporation to fix a minimum price for granite.
20. Learned counsel for the appellant State submitted that
              Rules 8-D and 19-B were valid having regard to the
              Preamble of the said Act and
Section 18
thereof. He
              submitted that the rule-making power of the State under
              Section 15(o) was wide enough to encompass Rules 8-D
              and 19-B.
21. The said Act is enacted to provide for the regulation of
              mines and the development of minerals under the control
              of the Union.
Section 2
of the said Act declares that it is
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                               Page 31 of 41
expedient in the public interest that the Union should take
              under its control the regulation of mines and the
              development of minerals to the extent provided in the said
              Act.
Section 13
empowers the Central Government to
              make rules for regulating the grant of prospecting licences
              and mineral leases in respect of minerals and for purposes
              connected therewith. Sub-section (1) of
Section 15
empowers the State Government to make rules for
              regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases and
              other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals
              and for purposes connected therewith. Sub-section (1-A)
              of
Section 15
states that such rules may provide for the
              matters set out therein, namely, the person by whom and
              the manner in which an application for a quarry lease,
              mining lease and the like may be made; the fees to be
              paid therefor; the time and the form in which the
              application is to be made; the matters which are to be
              considered where applications in respect of the same land
              are received on the same day; the terms and conditions on
              which leases may be granted or regulated; the procedure
              in this behalf; the facilities to be afforded to lease-holders;
              the fixation and collection of rent and other charges and
              the time within which they are payable; the protection of
              the rights of third parties; the protection of flora; the
              manner in which leases may be transferred; the
              construction, maintenance and use of roads, power
              transmission lines, etc. on the land; the form of registers to
              be maintained; reports and statements to be submitted
              and to whom; and the revision of any order passed by any
              authority under the said Rules. Clause (o) of sub-section
              (1-A) reads “any other matter which is to be or may be
              prescribed”.
Section 18
of the said Act states that it shall
              be the duty of the Central Government to take all such
              steps as may be necessary for the conservation and
              systematic development of the environment by preventing
              or controlling any pollution which may be caused by
              prospecting or mining operations.
22. Rules 8-D and 19-B empower the State Government or
              its officers or a State Government company or corporation
              as the State Government may direct to control the sale by
              every permit-holder of quarried granite or other rock
              suitable for ornamental or decorative purposes. They also
              empower the State Government or its officers or a State
              Government company or corporation, as the case may be,
              to fix the minimum price for the sale thereof. The object, as
              is shown by the terms of Government Order No. 214 dated
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                  Page 32 of 41
10-6-1992, quoted above, is to conserve and protect
              granite resources.
23. It is difficult to see how granite resources can be
              protected by controlling the sale of granite after its
              excavation and fixing the minimum price thereof.
24.    There is no power conferred upon the State
              Government under the said Act to exercise control over
              minor minerals after they have been excavated. The power
              of the State Government, as the subordinate rule-making
              authority, is restricted in the manner set out in
Section 15
.
              The power to control the sale and the sale price of a minor
              mineral is not covered by the terms of clause (o) of sub-
              section (1-A) of
Section 15
. This clause can relate only to
              the regulation of the grant of quarry and mining leases and
              other mineral concessions and it does not confer the
              power to regulate the sale of already mined minerals.”
37)    Likewise, the condition of license granted by the State of Kerala

       to the effect that it could be sold only within the Sate, that too for

       domestic and agricultural purposes, was struck down in the

       following words:
"3. The appellants' complaint is that certain conditions in
              the form of restrictions have been incorporated while
              issuing the licences. One of such conditions which the
              appellants attack is that the minerals permitted to be
              stocked were to be purchased only from authorised
              quarrying permit-holders on that behalf. Another condition
              is that they are permitted to sell the minerals only within
              the State of Kerala, that too for domestic and agricultural
              purposes. The appellants' complaint is that as far as
              cooperative societies are concerned, they are not saddled
              with any such restrictions imposed in the case of the
              appellants. Thus, according to the appellants, there is a
              clear discrimination between the cooperative societies and
              the individuals in the matter of restrictions imposed in the
              licences granted to them. Apart from that there is no legal
              sanction for such restrictions.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                Page 33 of 41
38)    Argument of Mr. Kapur that M.P.P. Kavery Chetty did not

       consider the earlier judgment in D.K. Trivedi & Sons is

       misplaced.       In this behalf, we entirely agree with the learned

       Additional Solicitor General that judgment in D.K. Trivedi & Sons

       and     other     judgments      cited   by   Mr.   Kapur    are   clearly

       distinguishable as the context and the subject matters in those

       cases were entirely different. It is not necessary to point out the

       differences in two sets of cases, as we entirely agree with the

       argument of Ms. Divan in drawing the distinction between the two

       and pointing out that there is no conflict whatsoever. She is right

       that the two sets of cases can be read harmoniously.
39)    In the cases of Amritlal Nathubhai Shah, D.K. Trivedi & Sons

       and Hind Stone, the measures in question had a direct nexus

       with the grant or the refusal to grant a lease.             In the instant

       appeals, which concern the sale of already excavated minerals

       that belong to the lessee, a prohibition by the State Government

       on sale thereof outside the State is not permissible under the
MMDR Act
.         In the case of Hind Stone, this Court succinctly

       stated the scope and ambit of the
MMDR Act
, highlighting that the

       Act is aimed at the ‘conservation and the prudent and

       discriminating exploitation of minerals’. Following passage from
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 34 of 41
the said judgment
shows that as a method of regulation,

       prohibition is clearly permissible, provided, however, that it has a

       direct nexus with the conservation, exploitation and excavation of

       minerals:
"10...The statue with which we are concerned, the
Mines
              and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act
, is aimed,
              as we have already said more than once, at the
              conservation and the prudent and discriminating
              exploitation of minerals. Surely, in the case of a scarce
              mineral, to permit exploitation by the State or its agency
              and to prohibit exploitation by private agencies is the most
              effective method of conservation and prudent exploitation.
              If you want to conserve for the future, you must prohibit in
              the present. We have no doubt that the prohibiting of the
              leases in certain cases is part of the regulation
              contemplated by
Section 15
of the Act.”
40)    On the other hand, the prohibition on the transport or sale of the

       already mined minerals outside the State has no direct nexus with

       the object and purpose of the
MMDR Act
which is concerned with

       conservation and prudent exploitation of minerals.
41)    Insofar as
Section 23-C
of the MMDR Act is concerned, it was

       inserted by the Amendment Act of 1999 with the objective to

       prevent illegal mining. That is clearly spelled out in the Statement

       of Objects and Reasons. We may reproduce a portion thereof

       again:
"(iii) A new provision is proposed to be inserted in the Act
              prohibiting transportation or storage or anything causing
              transportation or storage of any mineral except under the
              due provisions of the Act, with a view to preventing illegal
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                               Page 35 of 41
mining.
Further, the Act
is proposed to be amended to
              cover the breach of the provisions of the proposed new
              provision of the Act to be punishable. It is also proposed
              to insert a new provision to provide for anything seized
              under the Act as liable for confiscation under court orders.
A new section is proposed to be inserted to empower the
              State Governments to make rules for preventing illegal
              mining, transportation and storage of minerals and for
              purposes connected therewith.
(emphasis supplied)”
42)    It is in this context the words ‘transportation’ and ‘storage’ in

       Section 23-C are to be interpreted. Here the two words are used

       in the context of ‘illegal mining’.        It is clear that it is the

       transportation and storage of illegal mining and not the mining of

       minor minerals like sand which is legal and backed by duly

       granted license, which can be regulated under this provision.

       Therefore, no power flows from this provision to make rule for

       regulating transportation of the legally excavated minerals.
43)    As far as Issue No. (b) above is concerned, we are also of the

       considered opinion that the impugned rules violate Part XIII of the

       Constitution as the effect thereof is to fetter the freedom of trade,

       commerce and intercourse under
Article 301
of the Constitution.

       Under this Article, the expression ‘freedom’ must be read with the

       expression ‘throughout the territory of India’. Under
Article 302
,

       Parliament may impose restrictions on the freedom of trade,
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                               Page 36 of 41
commerce or intercourse between one State and another as may

       be required in the public interest. The expression ‘public interest’

       may include a regional interest as well. However,
Article 302
is

       qualified by
Article 303
which prohibits Parliament and the State

       Legislatures from making any law that gives preference to one

       State over another or discriminates between one State and

       another. Situations of scarcity are to be dealt with by Parliament

       under
Article 302(2).
The power of State Legislature to impose

       reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or

       intercourse, as may be required in the public interest, requires

       such a Bill or amendment to be moved in the State Legislature

       only after receiving previous sanction from the President. The

       President, being the head of the State and the guardian of the

       federation, must be satisfied that such a law is indeed required

       and, thus, acts as a check on the promotion of provincial interests

       over national interest. Going by the aforesaid scheme of this

       Chapter, it becomes apparent that when there are such

       restrictions on a State Legislature, then the State Government

       could not have imposed such a prohibition under a statute whose

       object is to regulate mines and mineral development, and not

       trade and commerce per se.
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                           Page 37 of 41
44)    That apart, we find force in the submission of the learned

       Additional Solicitor General that Part XIII of the Constitution is a

       code on checks and balances on the legislative power intended to

       achieve the objective of economic integration of the country. This

       was emphasised in
Video Electronics Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. State

       of Punjab & Anr.14
wherein this Court held:
"20. ...In our opinion, Part XIII of the Constitution cannot
              be read in isolation. It is part and parcel of a single
              constitutional instrument envisaging a federal scheme and
              containing general scheme conferring legislative powers in
              respect of the matters relating to List II of the Seventh
              Schedule on the States. It also confers plenary powers on
              States to raise revenue for its purposes and does not
              require that every legislation of the State must obtain
              assent of the President. Constitution of India is an organic
              document. It must be so construed that it lives and adapts
              itself to the exigencies of the situation, in a growing and
              evolving society, economically, politically and socially. The
              meaning of the expressions used there must, therefore, be
              so interpreted that it attempts to solve the present problem
              of distribution of power and rights of the different States in
              the Union of India, and anticipate the future contingencies
              that might arise in a developing organism. Constitution
              must be able to comprehend the present at the relevant
              time and anticipate the future which is natural and
              necessary corollary for a growing and living organism.
              That must be part of the constitutional adjudication. Hence,
              the economic development of States to bring these into
              equality with all other States and thereby develop the
              economic unity of India is one of the major commitments
              or goals of the constitutional aspirations of this land. For
              working of an orderly society economic equality of all the
              States is as much vital as economic unity.”




14 (1990) 3 SCC 87
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                 Page 38 of 41
Freedom of movement of goods, services and the creation

       of a common market must be understood contextually and as

       necessary for creating an economic union.
45)    It is also rightly contended by all the respondents that balanced

       development of the country is an equally vital facet of economic

       integration.       No doubt, Part XIII permits some forms of

       differentiation, for example, to encourage a backward region or to

       create a level playing field for parts of the country that may not

       have reached the desired level of development. In this context,

       Part XIII envisions a two-fold object: (i) facilitation of a common

       market through ease of trade, commerce and intercourse by

       erasing barriers; and (ii) Regulations (or restrictions) which may

       have the effect of differentiating between States or regions which

       may be necessary not only in emergent circumstances of scarcity

       etc. or but even for development of economically backward

       regions or otherwise justified in the public interest. That Part XIII

       is not about “freedom” alone but is a code of checks and

       balances, intended at achieving economic unity and parity. Such

       a desired objective for economic integration through checks and

       balances was also articulated in Video Electronics Pvt. Ltd.:
"36. ...Economic unity is a desired goal, economic
              equilibrium and prosperity is also the goal. Development
              on parity is one of the commitments of the Constitution.
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                            Page 39 of 41
Directive principles enshrined in
Articles 38
and
39
must
              be harmonised with economic unity as well as economic
              development of developed and under developed areas. In
              that light on
Article 14
of the Constitution, it is necessary
              that the prohibitions in
Article 301
and the scope of
Article
              304(a)
and (b) should be understood and construed.
              Constitution is a living organism and the latent meaning of
              the expressions used can be given effect to only if a
              particular situation arises. It is not that with changing times
              the meaning changes but changing times illustrate and
              illuminate the meaning of the expressions used. The
              connotation of the expressions used takes its shape and
              colour in evolving dynamic situations. A backward State or
              a disturbed State cannot with parity engage in competition
              with advanced or developed States. Even within a State,
              there are often backward areas which can be developed
              only if some special incentives are granted. If the
              incentives in the form of subsidies or grant are given to
              any part of (sic or) units of a State so that it may come out
              of its limping or infancy to compete as equals with others,
              that, in our opinion, does not and cannot contravene the
              spirit and the letter of Part XIII of the Constitution.
              However, this is permissible only if there is a valid reason,
              that is to say, if there are justifiable and rational reasons
              for differentiation. If there is none, it will amount to hostile
              discrimination….”
46)    In order to justify any ‘preference’ or ‘discrimination’ under
Article

       303
, a scarcity of goods would have to be made out. It is a

       matter of record that the Study Group’s report on which reliance

       is placed by the appellant focuses on the need to restrict the

       export of sand outside India and not within India. In any case,

       nothing prevents the appellant from restricting the quantum of

       sand being excavated.            However, once the appellant State

       permits sand to be excavated, neither can it legally restrict its

       movement within the territory of India nor is the same
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                   Page 40 of 41
constitutionally permissible. Likewise, there is no restriction on

       the State importing sand from other states. If it is the case that

       the demand of any State is not being met, it may purchase sand

       from other states. In any event, the market will dictate trade in

       sand inasmuch as it may make no business sense for mining

       company to transport and sell its sand in a far away destination

       after incurring large costs on transportation.
47)    We, thus, answer both the questions against the appellants.
48)    As a result, we do not approve the view of Andhra Pradesh High

       Court and Madras High Court. Rather, we affirm the impugned

       judgment of the Gujarat High Court and dismiss these appeals.
.............................................J.
                                                                        (A.K. SIKRI)



                                            .............................................J.
                                                         (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                            .............................................J.
                                                                       (M.R. SHAH)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 01, 2019
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010                                     Page 41 of 41