[Cites
29
, Cited by
130
]
Supreme Court of India
Khoday Distilleries Ltd. (Now Khoday ... vs Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare ... on 1 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2218, 2019 (4) SCC 376, (2019) 4 SCALE 113, (2019) 135 ALL LR 687, (2019) 145 REVDEC 334, (2019) 1 CLR 833 (SC), (2019) 200 ALLINDCAS 148, (2019) 2 ALL WC 1835, (2019) 2 CAL HN 268, (2019) 2 CIVILCOURTC 70, (2019) 2 ICC 494, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 576, (2019) 3 ALL RENTCAS 704, (2019) 3 UC 1843
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2432 OF 2019
                                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 490 OF 2012)


                      KHODAY DISTILLERIES LTD.
                      (NOW KNOWN AS KHODAY INDIA LIMITED)
                      AND OTHERS                                                        ..… APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                      SRI MAHADESHWARA SAHAKARA
                      SAKKARE KARKHANE LTD., KOLLEGAL
                      (UNDER LIQUIDATION) REPRESENTED
                      BY THE LIQUIDATOR                                               ..… RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                   WITH

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2433 OF 2019
                                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 13792 OF 2013)



                                                          JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Leave granted.
2)     Question of law in both these appeals is identical. However, facts
Signature Not Verified
of the Civil appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.
Digitally signed by
490 of 2012 are noted for discussion, as in this case, order dated
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2019.03.02
12:59:53 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.              Page 1 of 27
October 19, 2012 has been passed referring the question of law

       to a larger Bench.
3)     Before we advert to the question of law, we deem it appropriate to

       take stock of seminal facts as the said factual background would

       make it easier to understand the implication of the issue that

       arises for determination.
4)     Respondent No.1 herein had filed original suit against the

       appellant on the file of the XXXI Additional City Civil Judge,

       Bangalore City.             It was a money suit for recovery of

       Rs.1,00,76,630/- along with interest. The City Civil Judge, after

       trial, dismissed the suit as barred by limitation vide his judgment

       and decree dated November 11, 2005, even after finding on

       merits that money was payable by the appellant to respondent

       No.1. Against this, respondent No.1 preferred first appeal under
Section 96
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. This appeal

       was allowed by the High Court of Karnataka on November 12,

       2008 by holding that the suit was filed within the period of

       limitation. Accordingly, it passed decree of the amount claimed

       along with interest @ 12% per annum from the date of demand,

       i.e. July 19, 1994, up to August 03, 1994 and the interest was

       granted @ 10% per annum from August 04, 1994 till the date of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.      Page 2 of 27
payment. Against this judgment of the High Court, the appellant

       preferred the special leave petition. This special leave petition

       was dismissed by this Court on December 04, 2009 with the

       following order:
"Delay condoned.
Special Leave Petition is dismissed.”

               After the dismissal of the special leave petition, respondent

       No.1 filed execution petition before the trial court.
5)     It may be mentioned at this stage that after the High Court had

       decreed the suit of respondent No.1, the respondent filed

       application for rectification of the judgment, which was allowed on

       October 20, 2010 directing the appellant to pay the decretal

       amount with interest and costs. This is the subject matter of the

       execution proceedings.
6)     The appellant herein, even after dismissal of the special leave

       petition, went back to the High Court in the form of review petition

       seeking review of the judgment dated November 12, 2008 passed

       by the High Court. It was filed on the premise that the High Court

       had granted relief which was not even sought for by respondent

       No.1 in the suit. We may reproduce the precise ground taken in

       this behalf in the review petition:
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.        Page 3 of 27
"11. The above Review Petition is directed only with
               regard to the decree portion dated 12.11.2008 passed by
               this Hon’ble Court in RFA No. 427/2006 as corrected by
               the order dated 20.10.2010. It reads:
“We direct the plaintiff to recover the amount as
                  claimed at Rs.1,00,76,630/- with interest at the rate
                  of 12% from the date of demand made namely
                  29.07.1994 till 03.08.1994 and at the rate of 10%
                  from 04.08.1994 till the date of payment on the said
                  sum with costs.”

               A perusal of the prayer made in the suit O.S. No.
               2808/1997 as extracted in para 2 above shows that the
               plaintiff has not claimed interest at any particular rate and
               he has also not prayed the interest from any particular
               date. He has also not claimed interest at different rates
               also. Thus the decree passed by this Hon’ble Court in
               RFA No. 427/2006 is not based on the prayer sought for by
               the plaintiff in O.S. No. 2808/1997. This mistake appears
               on the face of the record. Hence the impugned judgment
               and decree in RFA No. 427/2006 dated 12.11.2008 as
               corrected on 20.10.2010 is liable to be reviewed and
               modify the said judgment and decree in terms of the
               prayer made by the plaintiff in O.S. No. 2808/1997.”

               On that basis, it was pleaded that the award of interest from

       August 04, 1994 is also without jurisdiction since it was not

       claimed by respondent No.1 in the trial court.
7)     This review petition has been dismissed by the High Court vide

       orders dated September 09, 2011, inter alia, with the following

       observations:
"The judgment and decree passed by this Court in the
               above appeal was questioned by the petitioners before the
               Hon’ble Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition to
               Appeal (Civil) CC No. 18374/2009 and the petition came to
               be dismissed on 4.12.2009.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.             Page 4 of 27
According to us, when the judgment and decree
               passed by this Court has been confirmed by the Hon’ble
               Supreme Court, question of entertaining any review by us
               does not arise for consideration.
Accordingly, review petition is dismissed.”
8)     As can be seen from the above order, the reason for dismissal of

       the review petition is that the Apex Court has already dismissed

       the special leave petition against the High Court’s judgment dated

       November 12, 2008. Therefore, review of the said judgment by

       the High Court is not permissible. It is this order in review petition

       which is challenged in these proceedings inasmuch as case of

       the appellant is that when the special leave petition was

       dismissed in limine and not by speaking order, there was no

       reason not to entertain the review petition by the High Court, as

       dismissal of the special leave petition in limine by non-speaking

       order does not amount to merger of the High Court judgment with

       that of the Supreme Court.
9)     The question of law which needs to be determined in the

       aforesaid circumstances is as to whether review petition is

       maintainable before the High Court seeking review of a judgment

       against which the special leave petition has already been

       dismissed by this Court.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.          Page 5 of 27
10)    The reason for referring the matter to a larger Bench is the

       conflicting views by different Benches of this Court which have

       been taken note of in the referral order. Those judgments will be

       discussed at the appropriate stage. At the same time, we would

       like to reproduce the following passages from the reference order:
"12. We may also point out in this connection that
Article
               136
of the Constitution does not confer any right of appeal
               on any party but it confers a discretionary power on the
               Supreme Court to interfere in suitable cases. Clause (1) of
Article 136
of the Constitution confers very wide and
               extensive powers on the Supreme Court. The article
               commences with a non obstante clause, the words are of
               overriding effect and clearly indicate the intention of the
               Framers of the Constitution that it is a special jurisdiction
               and residuary power unfettered by any statute or other
               provisions of Chapter IV of Part V of the Constitution. The
               jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution, of course,
               cannot be barred by statute since it is extraordinary power
               under
Article 136.
Article 136
is an extraordinary power
               which cannot be taken away by legislation.
13. We also notice that several statutes confer on
               aggrieved parties right of appeal to the Supreme Court in
               contradistinction with the powers conferred on the
               Supreme Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution, for
               instance,
Section 15-Z
of the Securities and Exchange
               Board of India (SEBI) Act, 1992 confers a right of appeal to
               any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
               Securities Appellate Tribunal. So also various regulatory
               legislations provide for statutory right of appeal. To what
               extent the principle of res judicata and merger would apply
               in respect of a decision rendered by this Court while
               exercising its statutory power of appeal as well as the one
               rendered while entertaining an appeal invoking
Article 136
is not seen considered by the larger Bench either in Abbai
               Maligai or Kunhayammed case, which is also, in our view,
               an issue to be considered by the larger Bench.
14. We notice that considerable arguments are being
               raised before this Court as well as before various High
               Courts in the country on the maintainability of review
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.              Page 6 of 27
petitions after the disposal of the special leave petition
               without granting leave but with or without assigning
               reasons on which also conflicting views are being
               expressed by the two-Judge Benches of this Court. In
               order to resolve those conflicts and for proper guidance to
               the High Courts, we feel it would be appropriate that this
               matter be referred to a larger Bench for an authoritative
               pronouncement.”
11)    There are two judgments of this court, both of which are three

       Judge Bench decisions.                   First in line is
Abbai Maligai

       Partnership Firm and Another v. K. Santhakumaran and

       Others1
. This judgment is relied upon by respondent No.1 with

       the plea that in that judgment this Court held that when the

       judgment and decree passed by the High Court is affirmed by the

       Supreme Court with the dismissal of the special leave petition,

       there is no question of entertaining the review petition by the High

       Court,      thereafter.
Other     judgment    is   in   the   case     of
Kunhayammed and Others v. State of Kerala and Another2
. In

       this judgment the Court laid down various ways in which special

       leave petitions can be disposed of and decided in which cases

       review would be permissible and where such a review is not

       entertainable, on the doctrine of merger and res judicata, etc. We

       may point out at this stage itself that various judgments which

       have been pronounced by this Court (which are the judgments

       rendered by two Judges’ Bench) have taken different paths, on

1   (1998) 7 SCC 386
2   (2000) 6 SCC 359
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                   Page 7 of 27
the interpretation of the aforesaid two cases, resulting in

       conflicting outcomes.
12)    In
Meghmala and Others v. G. Narasimha Reddy and Others3
and
K. Rajamouli v. A.V.K.N. Swamy
, the view taken by this

       Court was that review petition is not maintainable. In Meghmala

       the Court, however, made one exception by holding that in case a

       litigant files a review petition before filing the special leave petition

       in the Supreme Court and it remains pending till the special leave

       petition is dismissed, the review petition still deserves to be

       considered. However, the review petition filed after the dismissal

       of the special leave petition would amount to abuse of the

       process of the Court.
On the other hand, in Gangadhara Palo v.
Revenue Divisional Officer Officer and Another 4, this Court

       held that it will make no difference whether the review petition

       was filed in the High Court before the dismissal of the special

       leave petition or after the dismissal thereof. In either case, the

       doctrine of merger would apply, even when the special leave

       petition is dismissed in limine, which will bar the filing of the

       review petition before the High Court when the special leave

       petition is dismissed.
3   (2010) 8 SCC 383
4   (2011) 4 SC 602
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.           Page 8 of 27
13)     As against the aforesaid view, there is another line of cases

        holding that review petition is maintainable if no leave has been

        granted to file an appeal and there is dismissal of the special

        leave petition at the preliminary stage itself. These cases have

        taken a view that a preliminary stage does not constitute a

        binding precedent and, therefore, doctrine of merger would not

        apply. These cases are Palani Roman Catholic Mission v. S.

        Bagirathi Ammal5,
Bhakra Beas Management Board v.

        Krishna Kumar Vij and Another6
.
14)     After taking note of the aforesaid judgments, the reference order

        in the instant case makes a remark about the nature of conflict

        between them, which is noted in paragraph 11 of the judgment

        and is reproduced below:
"11. We notice that in K. Rajamouli this Court has
               followed Kunhayammed and distinguished Abbai
               Maligai Partnership Firm and in Gangadhara Palo the
               later Bench did not accept the view expressed in K.
               Rajamouli. To this extent, there is some conflict
               between the judgments in Gangadhara Palo and K.
               Rajamouli which calls for resolution by a larger Bench.”
15)     It may be useful to add, in the line of the aforesaid cases, a

        recent judgment of this Court in Medical Council of India v.
State of Kerala and Others7, which is again a two Judge Bench.

        Though in this case situation was not where review petition was
5   (2009) 16 SCC 657
6   (2010) 8 SCC 701
7   2018 (11) Scale 141
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.        Page 9 of 27
filed after the dismissal of the special leave petition, at the same

       time, dismissal of the special leave petition in limine was

       explained to mean that it was still a decision on merits by this

       Court.
16)    Having stated the manner in which the issue is dealt with in

       various judgments noted above, it would be apposite to first

       discuss the law
laid down in
Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm as

       well as Kunhayammed’s cases since both the judgments are

       rendered by three Judges’ Bench. Therefore, it is to be seen, in

       the first instance, as to whether they project conflicting views.
17)    Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm was a case under the
Rent

       Control Act
and the appeal came from the High Court of Madras.

       In an eviction petition filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in the said

       case, the Rent Controller had ordered eviction of the appellants

       therein on the ground of wilful default in payment of rent as well

       as on the ground of bona fide requirement of the premises by

       respondent Nos. 1 and 2 for their own business. In appeal, the

       order of the Rent Controller was set aside as it was found that

       there was a bona fide dispute with regard to the title of the

       property which could be decided by the Civil Court.                 The

       respondents preferred review petitions thereagainst, which were
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.       Page 10 of 27
dismissed. They approached this Court by way of special leave

       petitions which were also dismissed. After the dismissal of these

       special leave petitions, the respondents therein filed review

       petition in the High Court with a delay of 221 days. The High

       Court condoned the delay and also entertained the review petition

       on merits and not only allowed those review petitions but even

       reversed the orders made earlier in the civil revision petitions by

       allowing those petitions and ordering eviction of the appellants/

       tenants.       In appeal against this order passed in review and

       revision petitions, this Court held that the jurisdiction exercised by

       the High Court, under the circumstances, was palpably

       erroneous. Entire discussion in this behalf is contained in one

       paragraph, which we reproduce below:
"4. The manner in which the learned Single Judge of the
               High Court exercised the review jurisdiction, after the
               special leave petitions against the selfsame order had
               been dismissed by this Court after hearing learned counsel
               for the parties, to say the least, was not proper.
               Interference by the learned Single Judge at that stage is
               subversive of judicial discipline. The High Court was aware
               that the SLPs against the orders dated 7-1-1987 had
               already been dismissed by this Court. The High Court,
               therefore, had no power or jurisdiction to review the
               selfsame order, which was the subject-matter of challenge
               in the SLPs in this Court after the challenge had failed. By
               passing the impugned order on 7-4-1994, judicial propriety
               has been sacrificed. After the dismissal of the special
               leave petitions by this Court, on contest, no review
               petitions could be entertained by the High Court against
               the same order. The very entertainment of the review
               petitions, in the facts and circumstances of the case, was
               an affront to the order of this Court. We express our strong
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.           Page 11 of 27
disapproval and hope there would be no occasion in the
               future when we may have to say so. The jurisdiction
               exercised by the High Court, under the circumstances,
               was palpably erroneous. The respondents who
               approached the High Court after the dismissal of their
               SLPs by this Court, abused the process of the court and
               indulged in vexatious litigation. We strongly deprecate the
               matter in which the review petitions were filed and heard in
               the High Court after the dismissal of the SLPs by this
               Court. The appeals deserve to succeed on that short
               ground. The appeals are, consequently, allowed and the
               impugned order dated 7-4-1994 passed in the review
               petitions is hereby set aside. The respondents shall pay
               Rs 10,000 as costs.”
18)    In Kunhayammed’s case, on the other hand, the Forest Tribunal

       had held that land in dispute did not vest in the Government

       under the provisions of the
Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and

       Assignment) Act, 1971
. Against this order the appeal of the State

       of Kerala was dismissed by the High Court on December 17,

       1982. Thereagainst special leave petition was filed by the State,

       which was dismissed in limine stating - ‘Special Leave Petition is

       dismissed on merits’. Thereafter, the Estate filed an application in

       the High Court for review of its earlier order whereby appeal of

       the State had been dismissed upholding the order of the Forest

       Tribunal. It may be noted that during the pendency of this review

       petition,
Section 8(c)
was inserted in the
Kerala Private Forests

       (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971
by amendment made in the

       year 1986 enabling the Government to file appeal or review in
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.           Page 12 of 27
certain cases. This provision was introduced with retrospective

       effect, i.e. from November 19, 1983. Review petition was filed in

       January 1984. On these facts, the High Court passed orders

       dated December 14, 1995 overruling the objection to the

       maintainability of the review petition holding that review was

       maintainable and posted the case for hearing on merits. This

       order was challenged which became the subject matter of the

       appeal in the aforesaid cases. The contention of the petitioner

       before this Court was two fold: (a) the High Court’s order dated

       December 17, 1982 was merged with order dated July 18, 1983

       whereby the special leave petition was dismissed and, therefore,

       no review petition was maintainable; and (b) order of this Court in

       the special leave petition amounted to affirmation of the High

       Court’s order and, therefore, could not be reviewed by the High

       Court. This Court rejected the contention of the petitioner holding

       that review was maintainable as the doctrine of merger was not

       applicable in the aforesaid circumstances.            However, what is

       important is that the Court deliberated on the doctrine of merger

       and handed out well reasoned and lucid judgment explaining the

       situations where review would be maintainable as well as the

       situations where it would not be maintainable on the aforesaid

       doctrine.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.          Page 13 of 27
19)    Explaining the doctrine of merger, the Court held that logic behind

       this doctrine is that there cannot be more than one decree or

       operative orders governing the same subject matter at a given

       point of time.        When a decree or order passed by an inferior

       Court, Tribunal or Authority is subjected to a remedy available

       under law before a superior forum, then, though the decree or

       order under challenge continues to be effective and binding,

       nevertheless, this finality is to put in jeopardy. Once the superior

       court disposes of the dispute before it in any manner, i.e. either

       by affirming the decree or order or by settings aside or by

       modifying the same, it is the decree of the superior Court,

       Tribunal or Authority which is the final binding and operative

       decree and the decree or order of the lower Court, Tribunal or

       authority gets merged into the order passed by the superior

       forum.       The Court also clarified that this doctrine is not of

       universal or unlimited application.                   The nature of jurisdiction

       exercised by the superior forum and the content or subject matter

       of challenge laid or which could have been laid will have to be

       kept in view.          The Court thereafter discussed the provision

       pertaining to the appellate jurisdiction that is exercised by the

       Supreme Court conferred upon it by
Articles 132
to 136 of the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                   Page 14 of 27
Constitution of India. Insofar as jurisdiction under
Article 136
is

       concerned, it explained that
Article 136
opens with a non-
obstante clause and conveys a message that even in the field

       covered by the preceding articles, jurisdiction conferred by
Article

       136
is available to be exercised in an appropriate case. It is an

       untrammelled reservoir of power incapable of being confined to

       definitional bounds; the discretion conferred on the Supreme

       Court being subjected to only one limitation, that is, the wisdom

       and good sense or sense of justice of the Judges. No right of

       appeal is conferred upon any party; only a discretion is vested in

       the Supreme Court to interfere by granting leave to an applicant

       to enter in its appellate jurisdiction not open otherwise and as of

       right.
20)    Exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 136
and the manner in which

       it is dealt with is clarified as under:
"14. The exercise of jurisdiction conferred on this Court by
Article 136
of the Constitution consists of two steps: (i)
                granting special leave to appeal; and (ii) hearing the
                appeal. This distinction is clearly demonstrated by the
                provisions of Order 16 of the Supreme Court Rules framed
                in exercise of the power conferred by
Article 145
of the
                Constitution. Under Rule 4, the petition seeking special
                leave to appeal filed before the Supreme Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution shall be in Form No. 28. No
                separate application for interim relief need be filed, which
                can be incorporated in the petition itself. If notice is
                ordered on the special leave petition, the petitioner should
                take steps to serve the notice on the respondent. The
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.            Page 15 of 27
petition shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
               judgment or order appealed from and an affidavit in
               support of the statement of facts contained in the petition.
               Under Rule 10 the petition for grant of special leave shall
               be put up for hearing ex parte unless there be a caveat.
               The court if it thinks fit, may direct issue of notice to the
               respondent and adjourn the hearing of the petition. Under
               Rule 13, the respondent to whom a notice in special leave
               petition is issued or who had filed a caveat, shall be
               entitled to oppose the grant of leave or interim orders
               without filing any written objections. He shall also be at
               liberty to file his objections only by setting out the grounds
               in opposition to the questions of law or grounds set out in
               the SLP. On hearing, the Court may refuse the leave and
               dismiss the petition for seeking special leave to appeal
               either ex parte or after issuing notice to the opposite party.
               Under Rule 11, on the grant of special leave, the petition
               for special leave shall, subject to the payment of additional
               court fee, if any, be treated as the petition of appeal and it
               shall be registered and numbered as such. The appeal
               shall then be set down for hearing in accordance with the
               procedure laid down thereafter. Thus, a petition seeking
               grant of special leave to appeal and the appeal itself,
               though both dealt with by
Article 136
of the Constitution,
               are two clearly distinct stages. In our opinion, the legal
               position which emerges is as under:
(1) While hearing the petition for special leave to
                  appeal, the Court is called upon to see whether the
                  petitioner should be granted such leave or not. While
                  hearing such petition, the Court is not exercising its
                  appellate jurisdiction; it is merely exercising its
                  discretionary jurisdiction to grant or not to grant leave
                  to appeal. The petitioner is still outside the gate of
                  entry though aspiring to enter the appellate arena of
                  the Supreme Court. Whether he enters or not would
                  depend on the fate of his petition for special leave;
(2) If the petition seeking grant of leave to appeal is
                  dismissed, it is an expression of opinion by the Court
                  that a case for invoking appellate jurisdiction of the
                  Court was not made out;
(3) If leave to appeal is granted the appellate
                  jurisdiction of the Court stands invoked; the gate for
                  entry in the appellate arena is opened. The petitioner
                  is in and the respondent may also be called upon to
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.              Page 16 of 27
face him, though in an appropriate case, in spite of
                  having granted leave to appeal, the Court may
                  dismiss the appeal without noticing the respondent.
(4) In spite of a petition for special leave to appeal
                  having been filed, the judgment, decree or order
                  against which leave to appeal has been sought for,
                  continues to be final, effective and binding as
                  between the parties. Once leave to appeal has been
                  granted, the finality of the judgment, decree or order
                  appealed against is put in jeopardy though it
                  continues to be binding and effective between the
                  parties unless it is a nullity or unless the Court may
                  pass a specific order staying or suspending the
                  operation or execution of the judgment, decree or
                  order under challenge.”
21)     The Court thereafter analysed number of cases where orders of

        different nature were passed and dealt with these judgments by

        classifying them in the following categories:
(i)    Dismissal at the stage of special leave petition - without

        reasons - no res judicata, no merger8.
(ii)   Dismissal of the special leave petition by speaking or

        reasoned order - no merger, but rule of discipline and
Article 141
attracted9.
8   Proposition based on judgments in
Workmen v. Board of Trustees of the Cochin Port Trust
,
    (1978) 3 SCC 119;
Western India Match Co. Ltd. v. Industrial Tribunal
, AIR 1958 Mad 398;
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. State of Bihar
, (1986) 4 SCC 146;
Rup Diamonds v. Union of India
,
    (1989) 2 SCC 356; Wilson v. Colchester Justices, (1985) 2 All ER 97 (HL); Supreme Court
Employees' Welfare Assn. v. Union of India
, (1989) 4 SCC 187;
Yogendra Narayan Chowdhury
    v. Union of India
, (1996) 7 SCC 1; V.M. Salgaocar & Bros.
(
P) Ltd. v. CIT
, (2000) 5 SCC 373;
    Sree Narayana Dharmasanghom Trust v. SwamiPrakasananda, (
1997) 6 SCC 78 and State of
    Maharashtra v. Prabhakar Bhikaji Ingle
, (1996) 3 SCC 463.
9
Penu Balakrishna Iyer v. Ariya M. Ramaswami Iyer
, AIR 1965 SC 195;
Abbai Maligai Partnership
    Firm v. K. Santhakumaran
, (1998) 7 SCC 386;
Shankar Ramchandra Abhyankar v. Krishnaji
    Dattatreya Bapat
, (1969) 2 SCC 74;
Sushil Kumar Sen v. State of Bihar
, (1975) 1 SCC 774;
Gopabandhu Biswal v. Krishna Chandra Mohanty
, (1998) 4 SCC 447;
Junior Telecom Officers
    Forum v. Union of India
, 1993 Supp (4) SCC 693 and Supreme Court
Employees' Welfare Assn.
Case, (1989) 4 SCC 187.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                        Page 17 of 27
(iii) Leave granted - dismissal without reasons - merger results 10.
22)    It may be pertinent to mention here that while laying down the

        second principle mentioned above, the Court took note of the

        judgment in Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm and discussed it in

        the following manner:
"26. The underlying logic attaching efficacy to an order of
               the Supreme Court dismissing SLP after hearing counsel
               for the parties is discernible from a recent three-Judge
               Bench decision of this Court in
Abbai Maligai Partnership
               Firm v. K. Santhakumaran
[(1998) 7 SCC 386] . In the
               matter of eviction proceeding initiated before the Rent
               Controller, the order passed therein was subjected to
               appeal and then revision before the High Court. Special
               leave petitions were preferred before the Supreme Court
               where the respondents were present on caveat. Both the
               sides were heard through the Senior Advocates
               representing them. The special leave petitions were
               dismissed. The High Court thereafter entertained review
               petitions which were highly belated and having condoned
               the delay reversed the orders made earlier in civil revision
               petitions. The orders in review were challenged by filing
               appeals under leave granted on special leave petitions.
               This Court observed that what was done by the learned
               Single Judge was “subversive of judicial discipline”. The
               facts and circumstances of the case persuaded this Court
               to form an opinion that the tenants were indulging in
               vexatious litigations, abusing the process of the Court by
               approaching the High Court and the very entertainment of
               review petitions (after condoning a long delay of 221 days)
               and then reversing the earlier orders was an affront to the
               order of this Court. However the learned Judges deciding
               the case have nowhere in the course of their judgment
               relied on doctrine of merger for taking the view they have
               done. A careful reading of this decision brings out the
               correct statement of law and fortifies us in taking the view
               as under.”
10
Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Govt. of A.P.
, AIR 1964 SC 1372.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.            Page 18 of 27
23)    It may also be of interest to note that the Court dealt with the

       situation where the review is filed earlier in point of time and the

       special leave petition is filed thereafter, and dealt with the

       situation in the following manner:
"37. Let us assume that the review is filed first and the
               delay in SLP is condoned and the special leave is
               ultimately granted and the appeal is pending in this Court.
               The position then, under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
is that still
               the review can be disposed of by the High Court. If the
               review of a decree is granted before the disposal of the
               appeal against the decree, the decree appealed against
               will cease to exist and the appeal would be rendered
               incompetent. An appeal cannot be preferred against a
               decree after a review against the decree has been
               granted. This is because the decree reviewed gets merged
               in the decree passed on review and the appeal to the
               superior court preferred against the earlier decree — the
               one before review — becomes infructuous.”
24)    After elaborate discourse on almost all the aspects, the Court

       gave its conclusions and also summed up the legal position from

       paragraphs 39 to 44. We reproduce the same hereunder:
"39. We have catalogued and dealt with all the available
               decisions of this Court brought to our notice on the point at
               issue. It is clear that as amongst the several two-Judge
               Bench decisions there is a conflict of opinion and needs to
               be set at rest. The source of power conferring binding
               efficacy on decisions of this Court is not uniform in all such
               decisions. Reference is found having been made to (i)
Article 141
of the Constitution, (ii) doctrine of merger, (iii)
               res judicata, and (iv) rule of discipline flowing from this
               Court being the highest court of the land.
40. A petition seeking grant of special leave to appeal may
               be rejected for several reasons. For example, it may be
               rejected (i) as barred by time, or (ii) being a defective
               presentation, (iii) the petitioner having no locus standi to
               file the petition, (iv) the conduct of the petitioner disentitling
               him to any indulgence by the court, (iv) the question raised
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                 Page 19 of 27
by the petitioner for consideration by this Court being not
               fit for consideration or deserving being dealt with by the
               Apex Court of the country and so on. The expression often
               employed by this Court while disposing of such petitions
               are — “heard and dismissed”, “dismissed”, “dismissed as
               barred by time” and so on. May be that at the admission
               stage itself the opposite party appears on caveat or on
               notice and offers contest to the maintainability of the
               petition. The Court may apply its mind to the
               meritworthiness of the petitioner's prayer seeking leave to
               file an appeal and having formed an opinion may say
               “dismissed on merits”. Such an order may be passed even
               ex parte, that is, in the absence of the opposite party. In
               any case, the dismissal would remain a dismissal by a
               non-speaking order where no reasons have been assigned
               and no law has been declared by the Supreme Court. The
               dismissal is not of the appeal but of the special leave
               petition. Even if the merits have been gone into, they are
               the merits of the special leave petition only. In our opinion
               neither doctrine of merger nor
Article 141
of the
               Constitution is attracted to such an order. Grounds entitling
               exercise of review jurisdiction conferred by
Order 47 Rule
               1 CPC
or any other statutory provision or allowing review
               of an order passed in exercise of writ or supervisory
               jurisdiction of the High Court (where also the principles
               underlying or emerging from
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC
act as
               guidelines) are not necessarily the same on which this
               Court exercises discretion to grant or not to grant special
               leave to appeal while disposing of a petition for the
               purpose. Mere rejection of a special leave petition does
               not take away the jurisdiction of the court, tribunal or forum
               whose order forms the subject-matter of petition for special
               leave to review its own order if grounds for exercise of
               review jurisdiction are shown to exist. Where the order
               rejecting an SLP is a speaking order, that is, where
               reasons have been assigned by this Court for rejecting the
               petition for special leave and are stated in the order still
               the order remains the one rejecting prayer for the grant of
               leave to appeal. The petitioner has been turned away at
               the threshold without having been allowed to enter in the
               appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Here also the doctrine
               of merger would not apply. But the law stated or declared
               by this Court in its order shall attract applicability of
Article
               141
of the Constitution. The reasons assigned by this
               Court in its order expressing its adjudication (expressly or
               by necessary implication) on point of fact or law shall take
               away the jurisdiction of any other court, tribunal or
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                Page 20 of 27
authority to express any opinion in conflict with or in
               departure from the view taken by this Court because
               permitting to do so would be subversive of judicial
               discipline and an affront to the order of this Court.
               However this would be so not by reference to the doctrine
               of merger.
41. Once a special leave petition has been granted, the
               doors for the exercise of appellate jurisdiction of this Court
               have been let open. The order impugned before the
               Supreme Court becomes an order appealed against. Any
               order passed thereafter would be an appellate order and
               would attract the applicability of doctrine of merger. It
               would not make a difference whether the order is one of
               reversal or of modification or of dismissal affirming the
               order appealed against. It would also not make any
               difference if the order is a speaking or non-speaking one.
               Whenever this Court has felt inclined to apply its mind to
               the merits of the order put in issue before it though it may
               be inclined to affirm the same, it is customary with this
               Court to grant leave to appeal and thereafter dismiss the
               appeal itself (and not merely the petition for special leave)
               though at times the orders granting leave to appeal and
               dismissing the appeal are contained in the same order and
               at times the orders are quite brief. Nevertheless, the order
               shows the exercise of appellate jurisdiction and therein the
               merits of the order impugned having been subjected to
               judicial scrutiny of this Court.
42. “To merge” means to sink or disappear in something
               else; to become absorbed or extinguished; to be combined
               or be swallowed up. Merger in law is defined as the
               absorption of a thing of lesser importance by a greater,
               whereby the lesser ceases to exist, but the greater is not
               increased; an absorption or swallowing up so as to involve
               a loss of identity and individuality. (See Corpus Juris
               Secundum, Vol. LVII, pp. 1067-68.)
43. We may look at the issue from another angle. The
               Supreme Court cannot and does not reverse or modify the
               decree or order appealed against while deciding a petition
               for special leave to appeal. What is impugned before the
               Supreme Court can be reversed or modified only after
               granting leave to appeal and then assuming appellate
               jurisdiction over it. If the order impugned before the
               Supreme Court cannot be reversed or modified at the SLP
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.             Page 21 of 27
stage obviously that order cannot also be affirmed at the
               SLP stage.
44. To sum up, our conclusions are:
(i) Where an appeal or revision is provided against an
               order passed by a court, tribunal or any other authority
               before superior forum and such superior forum modifies,
               reverses or affirms the decision put in issue before it, the
               decision by the subordinate forum merges in the decision
               by the superior forum and it is the latter which subsists,
               remains operative and is capable of enforcement in the
               eye of law.
(ii) The jurisdiction conferred by
Article 136
of the
               Constitution is divisible into two stages. The first stage is
               upto the disposal of prayer for special leave to file an
               appeal. The second stage commences if and when the
               leave to appeal is granted and the special leave petition is
               converted into an appeal.
(iii) The doctrine of merger is not a doctrine of universal or
               unlimited application. It will depend on the nature of
               jurisdiction exercised by the superior forum and the
               content or subject-matter of challenge laid or capable of
               being laid shall be determinative of the applicability of
               merger. The superior jurisdiction should be capable of
               reversing, modifying or affirming the order put in issue
               before it. Under
Article 136
of the Constitution the
               Supreme Court may reverse, modify or affirm the
               judgment-decree or order appealed against while
               exercising its appellate jurisdiction and not while exercising
               the discretionary jurisdiction disposing of petition for
               special leave to appeal. The doctrine of merger can
               therefore be applied to the former and not to the latter.
(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a
               non-speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it
               does not attract the doctrine of merger. An order refusing
               special leave to appeal does not stand substituted in place
               of the order under challenge. All that it means is that the
               Court was not inclined to exercise its discretion so as to
               allow the appeal being filed.
(v) If the order refusing leave to appeal is a speaking
               order, i.e., gives reasons for refusing the grant of leave,
               then the order has two implications. Firstly, the statement
               of law contained in the order is a declaration of law by the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.             Page 22 of 27
Supreme Court within the meaning of
Article 141
of the
               Constitution. Secondly, other than the declaration of law,
               whatever is stated in the order are the findings recorded by
               the Supreme Court which would bind the parties thereto
               and also the court, tribunal or authority in any proceedings
               subsequent thereto by way of judicial discipline, the
               Supreme Court being the Apex Court of the country. But,
               this does not amount to saying that the order of the court,
               tribunal or authority below has stood merged in the order
               of the Supreme Court rejecting the special leave petition or
               that the order of the Supreme Court is the only order
               binding as res judicata in subsequent proceedings
               between the parties.
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and appellate
               jurisdiction of Supreme Court has been invoked the order
               passed in appeal would attract the doctrine of merger; the
               order may be of reversal, modification or merely
               affirmation.
(vii) On an appeal having been preferred or a petition
               seeking leave to appeal having been converted into an
               appeal before the Supreme Court the jurisdiction of High
               Court to entertain a review petition is lost thereafter as
               provided by sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of
Order 47 CPC
.”
25)         Having noted the aforesaid two judgments and particularly

       the fact that the earlier judgment in the case of Abbai Maligai

       Partnership Firm is duly taken cognisance of and explained in

       the latter judgment, we are of the view that there is no conflict

       insofar as ratio of the two cases is concerned. Moreover, Abbai

       Maligai Partnership Firm was decided on its peculiar facts, with

       no discussion on any principle of law, whereas Kunhayammed

       is an elaborate discourse based on well accepted propositions of

       law which are applicable for such an issue. We are, therefore, of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.           Page 23 of 27
the view that detailed judgment in Kunhayammed lays down the

       correct law and there is no need to refer the cases to larger

       Bench, as was contended by the counsel for the appellant.
26)    While taking this view, we may also point out that even in K.

       Rajamouli this Court took note of both these judgments and

       explained the principle of res judicata in the following manner:
"4. Following the decision in Kunhayammed [(2000) 6 SCC
               359] we are of the view that the dismissal of the special
               leave petition against the main judgment of the High Court
               would not constitute res judicata when a special leave
               petition is filed against the order passed in the review
               petition provided the review petition was filed prior to filing
               of special leave petition against the main judgment of the
               High Court. The position would be different where after
               dismissal of the special leave petition against the main
               judgment a party files a review petition after a long delay
               on the ground that the party was prosecuting remedy by
               way of special leave petition. In such a situation the filing
               of review would be an abuse of the process of the law. We
               are in agreement with the view taken in Abbai Maligai
               Partnership Firm [(1998) 7 SCC 386] that if the High Court
               allows the review petition filed after the special leave
               petition was dismissed after condoning the delay, it would
               be treated as an affront to the order of the Supreme Court.
               But this is not the case here. In the present case, the
               review petition was filed well within time and since the
               review petition was not being decided by the High Court,
               the appellant filed the special leave petition against the
               main judgment of the High Court. We, therefore, overrule
               the preliminary objection of the counsel for the respondent
               and hold that this appeal arising out of special leave
               petition is maintainable.”
27)    From a cumulative reading of the various judgments, we sum up

       the legal position as under:
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.              Page 24 of 27
(a)     The conclusions rendered by the three Judge Bench of this

       Court in Kunhayammed and summed up in paragraph 44 are

       affirmed and reiterated.
(b)     We reiterate the conclusions relevant for these cases as

       under:
"(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a
               non-speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it
               does not attract the doctrine of merger. An order refusing
               special leave to appeal does not stand substituted in place
               of the order under challenge. All that it means is that the
               Court was not inclined to exercise its discretion so as to
               allow the appeal being filed.
(v) If the order refusing leave to appeal is a speaking
               order, i.e., gives reasons for refusing the grant of leave,
               then the order has two implications. Firstly, the statement
               of law contained in the order is a declaration of law by the
               Supreme Court within the meaning of
Article 141
of the
               Constitution. Secondly, other than the declaration of law,
               whatever is stated in the order are the findings recorded by
               the Supreme Court which would bind the parties thereto
               and also the court, tribunal or authority in any proceedings
               subsequent thereto by way of judicial discipline, the
               Supreme Court being the Apex Court of the country. But,
               this does not amount to saying that the order of the court,
               tribunal or authority below has stood merged in the order
               of the Supreme Court rejecting the special leave petition or
               that the order of the Supreme Court is the only order
               binding as res judicata in subsequent proceedings
               between the parties.
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted and appellate
               jurisdiction of Supreme Court has been invoked the order
               passed in appeal would attract the doctrine of merger; the
               order may be of reversal, modification or merely
               affirmation.
(vii) On an appeal having been preferred or a petition
               seeking leave to appeal having been converted into an
               appeal before the Supreme Court the jurisdiction of High
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.           Page 25 of 27
Court to entertain a review petition is lost thereafter as
               provided by sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of
Order 47 CPC
.”
(c)     Once we hold that law
laid down in
Kunhayammed is to be

       followed, it will not make any difference whether the review

       petition was filed before the filing of special leave petition or was

       filed after the dismissal of special leave petition.
Such a situation

       is covered in para 37 of
Kunhayammed
case.
28)    Applying the aforesaid principles, the outcome of these appeals

       would be as under:
Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.

       490 of 2012: In the instant case, since special leave petition was

       dismissed in limine without giving any reasons, the review petition

       filed by the appellant in the High Court would be maintainable and

       should have been decided on merits. Order dated November 12,

       2008 passed by the High Court is accordingly set aside and

       matter is remanded back to the High Court for deciding the review

       petition on merits. Civil Appeal disposed of accordingly.
Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.

       13792 of 2013: In this case, we find that the special leave petition

       was dismissed with the following order passed on January 05,

       2012:
"We find no ground to interfere with the impugned
               order. The special leave petition is dismissed.”
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.         Page 26 of 27
Here also, special leave petition was dismissed in limine and

       without any speaking order. After the dismissal of the special

       leave petition, the respondent in this appeal had approached the

       High Court with review petition. Said review petition is allowed by

       passing order dated December 12, 2012 on the ground of

       suppression of material facts by the appellant herein and

       commission of fraud on the Court. Such a review petition was

       maintainable.         Therefore, the High Court was empowered to

       entertain the same on merits. Insofar as appeal of the appellant

       challenging the order dated December 12, 2012 on merits is

       concerned, the matter shall be placed before the regular Board to

       decide the same.
.............................................J.
                                                                                   (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                       .............................................J.
                                                                    (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                                       .............................................J.
                                                                                  (M.R. SHAH)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 01, 2019.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 490 of 2012 & Anr.                           Page 27 of 27