[Cites
2
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
R. Dhanasundari @ R. Rajeswari vs A.N. Umakanth And Ors on 6 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2089, (2019) 134 ALL LR 696, (2019) 144 REVDEC 404, (2019) 196 ALLINDCAS 13, (2019) 1 ALL RENTCAS 852, (2019) 1 CLR 811 (SC), (2019) 1 CURCC 340, (2019) 2 CGLJ 24, (2019) 2 ICC 854, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 158, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 326, (2019) 3 CIVILCOURTC 452, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 527, (2019) 4 SCALE 161
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE



                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7292 OF 2009




         R.DHANASUNDARI @ R. RAJESWARI                                         Appellant(s)

                                                        VS.

         A.N. UMAKANTH & ORS.                                                  Respondent(s)



         Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order

         dated 12.10.2006, as passed in C.R.P. (PD) No. 10 of 2006, whereby the High

         Court of Judicature at Madras has upheld the order dated 07.07.2005, as passed

         in O.S. No. 219 of 2004 by the District Munsif, Chengalpattu allowing the

         application filed by defendant Nos. 3 to 6 for transposing them as plaintiffs, after

         the existing plaintiffs sought permission to withdraw the suit.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2.
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.03.06
17:20:41 IST
The prayer of defendant Nos. 3 to 6 to be transposed as plaintiffs under
Reason:
Order XXIII Rule 1-A read with
Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure
,
1
1908 (‘
CPC
’), came to be made and allowed in somewhat peculiar set of facts

and circumstances, which could be noticed, in brief, as follows:-
(a)   The civil suit in question was originally instituted in the Court of the

Principal Subordinate Judge, Chengalpattu by A.C. Nataraja Mudaliar (original

plaintiff) against A.V. Manoharan (defendant No.1 - respondent No. 1 herein) and

R. Dhanasundari @ R. Rajeshwari (defendant No. 2 - appellant herein) for

cancellation of the sale deed dated 23.03.1985, which was executed by

defendant No. 1 in favour of defendant No.2. This suit was initially registered as

O.S. No. 122 of 1989.
(b)   The assertions in the plaint had been that the suit schedule property

was purchased in the name of a partnership firm M/s South India Engineering

Works of which, the plaintiff and the defendant No. 1 were the partners; and that

the said firm was dissolved by a deed of dissolution dated 22.05.1971 whereby,

the defendant No. 1 A.V. Manoharan was relieved of the assets and liabilities of

the firm and the suit schedule property vested with the plaintiff A.C. Nataraja

Mudaliar. It was alleged that the defendant No. 1 A.V. Manoharan, despite having

relinquished the rights in the suit property, sold the same to the defendant No. 2

under the impugned sale deed dated 23.03.1985.
(c)   During pendency of this suit, the original plaintiff A.C. Nataraja

Mudaliar expired on 19.05.1988 leaving behind 3 sons and 4 daughters as his

legal representatives, who were impleaded as plaintiff Nos. 2 to 8 in the suit. One
2
of the sons of the original plaintiff namely, A. N. Umakanth (plaintiff No. 5-
respondent No. 1 herein) was extended power of attorney by his siblings.
(d)    The suit was decreed ex parte in the year 1995 but later on, the ex

parte decree was set aside and the suit was restored to the original number.

However, in the interregnum, the respondent No. 1 A. N. Umakanth, the power of

attorney holder of all the legal representatives of the original plaintiff, sold the suit

property to three persons, namely Ramasamy, Dhanam Ramasamy and

Venkatasubramanian (respondent Nos. 2 to 4 herein) through a registered sale

deed dated 04.07.1995. In view of this transaction, upon restoration of the suit,

the said purchasers moved an application (IA No. 135 of 2002) for being

impleaded as plaintiffs. This application was allowed on 21.06.2002 and thereby,

the said purchasers were allowed to join the suit as plaintiffs Nos. 9 to 11.
(e)    However, the other plaintiffs (Nos. 2 to 4 and 6 to 8) took exception

to the aforesaid transaction of sale by the plaintiff No. 5; they revoked his power

of attorney and moved an application (IA No. 468 of 2003) for transposition of the

plaintiff No. 5 and his purchasers (plaintiff Nos. 9 to 11) as defendants. This

application was allowed on 25.06.2003 and, accordingly, the plaintiff No. 5 and

plaintiff Nos. 9 to 11 were transposed as defendants 3 to 6 in this suit.
(f)    Thus, at and until the given juncture, the proceedings and

developments had been that in the civil suit for cancellation of sale deed

executed by the defendant No. 1 in favour of the defendant No. 2, the original
3
sole plaintiff had expired; his legal representatives came on record as plaintiff

Nos. 2 to 8 with plaintiff No. 5 being the power of attorney holder of the other

plaintiffs; the suit was decreed ex parte and the said attorney sold the suit

property to three persons; when the ex parte decree was set aside and the suit

was restored to its number, the said purchasers came on record as plaintiff Nos.

9 to 11; and later on, the said seller and purchasers (plaintiff Nos. 5 and 9 to 11)

were transposed as defendant Nos. 3 to 6. At this juncture and with such change

of complexion, the suit was transferred to the file of District Munsif Court,

Chengalpattu and was renumbered as O.S. No. 219 of 2004.
(g)    After having, thus, been transferred and renumbered with addition

and transposition in the array of parties, the suit in question proceeded in trial

but, when the matter reached the stage of cross-examination of the defendants'

witness DW-3, the plaintiffs filed a memo seeking permission to withdraw the suit,

for the matter having been settled with the defendant Nos. 1 and 2. Though the

defendant Nos. 1 and 2 did not oppose the prayer so made by the plaintiffs but

then, the defendants 3 to 6 (who were transposed as defendants from their

earlier position as plaintiffs) filed objections to the memo for withdrawal and also

filed the application (IA No. 153 of 2005) under Order XXIII Rule 1-A read with
Order I Rule 10 CPC
with the prayer that they be transposed as plaintiff Nos. 2 to

5 in this suit.
4
3.    The said application for transposition (IA No. 153 of 2005) came to be

allowed by the Trial Court by its impugned order dated 07.07.2005 with the

following observations:-
“Upon perusing the petition, counter it reveals that the original
      suit was filed in the year 1989. Originally the petitioner has
      filed the above suit as a Power of Attorney agent of plaintiffs.
      When the power was in force, the power given to the
      petitioner was cancelled. When the power was inforce, the
      petitioner sold most of the suit item. The purchasers moved
      an application to implead themselves as plaintiffs in the above
      suit and the same was allowed. Later the plaintiffs have filed
      application to transpose the plaintiffs 5, 9 to 11 as defendants
      and the same was allowed. Later the trial commenced and the
      plaintiff witness had been examined. On the side of
      defendants 3 witnesses were examined. The cross-
      examination of 2nd defendant’s husband has been deferred. At
      this stage the plaintiff and the 2nd defendant entered into
      compromise and filed a memo stating that the suit is not
      pressed as settled out of court. The petitioner sold the
      property while the power of attorney was in force. Therefore
      the petitioner has interest in the out come of the suit. When
      the case is at the tail end and the suit is of the year 1989 and
      if the suit is allowed to be withdrawn this petitioner has no
      remedy and is not in a position to get any remedy in this suit.
      More over the petitioners if file fresh suit, the said suit will be
      barred by limitation. When all the parties to the suit entered
      into compromise, the court will permit the parties to withdraw
      the suit. But in this case only the plaintiff and 2 nd defendant
      alone entered into compromise. The remaining defendants
      are not parties to the compromise. Since there is no
      compromise with other defendants, this court will not accept
      as the matter is fully settled.
For the aforesaid reasons and in the interest of justice and to
      settle the matter once for all and determine the rights of the
      parties, this petition is allowed.”
5
4.    Aggrieved by the order aforesaid, the defendant No. 2 (appellant herein)

preferred the revision petition that has been considered and dismissed by the

High Court in its impugned order dated 12.10.2006 while observing as under:-
“15…….it is seen in this case that the defendants 3 to 6 who
      seek to transpose themselves as plaintiffs, were originally
      arrayed as plaintiffs 5 and 9 to 11. On the ground that the 5 th
      plaintiff (now the 3rd defendant) acted against the interest of
      the other plaintiffs (his own brothers and sisters) in selling the
      suit property to the defendants 4 to 6, the plaintiffs got them
      originally transposed as defendants 3 to 6 in I.A. No. 468 of
      2003. In other words, the present defendants 3 to 6 are
      subsequent purchasers, pendente lite, they had a substantial
      issue to be adjudicated as against the defendants 1 and 2,
      when they were plaintiffs 5 and 9 to 11. By virtue of their
      transposition as defendants 3 to 6, in the year 2003, they
      cannot be said to have lost their rights to have the same
      question adjudicated as against the defendants 1 and 2. As a
      matter of fact, the 3rd defendant’s right to prosecute the suit as
      a plaintiff, flowed out of his status as one of the legal heirs of
      the original sale relief prayed for in the suit filed, by his father
      did not get annulled by his transposition as the third defendant
      in the year 2003.
16. If the plaintiffs contest the suit and succeed, such
      success would have automatically enured to the benefit of the
      defendants 3 to 6. Therefore, the defendants 3 to 6 can be
      said to have an identity of interest with the plaintiffs.
17. Under such circumstances, I am of the view that the Trial
      Court was right in ordering the transposition of the defendants
      3 to 6 as plaintiffs. Therefore, I find no merits in the Civil
      Revision and the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed. No
      costs. The connected CMP & VCMP are closed.”
5.    Assailing the order aforesaid, learned counsel for the appellant (defendant

No. 2) has strenuously argued that the transaction concerning defendant Nos. 3
6
to 6 having taken place much after the institution of the suit, these defendants

have no cause of action against defendant Nos. 1 and 2 and hence, they cannot

be transposed as plaintiffs; that the right of the dominus litus plaintiffs to withdraw

the suit under
Order XXIII Rule 1 CPC
cannot be curtailed, especially when they

do not seek any liberty to file a fresh suit; and that the subsequent purchasers

have no legal right to seek cancellation of the sale deed which was executed in

favour of the appellant way back in the year 1985. These submissions are

supported on behalf of the respondent Nos. 6 & 8 to 11 (the plaintiffs) with the

contentions that the subsequent purchasers have a separate and distinct cause

of action, who ought to institute a separate suit and have no right to be

transposed as plaintiffs in the present suit.
6.    Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 has duly supported

the order impugned with reference to the subject matter of the suit as also the

developments that have taken place after filing of the suit and with the

submissions that defendant Nos. 3 to 6 have identical interest to seek

cancellation of the sale deed executed by the defendant No. 1 in favour of the

defendant No. 2. Hence, according to the learned counsel, when the existing

plaintiffs seek to withdraw, the defendant Nos. 3 to 6 have a right to be

transposed as plaintiffs so as to seek adjudication of their claim against the

defendant Nos. 1 and 2 in relation to the suit property.
7.    Having bestowed anxious consideration to the rival submissions and

having examined the record with reference to the law applicable, we are clearly
7
of the view that on the facts and in the circumstances of this case, upon the

existing plaintiffs seeking permission to withdraw under
Order XXIII Rule 1 CPC
,

the defendant Nos. 3 to 6 have rightly been allowed to be transposed as plaintiffs

under Order XXIII Rule 1-A read with
Order I Rule 10 CPC
and to continue with

the suit, as originally filed against the defendant Nos. 1 and 2.
8.    The law of procedure relating to the parties to a civil suit is essentially

contained in
Order I of the Code of Civil Procedure
, dealing with various aspects

concerning joinder, non-joinder and mis-joinder of parties. Rule 10 of Order I

specifically provides for addition, deletion and substitution of parties; and the

proposition for transposition of a party from one status to another, by its very

nature, inheres in sub-rule (2) of Rule 10 of
Order I CPC
that reads as under:-
"(2) Court may strike out or add parties. - The Court may at
      any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the
      application of either party, and on such terms as may
      appeared to the Court to be just, order that the name of any
      party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be
      struck out, and that the name of any person who or to have
      been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose
      presence before the Court may be necessary in order to
      enable the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate
      upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit be
      added."
8.1   On the other hand, the law of procedure in relation to withdrawal and

adjustment of suits is contained in
Order XXIII of Code of Civil Procedure
. As per

Rule 1 thereof, a plaintiff may seek permission for withdrawal of suit or
8
abandonment of a part of claim. Rule 1-A thereof 1 deals with an eventuality

where the plaintiff withdraws his suit or abandons his claim but a pro forma

defendant has a substantial question to be decided against the co-defendant.

This Rule 1-A of
Order XXIII CPC
reads as under:-
“R.1-A. When transposition of defendants as plaintiff may
       be permitted.- Where a suit is withdrawn or abandoned by a
       plaintiff under Rule 1, and a defendant applies to be
       transposed as a plaintiff under Rule 10 of Order 1, the Court,
       shall, in considering such application, have due regard to the
       question whether the applicant has a substantial question to
       be decided as against any of the other defendants.”
9.     It remains trite that the object of Rule 10 of
Order I CPC
is essentially to

bring on record all the persons who are parties to the dispute relating to the

subject matter of the suit so that the dispute may be determined in their presence

and the multiplicity of proceedings could be avoided. This Court explained the

principles, albeit in a different context, in the case of
Anil Kumar Singh v.

Shivnath Mishra
: (1995) 3 SCC 147 in the following:-
"7. ….. The object of the rule is to bring on record all the
       persons who are parties to the dispute relating to the subject-
       matter so that the dispute may be determined in their
       presence at the same time without any protraction,
       inconvenience and to avoid multiplicity of proceedings."
10.    As per Rule 1-A ibid., in the eventuality of plaintiff withdrawing the suit or

abandoning his claim, a pro forma defendant, who has a substantial question to

be decided against the co-defendant, is entitled to seek his transposition as

1 Inserted by the Amendment Act No. 104 of 1976
9
plaintiff for determination of such a question against the said co-defendant in the

given suit itself. The very nature of the provisions contained in Rule 1-A ibid.

leaves nothing to doubt that the powers of the Court to grant such a prayer for

transposition are very wide and could be exercised for effectual and

comprehensive adjudication of all the matters in controversy in the suit. The

basic requirement for exercise of powers under Rule 1-A ibid. would be to

examine if the plaintiff is seeking to withdraw or to abandon his claim under Rule

1 of Order XXIII and the defendant seeking transposition is having an interest in

the subject-matter of the suit and thereby, a substantial question to be

adjudicated against the other defendant.      In such a situation, the pro forma

defendant is to be allowed to continue with the same suit as plaintiff, thereby

averting the likelihood of his right being defeated and also obviating the

unnecessary multiplicity of proceedings.
11.   The present one is clearly a case answering to all the basics for

applicability of Rule 1-A of Order XXIII read with Rule 10 of
Order I CPC
. As

noticed, the principal cause in the suit is challenge to the sale deed executed by

defendant No. 1 in favour of defendant No. 2, with the original plaintiff asserting

his ownership over the property in question. After the demise of original plaintiff,

his sons and daughters came to be joined as plaintiff Nos. 2 to 8 with plaintiff No.

5 being the power of attorney holder of all the plaintiffs. After the suit was

decreed ex parte, the plaintiff No. 5 transferred the property in question to the
10
aforesaid three purchasers, who were joined as plaintiff Nos. 9 to 11 when the ex

parte decree was set aside and suit was restored for bi parte hearing. In the

given status of parties, even if the plaintiff Nos. 5 and 9 to 11 were later on

transposed as defendant Nos. 3 to 6, the suit remained essentially against the

defendant Nos. 1 and 2, that is, in challenge to the sale deed dated 23.03.1985,

as executed by the defendant No. 1 in favour of the defendant No. 2. In regard

to this cause, even if plaintiff Nos. 5 and 9 to 11 came to be transposed as

defendant Nos. 3 to 6, their claim against defendant Nos. 1 and 2 did not come to

an end; rather, the interest of the existing plaintiffs as also the defendant Nos. 3

to 6 had been one and the same as against the defendant Nos. 1 and 2.
12.   In the given status of parties and the subject matter of the suit, when the

plaintiffs entered into an arrangement with defendant Nos. 1 and 2 and sought

permission to withdraw under
Order XXIII Rule 1 CPC
, the right of defendant

Nos. 3 to 6 to continue with the litigation on their claim against defendant Nos. 1

and 2 immediately sprang up and they were, obviously, entitled to seek

transposition as plaintiffs under Order XXIII Rule 1-A
CPC
.
13.   It is also noteworthy that even if some question is sought to be raised as

regards the rights of the subsequent purchasers (defendant Nos. 4 to 6), the right

of the defendant No. 3 (earlier the plaintiff No. 5) to prosecute the suit as a

plaintiff remains rather indisputable in view of his status as one of the legal

representatives of the original plaintiff. The right of the said defendant No. 3
11
(earlier the plaintiff No. 5) to challenge the sale deed between defendant No. 1

and defendant No. 2 did not get annulled only by his earlier transposition as the

defendant; and he cannot be considered bound by the arrangement between the

existing plaintiffs and the defendant Nos. 1 and 2. In the given set of

circumstances, the Trial Court had been justified in allowing the prayer for

transposition and the High Court has rightly declined to interfere.
14.   For what has been discussed hereinabove, this appeal fails and is,

therefore, dismissed.
...…….……………………J
                                                     (UDAY UMESH LALIT)




                                                    ….…………………………J
                                                    (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



New Delhi,
Dated: 06th March, 2019
12