[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Fed. Of Bank Of India Staff Union . vs Union Of India on 1 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1260, 2019 (3) ABR 220, (2019) 161 FACLR 1007, (2019) 1 CURCC 251, (2019) 1 CURLR 945, (2019) 2 BANKCAS 362, (2019) 2 LAB LN 14, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 26, (2019) 2 SCT 158, (2019) 4 ALLMR 457, (2019) 4 SCALE 50, 2019 (4) SCC 462, (2020) 1 MAH LJ 804, (2020) 1 MPLJ 281, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 29
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL No.5570 OF 2014



                         Fed. of Bank of India Staff Unions
                         & Anr.                                      ….Appellant(s)

                                               VERSUS

                         Union of India & Anr.                      …Respondent(s)


                                          JUDGMENT
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1)   This appeal is directed against the final

                         judgment and order dated 08.04.2011 passed by

                         the High Court of Bombay at Goa in Writ Petition
(c) No.618 of     2010 whereby       the    High   Court

                         dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants

                         herein.
Signature Not Verified
2)   The appeal involves a short point as would be
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
clear from the facts stated infra.
Date: 2019.03.01
17:14:09 IST
Reason:
1
3)    The appellants herein are the writ petitioners

and the respondents herein are the respondents in

the writ petition filed in the High Court of Bombay

at Goa, out of which this appeal arises.
4)    Appellant No.1 is an Association of various

Staff Unions of the employees working in the Bank

of India ­ respondent No.2 herein. Appellant No.1 is

a registered Association under the
Trade Unions

Act, 1926
.           Appellant No.2 is an employee of

Respondent No.2 ­ Bank and at the relevant time

was   working         as Deputy    General     Secretary    of

appellant No.1­ Association.
5)
The       Banking     Companies   (Acquisition       and

Transfer        of    Undertakings)     Act,    1970
/1980

(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) deals with

Banking Companies and their internal affairs.
Section     9
of   the   Act   empowers     the   Central

Government to make scheme after consultation with
2
the Reserve Bank of India for carrying out the

provisions of the Act.
6)
Section    9     (3)
of     the       Act    provides     for

composition of Board of Directors and also provides

as to who can be nominated as Directors in the

Board of Directors. Clauses (a) to (i) of sub­section

(3) of
Section 9
of the Act sets out various categories

from    which     one    Director      from          each   of    such

categories is nominated in the Board of Directors.

Clause(e)        deals        with         a         category       of

workman/employee Director whereas clause(f) deals

with a category of officer/employee Director for their

nomination in the Board of Directors.
7)     In exercise of powers conferred under
Section

9(1)
of the Act, the Central Government has framed

a      Scheme      called­The          Nationalized              Banks

(Management           and     Miscellaneous             provisions)

Scheme, 1970.
8)     Chapter II of the Scheme deals with Board of

Directors. Clause 3 of the Scheme deals with the
3
constitution of the Board whereas Clause 3(2)(iii)

deals with disqualification of a workman/employee

for being nominated as a Director.
9)    So far as the procedure relating to the

nomination of a Director out of the officer/employee

category falling in clause(f) of
Section 9(3)
of the Act

is concerned, it is provided in the third schedule to

the Scheme.
10)   So far as the case at hand is concerned, it

relates to the nomination of a Director from the

workman/employee category falling in clause (e) of
Section 9(3)
of the Act and also relates to his

disqualification for being nominated as a Director in

that category.
11)   On 28.05.2009, the Management of the Bank

(respondent No.2) called upon the appellants to

furnish a panel of three workers/employees for

being nominated as a Director in order of preference

in the category of “Workman Director” in the Board

of Directors.
4
12)   The appellants, in compliance with the request

made by respondent No.2, sent a panel of three

names      of    the      workers/employees        in   order   of

preference to the Central Government by their letter

dated 08.06.2009. These names were ­ Mr. Dinesh

Jha “Lallan”, Mr. Ram Gopal Sharma and Mr.

Pranab Kumar Roy Chowdhary.
13)   The Secretary, Government of India, by letter

dated 10.10.2009, however, informed the appellants

that since all the three workers/employees, whose

names were sent, have less than three years of

residual        service    before   their     superannuation,

therefore it is not possible to nominate any of the

workers/employees as Director in the Board of

Directors.        The      appellants       were    accordingly

requested to send a fresh panel of names to enable

the Central Government to nominate one, out of the

three new names, as Director in the Board of

Directors.
5
14)    The appellants instead of sending the fresh

three names submitted their representation on

21.10.2009 and requested the Central Government

to re­consider the matter afresh and nominate any

one out of the three names already sent by them

vide their letter dated 08.06.2009. The parties then

went on exchanging the letters on this subject, but

the Central Government did not accede to the

request made by the appellants and insisted on

them        to    send     fresh    names      of     the

workers/employees.
15)    It   is   with   these   background   facts,   the

appellants felt aggrieved and filed a writ petition in

the High Court of Bombay at Goa. In that writ

petition, the appellants (writ petitioners) sought

quashing of the communication of respondent No.1

dated 10.10.2009 by which respondent No.1 had

rejected the panel of three names sent by them vide

their letter dated 08.06.2009. A writ of mandamus

was also prayed commending the respondents to
6
consider     the   nomination   penal   sent   by   the

appellants vide their letter dated 08.06.2009 and

nominate one worker/employee as Director out of

the three names sent by them in the Board of

Directors.
16)   In the alternative, the appellants also sought a

declaration that clause 3 (2) (iii) of the Scheme,

1970 be struck down as being ultra vires the

Constitution.
17)   The respondents opposed the writ petition by

filing their counter affidavit.     The respondents

placed reliance on the provisions of the Act and the

Scheme framed thereunder and contended inter alia

that the challenge made in the writ petition has no

factual or/and legal basis.
18)   By the impugned order, the High Court

dismissed the writ petition finding no merit therein,

which has given rise to filing of this appeal by way

of special leave by the unsuccessful writ petitioners

­ Union of workers/employees in this Court.
7
19)   Heard Mr. Sidharth Bhatnagar, leaned counsel

for the appellants and Mr.Pranab Kumar Mullick &

Ms.   Bhakti   Pasrija,   learned   counsel    for   the

respondents.
20)   Having heard the learned counsel for the

parties at length and on perusal of the record of the

case, we find no merit in this appeal.
21)   At the outset, we find that so far as the

challenge to the impugned communication dated

10.10.2009 and enforcement of the appellants’

letter dated 08.06.2009, i.e. (Relief Nos.(a) and (b) in

the writ petition) is concerned, both the reliefs have

been rendered infructuous.
22)   It is for the reason that the employees/workers

whose names were recommended by appellant No.1

in their letter dated 08.06.2009 have retired long

back. Not only that, on their retirement, many other

persons were nominated as Director out of the

category of worker/employee in the Board of
8
Directors of the Bank.         This relief, therefore, no

longer survives for consideration.
23)   Now the only question, which survives for

consideration in this appeal, is regarding the legality

of Clause 3(2)(iii) of the Scheme, 1970 ­ whether

Clause 3(2)(iii) of the Scheme is legal or ultra vires

the Constitution. The High Court, in the impugned

order, has held that the Clause 3(2)(iii) of the

Scheme is legal and valid.
24)   The challenge to the Clause 3(2)(iii) of the

Scheme is essentially based on one argument.

According to the appellants, there does not appear

to be any rational or basis in providing two different

types         of       disqualifications­one           for

workers/employees       and      the    other    for   the

officers/employees while considering their cases for

nomination     as   Director     from   their   respective

categories.
25)   In other words, the submission is that the

disqualification provided in Clause 3(2)(iii)(b) of the
9
Scheme for the worker/employee category is only

confined     to    their   category.     No   such    similar

disqualification      is    made       applicable    to    the

officer/employee category.
26)   This, according to the appellants, has created

discrimination between the two categories of the

Directors    without       any   reasonable     basis     and,

therefore,        Clause 3(2)(iii) of the Scheme and

especially clause (b) thereof violates the principle

underlined in
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
27)   We find no merit in this submission for more

than one reason.
28)
Section 9(3)(e)
and (f) of the Act and Clauses

3(2)(i),(ii) and (iii) of the Scheme are relevant for the

disposal of this appeal which read as under:
“Section 9(3)(e) and (f) of the Act
9. Power of Central Government to make
      scheme­(1) The Central Government may,
      after consultation with the Reserve Bank,
      make a scheme for carrying out the
      provisions of this Act.
(2) ……….
10
(3)   Every    Board   of  Directors    of  a
corresponding new bank, constituted under
any scheme made under sub­section (1), shall
include­
(a)   ………
(b)   ………
(c)   ……….
(e)   one director, from among such of the
      employees of the corresponding new
      bank who are workmen under clause (s)
      of
section 2
of the Industrial Disputes
      Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), to be nominated
      by the Central Government in such
      manner as may be specified in a
      scheme made under this section;
(f)     one    director,    from    among    the
        employees of the corresponding new
        bank who are not workmen under
        clause (s) of
section 2
of the Industrial
        Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), to be
        nominated by the Central Government
        after consultation with the Reserve
        Bank;
Clause 3(2)(i),(ii) and (iii) of the Scheme
3.   Constitution of the Board­(1) The
Central Government shall by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute the Board of a
Nationalised Bank.
(2)   (i) The director referred to in clause (e)
of sub­section (3) of
section 9
of the Act,
shall    be   nominated     by    the    Central
Government from out of a panel of three such
employees      furnished    to    it   by   the
representative union, within a date to be
specified by the Central Government, which
date shall not be more than six weeks from
the date of communication made by the
Central      Government,       requiring    the
11
representative union to furnish the panel of
names:
Provided that where the Central
Government is of the opinion that owing to
the delay which is likely to occur in the
verification and certification of any union or
federation as a representative union it is
necessary in the interest of the Nationalised
Bank so to do, it may nominate any employee
of the Nationalised Bannk, who is a workman,
to be a director of that Bank.
(ii) (a)Where there is no representative
        union, to represent the workman of a
        Nationalised Bank, or
(b) where such representative union being
        in existence omits or fails to furnish
        any panel of names within the specified
        date, or
(c) where all the persons specified in the
        panel furnished by the representative
        union are disqualified whether under
        item (iii) of this sub­clause or under
        clause 10, the Central Government
        may, at its discretion appoint such
        workman of the Nationalised Bank, as it
        may think fit, to be a director of such
        bank.
(iii) A workman of a Nationalised Bank shall
be disqualified for being nominated as a
director unless­
(a) he is and has been, serving for a
          continuous period of not less than
          five years in the Nationalised Bank,
          and
(b) he is of such age that there is no
          likelihood of his attaining the age of
          superannuation during his terms of
          office as director.”
12
29)   It would be clear from a perusal of clauses (e)

and (f) of
Section 9(3)
of the Act that both the

categories of employees are different ­ one is

worker/employee category as defined under
Section

9(3)(e)
and the other is officer/employee category as

defined under
Section 9(3)(f)
of the Act. Second, it is

for the legislature to decide as to what qualifications

and disqualifications should be prescribed for

various     categories   of   the    employees       for   their

nomination on the post of Director. Third, there lies

a distinction between the worker and the officer.
The former, i.e., worker is defined under
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and is governed

by that Act whereas the latter, i.e., officer is not

governed by the
Industrial Disputes Act
but is

governed by separate service rules.              Both these

categories    of   employees,       therefore,   cannot      be

equated with each other and nor can be placed at

par   for    providing    equal      qualification     or/and

disqualification for their nomination as a Director in
13
the Board of Directors. Fourth,
Article 14
of the

Constitution applies inter se two equals and not

inter se unequals. The case at hand falls under the

latter category and, therefore, reliance placed on the

principle   enshrined     under
Article   14
of    the

Constitution by the appellants is wholly misplaced.

Fifth, the nominee worker/employee has only a

right under the Act to be appointed as Director from

the category of worker/employee in terms of Section

9 (3)(e) of the Act provided the concerned nominee

whose name is recommended by the Union fulfills

the qualifications laid down in Clause 3(2)(iii) of the

Scheme but not beyond it.
30)   Learned   counsel    for    the   appellants     then

submitted that once the employee is nominated to

the Board of Directors­may be from different

categories specified under
Section 9
, then no

distinction should be made between them while

prescribing the qualification and disqualification.
14
31)   This submission has also no merit.           A mere

reading of
Section 9(3)
clause (a) to (i) would go to

show that the Board of Directors consists of persons

coming       from   different   fields.   There    cannot,

therefore,    be    a   uniform    qualification   or/and

disqualification for such persons.           Indeed, the

qualifications and disqualifications are bound to

vary from category to category and would depend on

the post, experience and the stream from where a

person is being nominated as a Director. Moreover,

the qualification and disqualification has to be seen

prior to his/her becoming a Director and not after

his/her appointment as a Director.
32)   In view of the foregoing discussion, we find no

good ground to interfere with the reasoning and the

conclusion arrived at by the High Court, which

rightly dismissed the appellants’ writ petition, and

upheld Clause 3(2)(iii) of the Scheme as being legal.
15
33)   The appeal is thus found to be devoid of any

merit. It fails and is accordingly dismissed.
………...................................J.
                         [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                       …...……..................................J.
                        [INDU MALHOTRA]

New Delhi;
March 01, 2019
16