[Cites
8
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Chief General Manager Gujarat Telecom ... vs Manilal Ambalal Patel on 8 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1547, 2019 (14) SCC 232, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 348, 2019 LAB IC 1741, (2019) 1 ESC 260, (2019) 2 SCT 204, (2019) 3 KER LT 946, (2019) 3 MAD LJ 222, (2019) 3 SERVLR 506, 2019 (4) ADJ 74 NOC, (2019) 4 SCALE 500, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1315
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL No.1681 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of SLP(C) No.31739/2016)


                      CHIEF GENERAL MANAGER GUJARAT
                      TELECOM CIRCLE,BHARAT SANCHAR
                      NIGAM LTD. & ORS.                                       APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                      MANILAL AMBALAL PATEL & ANR.                            RESPONDENT(s)


                                                J U D G M E N T
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.    This appeal by special leave is directed against

                      the   judgment    of   the   High        Court     in   Special   Civil

                      Application filed under
Articles 226
and
227
of the

                      Constitution     of    India    by       the     appellants    wherein

                      appellants     challenged      the       order     dated    29.10.2013

                      passed    by     the   Central          Administrative        Tribunal

                      (hereinafter     referred      to       as   the   "Tribunal").    The
Signature Not Verified
Tribunal by the impugned order quashed order dated
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.08
13:17:18 IST
Reason:
12.03.2013 and directed the appellants to pay interest

                      at the rate applicable to the Provident Fund deposits
1
for the delay occurred in payment of DCRG and Commuted

Value of Pension (hereinafter referred to as the

"CVP") from 01.08.2008 till the date of payment.
2.   The first respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the "applicant"), who filed the application before the

Tribunal was granted provisional pension by proceeding

dated 04.08.2008. It reads as follows:-
“Sub: Retirement on superannuation of 31.7.2008 A/N-
     Cases of officers of STS of Executive Grade (Ad-hoc)
     Regarding.
In accordance with BSNL New Delhi order No. 35/1/2007
     Pers-1 date 3.7.2008 and on approval of the competent
     authority, the following officers of STS of Executive
     Grade) adhoc permanently abscribed in BSNL are permitted
     to retire from BSNL services on attaining the age of
     superannuation w.e.f. 31.7.2007 (A/N).
Sl. Name of Officer        Staff  No./ERP Present
        No.                        No.            working
                                                  unit
1.   Sh. J.R. Sathwara, DE 10913/7005735  PGMTD
                                                  Ahmedabad
2.   Sh. B.P. Mishra, DE   12277/7021009  PGMTD
                                                  Vadodara
3.   Sh. P.P. Panchal, DE 11560/7016759   PGMTD
                                                  Vadodara
4.   Sh.N.N. Chaniyara, DE 13808/7025957  GMTD     –
                                                  Rajkot
5.   Sh. M.A. Patel, DE    11719/7021051  PGMTD
                                                  Surat
2. The BSNL C.O. ND has intimated that the vigilance
     clearance in respect of Shri M.A. Paatel, (SL. No. 5)
     DE, O/o PGMTD Surat has not received from Vigilance
     Cell of BSNL and therefore the officer shall be given
     only provisional pension and the DCRG and CVP shall
     be withheld till the conclusion of the vigilance/
     disciplinary case as per CCS (Pension) rules 1972.
2
3. It may please be ensured that there is no Vig/
     Disc case pending or contemplated against any of the
     above officer mentioned above as on the date of
     retirement. If any such case comes to notice, only
     provisional pension shall be granted to the officer
(s) and his DCRG and CVP shall be withheld till the
     Vigilance clearance is accorded.
4. Copy of the charge relinquishing report may be
     sent to this office in respect of all concerned.”


Though,    the    Anti-Corruption          Bureau        (hereinafter

referred   to    as   the     "ACB")     had   registered     a    case

against    the   applicant,      the     investigating       officer,

however,    had       found    no       evidence    against        him.

Investigating officer had submitted A-summary before

the Principal District Sessions, Judge, Banaskantha,

Palanpur, who refused to accept the summary. The State

of   Gujarat     thereupon       challenged        the    order.     On

30.03.2012 the criminal revision application, filed

by the State, was allowed according sanction to the

investigating officer to file A-summary report before

the trial Court. The applicant applied for interest

on pensionary benefits i.e. DCRG and CVP, which, was

rejected, on the basis that the criminal revision

petition, filed by the State, against the order of the

trial Court refusing to accept the A-summary was

disposed of and that after the order of the High Court
3
and Vigilance clearance the amounts were paid. He

approached the Tribunal and the Tribunal directed

payment   of    interest.        The       High    Court        in    the     writ

petition, filed by the appellants, has reasoned that

on   01.08.2008       (the       applicant         was     to        retire      on

superannuation on 31.07.2008), there were no criminal

proceedings against him. The High Court, inter alia,

held as follows:
“We are unable to accept the said submission as
     narrated     hereinabove.         There      were     no    criminal
     proceedings on 01.08.2008. All that the High Court in
     its order has done directing the authority below,
     which is produced at page no.219 at Para 14, which
     read as under;
14. The report made to the Court below by the
          investigating officer was, therefore, made under
          Section    173    of   the       Code   and    the    Court   was
          required to pass an order under Section 173(4)
          of the Code, which the Special Court has failed
          to do. The order passed by the learned Principal
          District    and    Sessions        Judge,      Banaskantha        at
          Palanpur, dated 03.05.2006 is, therefore, set
          aside. The prayer sought by the investigating
          officer for Summary “A” is allowed. Accordingly,
          present revision application is allowed. Rule is
          made absolute to the aforesaid extent. Muddamal
          currency note be confiscated to the State.
It will relate back to the date of filing of
     A-Summary,     which   is   prior       to   the    date    when   the
4
respondent retired. More particularly, in the year
     2007, when the Criminal Revision Application was filed
     before this High Court.”
3.   It was found that it related back to the A-

summary,    which     is   prior       to    the   date,    when   the

applicant retired, more particularly, in the year

2007, when the revision was filed in the High Court.
4.   This we understand to mean that the High Court

takes   the    view    that     the         investigating    officer

submitted A-summary report, which is initially not

accepted by the District Court which on revision by

the State was directed to be accepted by the High

Court. The report submitted by the agency, finding no

material against the applicant, would date back to the

date on which the report was submitted which would

further mean that as on the date when the applicant

retired, there was no criminal proceeding against the

applicant. Thereafter, the High Court reasoned that

there is a delay of huge period and the applicant was

given clearance by the Vigilance that there was no

case pending as the State has already filed A-summary
5
in the ACB trap case. There was no disciplinary action

taken by the State. It was against
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India and the interest also was found

not unreasonable. The High Court, in the petition

filed under
Article 227
, found no infirmity in the

order of the Tribunal and dismissed the same.
5.   We heard the learned counsel for the appellants

as well as the learned Additional Solicitor General.

Though service is complete on the applicant, none

appears on his behalf.
6.   Learned   counsel   for       the   appellants   drew   our

attention to the Central Civil Services (Commutation

of Pension) Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as

the "Commutation Rules"). Therein he relied upon Rule

4 of the Commutation Rules.
7.   It is his contention that in so far as judicial

proceeding was pending against the applicant and the

same came to be disposed of only in the year 2012,

applicant cannot claim interest as the applicant is

not even entitled to commutation of pension as is
6
clear from Rule 4 of the Commutation Rules. He further

submits that the District and Sessions Judge did not

accept the A-summary report which led to the revision

before the High Court in the year 2007 and the revision

petition      was    pending      as       on     01.08.2008    when       the

applicant      superannuated.              Therefore,       there    was     a

judicial proceeding and this disentitled the applicant

to CVP within the meaning of Rule 4. It is the further

case   that    due     to   the     pendency         of   the   vigilance

clearance,      DCRG    and    CVP          was    withheld     and    only

provisional     pension       was      granted       vide    order     dated

04.08.2008      and    later      sanction          was     accorded       for

provisional pension vide order dated 02.09.2008. When

the criminal revision was allowed by the High Court

and the request for summary-A was allowed by judgment

dated 30.03.2012, the respondent No.1 was accorded

vigilance clearance and vide order dated 25.10.2012,

approval was granted to regularize his pension and to

release other retirement benefits. Thereafter, it is

the case of the appellants that, as seen from the

written submissions, by order dated 17.10.2012 the

applicant was permitted to retire on attaining the age
7
of superannuation w.e.f his date of retirement i.e.

31.07.2008. The said order was also produced before

us.    It   is   the    further       case   that   the   applicant

thereupon made an application dated 01.11.2012 under

the Commutation Rules seeking commutation. The said

application was also produced along with the written

submissions. It is submitted that, accordingly, the

applicant was paid the CVP and retirement gratuity

vide     revised       pension    calculation        sheet   dated

31.12.2012. It is the case of the appellants that the

application made for commutation by the applicant was

within the period of one year, as contemplated in Rule

13(1) proviso (a). CVP is only an advance payment of

pension and does not accrue as of right and is governed

by the relevant Rules. Applicant was paid provisional

pension which is the maximum admissible pension since

his retirement and there was no monetary loss.
8.     The learned Additional Solicitor General made two

further submissions apart from apparently adopting the

arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the

appellants. It is submitted that Court may notice that
8
the applicant has been given provisional pension and

provisional pension has been enjoyed by the applicant

right   from    the     beginning.      Therefore,     necessary

adjustment would have to be made even if the arguments

based on Rule 4 is not found acceptable. In other

words, commutation of pension involves the payment of

a lump sum in lieu of monthly payments in the future

by way of pensionary benefits. When the applicant was

in    receipt   of    provisional       pension,     necessarily

adjustments would have to be made by reckoning the

amount and then calculating the CVP. Therefore, when

the   applicant   was    in   receipt    of   the    provisional

pension, in the same breath ordering the appellants

to pay interest would amount to conferment of double

benefit on the applicant. In other words, applicant

cannot on the one hand enjoy the provisional pension

and also cannot be given interest on CVP. The second

argument, which is pressed before us, was that there

were departmental proceedings against the applicant.

This is on the basis of the concept of departmental

proceedings to be found in Rule 9 of the CCS (Pension)

Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the "Pension
9
Rules"). Rule 9(6)(a) of the Pension Rules reads as

follows:
"9(6)(a) departmental proceedings shall be deemed to
        be instituted on the date on which the statement of
        charges is issued to the Government servant or
        pensioner, or if the Government servant has been
        placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such
        date; and
9.    Learned ASG would point that the applicant has

been placed under suspension and therefore that would

suffice to deny the benefit of commutation of pension

in which case interest could not be ordered to be

paid.
10.   There is no dispute that CVP has been paid to the

applicant      after    the   conclusion   of   the   vigilance

proceedings, clearing the applicant, but the question

to be considered by us as to whether the applicant was

entitled      to   be    paid   interest    for    the   period

immediately after retirement till the date on which

the CVP was actually paid to him. The scheme of the

Pension Rules, inter alia, indicate that under Rule

59, the authorities are duty bound to set in motion,

the proceedings for calculating and paying the pension

by the due date. Rule 59 would indicate that the said
10
procedure is divided into three stages; first stage -

verification of service; second stage – making good

omission in the service book; third stage - as soon

as the second stage is completed, but not later than

eight months prior to the date of retirement of the

Government servant various steps are to be undertaken.

Rule 61 contemplates that after complying with the

requirement of Rules 59 and 60, pension papers are to

be    forwarded     to    the    accounts           officer.      Rule   64

contemplates      provisional             pension       being   paid     for

reasons     other        than        departmental          or     judicial

proceedings.
11.   In   the   backdrop       of    these    provisions,         let    us

examine the scheme of the Commutation Rules. Rule 12

of the Commutation Rules declares who are the eligible

persons to apply for commutation of a percentage of

the pension without medical examination. In fact, Rule

11 provides that the Chapter applies to those who are

eligible to commute their pension without medical

examination.      The    person       may     be    a    person    who   is

authorized to receive a superannuation pension under
11
Rule 35 of the Pension Rules. Likewise, superannuation

pension is defined in the Pension Rules and Rule 35

of the Pension Rules declares that superannuation

pension shall be granted to a Government servant who

is   retired     on    attaining       the    age        of    compulsory

retirement. Rule 12 of the Commutation Rules further

renders   eligible      a    person    who        has    been       given    a

retiring pension under Rule 36 of the Pension Rules.

A retiring pension under Rule 36 of the Pension Rules

is granted, inter alia, to a Government servant who

retires   or    is    retired     in   advance          of    the    age    of

compulsory retirement. The next person who is declared

eligible is a person to whom pension is authorized on

his absorption in or under a corporation or company

or body in terms of Rule 37 of the Pension Rules and

who elects to receive monthly pension and retirement

gratuity.      The    next   category        of    persons          rendered

eligible to commute is a person authorized to receive

compensation pension on abolition of a permanent post

under Rule 39 of the Pension Rules. Finally, under

Rule 12 of the Commutation Rules, a person authorized

to   receive    pension      in   whole      or    in        part    on    the
12
finalization of departmental or judicial proceedings

referred to in Rule 9 of the Pension Rules and issue

of final orders is entitled to commute the pension.
12.    Rule 13 provides for the application to be made

for commutation of pension. We will advert to the Rule

when it is found necessary at a later stage. Under

Rule    14    of    the    Commutation       Rules    on    receipt    of

application under Rule 13, the Head of Office has to

take action as provided therein. Rule 15 provides for

authorization        of     commuted    value    by       the   Accounts

Officer. He is to verify whether the information

furnished      by    the    Head   of   Office       is    correct    and

applicant is eligible to commute a percentage of his

pension without medical examination. Sub-rule (2) of

Rule 15 provides that the Accounts Officer shall after

necessary verification issue authority for payment of

CVP to the Disbursing Authority, inter alia.
13.    Rule   18    of    the   Commutation     Rules       deals    with

another category of officers who are declared entitled

to    apply    for       commutation    of    their       pension.    The
13
difference between Rule 12 which we have referred to

and the persons mentioned in Rule 18 is that in the

case of persons rendered eligible under Rule 18, they

must undergo a medical examination whereas persons

mentioned in Rule 12, as aforesaid, do not have to

undergo any medical examination. Under Rule 18 of the

Commutation Rules, the following categories of pension

qualify:
(1) Invalid pension under Rule 38 of the Pension

       Rules.
(2) Pension granted under Rule 40 of the Pension

       Rules to a person who is compulsorily retired from

       service as penalty.
(3) Compassionate allowance given under Rule 41

       of the Pension Rules.
14.    Be it noted that compassionate allowance under

Rule    41   of   the   Pension    Rules   is   contemplated   in

respect of a Government servant who is dismissed or

removed from service. Rule 41 of the Pension Rules

gives power to the authority competent to dismiss or

remove a Government servant from service to sanction
14
a compassionate allowance, if the case is deserving

of special consideration and the sum is not exceeding

two-thirds of the pension or gratuity or both which

would have been admissible to him if he had retired

on compensation pension. Compensation pension is dealt

with in Rule 39 of the Pension Rules. It, inter alia,

provides that if a Government servant is selected for

discharge owing to the abolition of his permanent post

then unless he is appointed to another post                    which is

deemed    equal   to   that   of    his   own,      the    Government

servant will have the option to take compensation

pension for the service he had rendered. The last

category of persons under Rule 18 of the Commutation

Rules, who is declared eligible to commute after

undergoing    medical     examination,         is    a     Government

servant who has retired from service on one of the

pensions    which   are   mentioned       in   Rule       12   but   his

application for commutation has not been received by

the Head of Office within one year of his retirement.

There are other provisions which deal with the action

to   be   taken   which   include     provision          for   medical

examination of the applicant falling under Rule 18,
15
appeal    against    the    finding        of   medical    authority,

withdrawal of his application etc.
15.   The above discussion relate to the persons who

are eligible to commute and the pension which qualify.

As we have noted ordinarily by the time the person is

to retire, papers are to be got ready so that he

becomes entitled to the CVP. Thus, if application is

made and if all goes well, a person eligible, on his

applying, as provided in the Rules, would become

entitled    to    the     pension        without   delay   after   the

retirement.
16.   There are two situations which may result in a

Government servant not being sanctioned the final

pension    upon     his    retirement.          Rule   3(l)   of   the

Commutation Rules defines provisional pension to be

the pension referred to in Rule 64 or 69 of the Pension

Rules, as the case may be. Rule 64 of the Pension

Rules provides for sanctioning provisional pension in

a case where there is no departmental or judicial

proceeding. In other words, Rule 64 of the Pension
16
Rules contemplates a situation where the pension is

not finalized for reasons other than departmental or

judicial proceeding. When a person is so granted

provisional pension under Rule 64 of the Pension Rules

then Rule 9 of the Commutation Rules provides for

commutation of a fraction of the provisional pension

which is to be subject to the limit specified in Rule
5. It may be noticed that Rule 5 of the Commutation

Rules, inter alia, provides that a Government servant

shall be entitled to commute for a lump sum payment

of   an    amount    not   exceeding   forty      percent    of   his

pension.     Therefore,      this    limit   is    applicable      in

respect of full pension and also cases of provisional

pension. Even if a person is in receipt of only

provisional pension but which is granted under Rule

64, which as explained earlier, deals with a case

which is not covered by a departmental or judicial

proceeding, the Government servant is entitled to

commute fraction of the provisional pension subject

to   the    limit,    as   provided    under      Rule   5   of   the

Commutation Rules. Rule 31 of the Commutation Rules

provides that when final assessment of the pension is
17
done in regard to an employee to whom commuted value

of the percentage of the provisional pension has been

given under Rule 9, then he will be paid the difference

of the amount between commuted value determined on

final assessment of the pension and the commuted value

already paid.
17.   Time   is    now     ripe   to    notice   Rule   4   of   the

Commutation       Rules,    which      is   relied   upon   by   the

appellant and the Government of India. The same reads

as follows:
"4. Restriction on commutation of pension –


        No Government servant against whom departmental or
        judicial proceedings, as referred to in Rule 9 of
        the Pension Rules, have been instituted before the
        date of his retirement, or the pensioner against
        whom such proceedings are instituted after the date
        of his retirement, shall be eligible to commute a
        percentage of his provisional pension authorised
        under Rule 69 of the Pension Rules or the pension,
        as the case may be, during the pendency of such
        proceedings."
18.   Rule 4 deals with a case where provisional pension

has been granted under Rule 69 of the Pension Rules.

Rule 69 of the Pension Rules contemplates sanctioning

provisional pension when there is a departmental or

judicial proceeding against the Government servant.
18
It is when provisional pension is granted under the

said Rule on account of the fact that there is a

departmental or judicial proceeding pending that Rule

4 declares that the Government servant will not be

entitled to commute the provisional pension so granted

under Rule 69 during the pendency of the proceeding.
19.   In   this   case,   admittedly   the   applicant   was

sanctioned a provisional pension under Rule 69 on the

basis that there was a judicial proceeding pending.

We have set out the broad scheme of the Commutation

Rules. First we should ascertain what is the nature

of CVP. Is there legal right to receive CVP?             Can

there be cases where for delayed payment of CVP,

interest can be ordered? Is there any provision which

provides for interest?
20.   A scanning of the Commutation Rules reveals that

there is no provision which contemplates payment of

interest. In fact, the appellants have produced Office

Memorandum dated 05.10.1999 and the contention appears

to be raised that it does not contemplate the grant
19
of interest. We have gone through the said Office

Memorandum. On the one hand the Office Memorandum does

not contemplate grant of interest when CVP is paid

belatedly. But on the other hand, we notice that the

order does not declare that no interest shall be

payable when CVP is paid belatedly.
21.   The next exercise is to ascertain the true nature

of CVP. As we have noticed from the Commutation Rules

that CVP is inter-linked with pension. Pension is not

a bounty. It is a legal as well as a fundamental right

of a Government servant to receive his pension. It is

not an act of grace by the employer but it is the

right of the Government servant who has put in the

required number of years of service. This is subject

no doubt to Rule 9 of the Pension rules under which

there is power to withhold and recover part or whole

of the pension. In regard to pension, it is beyond

dispute that for belated payment of pension, interest

can be ordered to be paid. What is the position as far

as CVP is concerned?
20
22.    Commutation of pension is nothing but payment of

a portion of the pension calculated on a formula

provided in the Rules, the result of which is that the

employer will be absolved from payment of the pension

to the extent it is commuted and the employee will

receive the value of commuted pension in a lump sum

at one go. No doubt after a certain number of years

(15 years) the full pension gets restored. Therefore,

CVP flows out of his right to receive pension. In

fact, it is a part of his pension which is paid in

lump    sum      to   the   employee.    Having   culled    out   the

essential nature of CVP, we must consider whether

there is a legal right to receive the CVP or is it

discretionary and it may be withheld.
23.    It   is    undoubtedly     true    that    it   is   entirely

optional for the officer to commute a part of his

pension. In that sense it can be said that without an

application, he has no right to get commuted value.

But that does it mean, when an application is made,

as contemplated in the rules, no right is enshrined

in the rules to get the committed value?
21
24.   It is important to advert to Rule 13 in its

entirety. Rule 13 provides for the application to be

made by the eligible persons falling under Rule 12,

whereas Rule 19 deals with the application, to be made

by persons, who are eligible under Rule 18. It will

be remembered that Rule 12 deals with persons who are

eligible for commutation of their pension without

medical    examination,    whereas    Rule   18   deals   with

persons who are in receipt of pension or other amounts

and who become eligible only on undergoing medical

examination.
25.   Coming to Rule 13 it reads as follows:
“13. Application for commutation of pension -
(1) An applicant, who is in receipt of any pension
        referred to in Rule 12 and desires to commute a
        percentage of that pension any time after the date
        following the date of his retirement from service
        but before the expiry of one year from the date of
        retirement, shall-
(a) apply to the Head of Office in Form 1 after the
        date of his retirement;
(b) ensure that the application in Form 1, duly
        completed , is delivered to the Head of Office as
        early as possible but not later one year of the
        date of his retirement :
22
Provided that in the case of an applicant -
(a) referred to in Clause (iii) of Rule 12, where
order retiring him from Government service had been
issued from a retrospective date, the period of one
year referred to in this sub-rule shall reckon from
the date of issue of the retirement orders ;
(b) Referred to in Clause (v) of Rule 12, the period
of one year referred to in this sub-rule shall
reckon from the date of the issue of the orders
consequent on the finalization of the departmental
or judicial proceedings.
(2) An applicant who applies for commutation of
pension within one year of the date of his
retirement but his application in Form 1 is
received by the Head of Office after one year of
the date of his retirement, shall not be eligible
to get his pension commuted, without medical
examination. Such an applicant, if he desires to
commute a fraction of his pension, shall apply
afresh in Form 2 in accordance with the procedure
laid down in Chapter IV.
(3) Government servant who is due to retire on
superannuation and desires payment of the commuted
value of pension being authorized at the time of
issue of the pension payment order, shall be
eligible to apply for commutation of a fraction of
pension along with pension papers prior to the date
of retirement provided that -
(a)    the   Government    servant    retires    on
superannuation pension only;
(b) the application is submitted to the Head of
Office in Form 1-A, so as to reach the Head of
Office not later than three months before the date
of superannuation ;
(c) no such application shall be entertained if the
period is less than three months from the date of
superannuation of the Government servant ; and
23
(d) the Government shall have no liability for the
        payment of the commuted value of pension if the
        Government servant dies before the date of
        superannuation or forfeits claim to pension before
        such retirement.
26.   Rule 13(1) contemplates that the applicant for

commutation may be a person who is in receipt of

pension under Rule 12 and he is desirous of commuting

a percentage of pension mentioned in Rule 12. The Rule

further provides that in such a contingency he may at

any time after the date following the date of his

retirement from service but before the expiry of one

year from retirement apply in Form 1 to the Head of

Office. He must ensure that the application                 duly

completed is delivered to the Head of Office at the

earliest but not later than one year of date of

retirement. Sub-rule (3) of Rule 13 on the other hand

picks out one out of the several categories falling

in    Rule   12,   namely,   a     person   who   retires    on

superannuation pension for a special treatment. Sub-

rule (3) of Rule 13 contemplates that the Government

servant who is due to retire on superannuation and

desirous that the payment of the CVP be sanctioned or

authorized at the time of the pension payment order
24
shall apply for commutation along with pension papers.

He must apply prior to the date of retirement. The

application is to be submitted in Form 1A. It is to

reach the Head of Office not later than three months

before the date of superannuation. Secondly, he must

actually retire on superannuation pension only.
27.   At this juncture, it is necessary to notice Rule
6. Rule 6 provides for the time when the commutation

of pension is to become absolute. It reads as follows:
“6. Commutation of pension to become absolute-
(1) The commutation of pension shall become
        absolute in the case of an applicant referred to-
(i) in sub-rule (1) of Rule 13, on the date on
        which the application in Form 1 is received by the
        Head of Office ;
(i-a) in sub-rule (3) of Rule 13, on the date
        following the date of his retirement;
(ii) in Chapter IV, on the date on which the medical
        authority signs the medical report in Part III of
        Form 4;
Provided that -
(a) in the case of an applicant who is drawing his
        pension from a treasury or Accounts Officer, the
        reduction in the amount of pension on account of
        commutation shall be operative from the date of
        receipt of the commuted value of pension or at the
        end of three months after issue of authority by the
        Accounts Officer for the payment of commuted value
        of pension, whichever is earlier, and
25
(b) in the case of an applicant who is drawing
        pension from a branch of a nationalized bank, the
        reduction in the amount of pension on account of
        commutation shall be operative from the date on
        which the commuted value of pension is credited by
        the bank to the applicant's account to which
        pension is being credited.
(c) in the case of an applicant governed by sub-
        rule (3) of Rule 13 in whose case the commuted
        value of pension becomes payable on the day
        following the date of his retirement, the reduction
        in the amount of pension on account of commutation
        shall be operative from its inception. Where,
        however, payment of commuted value of pension could
        not be made within the first month after the date
        of retirement, the difference of monthly pension
        for the period between the day following the date
        of retirement and the date preceding the date on
        which the commuted value of pension is deemed to
        have been paid in terms of Rule 49 of the Central
        Government Accounts (Receipts and Payments) Rules,
        1983, shall be authroized by the Accounts Officer]

        (2) In the case of an applicant referred to in Rule
        9 or Rule 10, the commuted value is paid in two or
        more stages, the reduction in the amount of pension
        shall be made from the respective dates of the
        payments as laid down in Clause (a) or Clause (b)
        of the proviso to sub-rule (1).
(3) The date on which the payment of the commuted
        value of pension was made to the applicant or the
        commuted value was credited to the applicant's
        account shall be entered in both halves of the
        Pension Payment Order by the disbursing authority
        under intimation to the Accounts Officer who
        authorized the payment of commuted value of
        pension.”
                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
28.   Rule 6 declares that the commutation in regard to

a person covered by Rule 13(1) is to become absolute

when Form 1 is received by the Head of Office. In the

case of application under sub-rule (3) of Rule (13),
26
it becomes absolute on the date following the date of

his retirement. We are not to be detained by Chapter

4 which deals with cases where medical examination is

necessary. It is important to notice Clause (c) to the

proviso to Rule 6. It clearly contemplates that in the

case of person who applied under Rule 13(3), the CVP

becomes payable on the date following the date of his

retirement. This interpretation is inevitable having

regard to the express language of the said Rule. In

fact, it contemplates that the reduction in the amount

of   pension    on     account     of    commutation      shall     be

operative      from    its   inception.         This   means      that

consequent upon commutation, the full pension which

he would otherwise receive would suffer a diminution

and it is to take effect from the very first day

following his retirement. In fact, Clause (c) proviso

to Rule 6 does contemplate a situation where the CVP

is not made within the first month from the date of

retirement as it provides that the difference of

monthly   pension      for   the       period   between    the    day

following   the       date   of    retirement      and    the     date

preceding the date on which the CVP is deemed to have
27
been paid in terms of the Central Government Account

(Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983.
29.    We have noticed the Rules. We have found out that

the Rules declare the categories of pension which

would qualify for commutation. In other words, those

persons who fall in Rule 12 of the Commutation Rules,

without undergoing any medical examination can apply

for    commutation,   as   provided   in   Rule   13,   which

includes a person who receives superannuation pension.

If such a person applies under Rule 13, well within

the time, he is indeed conferred a legal right under

the Statutory Rules to receive commutated pension. It

does not lie in the mouth of Government which is

excepted to act as a model employer to sit over the

papers and delay the sanctioning or the payment of the

CVP.
30.        Therefore in a case where Rule 13(3) applies

and the Government servant who is due to retire on

superannuation applies for getting CVP along with

pension papers, prior to the date of his retirement

as provided and he actually retires on superannuation
28
and his application is within time, the CVP must be

paid immediately after the retirement. It may be true

that in the case of a person covered by Rule 18 which

deals with the cases, which we have mentioned, like

invalid pension, pension under Rule 40 of the Pension

Rules on being compulsorily retired by way of penalty

or   compassionate        allowance     on    being     dismissed    or

removed      he   must    undergo     a      medical    examination.

Therefore, applications by a person covered under

Rules 12 and 18 stand on a different footing. As far

as   application     by    a   person     governed      by   Rule   12,

provided he makes an application as contemplated under

Rule and the application gives details of the amount

of percentage of commutation which he requires subject

to the maximum of forty percent, he is entitled to

demand the payment of CVP. We have already noticed

that   the    Rule   does      not    provide     the    payment     of

interest. The Office Memorandum dated 05.10.1999 does

not prohibit payment of interest. The question would

then arise on what basis the Government servant can

seek interest.
29
31.
In
S.K. Dua Vs. State of Haryana and another
,

(2008) 3 SCC 44, this Court was dealing with a case

where the appellant was paid provisional pension but

other retirement benefit were not given including CVP,

leave     encashment,     gratuity     etc.    There    was    a

disciplinary proceeding and ultimately the appellant

was found exonerated from all the charges. In the said

circumstances, the benefits were given after four

years. As regards the question, as to on what basis

interest would be granted for delayed payment, we

notice the following statement of law made by this

Court:
"14. In the circumstances, prima facie, we are of
         the view that the grievance voiced by the appellant
         appears to be well- founded that he would be
         entitled to interest on such benefits. If there are
         Statutory Rules occupying the field, the appellant
         could claim payment of interest relying on such
         Rules. If there are Administrative Instructions,
         Guidelines or Norms prescribed for the purpose, the
         appellant may claim benefit of interest on that
         basis. But even in absence Statutory Rules,
         Administrative Instructions or Guidelines, an
         employee can claim interest under Part III of the
         Constitution relying on
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of
         the Constitution. The submission of the learned
         counsel for the appellant, that retiral benefits
         are not in the nature of bounty is, in our opinion,
         well-founded and needs no authority in support
         thereof. In that view of the matter, in our
         considered opinion, the High Court was not right
         in dismissing the petition in limine even without
         issuing notice to the respondents."
(Emphasis Supplied)
30
32.         Coming to the facts of this case, we notice

that the applicant was given provisional pension under

Rule   69    of    the   Pension     Rules.    This   immediately

attracts Rule 4 of the Commutation Rules prohibiting

commutation of the provisional pension. In fact, Rule

69 of the Pension Rules contemplates sanctioning of

provisional       pension   which    is   to   be   equal   to   the

maximum pension which would have been admissible on

the basis of the qualifying service upto the date of

retirement of the Government servant or if he was

under suspension on the date of retirement upto the

date immediately before being placed under suspension.

This brings us to Rule 9(4) of the Pension Rules,

which is the basis for applying Rule 69. Rule 9(4)

reads as follows:
"9(4). In the case of Government servant who has
       retired on attaining the age of superannuation or
       otherwise and against whom any departmental or
       judicial proceedings are instituted or where
       departmental proceedings are continued under sub-
       rule (2), a provisional pension as provided in Rule
       69 shall be sanctioned.
33.         To fully appreciate the scheme of the Rules,

we may also refer to Rule 9(6), which reads as follows:
31
"9(6) For the purpose of this rule -
(a) departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be
        instituted on the date on which the statement of
        charges is issued to the Government servant or
        pensioner, or if the Government servant has been
        placed under suspension from an earlier date, on
        such date; and

        9(6)(b) judicial proceedings shall be deemed to be
        instituted-
(i) in the case of criminal proceedings, on the
        date on which the complaint or report of a Police
        Officer, of which the magistrate takes cognizance,
        is made, and
(ii) in the case of civil proceedings, on the date
        the plaint is presented in the Court.”
34.   The learned counsel for the appellants and the

learned ASG are no doubt correct in contending that

there is prohibition against commuting of pension but

we must notice one aspect. What Rule 4 taboos is

commutation of provisional pension which is granted

under Rule 69 during the pendency of the proceedings.
35.   As we have noticed, there are three situations.
The first category is where the pension is finalized

immediately upon retirement and on the basis of the

application, the commutation as permissible subject

to the limit of forty percent, is ordered. The second

category is where there is provisional pension granted

under Rule 64. In such a case also commutation is
32
permissible           but     of    the       provisional             pension       again

subject to the limit under Rule 5. In the third

category where provisional pension is sanctioned on

account         of    pendency           of    judicial          or    departmental

proceeding            Rule     4    applies              and     it    forbids          the

commutation of "the provisional pension" granted under

Rule     69.      Since,       in    this          case        the    applicant         was

admittedly sanctioned provisional pension, while the

provisional pension was in place, the applicant could

not have sought commutation of the provisional pension

granted under Rule 69 in view of the embargo against

such commutation contained in Rule 4.
36.    On 17.10.2012, the following order was passed:
"Subject:   Retirement   on   superannuation on
          31.07.2008 (A/N) - Case of officers of STS of
          Executive Grade (Adhoc) - Regarding.
In continuation to this office Order No.354-
          1/2007-Pers-I dated 31.07.2008, the following
          officer   of   Adhoc   STS   of   Executive   Grade
          (Telecom/TTS/TFS) permanently absorbed in BSNL is
          permitted to retire from BSNL Services on attaining
          the age of superannuation w.e.f. the date indicated
          against his name.
S. No.    Staff No./   Name/Desgn. Circle           DOB              Date of
                HR No.         of the                                      Retirement
                               officer
           1.        11719   Shri M.A.             GUJ          01.08.48       31.07.2008
                             Patel, DE                                         (A/N)
33
2. It has been certified that retirement order is
        being issued on the basis of Vigilance Clearance
        received from the CVO, BSNL.
3. This has the approval of the Competent Authority.
4. Copy of Charge Relinquishing report may be sent
        to this office in respect of all concerned."
37.   On the basis of the same, apparently the applicant

moved   application     on   01.11.2012    where    he   sought

commutation of pension without medical examination.

He showed his date of retirement as 31.07.2008. He

sought the maximum admissible fraction as the proposed

commutation. On the basis of same, the appellant was

admittedly sanctioned CVP in December, 2012. If the

application dated 01.11.2012 is taken as the basis of

sanctioning of the CVP then there can be no ground at

all to give any interest as CVP has been given within

a reasonable time.
38.   The question, however, arises whether as has been

found by both, the Tribunal and the High Court, this

should be treated as a case where the applicant should

be granted interest from the date of his retirement

on account of the fact that on the date of his
34
retirement         there   was    neither   the     departmental

proceeding nor a judicial proceeding.
39.    As far as the argument of the learned ASG that

there was a departmental proceeding pending by virtue

of the fact that an order of suspension was passed

within the meaning of Rule 9(6), which we have already

referred to, we are of the view that there is no merit

in the said contention. While the applicant was placed

under suspension, in the year 1997, it is equally

indisputable that the said suspension was revoked in

the year 1999 well before the date of superannuation

of the applicant. It is not the law that to constitute

a departmental proceeding that a Government servant

has been placed under suspension at some point of time

of his career. What is contemplated is that there must

be     a    suspension     when   the   applicant    would   have

otherwise retired on superannuation. In this case the

suspension stood revoked several years prior to his

date       of   superannuation.   Therefore,   the    suspension

which       was   subsequently    revoked   cannot    constitute

suspension within the meaning of Rule 9(6)(b) of the
35
Pension Rules and we have no hesitation in repelling

the argument of learned ASG.
40.   A case under the
Prevention of Corruption Act
was

lodged against the applicant. However, the ACB, in the

course of investigation apparently was not able to

muster enough material to prosecute the case. This

resulted in the agency filing what is described as A-

summary. The A-summary came to be dealt with in the

following manner by the Sessions Judge:
"Heard.
Accused is traceable. There is no question of
        granting "A" Summary. it is nobody's case that
        accused is absconding. If at all, I.O. fact that
        evidence is not sufficient to prosecute the
        accused. He may apply under
Section 169
of Cr.P.C.
        Hence rejected as it is not tenable at law."
41.   This   order   was   passed   prior   to   the   date   of

superannuation of the applicant. It is, therefore,

that Criminal Revision Application No.52 of 2007 came

to be filed before the High Court of Gujarat. By order

dated 30.03.2012, the revision came to be allowed. It

is noticed that the applicant opposed the revision.

The A-summary was to be given in a case where the case

is found to be true but the accused is absconding.
36
Further, if the evidence against the accused is not

sufficient to prosecute the accused, also A-summary

could be given. The High Court took the view as

follows:
"The report made to the Court below by the
        investigating officer was, therefore, made under
        Section 173 of the Code and the Court was required
        to pass an order under Section 173(4) of the Code,
        which the Special Court has failed to do. The order
        passed by the learned Principal District and
        Sessions Judge, Banaskantha at Palanpur, dated
        03.05.2006 is, therefore, set aside. The prayer
        sought by the investigating officer for Summary "A"
is   allowed.    Accordingly,   present    revision
        application is allowed. Rule is made absolute to
        the aforesaid extent. Muddamal currency note be
        confiscated to the State."
42.   It is true that well before his retirement the

agency which had no doubt conducted a trap against the

applicant, had itself found that there was no material

in view of subsequent developments. It could be said

that this is a case where the applicant was exonerated

by the agency well before the date of his retirement.

No doubt this is not a case where the applicant has

been acquitted honourably after trial. In fact, there

was never a trial and the case was not sent up for

trial in view of the submission of A-summary.
37
43.    The other question also must be considered and

that     question    is     whether      there      was     a    judicial

proceeding pending at the time of the retirement. A

perusal of Rule 9 of the Pension Rules would show that

Government had a right to withhold the pension or

gratuity or both either in full or in part or withdraw

a pension in full or in part either permanently or for

the specified period. Government is also authorized

to order recovery from pension or gratuity of the

whole or in part of any pecuniary loss caused, if in

any departmental or judicial proceeding, the pensioner

is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence

during    the    period     of    his    service      which      includes

service after reemployment. Thereafter, sub-rule 9(6)

deals with what constitutes when a departmental or a

judicial    proceeding          will    be   deemed       to    commence.

Judicial proceedings are divided into two categories.

First    category     is    a    criminal     proceeding.            Second

category    is      civil    proceeding.       As     far       as   civil

proceeding is concerned, it is deemed to be instituted

when a plaint is presented. In other words, upon

presentation of a plaint in a civil case judicial
38
proceeding    commences.    In        the   case   of     a    criminal

proceeding by the deeming provision, it is deemed to

have been instituted for the purpose of Rule 9 when

the complaint or report of a police officer is made,

but that is not sufficient. In a case where a complaint

or a report of a police officer is made to a Court,

it should culminate in cognizance being taken by the

Magistrate, for the department to contend that the

date of the complaint or report is to be the date of

institution of the proceedings.
44.   From the order of the Sessions Judge which alone

is produced, it is not clear that cognizance was

taken. The criminal revision is a criminal proceeding.

But   the   case   was   about    the       ‘A’   diary       not   being

accepted. If the criminal revision was dismissed then

the matter would have been proceeded with by the

Sessions Judge. It is in the region of conjecture as

to what would have followed suit. At the time of the

retirement, the authorities could not have divined

what would happen in the revision. No doubt, the

purport of the revision petition was that the State
39
wanted the ‘A’ Summary to be accepted. The acceptance

of ‘A’ Summary which, in fact, was ordered by the High

Court would have brought the litigation as against the

applicant to an end. In so far as, we later propose

to render our finding on the effect of no application

being filed under Rule 13(3) and also keeping in mind

that the applicant did not take steps to challenge the

order dated 04.08.2008, we would think that much may

not turn on our even accepting the view of the High

Court, that there was no criminal proceeding as on the

date of the retirement. It also must be noted that the

present is not a case where the authorities acted

without any material at all even.   We proceed on the

basis that the criminal revision petition is not

criminal proceeding under Rule (9) of the Pension

Rules. A view was taken by the authorities regarding

the same at the point of time which could not be said

to have been taken without any basis at all. This, we

say as the basis for interest on CVP can only be state

action which is arbitrary. It is relevant to note that

both sides proceeded on the basis that there was a

proceeding within the meaning of Rule 9 and 69 of the
40
Pension Rules. Further, even at the time when the

order dated 04.08.2008 was passed it was open to the

applicant to complain that there was no judicial

proceeding,   having   regard   to   the   nature   of   the

proceeding pending in the High Court. The applicant

instead chose not to question the sanctioning of

provisional pension under Rule 69 and continued to

receive the provisional pension. We will notice the

consequences of the said order on his right to apply

under Rule 13(1).
45.   We have noticed that a claim for interest in

regard to CVP may lie when an application has been

made in time under rule 13(3) and the payment is

delayed. But in a case where application is made under

Rule 13(1) which can be made within a period of one

year from the date of retirement, the same would have

to be processed and undoubtedly at the earliest it

must be brought to its logical culmination as per the

rules. But certainly, in a case falling under Rule

13(1) there can be no question of paying interest from

the date of retirement as the application itself is
41
predicated after the date of retirement. No doubt the

question as to payment of interest even in such cases

would arise based on the date of application and the

reasonableness of the time taken in processing it and

the arbitrariness in a particular case in delaying the

matter.      This we say for the reason that as held in

by this Court in
S.K. Dua
(supra) the premise on which

interest can be granted in the case of CVP also is the

breach of
Articles 14
and
21
and it is a matter to be

decided on the facts of each case.
46.   It is significant to note that in this case the

applicant has no case even that he made an application

within the meaning of Rule 13(3) of the Commutation

Rules as contemplated before three months of his

retirement. Nothing stood in the way of the applicant

applying under Rule 13(3) apparently. If on the other

hand, there was any legal impediment which stood in

the   way,      then   also   he   cannot   claim    the   CVP   on

retirement. Without having made such an application

under the Commutation Rules, it is clear that there

can   be   no    question     of   even   becoming   entitled    to
42
commute   pension   w.e.f.       first       day    following    his

retirement. The Tribunal and the High Court have

completely overlooked the conspectus of the Rules. The

Tribunal, in fact, has proceeded to consider the

matter from the standpoint of interest payable on

gratuity which also was claimed by the applicant and

has not focused on the question relating to the point

of time when CVP becomes payable, and that the              nature

of CVP being one dependent entirely on an application

from the Government servant and therefore we have no

hesitation   in   coming    to        the   conclusion    that   the

direction to pay interest on the CVP, as ordered by

the   Tribunal,   from     the    date      of     retirement    from

01.08.2008 is clearly erroneous. Now, as far as Rule

13(1) is concerned, it enables a person who is in

receipt of a pension under Rule 12, to apply after

retirement but within one year thereof for CVP. It is

true that the applicant was not in receipt of any

pension under Rule 12 and therefore, he could not have

applied under Rule 13(1). This is for the reason that

as per order dated 04.08.2008, he was to be given

provisional pension which as we have noted was under
43
Rule 69 of the Pension Rules. The applicant, however,

proceeded to accept the provisional pension. It is

true that the effect of the order dated 04.08.2008 of

the sanctioning of the provisional pension under Rule

69,    was    that    he    was    precluded    from   applying    for

commuting the provisional pension, in view of Rule 4

and on the other hand, as he was not in receipt of

superannuation pension, he could not have filed an

application under Rule 13(1). Thus, a question may

arise.       Having   issued       order    dated   04.08.2008,    the

effect of which we have clarified, should interest be

ordered on the basis that the applicant was prevented

from   applying       for    CVP    under    Rule   13(1).   We   have

already found that the applicant was not precluded

from making any application under Rule 13(3). Had he

done so, his claim for interest from the date of

retirement could have been considered under
Articles

14
and
21.
We also take note of the fact that the

applicant did not challenge the order dated 04.08.2008

and he continued to accept the provisional pension

sanctioned thereunder. There could be no question of

granting interest from the date of retirement in view
44
of the absence of any application under Rule 13(3).
We make it clear that we are not pronouncing about the

liability to interest on DCRG amount which is not

subject   matter   of   controversy   before   us   and   the

direction to pay interest on gratuity is not being

interfered with.
47.   In the light of this, we are of the view, the

appeal is to be allowed as above. We do so. The

impugned order will stand set-aside and the order of

the Tribunal directing payment of interest on CVP

shall stand set-aside. No order as to costs.
......................J.
                                      (ASHOK BHUSHAN)



                                  ......................J.
                                     (K.M. JOSEPH)



New Delhi,
March 8, 2019.
45