[Cites
13
, Cited by
100
]
Supreme Court of India
C.I.T Bombay vs Tasgaon Taluka S.S.K.Ltd. on 5 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2533
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                   REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8890 OF 2012

     C.I.T. BOMBAY                                   ..APPELLANT
                                  VERSUS

     TASGAON TALUKA S.S.K.LTD.                       ..RESPONDENT

                                   WITH
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2485 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1279/2009)

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2484 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1281/2009)
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2482 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1278/2009)

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2483OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.1282/2009)

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2486 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.5700/2009)

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4801 OF 2014
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8891 OF 2012
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4549 OF 2013

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2487 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No.6412/2011)

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 302 OF 2013



                                  JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.05
17:51:54 IST
Reason:
M.R. SHAH, J.
2
Leave granted in all the special leave petitions.
2.        As common question of law arises in this group of appeals,

all these appeals are being disposed of together, by this common

judgment and order.
3.        For the sake of convenience, Civil Appeal No. 8890 of 2012

(
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs. Tasgaon Taluka Sahakari

Sikhar Karkhana Limited
) is treated and considered as a lead case,

and therefore, the facts from the said appeal are narrated and

considered.
3.1       The assessee (respondent herein) is a Co-operative Society

engaged in the business of production of sugarcane and sale thereof.

The assessee filed its return of income for the Assessment Year

1998-99 declaring ‘NIL; income. In the return, the assessee computed

carry forward loss of Rs.40,00,339/- and unabsorbed depreciation of

Rs.1,67,26,665/-. The return was processed under
Section 143(1) (a)
of the Income Tax Act, (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’), making

adjustment of Rs.2,02,242-/ relatable to
Section 40A (3)
of the Act.

Thereafter the assessee filed a revised return wherein business loss

was shown to the tune of Rs.3,32,42,426/-.
3.2       A notice under
Section 143
(2()/142(1) of the Act was issued

to the assessee. The assessee was having manufacturing activities of
3
white   sugar.     It   had    shown       the   income     from    business    of

manufacturing sugar, petrol pump station and also interest under the

head “income from other sources”.
3.3        After scrutiny of final accounts details along with return of

income and details furnished during the course of assessment

proceedings, an issue arose with respect to disallowance under
Section 37(1)
of the Act for excessive and unreasonable cane purchase

price paid to the members of the sugarcane.
3.4        It was noticed that during the year under consideration, the

assessee had crushed 189736.220 metric tones sugarcane.                        The

assessee had paid Rs.615/- and Rs.720-/ for crushing seasons

1996-97 and 1997-98 respectively per metric tone at the time of

purchase of cane and the balance amount was paid later on, as per

contracted price increase of sugarcane on contract basis and as per

Mantri Committee Advice in case of purchase of sugarcane from

members and others. It has found as under:
Particulars      Quantity in MT   Rate payable            Rate paid (Rs.)
Sugar Season     8,307.520        537.700                 875.000
96-97 from
members
From             1,652.653        537.700                 875.000
non-members
Total            9,960.173
Sugar Season     129,108.966      537.700                 875.000
97-98 from
members
From             50,667.081       537.700                 875.000
4
non-members
Total           179,776.047



3.5        It was noticed that the production of sugar was covered by

the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955
and the Government had issued

the Sugar Cane (Control) Order, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the

‘Control Order, 1966’), which deals with all aspects of production of

sugarcane and sale thereof including the price to be paid to the cane

growers.   It was noticed that Clause 3 of the Control Order, 1966

authorises Government to fix minimum cane price. It was also noticed

that in addition to this, additional cane price is also payable as per

Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966.
3.6        It was noticed that in the case of the assessee, the price

paid by the assessee to the sugarcane growers, most of those are its

members, was in excess than what was payable as per the above

Order and accordingly the assessee was asked to furnish details of

payments made for the purchase of sugarcane and also payment made

later on. The assessee was also asked to explain whether the payment

made later on is made at the request of the assessee or not.
3.7        It appears that the assessee furnished details of payment

made, wherein it was found that the price paid for purchase of

sugarcane at the rate of Rs.875/- PMT for sugarcane seasons 1996-97
5
and 1997-98. It was further stated that the cane price payable as per

Clause 3 and Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966, comes to

Rs.537.70 for sugarcane season 1996-97 and Rs.646.50 for sugarcane

season 1997-98. Therefore, the assessee was given an opportunity to

explain why price paid by it to members/non-members for purchase of

sugarcane, in excess of what was payable as per Clause 3 and Clause

5A of the Control Order, 1966, be not held as excessive.
3.8          In response thereto, the assessee filed written submissions.
It claimed that the payment has been made as per the rate fixed by

Commissionerate of Sugar, Maharashtra State, Pune, and the same is

as per guidelines given by the Mantri Committee. With regard to the

purchase made from non-members and members, it was the case of

the assessee that payment has been made as per price agreed to at the

time of purchase. It was submitted that a contract for the purchase of

sugarcane has been entered into at the time of start of sugarcane and

since the price is agreed at the time of purchase itself, the same is

required to be allowed as deduction. It was, therefore, claimed that no

disallowance be made either under
Section 40A (2)
of the Act or

otherwise.
4.           The Assessing Officer did not agree with the submissions on

behalf of the assessee. The ultimate conclusion of the A.O. was that

the difference between the price paid as per Clause 3 of the Control
6
Order, 1966, determined by the Central Government, and the price

determined by the State Government under Clause 5A of the Control

Order, 1966 (and consequently paid by the assessee to the cane

growers) can be said to be a distribution of profit,      as in the price

determination under Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966, there is an

element of profit and therefore the price paid to the cane growers

determined by the State Government is excessive and therefore it is

not deductible as expenditure, and is required to be included in the

income of the assessee.
4.1         While holding so, the Assessing Officer considered and

observed as under:
“…The Sugar cane control order, 1966, provides for the price
      to be paid to the cane growers. The initial price which is fixed
      as per clause 3 of this order takes into account the following
      facts.
a The cost of production of sugarcane.
b The return to the growers, alternative crops and
             general tread of process of Agricultural commodities.
          c The availability of sugar to the consumer at a fair price.
          d The price at which sugar produced from sugarcane is
             sold by producer of sugar.
e The recovery of sugar from sugarcane.
In addition to this, additional cane price is also payable to the
      growers of sugar cane as per clause 5A. This clause take into
      account the profitability of actually on the basis of price paid
      to grower of sugarcane as per clause 3 of the Control order. As
      per this Clause, the profit earned by the factory is shared by
      grower of sugarcane and producer of sugar. The prices under
      clause 3 are fixed by Central Govt. the total price payable to
      grower of sugarcane will be different on the basis of
      profitability of each units. In the State of Maharashtra, since
      90% of sugar producing factories are in co.op sector, being
7
aided by Govt., the Govt. has also appointed a committee
      known as Mantri Committee for the purpose of fixing state
      advisory Price of sugarcane. As per this, the initial price to be
      paid to the grower of sugarcane is fixed on the basis of price
      fixed by central Govt. as per clause 3 of the Control order.
      However, final price is fixed on the basis of profitability of each
      units and in the State of Maharashtra, entire profit is
      distributed     among       growers     of    sugarcane.        The
      Commissionerate of Sugar Fixes the final prices accordingly,
      this, however, is done at the specific request of the assessee.
      It is worthwhile to mention here that the society sends
      proposals to the Commissioner of Sugar for fixation of final
      cane payment. If there is higher profit available society
      proposes for higher payments. If available profit is less. Then
      proposed payment is accordingly less. This makes it clear that
      final payment of cane price includes profit of the society which
      gets distributed among the members in the form of additional
      cane price. The arguments of the society that regarding state
      advised price, it is mandatory for them to follow the same as
      correct to a limited extent which means that for the society it
      is must to pay initial advance’ price which is fixed by the
      Commissioner of Sugar irrespective of actual profits. However,
      after the end of the season, it is the society “who sends the
      statement of surplus to the Commissioner of Sugar in which
      cost of the cane is taken on the basis of initial advance price
      and remaining surplus is proposed to be distributed on the
      basis of total cane quantity purchases in the season. On being
      proposed by society, the Commissioner of Sugar gives consent
      to it and, therefore, the submission is not correct because it is
      the society who propose for such additional cane purchase
      price by way of appropriation of profits…”

4.2         The   Assessing    Officer       also   did   not   agree   with   the

submission on behalf of the assessee that the minimum cane price

notified by the Central Government is minimum and not actual cost

and therefore any payment in excess of the minimum price should not

be treated as an application of income by observing that the Statutory

Minimum Price (hereinafter referred to as the ‘SMP’) is further
8
increased by additional price on the basis of actual yield and if such

 adjusted price is more than initial advance price only such adjusted

 price is considered as allowable deduction instead of initial advance

 price. The Assessing Officer also noted that the additional cane price

 is calculated after the end of the accounting year and it represents the

 entire surplus or income earned by the sugar cooperative society in

 the whole year and it is the surplus profit of income which is

 distributed and, therefore, it cannot be treated as a legitimate

 deductible expenditure. Consequently, the Assessing Officer held that

 the price paid by the assessee as per Clause 3 & 5A of the Control

 Order, 1966 is the fair price and therefore anything paid to the

 members as well as non-members above the price determined and

 paid by the assessee as per Clause 3 & 5A of the Control Order, 1966

 will be unreasonable and excess price to its members in the form of

 additional cane purchase price and therefore such excess payments

 are not allowed under
Section 37
of the Act.         The chart of the

 calculation is as under:
Particulars Quantity   Price    SMP + 5A Difference Addition
                       paid per (excluding
                       MT       harvesting
                                and
                                transport)
Season     8307.520    875.000 537.700     337.300  2,802,126.00
96-97
Members
9
Season    129,108.966 875.000   646.500    228.500    29,501,399.00
97-98
Members
          1,37,416.486                                32,303,,525.00

 4.3       Alternatively, the Assessing Officer also held that the excess

 cane price paid to the cane growers over the SMP is disallowable as

 per
Section 40A(2)(a)
of the Act by observing that purchase price paid

 is excessive and unreasonable.
4.4       Accordingly, the Assessing Officer finalised the return and

 making   additions of    the amount paid by         the society       to its

 members/non-members above the SMP price/price determined under

 Clauses 3 & 5A of the Control Order, 1966, as income.
5.        On an appeal, the learned Commissioner of Income Tax

 (Appeals), relying upon and considering the decision of a Special

 Bench, Mumbai ITAT in the case of Manjara Shetkari Sakhar

 Karkhana Limited dated 19.08.2004 allowed the appeal preferred by

 the assessee and held that the price actually paid for the procurement

 of the sugarcane is to be allowed as business expenditure.              The

 learned CIT(A) also observed and held that the excess payment of cane

 price as fixed by the State Government (SAP) over and above SMP for

 sugarcane to members and non-members cannot be disallowed either

 under
Section 40A(2)(b)
of the Act, despite the fact that profit is one of

 the component in asserting the price. The CIT(A) observed that just
10
because profit is one of the component in asserting the price, it cannot

be said that profit is separately distributed in the guise of additional

price.   The learned CIT(A) observed that the amount paid by the

assessee – cooperative society to the sugarcane growers is considered

for the procurement of the sugarcane and it cannot be construed to be

appropriation of profits. Consequently, the learned CIT(A) deleted the

addition made by the Assessing Officer.
6.        The learned ITAT confirmed the order passed by the learned

CIT(A), which has been further confirmed by the High Court, by the

impugned judgment and order. By the impugned judgment and order,

the High Court has dismissed the appeal preferred by the department

by observing that the question is covered by the judgment of the High

Court in the case of
Commissioner of Income Tax vs. Manjara Shetkari

Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Limited
, reported in (2008) 301 I.T.R. 191

(Bom.). Hence, the present appeals by the department.

6.1       In some of the cases, some of the assesses – societies seem

to have paid the cane purchase price to the members/non-members

even in excess/above the price determined under Clauses 3 & 5A of

the Control Order, 1966.
Therefore, the question which is posed for

consideration before this Court is,
(i)   Whether any amount of sugarcane purchase price paid by the

assessee-society   to   its   members/non-members     above   the   SMP
11
determined under Clause 3 of the Control Order, 1966, may be paid as

per the price determined by the State Government under Clause 5A of

the Control Order, 1966, can be said to be the sharing of profit and

therefore is to be included in the return of income?; and
(ii)    Whether any amount of sugarcane purchase price paid by the

society to its members/non-members above/beyond the price even

determined as per Clauses 3 & 5A of the Control Order, 1966, and

which is found to be unreasonable and in excess of the fair market

value, can be said to be the sharing of the profit and is required to be

included in the total income of the assessee?
7.          Shri Arijit Prasad, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the department has vehemently submitted that in the facts and

circumstances of the case, as such, the Assessing Officer was justified

in     treating   and   considering   the   difference   between   the   SMP,

determined under Clause 3 of the Control Order, 1966, and the SAP

determined by the State Government under Clause 5A of the Control

Order, 1966 as sharing of profit, and therefore, the same was rightly

ordered to be included in the income of the assessee.
7.1          It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the department that cogent reasons have been given by

the assessing officer to treat the aforesaid difference as sharing of

profit, after detailed analysis of the manner and method in which the
12
sugarcane purchase price is determined under Clauses 3 & 5A of the

Control Order, 1966.
7.2       It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on    behalf   of   the   department     that   there     are   different

considerations/criterias to be applied while determining the sugarcane

purchase price at the stage of Clause 3 and at the stage of Clause 5A.

It is submitted that even the stages are also different while

determining the sugarcane purchase price at the stage of Clause 3 and

determined at the stage of Clause 5A.
7.3       It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the department that while determining the sugarcane

purchase price under Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966, firstly, it

is at the conclusion of the financial year and when the accounts are

settled, and secondly, there is an element of profit. It is submitted

that one of the components while dealing with the sugarcane purchase

price under Clause 5A is the profit, and whatever is paid to the cane

growers under Clause 5A is therefore sharing of profit.

7.4       It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the department that how and in what manner the sugarcane

purchase price is determined under Clause 5A has been considered by

this Court in detail in the case of
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar

Karkhana Sangh Limited vs. State of Maharashtra
, reported in 1995
13
Supp. (3) SCC 475. It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel

that as observed by this Court in the aforesaid decision, the additional

price determined under Clause 5A is at the end of the season. It is

submitted     that   as   observed,   the   Bhargava   Commission   had

recommended payment of additional price at the end of the season on

50:50 profit sharing basis between the growers and factories to be

worked out in accordance with Schedule II to the Control Order, 1966.

It is submitted that the additional purchase price determined under

Clause 5A comprises of not only cost of cultivation but profit as well.
It is submitted that as observed by this Court in the case of
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar Karkhana Sangh Limited
(supra),

the price (additional price determined under Clause 5A) thus being

paid on recovery of cane and profits made from sale of sugar is not

minimum but optimum price which is paid to a cane grower. It is

submitted that the entire price structure of cane is founded on two

basic factors, one, the recovery percentage and other the incentive for

sharing profit arrived at by working out receipt minus expenditure. It

is submitted that therefore the difference between the SMP and the

SAP is nothing but sharing of profit, and therefore, is liable to be

included in the return of income under
Section 37
of the Act.

7.5         It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the department that in many cases it is found that the
14
assessee-society has paid the sugarcane purchase price to its

members/non-members is excessive and much more than the market

price and/or even beyond the SAP. It is submitted therefore that even

considering
Section     40A   (2)
of    the   Act,    such    excessive   and

unreasonable amount paid is not allowable to be deductible.                   It is

submitted therefore that the High Court has materially erred in

holding that the price actually paid by the society for the procurement

of the sugarcane is to be allowed as business expenditure.

7.6        It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the department that in view of the above facts and

circumstances, the High Court was not justified in holding that the

excess amount of expenditure on sugarcane purchase price was a

charge of profit, i.e., diversion of profit and appropriation of profit.

7.7        Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the

present appeals and set aside the impugned judgments and orders

passed by the High Court and consequently the orders passed by the

ITAT as well as CIT(As) and to restore the respective orders passed by

the assessing officers.
8.         Shri P.     Chidambaram,         learned      senior   advocate,   Shri

Shekhar Naphade, learned senior advocate have appeared on behalf of

respective assesses.
8.1        Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective
15
assesses have vehemently submitted that as rightly observed and held

by the High Court, merely because there is an element and/or one of

the components while determining the SAP under Clause 5A of the

Control Order, 1966 is profit, it cannot be said that there is a sharing

of profit.
8.2           It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the respective assesses that under the Control Order,

1966, a sugarcane society has no other alternative but to pay to the

cane growers the sugarcane purchase price as determined by the

Central Government and the State Government, as the case may be.

It is submitted that even if the society would be incurring the loss, the

society has to pay the additional purchase price (final price)

determined by the State Government. It is submitted therefore that

whatever is paid by the assessee-society to the cane growers towards

sugarcane purchase price is an allowable expenditure which is

required to be deducted.
8.3           Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

assesses have also relied upon
Section 9
of the Sale of Goods Act. It is

further      submitted   by   the   learned   counsel   that   as   such   the

higher/additional price is paid by the society to both members and

non-members and therefore anything paid above or more than the

SMP per se cannot be said to be a sharing of profit.
16
8.4       It is further submitted by the learned counsel that even the

State Government is also 10% share holding and nothing is paid to the

State being a shareholder.       It is further submitted by the learned

counsel that even as per the Bye-laws, the society has to pay the

difference between the SMP and the SAP. It is submitted therefore the

difference between the SMP and the SAP, by no stretch of imagination,

can be said to be a sharing of profit and as such whatever is paid

while purchasing the sugarcane is deductible as expenditure incurred.

8.5       Making the above submissions., it is prayed to dismiss the

present appeals preferred by the department.
9.        We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respective parties at great length.
9.1       A short question which is posed before this Court for

consideration is, whether the sugarcane purchase price paid to the

cane growers by the assessee-society more than the SMP and is

determined under Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966, can be said

to be the sharing of profit/appropriation of profit or is allowable as

expenditure?
9.2       While    considering    the      aforesaid   issue/question,   the

mechanism for determining the SMP and SAP under the Control

Order, 1966 is required to be referred to and considered.           As per

Clause 3 of the Control Order, 1966, the Central Government may,
17
after consultation with such authorities, bodies or associations as it

may deem fit, by notification in the official Gazette, from time to time,

fix the minimum price of sugarcane to be paid by producers of sugar

or their agents for the sugarcane purchased by them.                 While

fixing/determining the SMP under Clause 3 of the Control Order,

1966, the Central Government is required to consider the following

aspects:
“(a) the cost of production of sugarcane;
(b) the return to the grower from alternative crops and
                the general trend of prices of agricultural
                commodities;
c the availability of sugar to the consumer at a fair
              price;
d the price at which sugar produced from sugarcane is
              sold by producers of sugar; and
           e the recovery of sugar from sugarcane.”



9.3          As per Explanation, different prices may be fixed for

different areas or different qualities or varieties of sugarcane. As per

sub-clause 2 of Clause 3, no person shall sell or agree to sell

sugarcane to a producer of sugar or his agent, and no such producer

or agent shall purchase or agree to purchase sugarcane, at a price

lower than that fixed under sub-clause 1 of Clause 3.        Clause 5A,

which has been inserted in the year 1974 provides for an additional

price to be paid for sugarcane purchased on or after 01.10.1974. It

provides that where a producer of sugar or his agent purchases
18
sugarcane, from a sugarcane grower during each sugar year, he shall,

in addition to the minimum sugarcane price fixed under Clause 3, pay

to the sugarcane grower an additional price, if found due in

accordance with the provisions of the Second Schedule annexed to the

Control Order, 1966.    How the additional price under Clause 5A of

the Control Order, 1966 is to be determined is provided in the Second

Schedule, which reads as under:
“SECOND SCHEDULE
                           [See Clause 5-A]

            The amount to be paid on account of additional
        price (per quintal of sugarcane) under Clause 5-A by a
        producer of sugar shall be computed in accordance with
        the following formula, namely :
R-L+A-B
                         X = ---------------
2C

            Explanation— In this formula.
1   ‘X’ is the additional price in rupees per quintal
                of sugarcane payable by the producer of sugar
                to the sugarcane grower.
2   ‘R’ is the amount in rupees of sugar produced
                during the sugar year excluding the excise duty
                paid or payable to the factory by the purchaser.
            3   ‘L’ is the value in rupees of sugar produced
                during the sugar year, as calculated on the
                basis of the unit cost per quintal ex-factory,
                exclusive of excise duty, determined with
                reference to the minimum sugarcane price fixed
                under Clause 3, the final working results of the
                year and the Cost Schedule and return
                recommended by the such authority as the
19
Central Government may, specify from time to
               time.
4   ‘A’ is the amount found payable for the previous
               year but not actually paid [vide sub-clause (9)].
           5   ‘B’ is the excess or shortfall in realisations from
               actual sales of the unsold stocks of sugar
               produced during the sugar year, as on 30th day
               of September [vide item 7(ii) below] which is
               carried forward and adjusted in the sale
               realisations of the following year.
6   ‘C’ is the quantity in quintals of sugarcane
               purchased by the producer of sugar during the
               sugar year.
7   The amount ‘R’ referred to in Explanation 2 shall
               be computed as under, namely:—
                i      the actual amount realised during the
                       sugar year; and
                ii     the estimated value of the unsold stocks
                       of sugar held at the end of 30th
                       September, calculated in regard to free
                       sugar stocks at the average rate of sales,
                       namely, during the fortnight 16th to 30th
                       September and in regard to levy sugar
                       stocks at the notified levy prices as on the
                       30th September.
Explanation.—In this Schedules “Sugar” means any form
       of sugar containing more than ninety per cent sucrose.”


9.4      At this stage, it is required to be noted that Clause 5A was

inserted in the year 1974 on the basis of the recommendations made

by the Bhargava Commission. As observed by this Court in the case of
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar Karkhana Sangh Limited
(supra),

the Bhargava Commission had recommended payment of additional

price at the end of the season on 50:50 profit sharing basis between

growers and factories, to be worked out in accordance with Second
20
Schedule to the Control Order, 1966. It is also required to be noted

that the additional price is fixed/determined under Clause 5A at the

end of the season and as per Second Schedule to the Control Order,

1966. Therefore, at the time when the additional purchase price is

determined/fixed under Clause 5A, the accounts are settled and the

particulars are provided by the concerned cooperative society what will

be the expenditure; what can be the profit etc. It is required to be

noted that so far as the SMP determined under Clause 3 of the Control

Order, 1966 by the Central Government is concerned, it is at the

beginning of the season and while determining/fixing the SMP by the

Central Government, the afore-stated things are required to be

considered.   Therefore, the difference of amount between the SMP

determined under Clause 3 and the SAP/additional purchase price

determined under Clause 5A has an element of profit and/or one of

the components would be the profit.
The entire scheme/mechanism

while determining the additional purchase price under Clause 5A has

been dealt with and considered by this Court in detail in the case of
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar Karkhana Sangh Limited
(supra).

In
the said decision
, it is observed that the additional purchase

price/SAP is paid at the end of the season; the Bhargava Commission

had recommended payment of additional price at the end of season on

50:50 profit sharing basis between the growers and factories to be
21
worked out in accordance with Second Schedule to the Control Order,

1966; that the additional purchase price comprises of not only the

cost of cultivation, but profit as well; the price thus being paid on

recovery of canes and profits made from sale of sugar is not minimum

but optimum price which is paid to a cane grower.        The additional

cane price or additional State fixed price are paid as a matter of

incentive. The entire price structure of cane is founded on two basic

factors, one, the recovery percentage and other the incentive for

sharing profit arrived at by working out receipt minus expenditure.

Therefore, to the extent of the component of profit which will be a part

of the final determination of SAP and/or the final price/additional

purchase price fixed under Clause 5A would certainly be and/or said

to be an appropriation of profit.        However, at the same time, the

entire/whole amount of difference between the SMP and the SAP per

se cannot be said to be an appropriation of profit.        As observed

hereinabove, only that part/component of profit, while determining the

final price worked out/SAP/additional purchase price would be

and/or can be said to be an appropriation of profit and for that an

exercise is to be done by the assessing officer by calling upon the

assessee to produce the statement of accounts, balance sheet and the

material supplied to the State Government for the purpose of

deciding/fixing the final price/additional purchase price/SAP under
22
Clause 5A of the Control Order, 1966.      Merely because the higher

price is paid to both, members and non-members, qua the members,

still the question would remain with respect to the distribution of

profit/sharing of the profit. So far as the non-members are concerned,

the same can be dealt with and/or considered applying
Section 40A (2)
of the Act, i.e., the assessing officer on the material on record has to

determine whether the amount paid is excessive or unreasonable or

not. However, this is not the subject matter in the present appeals.

We are restricting the present appeals qua the sugarcane purchase

price paid by the society to the cane growers above the SMP

determined under Clause 3 and the difference of sugarcane purchase

price between the price determined under Clause 3 and Clause 5A of

the Control Order, 1966.
9.5       Therefore, the assessing officer will have to take into

account the manner in which the business works, the modalities and

manner in which SAP/additional purchase price/final price are

decided and to determine what amount would form part of the profit

and after undertaking such an exercise whatever is the profit

component is to be considered as sharing of profit/distribution of

profit and the rest of the amount is to be considered as deductible as

expenditure.
10.       In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the
23
question of law is answered accordingly, partly in favour of the

department and partly in favour of the assessee. The impugned orders

passed by the High Court, ITAT, CIT(A) as well as the assessing

officers are hereby quashed and set aside and the matters are remitted

to the respective assessing officers to undertake the exercise as stated

hereinabove and after giving an opportunity to the respective assesses.
11.       All these appeals stand disposed of in terms of the above.
…………………………………..J.
                               [A.K. SIKRI]


                               ……………………………………J.
                               [S. ABDUL NAZEER]


NEW DELHI;                     ……………………………………..J.
MARCH 05, 2019.                [M.R. SHAH]