[Cites
5
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Swapnanjali Sandeep Patil vs Sandeep Ananda Patil on 6 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 1500, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 491, 2019 (3) ABR 508, (2019) 1 CLR 851 (SC), (2019) 135 ALL LR 744, (2019) 196 ALLINDCAS 86, (2019) 1 CURCC 317, (2019) 1 DMC 714, (2019) 2 ALL WC 1788, (2019) 2 CAL HN 289, (2019) 2 HINDULR 173, (2019) 2 RAJ LW 1750, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 378, (2019) 3 ALLMR 952, (2019) 4 ANDHLD 39, (2019) 4 SCALE 173, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1388
Author:
M.R.Shah
Bench:
M. R. Shah
,
L. Nageswara Rao
1

                                                                 NON-REPORTABLE



                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CIVIL APPEAL NO......................OF 2019

                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.25080 OF 2016)



       SWAPNANJALI SANDEEP PATIL                                   …APPELLANT
                               Versus



     SANDEEP ANANDA PATIL                                          …RESPONDENT


                                         JUDGMENT
M.R.SHAH, J.
Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and

     order dated 09.03.2016 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

     Bombay in First Appeal No.342 of 2015 by which the High Court has

     dismissed the said appeal filed by the original applicant and has

     confirmed the judgment and decree dated 01.12.2014 passed by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.06
learned District Judge, Pune in Marriage Petition No.55 of 2012 by
17:37:16 IST
Reason:
which the learned District Judge dismissed the said marriage petition,
2
the original applicant/appellant-wife has preferred the present appeal.
3. The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
(a) That   the appellant herein married with respondent–

            husband on 05.04.2010.
(b) That their marriage was an inter-caste marriage.
(c) According to the appellant-wife the respondent-husband

            started harassing her in various ways.
(d) That he used to come in a drunken state and he withdrew

           money from the bank account of the appellant by using her

           credit card. Therefore, on 30.06.2012 the appellant left the

            matrimonial house and took shelter in her parental home.
(e) According to the appellant-wife, while gathering her

           personal belongings for leaving the house, the appellant

           came across a zerox copy of Marriage Dissolution Deed,

           dated 14.12.2009 between the respondent and his first

            wife.
(f) She realized that the respondent had married her without

           obtaining the decree of divorce from the competent court

           and that at that time of marriage the respondent was

           having a living spouse and that he has suppressed the fact

            of the first marriage from the appellant.
(g) Therefore, the appellant-wife filed Marriage Petition No.55

           of 2012 in the Court of District Court, Pune under
Section

           25
of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, for declaration of

           marriage as null and void.
3
4. Thus, according to the appellant, the respondent obtained her

consent for marriage by fraud; the appellant was ignorant to the first

marriage of the respondent at the time of marriage; the respondent, at

the time of registration of marriage, in the document of marriage has

declared himself as bachelor; that he concealed the fact of his earlier

marriage which was in existence on the date of marriage of the

appellant with the respondent; and that at the time of her marriage

with the respondent, the respondent’s first marriage was subsisting

and therefore according to the appellant, she is entitled for declaration

of nullity of marriage.
5.   The     application    was    vehemently      opposed     by    the

respondent-husband. According to the respondent-husband, prior to

his marriage with the applicant, they were having a love affair; that

the respondent married with the daughter of his maternal uncle on

08.03.2007 at Bhusawal and the applicant was in knowledge of the

said fact. According to the respondent, after his marriage he started

residing with his wife at Dehu Road. According to the respondent, at

the time of their marriage on 05.04.2010, the applicant was in

knowledge of his first marriage and despite the same she married with

him. According to the respondent, at the time of marriage, as such, he

was not at all willing to marry to the applicant, however, because of

the pressure of the applicant and her threat to commit suicide he was
4
compelled to marry the applicant. It was also the case on behalf of the

respondent-husband that there was a customary divorce between the

respondent and his first wife, which was prior to the solemnization of

the marriage between the applicant and the respondent. Therefore, it

was the specific case on behalf of the respondent-husband that

neither there was any fraud nor there was any suppression of his first

marriage by the respondent-husband and therefore it was prayed to

dismiss the petition.
6.The learned trial court framed the following issues :
“(1) Whether marriage of petitioner and respondent performed on

5.4.2010 under
Special Marriage Act
by suppressing previous

marriage of respondent, performed on 8.3.2007 with Savita Patil in the

said marriage was in existence on the date of marriage of party?
(2) Whether consent of petitioner has been sought by respondent

for the above marriage by suppressing previous marriage?
(3) Whether respondent has meted out mental cruelty to

petitioner?
(4) Whether petitioner has forced the respondent to perform

marriage with her by giving threat of suicide having knowledge of

substitution of marriage of respondent with Savita Patil?
(5) Whether the petitioner justified decree of divorce?

     (6) What order?”
5
7. That the learned trial court dismissed the marriage petition by

observing that as the applicant is seeking nullity of marriage only on

the grounds that she was ill-treated by the respondent and on the date

of marriage the respondent was having a subsisting first marriage and

her consent to the marriage was obtained by fraud, none of the above

grounds is a ground for nullity of marriage as per the provisions of the
Section 25
of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as

the ‘Act’). The learned trial court therefore did not go into the details of

the allegations and counter-allegations made in the plaint and the

written statement on the ground that the case of the applicant does

not fall in any of the provisions enumerated under
Section 25
of the

Act and therefore the applicant is not entitled for a decree of nullity of

marriage.
8. Learned trial court also observed that even the application was out

of period of limitation as according to the provisions of
Section 25
of

the Act, the period of limitation is one year after the coercion had

ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered or the

petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with other party to the

marriage as husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the

case may be, the fraud had been discovered.
9. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree

passed by the learned trial court dismissing her marriage petition, the
6
appellant-wife preferred the appeal before the Bombay High Court

bearing First Appeal No.342 of 2015. Before the High Court the

grievance made on behalf of the appellant was that the district court

has decided the issue of limitation without framing the issue on that

ground. It was submitted that since no issue was framed, the

appellant did not get an opportunity to lead the evidence and,

therefore, first she was deprived of an opportunity of leading the

evidence to show the fact as regards the knowledge of the earlier

marriage of respondent, and the same has not been specifically

pleaded anywhere. Therefore, it was submitted that in the absence of

any such pleadings, there could not have been any evidence as

regards the fact of knowledge. The High Court did not accept the same

by observing that though ordinarily in the absence of framing        an

issue and giving an opportunity to the parties to lead evidence, the

issue cannot be decided, in the present case, there is sufficient

evidence before the court that the appellant was, in fact, well aware of

the fact of earlier marriage of the respondent and the customary

divorce obtained by him and, therefore, the uncontroverted evidence of

the respondent has established that in fact the appellant was the

cause of divorce of the respondent from his first wife. By observing so,

the High Court has dismissed the first appeal.
10. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment
7
passed by the High Court, the appellant-wife has preferred the present

appeal.
10.1 Shri Vinay Navare, learned Counsel has appeared on behalf of

the appellant-wife and Shri Sushil Kumar Jain, learned Senior

Advocate has appeared as an Amicus Curiae on behalf of the

respondent-husband.
11. Shri Navare, learned Advocate has vehemently submitted that, in

the present case, both the learned trial court as well as the High Court

have not at all considered
Section 24
of the Act. Relying upon
Section

24
of the Act, it is vehemently submitted by Shri Navare that, at the

time of marriage between the appellant and the respondent, the first

marriage of the respondent with his first wife was subsisting and

therefore the marriage between the appellant and respondent was a

nullity/void marriage. It is submitted that, in the present case, neither

the district court nor the High Court had considered
Section 24
of the

Act and only considered
Section 25
of the Act.
11.1 Further, it is vehemently submitted by Shri Navare that though it

was the case on behalf of respondent-husband that there was a

customary divorce between the respondent-husband and his first wife,

which was prior to the marriage between the appellant and the

respondent, neither there was any specific issue framed by the learned

trial court nor even the respondent-husband led any evidence and
8
prayed for the customary divorce between the respondent-husband

and his first wife. It is submitted, therefore, in absence of proving

customary divorce between the respondent-husband and his first wife,

there was a subsisting marriage between the respondent-husband and

his first wife at the time of the marriage between the appellant and the

respondent and therefore
Section 24
read with
Section 4
of the Act

was required to be considered.
11.2 It is submitted by learned advocate appearing on behalf of the

appellant-wife that so far as for the declaration sought for in view of
Section 24
of the Act is concerned, there is no period of limitation

provided, as a declaration for a void marriage can be sought at any

time, as the void marriage as is void and nullity. It is submitted

therefore the limitation provided under
Section 25
of the Act shall not

be applicable in a case where the declaration for nullity of marriage is

sought in view of
Section 24
read with
Section 4
of the Act is

concerned.
11.3 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present

appeal.
12. Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Jain, learned Senior

advocate     appearing   as   an   Amicus   Curiae   on   behalf   of   the

respondent-husband. It is vehemently submitted by Shri Jain that, in

the facts and circumstances of the case, both the learned trial court as
9
well as the High Court have rightly dismissed the marriage petition

and have rightly refused to grant the relief of declaration of nullity of

marriage between the appellant and the respondent, considering
Section 25
of the Act and by observing that the marriage petition was

barred by period of limitation, as provided under
Section 25
of the Act.

12.1 It is further submitted by Shri Jain that it was the specific case

on behalf of the respondent-husband that, at the time of marriage, the

appellant was in the knowledge of the first marriage of the respondent

with his first wife. It is submitted that as such she was the root cause

for the divorce between the respondent and his first wife. It is

submitted that as such the customary divorce had taken place

between the respondent-husband and his first wife much prior to the

date of marriage between the appellant and the respondent. It is

submitted, therefore, when there was already a dissolution of marriage

between the respondent and his first wife, by way of customary

divorce, which was much prior to the marriage between the appellant

and the respondent and, therefore the marriage between the appellant

and the respondent cannot be said to be void under
Section 24
of the

Act.
12.2 Shri Jain, learned Senior Counsel has heavily relied upon the

decision of this Court in the case of
Ass Kaur (Smt) (Deceased) by

LRs v. Kartar Singh (Dead) by LRs
(2007) 5 SCC 561 and the case of
10
Laxmibai (Dead) through LRs v. Bhagwantbuva (Dead) through

LRs (2013) 4 SCC 97.
12.3 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

present appeal.
13. Heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective

parties at length.
13.1 At the outset it is required to be noted that the appellant filed the

marriage petition for a declaration to declare her marriage with the

respondent as null and void on the ground that, at the time of their

marriage, the first marriage of the respondent with his first wife was

subsisting; that the respondent committed a fraud and suppressed the

material fact of his first marriage, and in fact, in the registration form

he stated himself to be a bachelor. On the other hand, it was the case

on behalf of the respondent that neither there was any suppression

nor any fraud committed by him. It was the case on behalf of the

respondent that the appellant was in the knowledge of his first

marriage and that as such there was a customary divorce between the

respondent and his first wife, which was much prior to the marriage

between the appellant and the respondent. That the learned trial court

dismissed the marriage petition on the ground that none of the

grounds stated in the plaint for declaration of the marriage between

the appellant and respondent as null and void, would fall within
11
Section 25
of the Act and that, even otherwise, the marriage petition is

beyond the period of limitation as prescribed in explanation to
Section

25
of the Act. It is required to be noted that, however, neither the trial

court nor even the High Court at all considered
Section 24
read with
Section 4
of the Act nor considered the case on behalf of the appellant

that as at the time of her marriage with the respondent, the

respondent’s first marriage was subsisting and therefore the marriage

between the appellant and the respondent would be void and nullity.

13.2 As per
Section 4
of the Act, the marriage between any two

persons may be solemnized under the
Special Marriage Act
if at the

time of the marriage neither party has a spouse living.
Section 24
of

the Act provides that any marriage solemnized under the
Special

Marriage Act
shall be null and void and may, on a petition presented

by either party thereto against the other party, be so declared by a

decree of nullity if any of the conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), (c)

and (d) of
Section 4
has not been fulfilled. Clause (a) of
Section 4
provides that neither party shall have a spouse living at the time of

marriage. Therefore, considering
Section 24
read with
Section 4
of the

Act, if at the time of marriage either of the party has spouse living,

then the said marriage is a void marriage and a decree of nullity can

be passed on a petition presented by either party thereto against the

other party. No period of limitation is prescribed so far as presentation
12
of petition for declaration to declare a marriage being nullity/void

marriage, under
Section 24
of the Act and rightly so, as once the

marriage is void the same is a nullity and at any time the same can be

declared as nullity being a void marriage. Therefore, both the trial

court as well as the High Court have committed an error in observing

that the marriage petition was barred by limitation. While holding so,

both the trial court as well as the High Court had considered first

proviso to
Section 25
of the Act. In the facts and circumstances of the

case, we are of the opinion that
Section 25
of the Act shall not be

applicable and
Section 24
of the Act would be applicable which does

not provide for any period of limitation like first proviso to
Section 25
of the Act.
14.   Now,    so   far   as   the   submission    on   behalf    of   the

respondent-husband that there was already a customary divorce

between him and his first wife, which was much prior to the marriage

between the appellant and the respondent and that the appellant was

in the knowledge of his first marriage is concerned, at the outset, it is

required to be noted that as such there is no specific issue framed by

the learned trial court on the alleged customary divorce between the

respondent and his first wife. Even there was no specific issue framed

with respect to the limitation. There was not even an issue framed

with respect to the knowledge of the appellant that she was having the
13
knowledge of the first marriage of the respondent with his first wife. In

absence of any such issue framed, the learned trial court as well as

the High Court have committed a grave error in observing that there

was a customary divorce between the respondent-husband and his

first wife. There must be a specific issue framed by the Court on the

aforesaid and the same is required to be established and proved by

leading evidence. In the present case, neither an issue has been

framed nor even the respondent husband has led any evidence and

proved that there was a customary divorce between respondent and

his first wife. Even the respondent-husband was required to prove that

such a customary divorce was permissible in their caste/community.

In the absence of any such issue or any evidence, the Courts below

were not justified in observing that there was a customary divorce

between the respondent and his first wife. Therefore, in absence of the

above, it can be said that at the time of marriage between the

appellant and the respondent, the respondent had a living spouse and,

therefore, considering
Section 24
read with
Section 4
of the Act, the

marriage between the appellant and respondent was void and the

appellant was entitled to a decree of nullity at her instance. Therefore,

both the Courts below have materially erred in rejecting the marriage

petition. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the

appellant is entitled to a decree of nullity of the marriage between the
14
appellant and the respondent.
15. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present

appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court dated 09.03.2016 passed in First Appeal No.342/2015, as

well as the judgment and decree passed by the learned district court,

dismissing the marriage petition, are hereby quashed and set aside.

The Marriage Petition No.55 of 2012 is hereby decreed and there shall

be a decree of nullity of the marriage of the appellant-wife with the

respondent-husband, solemnized on 05.04.2010 before the Marriage

Officer, Pune. Consequently, the marriage between the appellant-wife

and the respondent-husband solemnized on 05.04.2010 before the

Marriage Officer, Pune is hereby declared as null and void. No costs.
…………………….............................J.
                                  (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                 .…………………….............................J.
                                    (M. R. SHAH)

New Delhi,
March 6, 2019.