[Cites
2
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
Sant Dnyaneshwar Shikshan Sansthan vs The State Of Maharashtra on 5 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1740, (2019) 1 ESC 289, 2019 (4) ADJ 77 NOC, (2019) 4 SCALE 1, (2020) 1 ALLMR 932
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
         SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.

                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                   Reportable
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014

                         SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHA AND ANR.                               …Appellants

                                                                         VERSUS

                         STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.                                       …Respondents

                                                               WITH

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9385 OF 2014

                         SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHA AND ANR.                               …Appellants

                                                                         VERSUS

                         STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.                                       …Respondents

                                                                   WITH
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9673-9674 OF 2014
                         STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS. ETC.                                  …Appellants

                                                               VERSUS

                         MANISHA BHIMRAJ PATIL & ORS. ETC.                                       …Respondents

                                                          JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
Digitally signed by
1.     These appeals by special leave challenge the correctness of the
MUKESH KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.05
16:34:26 IST
Reason:
judgment and order dated 22.10.2013 passed by the High Court of Judicature
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
2
at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad in Writ Petition Nos.6537 of 2012 and 3728

       of 2012 respectively.
2.         A Primary Ashram School was being run by Banjara Magasvargiya

       Shikshan Prasarak Mandal in the name of Prabodhankar Thakare Prathmik

       Ashram Shala, Talegaon Tanda, Taluka-Chasligaon, Distt-Jalgaon. Around

       2009 certain irregularities and deficiencies having been found, a report was

       submitted to the Director of VJNT, OBC, Social Welfare of Special Backward

       Class, Pune. Consequently, the recognition granted to said Ashram Shala

       came to be withdrawn on 23.08.2010 for not taking corrective steps with

       regard to deficient infrastructural facilities. By the same order the students of

       said Ashram Shala were directed to be absorbed in nearby Ashram Schools.
3.     By subsequent order dated 15.12.2010 passed by the Director,

       permission/no objection was given to absorb the employees of said Ashram

       Shala in other Primary Ashram Schools recognized by the Government. In a

       tabulated chart, the order noted the names of Primary Ashram Schools where

       each of those employees was to be absorbed and directed the employees to

       report within seven days.                 The employees at Sl.Nos.10,11 and 12 were

       temporarily adjusted in the office of Special District Welfare Officer and after

       review of vacant posts in the division, the adjustment of said employees was
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
3
to be undertaken. In partial modification of the aforesaid order, an order was

       passed on 18.06.2011 making revised postings of the employees.
4.     Thereafter, on 02.01.2012 a Resolution was passed by Government of

       Maharashtra, Department of Social Justice and Special Assistance accepting

       proposal of handing over said Ashram Shala to another entity named Sant

       Dnyaneshwar Shikshan Sanstha, Islampur, Taluka Walava, District Sangli

       (appellant in Civil Appeal No.9384 and 9385 of 2014). Under the Resolution

       the entire Ashram Shala which had been closed down was to be transferred to

       a place at a distance of 400 kms. The relevant portion of the Resolution was

       as under:-
“Govt. Resolution :- The proposal of handing over closed
                     down Ashram School named as the Prabodhankar Thakare
                     Primary Ashram School run and govern by the Banjara
                     Backward Education Society, At Talegaon Tanda, Taluka
                     Chalisgaon to the Dnyaneshwar Education Society,
                     Islampur, Taluka Walava, District Sangli and transfer at the
                     Punyashlok Ahilyadevi Holkar Primary Ashram School,
                     Choundi, Taluka Jamkhed, District Ahmed Nagar is
                     approved subject to following terms and conditions:
1. The currently serving approved Teaching/Non-Teaching
                     employees of closed down Ashram School shall be
                     absorbed.
2. The Resident Students of the closed down Ashram
                     School shall be shifted in new society.
3. The Orders, Terms and Conditions time to time issued
                     by the Government shall be binding upon the society.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
4
5.     The employees of erstwhile Ashram Shala which was closed down and

       who were absorbed in various posts as stated above challenged the Resolution

       dated 02.01.2012 and communication issued to each of those employees on

       06.04.2012 to report at the new place, by filing Writ Petition No. 3728 of

       2012 before the High Court. On 24.04.2012 the effect of communication

       dated 06.04.2012 was stayed by the High Court. Despite the order of stay, a

       communication was issued by the Assistant Commissioner, Social Welfare

       Department to various schools where the employees were actually absorbed to

       relieve them. It is a matter of record that since April, 2012 the employees

       have not received any payment towards salary or emoluments.
6.     The challenge raised by the employees was accepted by the High Court.

       The High Court considered Government Resolution dated 01.08.2007 dealing

       with the subject “The conditions for transfer of Primary and Secondary

       Residential Schools” and found that said Resolution dated 01.08.2007 did not

       make any reference to transfer of a derecognized or closed school. It further

       found that none of the terms and conditions as stipulated in said Resolution

       dated 01.08.2007 were satisfied in the present case. It was observed that the

       recognition accorded to an Ashram School was being considered as if it was a

       business licence. The High Court held that the transfer was not preceded by
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
5
any circulation about intention to transfer, which would have enabled other

       institutions to explore possibility of putting in their claims. The High Court

       also relied upon the decision of the Division Bench of the same High Court

       rendered in
Jeevanjyoti Krida and Shikshan Prasarak Mandal vs. State of

       Maharashtra
and ors.1 .
Allowing the Writ Petition the High Court quashed Government

       Resolution dated 02.01.2012 and directed the State authorities to release the

       salaries of the employees regularly with further direction to issue to said

       employees proper absorption orders in the schools nearer to the derecognized

       Ashram Shala or allow them to continue at the places of absorption according

       to the position prior to 02.01.2012.
7.      The aforesaid decision of the High Court is presently under challenge by

       appellant in C.A. Nos.9384 and 9385 of 2014 (‘appellant’ for short). While

       issuing notice on 17.12.2013, this Court had directed that the school run by

       the appellant in terms of Resolution dated 02.01.2012 would continue to run

       and would not be directed to be closed down till further orders. Consequently,

       the school is still being run by the appellant. Challenge has also been raised

       by State of Mahrashtra by filing Civil Appeal Nos. 9673-9674 of 2014 against

       the very same judgment of the High Court. According to the State, the
1
2012(6) Maharashtra Law Journal (Mh.L.J) page no. 836
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
6
Resolution dated 02.01.2012 was perfectly within the competence of the State

       and was a proper exercise of power.
8.     We have heard Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, learned Advocate for the

       appellant in Civil Appeal Nos.9384 and 9385 of 2014, Mr. Arun R. Pednekar,

       learned Advocate for the State in Civil Appeal Nos. 9673-9674 of 2014 and

       Mr. Vinay Navre, learned Advocate for the employees.
9.     The Government Resolution dated 01.08.2007 dealt with certain

       conditions under which transfer of employees of primary and secondary

       residential schools could be permitted. Those conditions were as under:-
“1. The government may permit or consider another option
                  to grant other place to the Ashram run by the institute if the
                  population is enough and the plan has been granted by the
                  government, and considering all the facilities of that
                  Ashram.
2. The location from where the Ashram is functioning and
                     its undertakings and if there is a necessity to requisite that
                     land or there is any danger of earthquake flood natural
                     calamity or
3. If the population of the place where the Sanstha is
                     located is by any reason lessened or moved to some other
                     place/village and if the population becomes less than 50%
                     or
4. If there is any scarcity of basic needs such as
                     availability of land, water, electricity or any other tension
                     such as communal tension and or if that place is not safe for
                     there is occurrence of tension frequently, within the area of
10 k.m., the Director of that Division of the government can
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
7
permit to start the functioning of the Sanstha if there is all
                     the required facilities.
5. The permission can be sought by the director of the
                     public welfare (local) authority to shift the location of the
                     Sanstha within the area of 10 km. if the basic facilities such
                     as water, electricity, ground, building are available at that
                     place.
6. If there is an application from the Sanstha or if it faces
                     the problems as mentioned in para 1 such as lack of basic
                     necessities, or the population of children is reduced or the
                     place has gone into Government requisition plan etc. then
in
                     that case
the govt. authority can consider the permission to
                     shift the place of the Sanshtha.
7. The authority will have the power to grant the
                     permission under extraordinary conditions or situations.
8. If the grant has not been given to any Sanstha once it
                     has shifted its base, the responsibility of the payment of
                     salaries of the teachers and staff shall be wholly on the
                     Sanstha itself.
9. If the location of the Sanstha (Organisation) is changed
                     without seeking the permission of the authority then
in that
                     case
it will be held illegal and for that the Govt. authority
                     will not be responsible for any query which may be raised
                     on issues such as staff, immovable property population of
                     the children. And the permission given to that organization
                     will stand cancelled. The govt. authority will have the right
                     and power to hand over the functions of the Sanstha to some
                     other Sanstha/Organization.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
8
10. In Jeevanjyoti1 almost similar fact situation came up for consideration

       before the High Court where transfer of recognition, after derecognition of an

       existing Ashram School, was effected and the distance between two places

       was about 600 kms. After considering the issues involved, the High Court

       held that once an existing Ashram School was derecognized there would be

       no occasion to handover that recognition to another Ashram School. The

       relevant portion of the decision of the High Court was as under:-
“………Evidently since a policy decision has been taken by
                     the Government in 2006 not to allow new Ashram Schools,
                     this was an attempt to get around that decision ostensibly by
                     handing over the recognition of a derecognized school to
                     another NGO. Once an existing Ashram School was
                     derecognized, there would be no occasion to handover that
                     recognition to another Ashram School. If as a result of the
                     derecognition of an Ashram School the Government is in a
                     position to fund some other institution elsewhere in the
                     State of Maharashtra, that is a completely separate and
                     independent decision, in arriving at which a transparent
                     decision making process must be followed. Recognition is
                     not like a licence to enter on a business which can be
                     transferred. Once recognition granted to a school is
                     withdrawn, that original recognition ceases to exist in law
                     and in fact. There is no occasion then to ‘transfer’ the
                     erstwhile recognition to another institution.
………
12. Ordinarily, we would have been inclined to set aside
                     the Government Resolution dated 30 August, 2011 at this
                     stage, having regard to the illegality in purportedly
                     transferring the recognition of a derecognized primary
                     Ashram School to the Fourth Respondent and the absence of
                     a transparent procedure, even assuming that this was
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
9
permissible. However, the Court cannot now be unmindful
                     of the factual position on the ground which is that 120
                     students have been admitted during the current academic
                     year to the Fourth Respondent which is a residential primary
                     Ashram School. These students who belong to the reserved
                     category would now be left in a state of uncertainty if the
                     Government Resolution dated 30 August, 2011 is set aide
                     and their education would be liable to suffer. In this view of
                     the matter, we are now taking recourse to the step of
                     quashing and setting aside the Government Resolution dated
                     30 August, 2011, particularly having regard to the fair
                     attitude shown by Counsel appearing on behalf of the
                     Petitioner that even the Petitioner would not seek such an
                     extreme direction at this stage having regard to the aforesaid
                     circumstances.     We are, however, of the view that
                     henceforth the State Government must frame appropriate
                     guidelines, procedures or, as the case may be, rules and
                     regulations laying down the procedure for considering
                     requests for transfers of managements of Ashram Schools
                     falling within the jurisdiction both of Tribal Development
                     Department and the Social Justice Department. Until the
                     State Government does so, we are of the view that direction
                     should be issued by the Court to obviate an arbitrary
                     exercise of power. The directions which we issue would be
                     as follows:
(i) When a change in the management of an aided
                     Ashram School is contemplated, the State Government shall
                     issue and publish a notice in two prominent newspapers in
                     the concerned area and on the website of the Department
                     inviting applications from interested organisations including
                     NGOs for conducting the Ashram School. The Government
                     shall simultaneously invite suggestions from all
                     stakeholders in including parents, citizens and the teaching
                     and non-teaching staff who may be affected by the transfer
                     of a management;
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
10
(ii) The Director (VJNT) or, as the case may be, the
                     Director (Tribal Development) shall hold an enquiry in
                     regard to the reasons for a proposed change in management.
                     The concerned District Social Welfare Officer shall submit a
                     report to the Director (VJNT) or, as the case may be, the
                     Director (Tribal Development) before a final decision is
                     taken. The track record and credentials of the proposed
                     transferee management(s) shall be duly considered;
(iii) After objections are heard, the Director (VJNT)
                     or, as the case may be, the Director (Tribal Development)
                     shall pass a reasoned order. The actual transfer or change in
                     management shall be given effect to thirty days after the
                     publication of the passing of the order in the same mode of
                     publication as indicated earlier and it should preferably be
                     from the commencement of the new academic session,
                     unless for exceptional reasons it becomes necessary to
                     exercise the power during the academic year to prevent a
                     disruption of the education of the children.”
11.        The decision in Jeevanjyoti1 was rendered on 11.09.2012 i.e. after the

       Government Resolution dated 02.01.2012. However, said decision was never

       challenged by the State. On the other hand, a Government Resolution was

       issued on 19.12.2016 laying down policy for transfer of recognition of an

       Ashram Shala in a fair and transparent manner, in terms of said decision in

       Jeevanjyoti1.        In the face of such stand by the Government, the submission

       raised by Mr. Navre, learned advocate that the appeal preferred by the State

       Government against the decision which had followed the decision in

       Jeevanjyoti1 may not be entertained, has some force.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
11
12. In any case, we have gone through the record and considered rival

       submissions. The way the issue of transfer was dealt with by the State

       Government, the criticism levelled by the High Court was fully justified. The

       permission to an Ashram Shala was taken as if it was a business licence which

       could be utilized at any place. In terms of Government Resolution dated

       01.08.2007, the applications for transfer would normally be considered within

       a distance of 10 kms. In the present case, the distance itself is 400 kms. and

       for a Primary Ashram Shala it would not be proper to expect the children

       enrolled in the Ashram Shala to be transferred to a new place. Further, there

       was no school in existence at the place where the transfer was effected and an

       entity that was based in a completely different district was allowed to set up a

       new Ashram Shala. In our view, the High Court was right in rejecting the

       submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant as well as the State

       Government. We, therefore, affirm the view and dismiss these appeals.
13. However, we deem it appropriate to pass following directions:-
a) Considering the facts and circumstances that the

                     students presently enrolled in the Ashram school run by the

                     appellant would be put to great prejudice if the school is to

                     be closed as a result of dismissal of these appeals, it is

                     directed that said school may continue till the academic
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
12
session 2019-2020. However, the school of the appellant

                     which is presently functioning by virtue of Resolution dated

                     02.01.2012 shall not be allowed to function from the

                     academic session 2020-2021.
b)    The State authorities are directed to invite proposals

                     strictly in terms of the directions issued by the High Court

                     in Jeevanjyoti1 from interested parties/societies to set up a

                     new school or conduct the very same school which was

                     closed down. Preference shall be given to those who wish

                     to re-start or set up a new Ashram School at a location in

                     conformity with Resolution dated 01.08.2007. If no such

                     proposal is received or is not found viable, then in terms of

                     the decision in Jeevanjyoti1 and for exceptional reasons to

                     be recorded, permission may be given to start a new Ashram

                     Shala at a location beyond the limits prescribed under said

                     Resolution dated 01.08.2007. In either case, there shall be

                     adequate publicity and steps will be undertaken in

                     conformity with the decision in Jeevanjyoti1.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
13
c) The employees who are presently transferred to the

                     school of the appellant shall always be treated to be in

                     continuous service and the entire period from 02.01.2012,

                     right upto the date of this judgment, shall be taken to be part

                     of continuous service.
d) All those employees, till the conclusion of academic

                     session 2019-2020 shall be part of the school presently

                     being run by the appellant.                  Contemporaneous with the

                     closure of said school in terms of direction (a), the services

                     of the employees shall be directed to be absorbed in any

                     school wherever there are vacancies, or to the school which,

                     as a result of the aforesaid direction would either be re-

                     started or newly set up.
e) The employees shall be entitled to salary and

                     emoluments for the period that they had rendered service.

                     For the period they could not/did not render service, the

                     employees shall be entitled to 25% of back-wages.
(f) All the arrears of salary and emoluments shall be

                     released by the State Government to the employees within

                     six weeks from today.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9384 OF 2014 ETC.
SANT DNYANESHWAR SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN AND ANR. VS. THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS
.
14
14. With the aforesaid directions these appeals stand dismissed without any

       order as to costs.
………..…..……..……J.
                                                                                      (Uday Umesh Lalit)



                                                                                    .………….……………J.
                                                                                      (Dinesh Maheshwari)

       New Delhi,
       March 05, 2019.