[Cites
13
, Cited by
43
]
Supreme Court of India
M. R. Krishna Murthi vs The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. on 5 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 5625, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 493, (2019) 134 ALL LR 212, (2019) 196 ALLINDCAS 107, (2019) 1 ACC 730, (2019) 1 CURCC 352, (2019) 2 ACJ 1291, (2019) 2 KER LJ 253, (2019) 2 RECCIVR 455, (2019) 2 TAC 1, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 543, (2019) 4 MAD LJ 302, (2019) 4 SCALE 362, (2019) 74 OCR 436, (2020) 1 ANDHLD 283
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2476-2477 OF 2019
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NOS. 31521-31522 OF 2017)


     M.R. KRISHNA MURTHI                                                  .....APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

     THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO. LTD.                                  .....RESPONDENT(S)
     & OTHERS


                                                  JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Leave granted.
2)               The appellant herein, who is a practicing advocate, had suffered in nasty

                         accident at the young age of 18 years. He was a student at that time studying in

                         Modern School, Delhi. It was 26th May, 1988. He was travelling along with his

                         mother from Delhi to Mussoorie to celebrate his 18th birthday falling on 27th

                         May, 1988. On Delhi-Dehradun highway the accident took place in which his

                         entire left leg was crushed. He was rushed to the hospital and his hospitalization

                         continued for over two months. He had to undergo surgery for which he was
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.05
operated on 31st May, 1988. Though, the appellant was discharged from the
17:51:55 IST
Reason:
hospital after two months, his treatment continued for over 6 years, during

                         which period he had to undergo further operations. In all, three surgeries were
2
performed. First, for putting plates and screws, another for removal of plates

   and screws wherein doctor discovered that he could not remove the plates and

   screws of femur bone. The result is that even today the said screws and plates in

   the femur bone remain planted. This exposes him to the risk of another fracture

   anytime. The third operation was for removal of a lump in the right leg which

   had developed after the accident and had grown over the years.
3) As per the appellant, the net result of the aforesaid accident of such severity is

   that he is suffering permanent disability (pain and difficulty in locomotion)

   even today. This disability is certified by the District Government Hospital,

   Muzaffarnagar at 40%, as per the disability certificate dated 10 th December,

   2005 (Exh. PW-4/103).
4) The appellant filed an application claiming compensation before Motor

   Accidents Claims Tribunal (MACT), Muzaffarnagar, U.P. as the accident took

   place in the area within the jurisdiction of the said MACT. However, on his

   application for transfer of the said claim petition, this Court passed orders dated

   12th January, 1998 transferring the case to MACT, Patiala House, New Delhi.

   The MACT, after conclusion of the trial, rendered its award dated 23 rd May,

   2007 attributing negligence to the driver of the ambassador car which had hit

   the vehicle in which the appellant was travelling. As the accident occurred due

   to the negligence of the said driver (Respondent no. 4 in MACT case), and the

   offending vehicle was insured with Respondent no. 1, namely, New India
3
Assurance Company Limited, the liability was fastened on the Insurance

   Company, the driver of the vehicle as well as the owner of the vehicle who also

   arrayed as respondents. The MACT, thereafter, dealt with the issue of quantum

   of compensation and awarded a sum of Rs. 8,48,000/-, the breakup of which is

   as under:
"Pain and sufferings       Rs.50,000/-
            Medicines                        Rs.2,10,000/-
            Special Diet                     Rs.15,000/-
            Conveyance                 Rs.15,000/-
            Compensation on account          Rs.4,08,000/-
            of loss of income adopting
            multiplier of 18 permanent Rs.75,000/-
            disability attendant       Rs.25,000/-
            loss of enjoyment                Rs.50,000/-
            Total                            Rs.8,48,000/-”
5) The MACT also awarded interest @7% for a period of 10 years, inter alia,

   taking note of the fact that the claim petition has been dismissed in default

   twice.
6) The appellant filed the appeal thereagainst before the High Court. However,

   when it was taken up for hearing, nobody appeared on behalf of the appellant.

   Going by the fact that on several consecutive dates the appellant was not

   represented and remained absent, instead of dismissing the appeal in default, the

   High Court decided the matter on merits after hearing the counsel for the

   Insurance Company and on perusing the record.
7) Main contention of the appellant in appeal was that MACT had failed to take

   into account the disability certificate which showed that the appellant had
4
suffered permanent disability to the extent of 40%. This submission is rejected

   by the High Court with the observations that the MACT had, in fact, calculated

   the loss of future income on the basis of inference that the claimant has suffered

   functional disability to the extent of 40% corresponding to affecting his earning

   capacity. The High Court also took note of the income tax returns which were

   filed by the appellant for the periods 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06. However, as

   per the High Court, these income tax returns were irrelevant and could not be

   taken into consideration as accident occurred way back in the year 1988 and,

   therefore, compensation had to be fixed with reference to the date of the

   accident when the claimant was a boy of 18 years only. Instead, only addition

   is made by the High Court, that too on some other count. It has noted that the

   appellant would require services of a driver till he attains age of 70 years, which

   is a normal expected lifespan. Though, no evidence was led in support of this

   claim, the High Court has awarded an additional lumpsum damages in the sum

   of Rs. 50,000/- on this account, given the nature of disability and physical

   disfigurement suffered by the appellant.
8) The appellant, thereafter, preferred a review petition under
Order LXVII Rule 1

   of the Code of Civil Procedure
seeking review of the judgment dated 17 th May,

   2016 rendered by the High Court. It was pointed out that there was an error

   committed by the MACT as it had applied the multiplier of 17, whereas

   multiplier of 18 should have been adopted while calculating the compensation

   towards loss of income, going by the fact that the appellant was only 18 years
5
of age when he suffered the injuries. This plea has been accepted by the High

   Court thereby applying the multiplier of 18, instead of 17 which has resulted in

   enhancement of compensation by Rs.24000/- together with corresponding

   interest. Main judgment dated 17th May, 2016 as well as order dated 19th May,

   2017 passed in review petition are the subject matters of the present appeals.
9) Mr. Arun Mohan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has made

   two-fold submissions which are paraphrased in the following manner:
(i)   In the first instance, it is submitted that the MACT as well as the High

   Court have erred in computing the future earning by fixing the income at the

   rate of Rs.5000/- only while assessing the loss of future earnings. No doubt,

   submitted the learned senior counsel, the appellant was only a student and,

   therefore, there was no real earning at that stage. Only future prospects can be

   taken into consideration, as per the law laid down by this Court in a series of

   judgments. However, submission of learned senior counsel was that while

   assessing the loss of future earning, the Court should have regard to the family

   background of the victim, the institution in which he is getting education, his

   potential to adopt the career he desired to choose, career prospects in view of

   attendant circumstances etc. In this hue, Mr. Arun Mohan submitted that the

   appellant belongs to a family of lawyers as both his parents were senior lawyers

   practicing in Supreme Court. Because of this family background, the appellant

   also wanted to join legal profession. Though, at the time of accident, he was

   studying in school, after school he intended to pursue his studies in law. He, in
6
fact, did law and has joined the legal profession, which fact was placed on

record, as by the time the appellant became a lawyer the case before MACT

was still pending. Further, having regard to affluent family background, the

appellant at the time of accident was studying in prestigious Modern School,

Barakhamba Road, New Delhi. All these circumstances clearly indicated that

the appellant had a bright future and, therefore, his future earnings could not be

considered without keeping in view the aforesaid factors.                In such

circumstances, loss of future earning prospects by treating the future earnings at

the rate of Rs.5000/- only was abysmally low. He also submitted that though in

the review petition filed before the High Court, specific ground to this effect

was taken, it has not even been considered by the High Court.
(ii)   Second submission of Mr. Arun Mohan was a passionate plea aimed at

reforming the system at following levels:
(a)   On-road safety and grant of adequate compensation to the

       victims without any delay. For ensuring expeditious settlement of

       claims, resort to alternate means which may include innovative

       measures.
(b)   Taking   adequate      steps    including    adopting    innovative

       measures, to ensure fast track disposal of cases by MACTs.
(c)   Ensuring receipt of compensation in the safe hands of

       victims and/or kiths and kins of victims, that too over a sustained

       period.
7
10)    Detailed submissions on these aspects and suggestions of Mr. Arun

  Mohan are as under:
"Road Safety and Compensation

       IT is perceived that of road accidents (1,40,000 dead per year and
       5,00,000 injured per year), less than 10% reach the MACT with claims.
       Almost 90% do not have Access to Justice.
And of the 10% or so who do reach MACT, the questions arise:
1.     What is the ‘Cost’ to the State judiciary and insurance sector for
       adjudication of these claims?
2.     What are the time delays?
3.     On what income source do the dependents/injured survive during
       pendency till the payout?
4.     Of the ultimate payout, how much actually reaches the recipients
       and how much is lost?
5.     After, say, five years of receiving the compensation, what actually
       remains with the majority of the recipients?
These were some disturbing questions on a ground level survey.

       Put differently, firstly, as most are poor, there is hardly any access to
       justice; the court resources are wasted; there are delays and difficulties
       and slicing away (cut) from the payout; and little safety for the money
       that is received.
As a Solution to these problems, there are two proposals:
1.     establishing a Motor Accidents Mediation Authority (MAMA) in
       every district;
2.    making it compulsory for the accident investigator to:
(a)    send a copy of his Report to MAMA;
              (b)    send e-mail to National Road Safety Council’s cell
identifying the accident spot and how similar accidents could be
       prevented in future.
MAMA will follow the following procedure:
1.    MAMA will then issue notices to the claimants and others.
2.    interim compensation (with recourse) of few thousand rupees a
       month pending adjudication as direct credit to Aadhaar linked bank
       account;
8
3.      completion of paperwork at MAMA;
4.      mediation proceedings at MAMA;
5.      complete safety in the hands of the recipient.
The amount settled is not given as rupees (or even FDRs), but as Annuity
       Certificates, which have more return for the same value-meaning lesser
       payout by the insurance sector with full receipt by the claimant.”
11)    He further submitted that this Court may consider a direction to the

  Government to frame these procedures and schemes. LIC/RBI can provide for

  availability of Annuity Certificates in consultation with the Pension Fund

  Regulatory and Development Authority and the commercial Banks/insurance

  companies.
12)    To facilitate appreciation and implementation, he gave two flowcharts as

  below:
9
10
13)     In the Flowchart-1 (under the existing law), a direction from this Court is

  sought to all MACTs to compulsorily refer motor accident cases to the District

  Mediation Authority which will serve the purpose till the Government amends

  the Statute. Flowchart - 2 shows where the amended statute and the rules can

  provide for establishing a Motor Accident Mediation Authority (MAMA) in

  every district in the country. He also suggested that rules can provide for every

  accident investigator to send information to : (1) MAMA; and (2) National

  Road Safety Council’s Cell.
14)     Speaking with an optimist tone, Mr. Mohan submitted that there is a hope

  that with a provision for MAMA:
(1)   access to justice will substantially increase;

  (2)   the court costs will reduce;
(3)   insurance sector costs (as payout) will reduce;

  (4)   Annuity Certificates of the payout will nearly eliminate the ‘slicing

  away’; and

  (5)   the actual benefit to the recipients will be far more (with Annuity

  Certificates) than it is at present.
15)     Mr. Salil Paul, learned counsel appearing for the Insurance Company

  advanced his argument on the quantum of compensation based on future

  prospective. His submission was that the yardstick adopted by the courts below

  in fixing the income based on future prospective on the basis of which
11
compensation is given to the appellant is in tune with various judgments

  rendered by this Court as well as the High Court. Therefore, no interference was

  called for, insofar as grant of compensation is concerned. He referred to certain

  judgments in support.
16)       With reference to the second submission of Mr. Arun Mohan, Mr. Salil

  Paul gave a positive response with the plea that since suggestions given by Mr.

  Arun Mohan were in larger public interest for reformation of the system, he had

  no objection if the Court issues appropriate directions in this behalf. At the

  same time, he also pointed out that insofar as speedy disposal of cases and

  payment of compensation to the victims, particularly, young victims are

  concerned, the High Court of Delhi had given directions on the basis of which

  Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure was approved by High Court of Delhi.
Modified version thereof has now been approved as recent as on 7 th December,

  2018 which takes care of the speedy disposal as well as periodical payments to

  be made to the young victims over a period of time. Mr. Salil Paul placed on

  record the relevant judgments as well as Modified Claims Tribunal Agreed

  Procedure approved by the Delhi High Court vide orders dated 7th December,

  2018.
17)       We now proceed to discuss the merits of the aforesaid two proposition

  advanced before us.
(I)     Assessment of Compensation:
12
Admittedly, the appellant was a student studying in a school. He was not

doing any job or was in any vocation and, thus, was not earning anything. The

loss of future earning is to be assessed on the aforesaid basis. Before adverting

to the arguments that are raised by Mr. Arun Mohan and taken note of above, it

would be appropriate to scan through certain judgments cited before us by both

the parties in order to decipher the principles for determining loss of future

earning in such circumstances. First case which we would like to refer is the

judgment in the case of
Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co.

Ltd.
, (2010) 10 SCC 254. In that case also, the appellant who was a victim of

accident, was a student. He was in the final year of engineering which he was

doing from a reputed college. He had a brilliant academic record, having

passed all semester examinations with distinction. In the accident that took

place, the appellant suffered multiple injuries which led to 70% permanent

disability.   This disability rendered him incapacitated which had the

consequence of dashing forever his dream of becoming Mechanical Engineer,

studies for which career he had undertaken. On the aforesaid facts, his future

earning were assessed at Rs.60,000/- per annum by taking salary and

allowances payable to Assistant Engineer in public employment. This future

earning was discounted at 30% on the basis of which multiplicand was taken at

Rs.42,000/- per annum. Going by his age which was 25 years at the time of

accident, multiplier of 18 was applied and on that basis, compensation towards

loss of future earning was assessed at Rs.7,56,0000/-.
13
Second case to which reference is made is
Oriental Insurance Company

Limited v. Deo Patodi & Ors.
, (2009) 13 SCC 123. Here, the victim was a

brilliant student and while a student, he was also earning Rs.80,000/- per month

in a job on part-time basis in the United Kingdom. He had not accepted a job

offered by a US based company at a salary of              Rs.18 lakhs per annum.

However, at the time of accident, he was not working. Accident took place on

June 12, 2003 when he was 22 years of age. He suffered head injuries which

proved fatal and he died within six days i.e. on June 18, 2003.                 While

computing the compensation under the head ‘loss of dependency’ (he was the

only son of the claimant), the Tribunal as well as the High Court held that the

deceased would have earned only Rs.18,000/- per month. This Court, in appeal,

however, considered the aforesaid estimation of income to be on lower side and

the Court decided to fix the earning at Rs.25,000/- per month, which was 1/3rd

of the amount that he was receiving in the United Kingdom. The relevant

discussion in this behalf runs as under:
"8. The question in regard to the calculation of loss of dependency, it is
      trite, would vary from case to case. The fact that the deceased was a
      brilliant student is not in dispute. He had graduated in Business
      Administration in the UK. Even as a student, in a job on a part-time basis
      he was being paid a salary of Rs 80,000 per month (UK £1008.31). He
      paid his income tax even in the UK. After his graduation, he came back
      to India. He was offered a job as EU Controller by GOA LLC, a
      company based in Chicago, USA at an annual salary of Rs 18 lakhs (i.e.
      $41,600). However, when the accident took place he was not working;
      having not accepted the said offer. He was still a student. It would have
      been hazardous for the Tribunal to calculate the amount of compensation
      towards the loss of dependency on that basis.
9. The Tribunal and the High Court, however, in our opinion, keeping in
      view the aforementioned backdrop might not be correct in holding that
14
he would have earned only Rs 18,000 per month. It is true that the cost
of living in the western countries would be higher. The standard of living
in the western countries cannot be followed; in the absence of any
material placed before this Court it should not be followed in India. Even
in a case where the victim of an accident was earning salary in US
dollars, this Court opined that a lower multiplier should be applied.
10.
In
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Patricia Jean Mahajan
[(2002)
6 SCC 281] this Court held: (SCC pp. 294-95, paras 19-20)
  “19. In the present case we find that the parents of the deceased
  were 69/73 years. Two daughters were aged 17 and 19 years. The
  main question, which strikes us in this case is that in the given
  circumstances the amount of multiplicand also assumes relevance.
  The total amount of dependency as found by the learned Single
  Judge and also rightly upheld by the Division Bench comes to
  2,26,297 dollars. Applying multiplier of 10, the amount with
  interest and the conversion rate of Rs 47, comes to Rs 10.38 crores
  and with multiplier of 13 at the conversion rate of Rs 30 the
  amount comes to Rs 16.12 crores with interest. These amounts are
  huge indeed. Looking to the Indian economy, fiscal and financial
  situation, the amount is certainly a fabulous amount though in the
  background of American conditions it may not be so. Therefore,
  where there is so much of disparity in the economic conditions and
  affluence of the two places viz. the place to which the victim
  belongs and the place where the compensation is to be paid, a
  golden balance must be struck somewhere, to arrive at a
  reasonable and fair mesne. Looking by the Indian standards they
  may not be much too overcompensated and similarly not very
  much under compensated as well, in the background of the country
  where most of the dependent beneficiaries reside. Two of the
  dependants, namely, parents aged 69/73 years live in India, but
  four of them are in the United States. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee
  submitted that the amount of multiplicand shall surely be relevant
  and in case it is a high amount, a lower multiplier can
  appropriately be applied. We find force in this submission. …
20. The court cannot be totally oblivious to the realities. The
  Second Schedule while prescribing the multiplier, had maximum
  income of Rs 40,000 p.a. in mind, but it is considered to be a safe
  guide for applying the prescribed multiplier in cases of higher
  income also but in cases where the gap in income is so wide as in
  the present case income is 2,26,297 dollars, in such a situation, it
  cannot be said that some deviation in the multiplier would be
  impermissible. Therefore, a deviation from applying the multiplier
  as provided in the Second Schedule may have to be made in this
  case. Apart from factors indicated earlier the amount of
  multiplicand also becomes a factor to be taken into account which
15
in this case comes to 2,26,297 dollars, that is to say an amount of
           around Rs 68 lakhs per annum by converting it at the rate of Rs 30.
           By Indian standards it is certainly a high amount. Therefore, for
           the purposes of fair compensation, a lesser multiplier can be
           applied to a heavy amount of multiplicand.”
The said decision
, however, to some extent was clarified by this Court in
Punjab National Bank v. Indian Bank
[(2003) 6 SCC 79] .
11. It is in the aforementioned situation, we are of the opinion that the
        fair amount of compensation should have been calculated at Rs 25,000
        per month being about one-third of the amount which he was receiving
        in the UK.”
18)     We may also take note of one judgment of High Court of Delhi in MAC. APP. No.

  135 of 2008 titled
‘New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Ganga Devi & Ors.’
decided on

  November 23, 2009. In that case also, accident resulted in death of the victim, named, Dr.

  Brij Mohan. He was 24 years of age at the time of accident and had completed his

  MBBS. He was doing one year internship and was getting stipend of Rs.5,000/-
per month. The deceased had cleared the UPSC examination for the post of

  Medical Officer and was scheduled to be appointed as Medical Officer after

  completing the internship. Evidence of PW-2, Senior Assistant of the Hospital,

  where the deceased was interning, was produced who deposed that after

  completing his internship, there was a possibility of getting absorbed as Junior

  Resident Doctor in the same hospital at salary of Rs.18,000/- to Rs.20,000/- per

  month.
19)     The Tribunal took the view that the aforesaid evidence was insufficient to

  prove the income. Accordingly, it took the minimum wages of a graduate

  worker as Rs.3,543/- per month and added 50% towards inflation and rise in
16
price index. From this, 1/3rd was deducted towards personal expenses and

  multiplier of 11 was applied to compute the loss of dependency at

  Rs.9,35,352/-. The High Court set aside the order of the Tribunal holding that

  evidence of PW-2 was believable.         On that basis, income was taken at

  Rs.18,000/- per month to which 50% was added towards future prospects,

  following the judgment of this Court in
Sarla Verma v. Delhi Transport

  Corporation
, (2009) 6 SCALE 129. Deduction towards personal expenses was

  made on which multiplier of 13 was applied.
20)     The aforesaid cases are of all those victims who were students at the time

  of accident and were not in actual employment. In addition, Mr. Arun Mohan

  had also referred to the judgment in N. Manjegowda v. Manager, United India

  Insurance Company Limited, (2014) 3 SCC 584, where victim of an accident

  was a young advocate aged about 36 years. In the accident, he sustained whole

  body disability of 50%. This judgment is cited for the purpose of showing

  principle laid down by the Court in determining the loss of earning capacity of

  an advocate who suffers disability in an accident. The Tribunal had assessed

  the loss of future income due to disability at Rs.6,17,500/- per annum. The

  High Court reduced the same to Rs.1,50,000/-. This Court noted that due to the

  said accident, the appellant had suffered partial sensory loss all over his limbs

  and there was lack of proper coordination in all four limbs. He needed an

  assistance for daily routine work. This kind of disability, in the opinion of the

  Court, hindered his ability to practice as an advocate and compete with others in
17
the field of legal profession. He was bound to suffer huge professional loss in

  the said condition. This Court, in the aforesaid circumstances, took the view

  that loss of future income fixed at Rs.6,17,500/- did not require any deduction.

  On the contrary, the loss of earning should be treated as 70% and the

  appropriate multiplier should be 16 in place of 13. On that basis, the loss of

  income due to disability needed enhancement from Rs.6,17,500/- by at least

  Rs.4,00,000/- and the compensation under the head loss of income due to

  disability was worked out accordingly.
21)     It would be also appropriate to take note of certain judgments dealing

  with the assessment of loss of future earnings on account of disability suffered

  as a result of accident, even when these cases pertain to those victims who were

  having their earnings, as these cases would throw light on the general principles

  which were laid down for assessing such a loss.
22)     In the case of
Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar & Anr.
, (2011) 1 SCC 343,

  where the victim suffered 45% disability to left lower limb and permanent

  functional disability of 25%, the Court held that it is a functional disability

  which would be the operative criteria for assessing the loss of future earnings

  and not physical disability.    There is a detailed and lucid discussion of

  assessment of future loss of earning due to permanent disability, covering all

  possible facets and discussing every nuance of the subject matter.         After

  explaining the meaning of permanent disability and contrasting it with

  temporary disability and also the manner in which permanent disability of
18
different limbs expressed by Doctors in the Disability Certificates is to be

interpreted, the Court clarified that the assessment of compensation under the

head of loss of future earnings would depend upon the effect and impact of such

permanent disability on his earning capacity.            The manner in which the

assessment is to be carried out is contained in the following passages in
the said

judgment
:
"12. Therefore, the Tribunal has to first decide whether there is any
      permanent disability and, if so, the extent of such permanent disability.
      This means that the Tribunal should consider and decide with reference
      to the evidence:
(i) whether the disablement is permanent or temporary;
(ii) if the disablement is permanent, whether it is permanent total
      disablement or permanent partial disablement;
(iii) if the disablement percentage is expressed with reference to any
      specific limb, then the effect of such disablement of the limb on the
      functioning of the entire body, that is, the permanent disability suffered
      by the person.
If the Tribunal concludes that there is no permanent disability then there
      is no question of proceeding further and determining the loss of future
      earning capacity. But if the Tribunal concludes that there is permanent
      disability then it will proceed to ascertain its extent. After the Tribunal
      ascertains the actual extent of permanent disability of the claimant based
      on the medical evidence, it has to determine whether such permanent
      disability has affected or will affect his earning capacity.
13. Ascertainment of the effect of the permanent disability on the actual
      earning capacity involves three steps. The Tribunal has to first ascertain
      what activities the claimant could carry on in spite of the permanent
      disability and what he could not do as a result of the permanent disability
      (this is also relevant for awarding compensation under the head of loss of
      amenities of life). The second step is to ascertain his avocation,
      profession and nature of work before the accident, as also his age. The
      third step is to find out whether (i) the claimant is totally disabled from
      earning any kind of livelihood, or (ii) whether in spite of the permanent
      disability, the claimant could still effectively carry on the activities and
      functions, which he was earlier carrying on, or (iii) whether he was
      prevented or restricted from discharging his previous activities and
19
functions, but could carry on some other or lesser scale of activities and
          functions so that he continues to earn or can continue to earn his
          livelihood.
xx           xx            xx
19. We may now summarise the principles discussed above:
(i) All injuries (or permanent disabilities arising from injuries), do not
        result in loss of earning capacity.
(ii) The percentage of permanent disability with reference to the whole
        body of a person, cannot be assumed to be the percentage of loss of
        earning capacity. To put it differently, the percentage of loss of earning
        capacity is not the same as the percentage of permanent disability (except
        in a few cases, where the Tribunal on the basis of evidence, concludes that
        the percentage of loss of earning capacity is the same as the percentage of
        permanent disability).
(iii) The doctor who treated an injured claimant or who examined him
        subsequently to assess the extent of his permanent disability can give
        evidence only in regard to the extent of permanent disability. The loss of
        earning capacity is something that will have to be assessed by the Tribunal
        with reference to the evidence in entirety.
(iv) The same permanent disability may result in different percentages of
        loss of earning capacity in different persons, depending upon the nature of
        profession, occupation or job, age, education and other factors.”
23)       From the conjoint reading of the aforesaid judgments, inter alia, following principles

  can be culled out which would be relevant for deciding the instant appeal:
(i)     In those cases where the victim of the accident is not an earning person but a student,

  while assessing the compensation for loss of future earning, the focus of the examination

  would be the career prospect and the likely earning of such a person in future. For example,

  where the claimant is pursuing a particular professional course, the poseer would be: what

  would have been his income had he joined a service commensurating with the said course.
That can be the future earning.
20
(ii)    There may be cases where the victim is not, at that stage, doing any such course to get

  a particular job. He or she may be studying in a school. In such a case, future career would

  depend upon multiple factors like the family background, choice/interest of the complainant

  to pursue a particular career, facilities available to him/her for adopting such a career, the

  favourable surrounding circumstances to see which would have enabled the claimant to

  successfully pick up the said career etc.

          If the chosen field is employment, then the future earning can be taken on the basis of

  salary and allowances which are payable for such calling. In case, career is a particular

  profession, the future earning would depend on host of other factors on the basis of which

  chances to achieve success in such a profession can be ascertained.
(iii)   There may be cases like Deo Patodi where even a student, the claimant

  would have made earnings on part-time basis or would have received offer for a

  particular job. In such cases, these factors would also assume relevance.
(iv)    After ascertaining the likely earning of the victim in the aforesaid

  manner, the nature of injuries and disability suffered as a result thereof would

  be kept in mind while determining as to how much earning has been affected

  thereby. Here, impact of injuries on functional disability is to be seen. In case

  of death of victim, it would result in total loss of earning. In the case of

  injuries, the nature of disability becomes important. Such an exercise was

  undertaken in N. Manjegowda case.
24)       The relevant factors which are brought on record by the learned senior

  counsel for the appellant are these: the appellant belongs to a family of lawyers

  as both his parents were senior lawyers practicing in the Supreme Court.
21
Because of his family background, the appellant also wanted to join legal

  profession, even though at the time of accident, he was studying in school.

  Having regard to affluent family background, the appellant at the time of

  accident was studying in prestigious Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New

  Delhi. All these circumstances clearly indicated that the appellant had a bright

  future and, therefore, his future earnings could not be considered without

  keeping in view the aforesaid factors. The appellant also produced evidence in

  respect of his disability. This disability does not indicate much loss of prospects

  in earning as it is similar to N. Manjegowda case. Of course, his movements

  are restricted and he needs a Driver as he is not in a position to drive the car

  himself. This would hinder the earning capacity to some extent, though not

  significant extent.
25)     From the judgment of the MACT, we find that, on this aspect, it has

  followed judgment of
Arun Sondhi v. Delhi Transport Corporation
,

  (2001) ACJ 1779 and has awarded the compensation at Rs.4,08,000/-.

  It has also added Rs.75,000/- on account of 40% permanent disability

  on the ground that apart from resulting in loss of income, it has severe

  impact on the life of the appellant as a whole.                     The figure of

  Rs.4,08,000/- is calculated in the following manner:
"42. Learned counsel for petitioner has argued at length that a
        substantial amount of compensation is required to be awarded to the
        petitioner on account of loss of earning capacity in future. It has been
        stated that on account of injuries suffered in the accident the income of
        the petitioner has reduced to 60% of what he could have earned
        otherwise. I consider that this argument raised by learned counsel for the
22
petitioner cannot be accepted. The petitioner was student at the time of
       accident. He started his career after around 5 years of accident. I do not
       say that the injuries did not have an adverse impact on the petitioner, but
       to quantify the same in the manner claimed by the petitioner may not be
       just.
In this regard, I consider that the guidance can be taken from the
       case of
Arun Sondhi v. Delhi Transport Corporation
, 2001 ACJ 1779.
       In this case, the injured was a student of 21 years and he had suffered
       disability of 100%. In L.P.A. the loss of future earning was assessed at
       Rs.5000/- p.m. and after adopting multiplier of 16 compensation of
       Rs.10,80,000/- was allowed. If the same principle is adopted and future
       earning is taken at Rs.5000/- p.m. and the disability of 40%, the monthly
       loss of income comes to Rs.2000/- p.m. or Rs.24,000/- p.a. It is a settled
       proposition that in the case of permanent disability the multiplier is to be
       adopted according to the age at the time of trial. In this case adopting
       this principle if the multiplier of 17 is adopted the compensation on
       account of loss of future income comes to Rs.24,000/- x 17 =
       Rs.4,08,000/-.”
26)    As can be seen from the above, loss of future earning is assessed

  at Rs.2,000/- per month or Rs.24,000/- per annum. In the process, the

  MACT has not considered future prospects having regard to the relevant

  facts pointed out above which should have been taken into

  consideration. At the same time, it is the functional disability which has

  to be kept in mind. Though, not very seriously, the functional capacity

  has been impaired because of the disability suffered by the appellant as

  the appellant cannot run around like other young advocates of his age.
Going by the overall circumstances, we are of the opinion that in case of

  the appellant, loss of future earning can be fixed at Rs.5,000/- per month

  i.e. Rs.60,000/- per annum on which multiplier of 18 is to be applied.

  Calculated in this manner, the loss future earning comes to

  Rs.10,80,000/-.     The appellant, thus, would be paid another sum of

  Rs.6,54,000/- under this head along with interest as awarded by the
23
Court below. We may place on record the statement of Mr. Arun Mohan

  that the appellant has volunteered to give this amount to any

  Government or public charitable organisation working towards road

  safety. We appreciate this gesture of the appellant. We leave it to the

  appellant to donate the amount to any particular organisation of his

  choice.     Alternatively, it can also be given for MAMC project by the

  appellant. Choice would entirely be that the appellant.
(II)   With this, we advert to the second proposition advanced by Mr. Arun Mohan. At the

  outset, we would like to point out that this aspect pertains to the reforms that can be brought

  insofar as payment of compensation to the victims of road accidents is concerned. We would

  also like to commend the suggestions given by Mr. Arun Mohan to bring about such reforms

  which are visionary in nature. The two aspects which he has highlighted are taken up for

  discussion in seriatim.
(A)    ROAD SAFETY AND COMPENSATION:

27)      Focus here is to ensure access to justice for road accident victims and also to bring
about a mechanism which prevents delays and other obstacles in awarding compensation to

  road accident victims. The suggestion of Mr. Arun Mohan for establishing a MAMA in every

  District is worthy of acceptance. Whatever steps are taken by the authorities for reducing

  road accidents, harsh reality is that accidents would keep on happening. There may be a

  possibility of reducing the number of road accidents, but occurrence thereof cannot be

  totally eliminated. Such accidents, particularly fatal accidents, would always lead to filing of

  claims by the victims and/or kith and kin of victims, for compensation. Fatal accidents also

  trigger prosecution of the driver who was negligent and rash in driving which caused the

  accident. Insofar as disputes regarding claims are concerned, there is a need to resolve the
24
same at the earliest inasmuch as compensation money may be badly needed by the claimants

  for so many reasons and delay may bring insurmountable sufferings of various kind. Having

  regard to the fact that large number of accidents are giving rise to phenomenal quantum jump

  in such cases, methods need to be adopted for quick resolution. Here, mediation as a concept

  of dispute resolution, even before dispute becomes part of adversarial adjudicatory process,

  would be of great significance.      Advantages of mediation are manifold.       This stands

  recognised by the Legislature as well as policy makers and need no elaboration. Mediation is

  here to stay. It is here to evolve. It is because of the advantages of mediation as a method

  here to find new grounds. It is here to prosper, as its time has come. It is now finding

  statutory recognition and has been introduced in few Statutes as well. Examples are the

  Companies Act, Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, Commercial Courts Act etc. In these

  enactments provisions are made even for pre-litigation mediation by making this process

  mandatory. There is, in any case, umbrella provisions in the form of
Section 89
of the Code

  of Civil Procedure which, inter alia, provides for court annexed mediation as well. Time is

  ripe now to have similar mechanism for settling accident claims as well. Therefore, the

  suggestion of establishing MAMA is laudable. We recommend to the Government to

  examine the feasibility of setting up MAMA by making necessary amendments in the
Motor

  Vehicles Act
itself. In fact, the way mediation movement is catching up in this country, there

  is a dire need to enact Indian Mediation Act as well.
28)      Till the time such an amendment is made by the Parliament, National Legal Services

  Authority (NALSA) should take up this work as a project. A complete report/module be

  made about the functioning of Motor Accident Mediation Cell (MAMC). This exercise be

  completed within a period of two months. Thereafter, this project can be shared with all

  State Legal Services Authorities (SLSA) so that State Legal Services Authorities implement

  the same through their respective District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs).
25
29)       There is Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee (M
CPC
) in the Supreme

  Court which takes various policy decisions for better working of mediation, including court

  annexed mediation. Broadening the structure of M
CPC
, so as to have proper coordination

  with High Court Mediation Centers as well as Mediation Centers at District Court Level is

  achieved. Thus, NALSA can even consider entrusting the project of MAMC to M
CPC
as

  well.
30)       In a book titled ‘Road Accidents: Prevention, Attention and Compensation’, authored

  by Mr. Arun Mohan, Senior Advocate various aspects pertaining to access to justice to road

  victims are deliberated upon. There is a specific chapter on the establishment of MAMA

  which can be of immense help to the NALSA for preparing and finalizing the project.

  NALSA would be well-advised to take into consideration the suggestions and proposals

  given in that book. It may, inter alia, make a provision for the accident investigator to

  compulsorily send a copy of report to MAMC or email to National Road Safety Council.

  Forwarding the copy to MAMC shall facilitate mediation, on the other hand giving

  information to National Road Safety Council would help the council to take measures for

  preventing such accidents in future.
(B)     FAST TRACKING DISPOSAL OF CASES BY MACTs :

31)       Establishment of MAMA/MAMC is for the purpose of resolving the claims before the
case is filed in the MACT. It is a matter of common knowledge that for amicable settlement

  of the cases pending before MACT, ADR in the form of Lok Adalat is resorted to, which has

  achieved tremendous success over a period of time. These Lok Adalats are also organised by

  the Legal Services Authorities. Settlement of cases by Lok Adalats have their own pros and

  cons. Be as it may, resort to Lok Adalat should continue because of its own advantages.
26
32)      Notwithstanding, the aforesaid ADR methods, adjudicatory process before the

  MACTs is indispensable. There cannot be a guarantee that 100% cases would be settled

  through mediation or Lok Adalat. Therefore, there is a dire need for deciding these cases

  without delays and within reasonable period.        The Delhi High Court has given few

  judgments providing for mechanism to speed up the disposal of such cases and to ensure that

  schemes are settled within a period of 90/120 days from the date of accident. In nutshell,

  these directions include that on the occurrence of accident, the police which comes into the

  picture in the first instance, should complete the investigation and along with filing of FIR

  before the concerned Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, copies are sent to MACT as well as

  Insurance Company also. Insurance Company is supposed to look into the same to find out

  as to whether the claim is payable and within 30 days it should respond to MACT and once

  all these documents are before the MACT in the form of evidence etc. as well it would enable

  the MACT to decide the case within 30 days. The case where entire procedure is articulated

  is judgment dated 16th December, 2009 in FAO No. 843 of 2003. This Court has also given

  its imprimatur in
Jaiprakash v. National Insurance Company (SLP(Civil) No.
11801-11804

  of 2005) in its order dated 13th May, 2016 in the following manner:
"Insofar as the said suggestion is concerned, learned Solicitor General
         drew our attention to the response filed before us on behalf of the
         General Insurance Council, in particular paragraph 4, which states that
         presently the procedure suggested in Paragraph 23 is being followed by
         the Insurance Companies in Delhi by way of a Scheme called "Claims
         Tribunal Agreed Procedure" which was formulated by the Delhi High
         Court in the judgment dated 16.12.2009 passed in FAO No.843 of 2003
         in
Rajesh Tyagi & Ors. v. Jaibir Singh
3 & Ors. It is also mentioned
         therein that Tribunal as well as the Legal Service Authority are taking
         effective steps to implement the said procedure, which is being carried
         out in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. In paragraph 5, it is further
         submitted that since this procedure has been successful in Delhi it can be
         extended on pan India basis. The agreed procedure has also been filed as
         Annexure R5 with the response filed on behalf of the General Insurance
         Council.
“We have also perused the procedure, which has been placed
            before us as Annexure R5 with the response which, in our view,
27
appears to be a comprehensive one and that we can issue further
           directions to the Registrar General of the Delhi High Court to
           ensure that procedure is strictly followed insofar as Delhi is
           concerned and also circulate the said procedure to all the other
           High Courts and the Registrar General of all the other High Courts
           are directed to ensure that the said procedure is implemented
           through the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals in coordination
           with the Legal Service Authorities as well as the Director General
           of Police of the States concerned.
The Registry of the Supreme Court is directed to forward a copy of this
        order along with Annexure R5 (pages 32 to 46 in the response filed on
        behalf of the General Insurance Council) to all the High Courts including
        the Delhi High Court to ensure compliance of the present order.”
33)     Vide order dated 6th November, 2017 in
Jaiprakash
case, this Court

  modified its order dated 13th May, 2016 and directed all States to implement the

  Modified Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure formulated by Delhi High Court

  on 12th December, 2014. The copy of the Modified Claims Tribunal Agreed

  Procedure was directed to be circulated to the Registrar General of each High

  Court for necessary compliance.         The relevant part of the said order is

  reproduced hereunder:
"It is also pointed out by learned amicus curiae that the order passed by
        Justice Midha referred to in our order of 13th May, 2016 was actually
        modified by Justice Midha on 12th December, 2014. The order dated
        13th May, 2016 will, therefore, stand modified to the extent that Justice
        Midha has himself modified his earlier order on 12th December, 2014.
        The Registry will send a copy of this order as well as the order passed by
        Justice Midha on 12th December, 2014 to the Registrar General of each
        High Court for necessary information and compliance.”
34)     This needs to be followed at All India Level. NALSA should take up and

  monitor the same as well in coordination and cooperation with various high

  courts to facilitate the same.
28
(C) Ensuring receipt of compensation in the safe hands of victims and/or

kiths and kins of victims:
35)      Mr. Arun Mohan has suggested that Government may frame procedures

      and schemes in this behalf. In particular LIC/RBI can provide for availability

      of annuity services in consultation with Pension Fund Regulatory and

      Development Authority and the commercial banks/insurance companies. To

      facilitate the same, the learned senior counsel has given two flowcharts, one

      under the existing law and the other on establishment of MAMA. The details

      for framing such procedure and schemes are given in the book of Mr. Arun

      Mohan
referred to above
. We impress upon the Government to look into the

      feasibility of framing such schemes and for the availability of annuity

      certificates. This exercise may be done within the period of six months and

      decision be taken thereupon.
36)      In addition, we would also like to mention that the Delhi High Court

      (speaking through J.R. Midha, J.) in Rajesh Tyagi v. Jaiveer Singh and Others

      (FAO No. 842 of 2003) undertook the exercise of framing Motor Accident

      Claims Annuity Deposit Scheme (MACAD Scheme) in cooperation with Indian

      Banks Association. Purpose of involving the banks was to ensure that the

      Scheme is implemented through the banks. In its order dated 7 th December,

      2018 passed in the aforesaid case, the learned Judge recorded that 21 banks had

      taken decision to implement MACAD Scheme which was approved by the

      Court on 1st May, 2018. Operative documents of these 21 banks were taken on
29
record. The court directed that sets of these operative documents be furnished

to the Registrar General of the High Court so that these are circulated to all the

MACTs. Further, directions for implementation of the said Scheme are given.
Therefore, we would like to reproduce order dated 7th December, 2018 in its

entirety.
"1. Mr. Lalit Bhasin, learned counsel for Indian Bank Association has
      handed over copies of the operative documents of 21 Banks which have
      implemented Motor Accident Claims Annuity Deposit Scheme
      (MACAD Scheme) approved by this Court on 01st May, 2018. The
      compilations of the operative documents of 21 banks are taken on
      record. Learned counsel for the Indian Bank Association shall furnish the
      sets of the operative documents to the Registrar General for being
      circulated to all the Claims Tribunals. 2. The Registrar General is
      directed to circulate the aforesaid compilation to all the Claims Tribunals
      for being implemented forthwith. The Claims Tribunals shall disburse
      the awarded amount to the claimants in a phased manner in terms of the
      order dated 01st May, 2018 and the award amount be disbursed through
      MACAD Scheme. 3. All the Banks are directed to appoint a Nodal
      Officer within four weeks. Learned counsel for the IBA shall compile the
      list of all the Nodal Officers of the Banks with their respective addresses,
      phone numbers as well as e-mail addresses and submit the same to the
      Registrar General who shall circulate the list of Nodal Officers to all the
      Claims Tribunals. The Nodal Officer of each Bank shall ensure the
      implementation of the MACAD Scheme by their branches. The Claims
      Tribunal shall send the copy of the disbursement order by e-mail to the
      Nodal Officer of that Bank who shall ensure the disbursement by the
      Bank within three weeks of the receipt of the e-mail. 4. The Indian Bank
      Association and Delhi State Legal Services Authority shall give adequate
      publicity to MACAD Scheme in the print as well as digital media. 5.
      Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure in terms of the order dated 15th
      December, 2017 is further modified to incorporate the directions
      contained in orders dated 18th January, 2018, 09th March, 2018, 01st
      May, 2018, 20th July, 2018 and 07th September, 2018. The Modified
      Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure is annexed to this order. 6. The
      Registrar General shall circulate the Modified Claims Tribunal Agreed
      Procedure to all the Claims Tribunals. The Claims Tribunals, Delhi
      Police and Insurance Companies are directed to implement the Modified
      Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure with effect from 01st January, 2019.
7. Learned amicus curiae submits that the Committee is deliberating
      upon the issues referred to it by this Court. Let the final report of the
      Committee be submitted before this Court on the next date of hearing. 8.
      List for reporting compliance on 08th February, 2019 at 02:30 P.M. 9.
30
This Court appreciates the assistance rendered by Mr. Lalit Bhasin,
        learned counsel for Indian Bank Association for implementation of
        MACAD Scheme. 10. Copy of this order along with Modified Claims
        Tribunal Agreed Procedure be sent to the Registrar General of this Court,
        National Legal Services Authority (NALSA), Delhi State Legal Services
        Authority (DSLSA), Delhi Police as well as General Insurance Council
        (5th Floor, Building No.14, National Insurance Building, Jamshedji Tata
        Road, Churchgate, Mumbai-400020). General Insurance Council shall
        circulate this order to all the Insurance Companies. 11. Copy of this
        order be given dasti to learned counsel for the parties as well as learned
        counsel for IBA and Delhi Police under signature of Court Master.”
37)     Thus, direction for implementation of the ‘Claims Tribunal Agreed

  Procedure’ which is substituted by modified procedure, as noted above, are

  already there. However, we find that there is no proper implementation thereof

  by the Claims Tribunals. We, thus, direct that there should be programmes from

  time to time, in all State Judicial Academies to sensitizing the presiding officers

  of the Claims Tribunals, Senior Police Officers of the State Police as well as

  Insurance Company for the implementation of the said Procedure.
38)     The Modified Claims Tribunal Agreed Procedure as approved by High

  Court of Delhi in its aforesaid order dated 7th December, 2018 has the

  propensity to ensure speedy disposal of MACT cases.             Likewise, Operative

  Documents of 21 documents which have implemented Annuity Deposit Scheme

  can ensure that compensation is delivered to the persons for whom it is meant.
It has the element of annuity payments as well. There is, therefore, a need to

  implement the MACAD Scheme by the Claims Tribunals in the entire country.

  We direct accordingly. We also direct 21 banks to implement its operative

  documents on All India basis.
31
39)     We sum up the various directions/recommendations hereinbelow:
(a)   We impress upon the Government to also consider the feasibility of

  enacting Indian Mediation Act to take care of various aspects of

  mediation in general.
(b)   The Government may examine the feasibility of setting up MAMA

  by making necessary amendments in the
Motor Vehicles Act
. For this

  purpose, it can consider the two flow charts given by the appellant.
(c)   In the interregnum, NALSA is directed to set up Motor Accident

  Mediation Cell which can function independently under the aegis of

  NALSA or can be handed over to M
CPC
. Such a project should be

  prepared within a period of two months and it should start functioning

  immediately thereafter at various levels as suggested in this judgment.
We reiterate the directions contained in order dated November 6, 2017

  in
Jai Prakash
case for implementation of the latest Modified Claims

  Tribunal Agreed Procedure. For ensuring such implementation, NALSA

  is directed to take up the same in coordination and cooperation with

  various High Courts.    MACAD Scheme shall be implemented by all

  Claim Tribunals on All India basis. 21 Banks, Members of Indian Banks

  Assocation, who had taken decision to implement MACAD Scheme

  would do the same on All India basis.
(d)   We impress upon the Government to look into the feasibility of

  framing necessary schemes and for the availability of annuity
32
certificates. This exercise may be done within the period of six months

    and decision be taken thereupon.
(e)   Likewise, we direct that there should be programmes from time to

    time, in all State Judicial Academies, to sensitizing the Presiding Officers

    of the Claims Tribunals, Senior Police Officers of the State Police as well

    as Insurance Company for the implementation of the said Procedure.
40)     The appeals are disposed of in the aforesaid manner.
.............................................J.
                                                                            (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                .............................................J.
                                                             (S. ABDUL NAZEER)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 05, 2019