[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Prakash Singh vs Union Of India on 13 March, 2019
Author:
Ranjan Gogoi
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
L. Nageswara Rao
,
Ranjan Gogoi
1


                                                                  NON­REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                          I.A. NO.24616 OF 2019

                                                     IN

                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.310 OF 1996


                      PRAKASH SINGH & ORS.                        …PETITIONER(S)/
                                                                   APPLICANT(S)
                                                  VERSUS

                      UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                       … RESPONDENT(S)
                                                WITH
                              I.A.NO. 115064/2018, I.A.NO. 20735/2019,
                                         I.A.NO.11484/2019

                                                JUDGMENT
RANJAN GOGOI, CJI

                      I.A. NO.24616 OF 2019
1.         On an earlier occasion, this Court had the occasion

                      to deal with another application for clarification of this Court’s

                      order dated 3rd July, 2018 [i.e. I.A. No.144172 of 2018] though
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
in a different context. While passing the order on the said I.A.
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2019.03.13
15:30:48 IST
on 16.1.2019, this Court referring to the principles underlying
Reason:
the judgment of this Court in
Prakash Singh & Ors. vs.
2
Union of India & Ors.1
had specifically noticed the relevant

directions issued under
Article 142
of the Constitution of

India, which are in the following terms:
“Selection and minimum tenure of DGP.
(2) The Director General of Police of the
               State shall be selected by the State
               Government from amongst the three
               seniormost officers of the Department who
               have been empanelled for promotion to
               that rank by the Union Public Service
               Commission on the basis of their length of
               service, very good record and range of
               experience for heading the police force.
And, once he has been selected for the
               job, he should have a minimum tenure of
               at least two years irrespective of his date
               of superannuation. The DGP may,
               however, be relieved of his responsibilities
               by the State Government acting in
               consultation with the State Security
               Commission consequent upon any action
               taken against him under the All India
               Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules or
               following his conviction in a court of law
               in a criminal offence or in a case of
               corruption, or if he is otherwise
               incapacitated    from    discharging     his
               duties.”
2.           Thereafter this Court took note of the fact that

different States have enacted their respective Police Acts

and/or have carried out further amendments in their
1 (2006) 8 SCC 1
3
respective Police Acts. However, all such amendments did not

wholly follow the dictum
laid down by
this court in
Prakash

Singh
(supra). This had led to filing of writ petition (i.e. Writ

Petition (Civil) No.286 of 2013 challenging the validity of the

provisions of Police Acts enacted by different States.
3.         Primary ground of challenge in Writ Petition (Civil)

No.286 of 2013 is that the enactments are not in tune or

rather negate the directions of this Court in
Prakash Singh
(supra).
4.         The present application (I.A. No.24616 of 2019) has

been   filed   by   the   applicants/petitioners   for   adequate

clarification of the directions contained in the order dated 3 rd

July, 2018, (passed in I.A. No.25307 of 2018 in Writ Petition

No.310 of 1996) which are extracted below. Specifically, the

directions in clauses (e) and (f) have been argued to be

necessary to be clarified by this Court.
“(a) All the States shall send their proposals
           in anticipation of the vacancies to the Union
           Public Service Commission, well in time at
           least three months prior to the date of
4
retirement of the incumbent on the post of
Director General of Police;
(b) The Union Public Service Commission
shall prepare the panel as per the directions
of this Court in the judgment in Prakash
Singh’s case(supra) and intimate to the
States;
(c) The State shall immediately appoint one
of the persons from the panel prepared by
the Union Public Service Commission;
(d) None of the States shall ever conceive of
the idea of appointing any person on the
post of Director General of Police on acting
basis for there is no concept of acting
Director General of Police as per the
decision in Prakash Singh’s case(supra);
(e) An endeavour has to be made by all
concerned to see that the person who
was selected and appointed as the
Director General of Police continues
despite his date of superannuation.
However, the extended term beyond the
date of superannuation should be a
reasonable period. We say so as it has
been brought to our notice that some of
the States have adopted a practice to
appoint the Director General of Police on
the last date of retirement as a
consequence of which the person
continues for two years after his date of
superannuation. Such a practice will not
be in conformity with the spirit of the
direction.
(f) Our direction No.(c) should be
considered by the Union Public Service
5
Commission to mean that the persons
            are to be empanelled, as far as
            practicable, from amongst the people
            within the zone of consideration who
            have got clear two years of service. Merit
            and seniority should be given due
            weightage.
(g) Any legislation/rule framed by any of the
            States or the Central Government running
            counter to the direction shall remain in
            abeyance to the aforesaid extent.”
                                  [emphasis supplied)
5.          The grievance raised by the applicants/petitions is

two­fold.
To do away with the practice of States appointing the

Director General of Police on the last date of the normal

tenure of an incumbent “so as to ensure that such

incumbents get extended term of two years in view of the

directions of this Court contained in
Prakash Singh
(supra)”

clarifications were issued by this court by order dated 3 rd July,

2018 in paragraph (e) and (f), quoted above.                  The said

directions do not seem to have ended the controversy

inasmuch      as    it   is      now       the   grievance    of   the

applicants/petitioners        that   the     Union   Public    Service

Commission while empanelling officers for consideration for
6
appointment to the post of Director General of Police is

considering the minimum residual tenure required to be taken

into account as two years. In the process, according to the

applicant, many suitable and eligible officers are being left

out.
6.        Having read and considered the decision of this

court in
Prakash Singh
(supra) we are of the view that what

was emphasized in
Prakash Singh
(supra) is a minimum

tenure of two years for an incumbent once he is appointed as

the Director General of Police. The direction issued by this

Court neither contemplated the appointment of a Director

General of Police on the eve of his retirement nor the practice

now adopted by the Union Public Service Commission in

making the empanelment, i.e. empanelling officers who have

at least two years of tenure.
7.        Neither of the aforesaid practice, in our considered

view, can further the directions of this Court in
Prakash

Singh
(supra) or give impetus to what this Court had in mind

in issuing the directions in
Prakash Singh
(supra), namely,

that the appointment of a Director General of Police in a State
7
should be purely on the basis of merit and to insulate the said

office from all kinds of influences and pressures, once

appointed the incumbent should get a minimum tenure of two

years of service irrespective of his date of superannuation.
8.        Neither       this   Court      had     contemplated

recommendation for appointment of officers who are on the

verge of retirement or appointment of officers who have a

minimum residual tenure of two years. The emphasis was to

select the best and to ensure a minimum tenure of two years’

service of such officer who is to be selected and appointed.

The Police Acts enacted also do not contemplate any fixed

residual tenure for an officer to be recommended for

appointment as the Director General of Police of a State.
In

the above conspectus the object in issuing the directions in
Prakash Singh
(supra), in our considered view, can best be

achieved if the residual tenure of an officer i.e. remaining

period of service till normal retirement, is fixed on a

reasonable basis, which, in our considered view, should be a

period of six months.
8
9.         This will take care of any possible action on the part

of the State Government which can be viewed by any quarter

as an act of favouritism. Recommendations for appointment

of the Director General of Police on the eve of retirement of the

incumbent or of the Union Public Service Commission in

embarking upon a course of action which may have the effect

of overlooking efficient and eligible officers will stand obviated

by the above direction which we had deemed to be fit and

proper to issue.
10.        We, therefore, clarify the order of this Court dated

3rd July, 2018 passed in I.A. No.25307 of 2018 in Writ Petition

No.310    of   1996   to   mean     that   recommendation      for

appointment to the post of Director General of Police by the

Union Public Service Commission and preparation of panel

should be purely on the basis of merit from officers who have

a minimum residual tenure of six months i.e. officers who

have at least six months of service prior to the retirement.
11.        The above direction, naturally, will hold the field

until the validity of the Police Acts in force which provides to
9
the contrary are examined and dealt with by this Court in Writ

Petition (Civil) No.286 of 2013.
12.        All the Interlocutory Applications are disposed of in

terms of the above.
………………………., CJI
                                          [RANJAN GOGOI]


                                        ………………………….,J
                                        [L. NAGESWARA RAO]


                                        ………………………….,J
                                          [SANJIV KHANNA]

NEW DELHI
MARCH 13, 2019