[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs Kewal Krishan on 21 June, 2023
Author:
B.V. Nagarathna
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
1


                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE      SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL     APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2128/2014



                         STATE OF PUNJAB                                ..APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         KEWAL KRISHAN                                 ..RESPONDENT(S)


                                             J U D G M E N T
1.     Counsel for the appellant is present. None

                         has appeared for the respondent.                The office has

                         submitted a report that notice has been served on

                         the   sole    respondent,       yet    no     one   has    entered

                         appearance on his behalf.
2.     We    have     heard   Mr.     Mohit    Siwach,    learned

                         counsel for the appellant.
3.     This appeal assails the judgment and order

                         of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana (for short

                         the   High    Court)    dated       01.05.2012      rendered    in

                         Criminal     Appeal    No.    372     of    2002,   whereby    the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet Kaur
Date: 2023.06.27
judgment and order of the trial Court convicting
11:58:37 IST
Reason:
and   sentencing      the     respondent      (Kewal      Krishan)

                         under
Section 302
, IPC has been set aside and the
2
appellant (respondent herein) has been acquitted

of the charges for which he was tried.
4.       The prosecution case rests on evidence in

respect of following circumstances:
(a) The deceased was last seen alive in his own

house in the company of the accused at about 7.00

p.m. on 10.12.1998 by PW-2.
(b)   Dead   body      of   the   deceased   with    multiple

injuries was found in his house by PW-6, nephew of

the deceased, on 12.12.1998 at around 1.00 pm.
(c) Autopsy conducted on 12.12.1998, at about 4.15

pm, reflected that death of the deceased could

have occurred within two days, as a result of

shock and haemorrhage, due to ante mortem incised

wounds.
(d)   Accused     made      an   extra-judicial     confession

before    P.W-3   on     25.12.1998    and   was   thereafter

handed over to the police on the same day.
(e) Accused made a disclosure to the police on

25.12.1998 with regard to the place where he hid

the knife used in the crime, which led to the

recovery of a Khanjar (knife) (Ex.P-1).
(f) The autopsy surgeon opined that the incised

wounds found on deceased’s body could have been

caused by use of that Khanjar.
3
5.          The trial Court found those circumstances

proved      and    forming     a    chain      so   complete      as   to

conclusively indicate that it was the accused and

no one else who committed the murder and thus

convicted and sentenced the accused accordingly.
6.          Aggrieved by his conviction, the accused

went in appeal to the High Court.
7.          The High Court noticed that the accused in

his statement under
section 313
of the Code of

Criminal          Procedure,        1973       had      denied         the

incriminating circumstances appearing against him

in the prosecution evidence and had claimed that

he    was    arrested    on    12.12.1998           itself   on   false

implication.         Thereafter,         the   High    Court,     on     a

careful        analysis        of        the        evidence,      more

particularly the statement made by PW-2 that on

13.12.1998 he had disclosed to the police about

the involvement of the accused, doubted the date

of arrest of the appellant (i.e., 25.12.1998), as

set up by the prosecution, and opined that the

statement of PW-2 probabilizes the claim of the

accused that he was arrested on 12.12.1998 itself.

The High Court found PW-2’s evidence of last seen

not    convincing      and    reliable         inasmuch      as   if    on

13.12.1998 PW-2 had informed the police about his

suspicion in respect of the involvement of the

accused,       the    police       would       have    arrested        the
4
accused forthwith and not waited till 25.12.1998.

But the record indicated that the name of the

accused    came      to   light   for     the    first      time    on

25.12.1998. In these circumstances, the High Court

found PW-2 unreliable, as being a witness who was

set up later. Otherwise also, the High Court found

that last seen circumstance did not conclusively

point     towards     the    guilt      of      the    accused      by

excluding      all    hypotheses        consistent         with    his

innocence, inasmuch as there was a huge time gap

between the date and time when the deceased was

last    seen   in    the    company     of    the     accused      and

discovery of deceased’s dead body. Further, the

High Court took note of the circumstance that the

autopsy     conducted       on    12.12.1998          at   4.15     pm

indicated      occurence     of    rigor      mortis       on     lower

limbs,    which      suggested     that      death     could      have

occurred within 30 hours of the autopsy, thereby

throwing open the possibility of death occurring

much later than at 7.00 pm on 10.11.1998, when the

deceased was allegedly seen in the company of the

accused. Taking note of the above and bearing in

mind that the accused did not reside with the

deceased and no evidence was led that except the

accused no one else could have entered the house

of the deceased in the interregnum, the last seen

circumstance was found inconclusive.
5
8.     In respect of the circumstance of recovery

of the knife, the High Court, firstly, doubted the

date of arrest, as noticed above,                 and,   secondly,



noticed that there was no serologist report to

ascertain whether the knife was stained with human

blood as to connect it with the crime.
9.     The   High    Court     also     discarded        the   extra

judicial confession on the ground that there was

no cogent explanation set out in the prosecution

evidence   to    demonstrate     as     to    why    the    accused

would make a confession to P.W.3, particularly,

when the accused had no significant relationship

with PW-3 and PW-3 could not have helped him. The

extra judicial confession was also doubted on the

ground that the date of arrest of the accused

(i.e., 25.12.1998) appeared doubtful, inasmuch as

there was a high probability of the accused being

arrested earlier i.e., 12.12.1998, as claimed by

him,   because     from    the       statement      of     PW-2   it

appeared that the police was informed by him on

13.12.1998      itself    in   respect       of    his   suspicion

regarding the involvement of the accused.
10.    After a thorough analysis of the evidence

as highlighted above, the High Court found that,

firstly, the incriminating circumstances were not

proved beyond reasonable doubt and, secondly, they
6
did    not    constitute          a        chain       so       complete    as   to

conclusively indicate that it was the accused and

no     one    else        who,        in    all        human        probability,

committed the crime. Consequently, the High Court

set    aside        the       order        of    the        trial    Court       and

acquitted the accused of the charge.
11.      Learned counsel for the State (appellant)

has submitted that there was no proven enmity of

the     witnesses             with         the        accused.        In     these

circumstances, there was no occasion for the High

Court to doubt the testimony of the prosecution

witnesses           in        respect           of        the     incriminating

circumstances laid out by the prosecution. In such

a situation there was no justification to reverse

the conviction recorded by the trial Court. It was

argued       that    the       deceased          was       last     seen    alive,

having liquor with the accused, in the evening of

10.12.1998 and thereafter the deceased was not

seen     alive           by     anyone.              The        autopsy    report

probabilizes death of the deceased at around the

same time when he was last seen in the company of

the accused.             In these circumstances, the burden

was on the accused to prove as to when he left

company       of     the       deceased.             In     absence       whereof,

coupled        with           other        circumstances,              accused’s

conviction          was       justified.             Therefore,       the     High

Court fell in error by setting aside the judgment
7
of the trial Court and acquitting the respondent.
12.     We have considered the submissions of the

learned counsel for the appellant and have perused

the record carefully.
13.     Before     we     proceed     further,     it    would    be

apposite to notice the law as to when it would be

appropriate for this Court, exercising power under
Article    136
of     the   Constitution       of    India,    to

interfere with an order of acquittal passed by the

High Court while reversing an order of conviction

recorded    by    the    Trial   Court.     The    law    in    this

regard is well settled. Normally, this Court is

reluctant to interfere with an order of acquittal.

But when it appears that the High Court has on an

absolutely       wrong    process      of   reasoning      and     a

legally erroneous and perverse approach to the

facts of the case and ignoring some of the most

vital   facts,     acquitted      the    respondent       and    the

order of acquittal passed by the High Court has

resulted in a grave and substantial miscarriage of

justice, extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article

136
of the Constitution of India may rightfully be

exercised (See :
State of U.P. v. Sahai
, (1982) 1

SCC 352).
14.
In
State of M.P. v. Paltan Mallah
, (2005) 3

SCC 169 reiterating the same view it was observed:
“8……..     This    being   an     appeal    against
8
acquittal, this Court would be slow in

      interfering        with     the      findings       of    the

      High    Court,     unless        there       is   perverse

      appreciation        of       the       evidence         which

      resulted      in      serious          miscarriage        of

      justice and if the High Court has taken

      a plausible view this Court would not

      be    justified       in    interfering           with    the

      acquittal     passed         in        favour      of     the

      accused and if two views are possible

      and the High Court had chosen one view

      which is just and reasonable, then also

      this     Court      would         be       reluctant       to

      interfere with the judgment of the High

      Court.”
15.
In a recent decision rendered by this Court

in
Basheera Begam v. Mohd. Ibrahim
, (2020) 11 SCC

174, it was observed:
“190. ………..Reversal of a judgment and

      order    of   conviction             and    acquittal      of

      the    accused     should        not       ordinarily      be

      interfered            with             unless            such

      reversal/acquittal               is        vitiated        by

      perversity. In other words, the court

      might reverse an order of acquittal if

      the court finds that no person properly

      instructed       in        law       could    have       upon
9
analysis           of     the     evidence         on    record

      found the accused to be “not guilty”.”
16.        In light of the law noticed above, we would

have to examine, firstly, whether the High Court

ignored or misread any material piece of evidence

which      has     resulted        in    miscarriage           of    justice;

secondly, whether there is any perversity in the

appreciation of evidence; and, thirdly, whether

the view taken by the High Court is a plausible

view.
17.        This     is      a    case    based      on    circumstantial

evidence.        It    is       trite    law      that    to    convict      an

accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence,

the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt

each of the incriminating circumstances on which

it proposes to rely; the circumstance(s) relied

upon must be of a definite tendency unerringly

pointing towards accused’s guilt and must form a

chain so far complete that there is no escape from

the conclusion that within all human probability

it    is    the       accused      and       no    one    else       who   had

committed the crime and they (it) must exclude all

other hypothesis inconsistent with his guilt and

consistent with his innocence.
18.        In the instant case, we notice from the

record that the dead body of the deceased, lying

in    a    naked      condition         in   his    house,          was   first
10
discovered by PW-6, nephew of the deceased, on

12.12.1998 at around 1.00 pm. Upon discovery of

the dead body, on the information provided by PW-

6, FIR was registered against unknown accused and

inquest etc. was carried out. What is important is

that the name of the accused did not surface on

the record till 25.12.1998, that is when he was

allegedly handed over to the police by PW-3 upon a

confession made by him before PW-3. PW-2, the sole

witness      of    the     last    seen       circumstance,         in    his

deposition in court, stated that he had expressed

his suspicion in respect of accused’s involvement

to the police on 13.12.1998. The High Court opined

that    if        PW-2     was     aware       of      the      last     seen

circumstance and had made such a disclosure, there

was no reason for the police not to act against

the    accused           till     25.12.1998.          Therefore,         the

statement         of      PW-2     in        respect       of     imparting

knowledge of the last seen circumstance appeared

doubtful and it appeared that the witness was set

up to create link evidence. The High Court also

noticed that the alleged date and time when the

deceased       was       last    seen    alive       was     at    quite   a

distance from the date and time when the deceased

was    found      dead.     Indisputably            the    deceased       was

found dead in his own house where the accused did

not reside. The deceased was allegedly last seen
11
alive in the company of the accused in the evening

at around 7 pm of 10.12.1998 whereas the body of

the    deceased     was     found      2     days     later,    on

12.12.1998.       Autopsy    report,        based    on     autopsy

conducted at around 4.15 pm on 12.12.1998, noted

occurance    of    rigor    mortis     in   the     lower    limbs,

which gives rise to a possibility of death being

within 30 hours of the autopsy, meaning thereby

that death might have occurred much after 7 pm of

10.12.1998. In such circumstances, bearing in mind

that the deceased was found dead in his own house,

where the accused did not reside, and there was no

evidence as to when the accused left the house and

that no one else could have entered the house in

the interregnum, other intervening circumstances

including hand of some third person in the crime

was not ruled out by the prosecution evidence. For

the reasons above, we are of the considered view

that the High Court was justified in doubting the

testimony    of    PW-2     and    finding     the    last     seen

circumstance inconclusive in pointing towards the

guilt of the accused by excluding other hypotheses

consistent with his innocence.
19.     As regards recovery of the Khanjar (knife)

is concerned, the same was denied by the accused

and there was no serologist report to connect it

with   the   crime.   Therefore,       it    had     very    little
12
incriminating value to sustain conviction on its

own basis.            Moreover, the High Court, on strength

of the circumstances appearing in the evidence,

doubted the date of arrest and, upon consideration

of the circumstances, accepted the possibility of

the arrest of the accused being much earlier in

point of time, as claimed by the accused, than

what       was    set     up     by    the    prosecution.        In    such

circumstances, the recovery, which was made on

25.12.1998, allegedly on disclosure made by the

accused on 25.12.1998, becomes doubtful. The view

of the High Court in this regard cannot be termed

perverse as to warrant interference by this Court.
20.        Insofar as the evidence of extra judicial

confession made by the accused is concerned, the

same       was    provided        by     PW-3,      a   member     of    the

Panchayat wherein the deceased resided. Ordinarily

a    person       makes     a    confession        either    to    absolve

oneself          of   the       burden       of    guilt    or    to    seek

protection under the hope that the person to whom

confession is made would protect him. Normally a

confession to absolve oneself of the guilt is made

to     a    person        on     whom        the    confessor      reposes

confidence. The High Court noticed that there was

no evidence to demonstrate that the accused had

any prior relations with PW-3 or that the accused

hoped for, or sought, any help from PW-3 and,
13
therefore, made the confession to him. Notably,

the accused denied making any such confession. For

the reasons above, including other, which need not

be put on record, the High Court discarded the

circumstance of the accused making a confession

before      PW-3   on    25.12.1998.    Otherwise    also,     an

extra judicial confession is a very weak type of

evidence and solely on its basis a conviction is

not ordinarily to be recorded.
21.         The argument of the learned counsel for the

appellant that since there was no proven enmity

between the accused and the witnesses therefore

there was no reason to disbelieve them, would not

be of much help to the appellant because this is a

case based on circumstantial evidence. In a case

based on circumstantial evidence not only do each

of    the    incriminating     circumstances      have   to    be

proved        beyond     reasonable     doubt      but      those

incriminating          circumstances    must    constitute      a

chain so far complete that there is no escape from

the conclusion that within all human probability

it is the accused who has committed the crime and

further,       cumulatively,     they    must     exclude     all

hypotheses consistent with the innocence of the

accused and inconsistent with his guilt. As we

have found that the incriminating circumstances

were     not    proved     beyond    reasonable     doubt     and
14
otherwise also the circumstance of last seen was

inconclusive,       in    our    view,          the    High   Court       was

justified in setting aside the order of conviction

recorded by the Trial Court.
22.     The argument that the accused has failed to

discharge     his    burden      under
section     106
of   the

Evidence Act and, therefore, his conviction was

justified     is    misconceived.
Section        106
of      the

Evidence Act does not absolve the prosecution of

discharging     its       primary      burden          of   proving       the

prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt.                             It is

only when the prosecution has led evidence which,

if believed, will sustain a conviction, or which

makes out a prima facie case, the question arises

of considering facts of which the burden of proof

would   lie        upon    the      accused.            (See:
Shivaji

Chintappa Patil v. State of Maharashtra
(2021) 5

SCC   626).    Here,       as    we        have       discussed      above,

firstly, the incriminating circumstances were not

proved beyond reasonable doubt and, secondly, they

do not form a chain so complete from which it

could be inferred with a degree of certainty that

it is the accused and no one else who, within all

human probability, committed the crime. In these

circumstances,       there       was       no     occasion      to    place

burden on the accused with the aid of
section 106
of the Evidence Act to prove his innocence or to
15
disclose that he parted company of the deceased

before his murder.
23.   For all the reasons above, while keeping in

mind that the view taken by the High Court is a

plausible view and that it was not pointed out

that any material evidence was ignored or misread,

we do not find a good reason to interfere with the

order of acquittal passed by the High Court.
24.   The appeal is accordingly, dismissed.
....................J.
                                   [B.V. NAGARATHNA]



                              ....................J.
                                      [MANOJ MISRA]


NEW DELHI,
JUNE 21, 2023.