[Cites
74
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Indore Development Authority And Etc. vs Manoharlal And Ors. Etc. on 23 October, 2019
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
Arun Mishra
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.9036­9038 OF 2016

         INDORE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY                          ..PETITIONER(S)

                                              VERSUS

         MANOHAR LAL & ORS. ETC.                               ..RESPONDENTS

                                                WITH

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.19532­19533 OF 2017
                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.9798­9799 OF 2016
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 17088­17089 OF 2016
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.37375 OF 2016
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.37372 OF 2016
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.16573­16605 OF 2016
                     SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO....CC NO. 15967 OF 2016
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19356 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19362 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19361 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19358 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19357 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19360 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19359 OF 2017
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 34752­34753 OF 2016
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2019.10.24
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.15890 OF 2017
12:00:44 IST
Reason:

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19363 OF 2017
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.19364 OF 2017
                                                  1
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.19412 OF 2017
     M.A. 1423 OF 2017 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.12247 OF 2016
         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.33022 OF 2017
         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.33114 OF 2017
         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.33127 OF 2017
     M.A. 1787 OF 2017 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.10210 OF 2016
     M.A. 1786 OF 2017 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.10207 OF 2016
       M.A. 45 OF 2018 IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.6239 OF 2017
         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.16051 OF 2019
                     DIARY NO. 23842 OF 2018
         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.30452 OF 2018
                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.4835 OF 2015
     SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.30577­30580 OF 2015


                              ORDER
ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.   The question of interpretation of
Section 24
of the Right to Fair

Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation

and Resettlement Act, 2013 (for short, 'the Act of 2013'), has been

referred to a five­Judge Constitution Bench of this Court.
2.   A three­Judge Bench of this Court in
Pune Municipal Corporation

& Anr. v. Harakchand Misirimal Solanki & Ors.
(2014) 3 SCC 183, had

delivered a judgment interpreting
section 24
of the Act of 2013.
In
Yogesh Neema & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(2016) 6 SCC 387, a

two­Judge Bench, doubted the decision of           Sree Balaji Nagar
2
Residential Assn. v. State of Tamil Nadu (2015) 3 SCC 353 and referred

the matter to a larger Bench.
3.   Yet in another Civil Appeal No.20982 of 2017 arising out of

S.L.P. (C) No.2131 of 2016 (
Indore Development Authority vs.

Shailendra (Dead
) through Lrs. & Ors., 2018 SCC Online SC 100) the

matter was referred to a larger Bench on 7.12.2017.
The following

observations were made in
Indore Development Authority
(supra):
“19. It was also urged that this Court is also bound to prevent
        the abuse of process of law. The cases which have been
        concluded are being revived. In spite of not accepting the
        compensation deliberately and statement are made in the
        Court that they do not want to receive the compensation at
        any cost, and they are agitating the matter time and again
        after having lost the matters and when proceedings are kept
        pending by interim orders by filing successive petitions, the
        provisions of
section 24
cannot be invoked by such
        landowners.
20. There is already a reference made as to the applicability of
        section 24 in SLP (C) No.10472/2008 – Yogesh Neema & Ors v.
State of M.P. & Ors. vide order dated 12.01.2016. There are
        several other issues arising which have been mentioned above
        but have not been considered in
Pune Municipal Corpn.
(supra). Thus, here is a case where the matter should be
        considered by a larger Bench. Let the matter be placed before
        Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders.”
4.
In
Indore Development Authority v. Shailendra (Dead
) thr. Lrs.
&
Ors.
(supra), the bench consisting of one of us, namely, Arun Mishra,

J., Adarsh Kumar Goel, J. and Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, J. has

decided the matter, and the view taken is that in
Pune Municipal

Corporation
(supra), the Court did not consider several aspects as to
3
the interpretation of
section 24
of the Act of 2013.                The decision

mentioned above was accepted unanimously by the three Judges.
However, as
Pune Municipal Corporation
(supra) was a judgment by a

bench of coordinate strength, two of us, namely, myself and Adarsh

Kumar Goel, J. opined that decision is per incuriam. However, Mohan

M. Shantanagoudar, J. opined that it would be appropriate to refer the

matter to a larger Bench.
In the majority opinion in
Indore

Development Authority
(supra), the questions formulated have been

answered thus:
“228. Our answers to the questions are as follows:
Q. No. I:­ The word 'paid' in
section 24
of the Act of 2013 has
        the same meaning as 'tender of payment' in
section 31(1)
of
        the Act of 1894. They carry the same meaning, and the
        expression 'deposited' in
section 31(2)
is not included in the
        expressions 'paid' in
section 24
of the Act of 2013 or in 'tender
        of payment' used in
section 31(1)
of the Act of 1894. The words
        'paid'/tender' and 'deposited' are different expressions and
        carry different meanings within their fold.
In
section 24(2)
of the Act of 2013 in the expression
        'paid,' it is not necessary that the amount should be deposited
        in Court as provided in
section 31(2)
of the Act of 1894. Non­
        deposit of compensation in Court under
section 31(2)
of the
        Act of 1894 does not result in a lapse of acquisition under
section 24(2)
of the Act of 2013. Due to the failure of deposit in
        Court, the only consequence at the most in appropriate cases
        may be of a higher rate of interest on compensation as
        envisaged under
section 34
of the Act of 1894 and not lapse of
        acquisition.
Once the amount of compensation has been
        unconditionally tendered, and it is refused, that would amount
        to payment, and the obligation under
section 31(1)
stands
        discharged, and that amounts to the discharge of obligation of
        payment under
section 24(2)
of the Act of 2013 also. It is not
        open to the person who has refused to accept compensation, to
        urge that since it has not been deposited in Court, the
        acquisition has lapsed. Claimants/landowners, after refusal,
4
cannot take advantage of their own wrong and seek protection
        under the provisions of
section 24(2)
.
Q. No. II:­ The normal mode of taking physical possession
        under the land acquisition cases is drawing of Panchnama as
        held in
Banda Development Authority
(supra).
Q. No. III:­ The provisions of
section 24
of the Act of 2013, do
        not revive barred or stale claims such claims cannot be
        entertained.
Q. No. IV:­ Provisions of
section 24(2)
do not intend to cover
        the period spent during litigation and when the authorities
        have been disabled to act under
section 24(2)
due to the final
        or interim order of a court or otherwise, such period has to be
        excluded from the period of five years as provided in
section
        24(2)
of the Act of 2013. There is no conscious omission in
section 24(2)
for the exclusion of a period of the interim order.
        There was no necessity to insert such a provision. The
        omission does not make any substantial difference as to legal
        position.
Q. No. V:­ The principle of actus curiae neminem gravabit is
        applicable, including the other common law principles for
        determining the questions under
section 24
of the Act of 2013.
        The period covered by the final/ interim order by which the
        authorities 196 have been deprived of taking possession has to
        be excluded.
Section 24(2)
has no application where Court has
        quashed acquisition.”

     Question Nos.2, 3, 4, and 5, which have been decided, did not

arise in
Pune Municipal Corporation
(supra). Question             No.2      was   a

general question with respect to the mode of taking possession under

the land acquisition cases.
Remaining question arose out of
Yogesh

Neema
(supra).
5.   A three­Judge Bench of this Court on 21.2.2018 requested the

other benches to defer the hearing until a decision, one way or the

other, on the issue whether the matter should be referred to the larger

Bench or not.
5
6.   A Division Bench presided by Adarsh Kumar Goel, J. on

22.2.2018 in
Indore Development Authority v. Shyam Verma and Ors.,

(S.L.P. (C) No.9798
of 2016) considered it appropriate to refer the

matter to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India to refer the issues to be

resolved by a larger Bench at the earliest.
7.   On 22.2.2018, a Bench consisting of myself and Amitava Roy, J.
have in
State of Haryana v. Maharana Pratap Charitable Trust (Regd.)

& Anr. (Civil Appeal No.
4835 of 2015) referred the matter to the

Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India to constitute an appropriate bench

for consideration of the larger issue. Thus, it is apparent that two­

division Benches, i.e., one consisting of myself and another consisting

of Adarsh Kumar Goel, J. referred the matter to Hon’ble the Chief

Justice of India. Hon'ble, the Chief Justice of India, considered it

appropriate to constitute a Constitution Bench to deal with all the

issues in an apposite manner.
8.   The case was listed before a five­Judge Constitution Bench on

6.3.2018. The Constitution Bench observed that it would consider all

the aspects including the correctness of the decision of
Pune Municipal

Corporation
(supra) and the other judgments following
the said

decision
as well as the judgments rendered in
Indore Development
6
Authority
(supra). Thus, all the questions are kept open to be decided.
No particular question has been referred to the larger bench.                 After

that, Hon'ble, the Chief Justice of India has constituted this Bench to

decide the reference.
9.   Mr.    Shyam   Divan,        Mr.   Dinesh   Dwivedi     and   Mr.    Gopal

Sankarnarayanan,        learned    Senior   Advocates   on    behalf     of    the

respondents, have raised a preliminary objection for recusal of one of

us, namely; Arun Mishra, J. on the ground that Constitution Bench

consists of one of the Judges who were on a smaller panel and the

correctness of the opinion cannot be, thus, judged by the Constitution

Bench independently, as a final view has been expressed in
Indore

Development Authority
(supra) wherein the decision in
Pune Municipal

Corporation
(supra) has been held to be per incuriam.
Thus, the Judge

who has decided the matter in
Indore Development Authority
(supra) is

pre­disposed to decide the matter only in a particular way. It was also

submitted that there is reasonable apprehension that the Judge may

have some bias in dealing with the matter by a larger Bench. As such,

one of us, namely; Arun Mishra, J. should recuse.              It was further

submitted that a Judge could not sit in appeal to adjudge his

judgment.    The jurisdictions are primarily corrective jurisdictions

under the hierarchal system, and professional as well as institutional

integrity demands that the same person should not be a Judge at both
7
levels. The Judge who has decided the matter may be pre­disposed to

support the previous reasoning and
,
in that case
, it would seem that

he is or she is a Judge in his or her own cause.
The learned Counsel

for the respondents are of the view that the
Indore Development

Authority
(supra) is wrongly decided. The Court or Tribunal should be

above unfairness or bias.   The Judge has to step down, in case he

cannot impart justice impartially.     The judge or judges concerned

should excuse themselves and abstain from sitting in the case.        A

Judge cannot hear an appeal against his/ her own decisions.
10.   Per contra, Shri Tushar Mehta, Learned Solicitor General, Shri

Mohan Parasaran, Shri Anoop Chaudhary and Shri Vivek Tankha,

learned Senior Advocates submitted that there is no question of

recusal and as a matter of substance it is the practice of this Court

that the Judges who have decided the matter earlier or have referred it

are made part of the Bench. They have cited several decisions to the

effect that Judges who have delivered a Judgment in a three­Judges

Bench formed part of a five­Judges Bench or the larger Benches which

decided the matter. The plea of bias or pre­disposition is not attracted

in the matter of judicial decisions. The plea of bias or pre­disposition

is based on extra­judicial factors. What the Court is required to

answer is only a pure question of law, and there are occasions when

Hon'ble, the Chief Justice of India, has considered it appropriate to
8
constitute an appropriate bench having decided a case. Recusal of any

Judge cannot be sought on the ground that the decision rendered by

him in a smaller bench has to be considered by the larger bench.
11.   Learned Solicitor General submitted that a tendency is growing

in that as soon as important matters are listed, particular articles are

written in the newspapers concerning the Constitution of the bench or

to influence the decision on merits of a case. Newspaper articles are

written to influence Court.    The very independence of the judicial

system is at stake, if in this kind of scenario, recusal is sought by

powerful lobbies, and any recusal would be defeating the very oath of

the office which a Judge takes.
12.   Shri Mohan Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel has also pointed

out that the practice of this Court makes the law, and the Judges who

have decided the matters in a smaller Bench have ordinarily formed

quorum of the larger Benches. The question is of deciding the legal

principle. In the Review jurisdiction and Curative Petitions; the same

Judge hears the matter. There is nothing wrong in case the Judges

who have heard the matter in smaller Benches form part of the larger

bench. There is no question of any pre­disposition in such matters or

bias, and as such, the decision rendered in smaller formation cannot

be a ground for seeking recusal.
9
13.   The first question before us is whether a Judge who has

expressed an opinion in a smaller Bench and the case has been

referred to a larger Bench, because of the conflict of the opinion or

otherwise, can hear the matter in a larger bench.       For finding an

answer to the same, we have to look into the practice of this Court.
14.   Shri M.C. Setalvad, in his autobiography “My Life, Law and other

things” has referred in Chapter 12 the events between 1955 to 1969.
He has referred to one of the important decisions of this Court

delivered by S.R. Das, J., who was the then Acting Chief Justice. It

was the Bengal Immunity case.
In 1953, a bench presided over by

Chief Justice Sastri of which Justice Bhagwati was a member held

that State could impose sales tax on goods delivered for consumption

in that State, even though the sale was an inter­State sale as held in
State of Bombay v. United Motors India Ltd.
, 1953 SCR 1069 with

Justice Bose and Justice S.R. Das, Justice Bose delivered a dissenting

judgment and S.R. Das, J. as a Junior Judge had also expressed a

contrary opinion in another decision.
15.   The same question arose in
Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of

Bihar
, 1955 (2) S.C.R. 603, which came up when S.R. Das, J. was

acting as the Chief Justice. S.R. Das, J. who held strong views on the
10
matter, had the matter placed before larger Bench of seven Judges,

including the two, Justice Bose and Justice Bhagwati, who had

participated in the earlier decision.
Justice Bhagwati, who had formed

part of the majority in the
United Motors
case (supra), agreeing with

the view of Chief Justice Sastri, had reversed his former view, giving

his reasons in detail and held that earlier decision was erroneous.
Following are the extracts from "My Life, Law and other things" by

M.C. Setalvad :
“One of the important decisions of the Supreme Court
           delivered while S.R. Das was the Chief Justice, was the
Bengal
           Immunity
Case. That case had an interesting history.
Article
           286
of the Constitution (as it then stood) prohibited a State
           Legislature from imposing sales tax on transactions of inter­
           State sales and sales in the course of export. The Article was
           not, however, happily worded. In 1953, a Bench of the
           Supreme Court presided over by Chief Justice Sastri, of which
           Justice Bhagwati was a member, held that a State could
           impose sales tax on goods delivered for consumption in that
           State, even though the sale was an inter­State sale 1. This
           decision was contrary to the express provision of the
           Constitution that Parliament alone could authorise the
           imposition of a tax on sales in the course of inter­State sales
           and was based on an explanation to
Article 286(1)(a)
, which
           was not applicable. Justice Bose had delivered a dissenting
           judgment, and S.R. Das as a puisne judge had also expressed
           a contrary opinion in another decision.
The same question arose in
Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v.
           State of Bihar2
which came up when S.R. Das was acting as
           the Chief Justice. The Bengal Immunity Co. manufactured
           medicinal products in Bengal and sold them all over India
           including Bihar. The Company had no office or agent in Bihar
           but the Bihar sales tax authorities sought to compel the
           Company to register as a dealer in Bihar and pay sales tax on
           the ground that goods delivered in Bihar for consumption in
           Bihar as a direct result of the sale were liable to sales tax in
           Bihar even though the sale had taken place in Bengal.
The
           view of the State of Bihar was in accordance with the decision
           of the Supreme Court in the
United Motors
Case but Das, who
           held strong views in the matter, had the matter placed before a

1
State of Bombay v. United Motors (India) Ltd.
, (1953) S.C.R. 1069.
2 (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603.
11
larger Bench of seven judges including two, Justice Bose and
           Justice Bhagwati, who had participated in the earlier decision.
              The matter was of vital importance to the States, because
           under the view expressed by Chief Justice Sastri in the
United
           Motors
Case, one State – the State in which goods had been
           delivered for consumption as a direct result of the sale – would
           be entitled to levy sales tax on such transactions, while, under
           the other view, no State at all would be able to tax the goods,
           as the transaction of sale would be an inter­State sale. The
           Centre alone could make a law for levying a sales tax on inter­
           State sales. There is little doubt that the somewhat strained
           construction put upon the Explanation to
Article 286(1)(a)
by
           Chief Justice Sastri and the majority was due to the
           consideration that the sources of revenue of the States under
           the Constitution which were already slender should not be
           diminished by denying to the States the opportunity of levying
           sales tax altogether in such cases.
Notices were issued to all the States and many of them
           intervened by their Advocates­General. N.C. Chatterjee
           appeared for the Bengal Immunity Company, and Lal
           Narayanan Sinha, then the Government Advocate of Bihar,
           appeared for the State of Bihar. I intervened on behalf of the
           State of West Bengal.         Sikri, as the Advocate­General,
           represented the State of East Punjab.
At the outset arose the question whether the Supreme
           Court could overrule its previous decision if it was satisfied
           that it was erroneous. That was the first occasion on which the
           Court was called upon to deal with this important question.
              The Court naturally considered the practice followed in
           other final Courts of appeal. The Privy Council had held that
           though it was not absolutely bound to follow its earlier
           decisions it would seldom differ from them in constitutional
           matters as they would have been acted upon both by
           Governments and subjects. The United States Supreme Court
           had on a number of occasions expressly overruled its previous
           decisions. The majority of the Supreme Court including Das
           preferred to follow the American practice. Das pointed out the
           difference between the position in England where the House of
           Lords had held that it was bound by its earlier decisions 3 and
           India and observed:
But, in a country governed by a federal constitution,
           such as the United States of America and the Union of India
           are, it is by no means easy to amend the Constitution, if an
           erroneous interpretation is put upon it by this Court. An
           erroneous interpretation to the Constitution may quite
           conceivably be perpetuated or may at any rate remain
           unrectified for considerable time to the great detriment to
           public well­being.     The considerations adverted to in the
           decisions of the Supreme Court of America quoted above are,
           therefore, apposite and apply in full force in determining
           whether a previous decision of this Court should or should not
3. In England the position has since changed; the House of Lords is no longer bound by
its own decisions.
12
be disregarded or overruled          There is nothing in our
Constitution which prevents us from departing from a previous
decision if we are convinced of its error and its baneful effect
on the general interests of the public.
He then proceeded to point out a number of circumstances
which made it necessary to set right what he considered to be
the harmful effects of the earlier decision which he believed to
be erroneous.       He ultimately formulated the governing
principle in these words:
Reference is made to the doctrine of finality of judicial
decisions and it is pressed upon us that we should not reverse
our previous decision except in cases where a material
provision of law has been overlooked or where the decision has
proceeded upon the mistaken assumption of the continuance
of a repealed or expired statute and that we should not differ
from a previous decision merely because a contrary view
appears to us to be preferable. It is needless for us to say that
we should not lightly dissent from a previous pronouncement
of this Court. Our power of review, which undoubtedly exists,
must be exercised with due care and caution and only for
advancing the public well­being in the light of the surrounding
circumstances of each case brought to our notice; but we do
not consider it right to confine our power within rigidly fixed
limits, as suggested before us.
The minority, consisting of three Judges, did not, however,
accept this position.
On the merits, the majority of the Court consisting of four
judges, including the acting Chief Justice, came to the
conclusion that the provisions of several parts of
Article 286
made it clear that it had to deal with different topics and one
part could not be projected or read into another.             The
conclusion reached was that the Explanation to clause (1) (a)
could not be ultimately extended to clause (2) either as an
exception or as a proviso and read as limiting the ambit of
clause (2). Until Parliament provided otherwise by law in
exercise of its powers under clause (2) of the Article, no State
could impose any tax on sales or purchases taking place in the
course of inter­State trade or commerce. The decision of Chief
Justice Sastri to the extent that it decided to the contrary
could not be accepted as well­founded on principle or
authority.
The dissenting view was expressed in powerful opinions by
each of the three dissenting Judges. They took the view that
the scheme of the Article was that it fixed the situs of the sales
with a view to avoid multiple taxation. For that purpose, it
divided sales into two categories, “inside sales” and “outside
sales”, and enacted that a State cannot tax an outside sale.
When, in the same context, the Explanation declared that a
sale must be deemed to have taken place in the State in which
the goods are delivered for consumption, its purpose clearly
was to take such sales out of inter­State trade and stamp them
with the character of inter­State sales.
13
The most powerful dissent was that delivered by Justice
         Aiyar, whose judgment was the most exhaustive and the
         longest of the judgments delivered by the various Judges. One
         of the notable judgments in the case was that of Justice
         Bhagwati who had formed part of the majority in the
United
         Motors
case, agreeing with the view of Chief Justice Sastri. He
         reversed his former view with skill, giving his reasons in detail.
         He had the courage to state that his opinion in the earlier
         decision “was clearly erroneous and public interest demand
         the same should be reversed.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
16.   In M/s. Ujagar Prints and Ors. (II) v. Union of India & Ors. (1989)

3 SCC 488, a Constitution Bench of this Court was constituted

consisting of R.S. Pathak, C.J., Sabyasachi Mukherji, S. Natarajan,

M.N. Venkatachaliah and S. Ranganathan, JJ.                 The question which

arose for consideration was the correctness of the decision in Empire

Industries Ltd. v. Union of India (1985) 3 SCC 314, which was decided

by a Bench consisting of three­Judges, namely S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, S.

Varadarajan, and Sabyasachi Mukherji, JJ. Sabyasachi Mukherji, J.
delivered the judgment on his behalf and S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, J.
Varadarajan partly concurred.          The matter was referred to examine

the correctness of the view of Justice Sabyasachi Mukherji expressed

for the Court in
Empire Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
(supra). The

view taken in the previous decision by Sabyasachi Mukherji, J., was

held to be good law.
It was a case where the correctness of the view

taken in
Empire Industries
case (supra) on certain aspects was

doubted by another Bench of this Court in M/s.
Ujagar Prints v. Union

of India
(1986) Supp. SCC 652. Accordingly, the matter was referred
14
to a five­judge Bench.
Sabyasachi Mukherji, J. was one of the

members of the Bench which affirmed his decision in the
Empire

Industries
case (supra).
17.   There is yet another instance of a Constitution Bench which

comprised of Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J., P.N. Bhagwati, S. Murtaza Fazal

Ali, Amarendra Nath Sen, P. Balakrishna Eradi, JJ. in the matter of
Gyan Devi Anand v. Jeevan Kumar & Ors.
(1985) 2 SCC 683, where

the question which arose was whether statutory tenancy is heritable.
In
Gyan Devi Anand
(supra), the correctness of the decision in
Ganpat

Ladha v. Sashikant Vishnu Shinde
, (1978) 2 SCC 573 came up for

consideration.
The decision in Ganpat Ladha’s case had been

overruled, and
Damadilal v. Parashram
, (1976) 4 SCC 855 was

affirmed. The Court has observed thus:
“35.
In our opinion, the view expressed by this Court in
Ganapat Ladha v. Sashikant Vishnu Shinde
, (1978) 2 SCC 573
         and the observations made therein which we have earlier
         quoted, do not lay down the correct law. The said decision
         does not properly construe the definition of the ‘tenant’ as
         given in
Section 5(11)(b)
of the Act and does not consider the
         status of the tenant, as defined in the Act, even after
         termination of the commercial tenancy.
In our judgment in
Damadilal v. Parashram
, (1976) 4 SCC 855, this Court has
         correctly appreciated the status and the legal position of a
         tenant who continues to remain in possession after
         termination of the contractual tenancy. We have quoted at
         length the view of this Court and the reasons in support
         thereof.
The view expressed by a seven Judge Bench of this
         Court in
Dhanapal Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal
, (1979) 4 SCC
         214 and the observations made therein which we have earlier
         quoted, lend support to the decision of this Court in
Damadilal
case. These decisions correctly lay down that the termination
         of the contractual tenancy by the landlord does not bring
         about a change in the status of the tenant who continues to
15
remain in possession after the termination of the tenancy by
         virtue of the provisions of the
Rent Act
. A proper interpretation
         of the definition of tenant in the light of the provisions made in
         the Rent Acts makes it clear that the tenant continues to enjoy
         an estate or interest in the tenanted premises despite the
         termination of the contractual tenancy.”
18.   Justice P.N. Bhagwati concurred with the view and overruled his

own decision in Ganpat Ladha’s case (supra). Justice Bhagwati has

observed thus:
“3. On November 6, 1960 the appellant­landlord filed a suit
         for eviction which is now before us. On August 30, 1962, the
         first date of hearing, the issues were framed. On June 18,
         1963, the trial court decreed the suit on the following findings:
the notice to quit was valid and duly served; the arrears of rent
         were properly demanded under
Section 12(2)
of the Act; the
         demand was not complied with in accordance with law by the
         tenant within a month of the demand; the case was governed
         by the provisions of
Section 12(3)(b)
and not by the provisions
         of
Section 12(3)(a)
because a dispute about the fixation of
         standard rent was still pending when the notice demanding
         standard rent was given; nevertheless, the tenant was not
         entitled to the protection of
Section 12(3)(b)
, since he had not
         paid the rent regularly in accordance with the conditions
         under which the protection of
Section 12(3)(b)
could be given
         to him.”
19.   Also, in the landmark decision of
Kesavananda Bharati v. the

State of Kerala
(1973) 4 SCC 225, the earlier view held by this Court in
Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan
1965 AIR SC 845 was overruled

though some of the Hon’ble Judges in the two cases were common.
20.   In Hyderabad Industries Limited and Anr. v. Union of India &

Ors. (1995) 5 SCC 338, a three­Judge Bench of this Court consisting

of A.M. Ahmadi, C.J., S.P. Bharucha, and K.S. Paripoornan, JJ.
doubted the correctness of the view taken in
Khandelwal Metal &
16
Engineering Works v. Union of India
(1985) 3 SCC 620 and referred the

matter to a larger Bench.
The larger bench consisted of S.P.

Bharucha, B.N. Kirpal, S. Rajendra Babu, Syed Mohammed Quadri,

and M.B. Shah, JJ. They answered the reference reported in

Hyderabad Industries Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors. (1999) 5 SCC
15. It is significant to note that S.P. Bharucha, J., who had doubted

the correctness of the decision and referred the matter to a

Constitution Bench, has overruled the earlier view on certain grounds.
21.
In M/s.
Cloth Traders (P) Ltd. v. Additional C.I.T., Gujarat­I
, (1979)

3 SCC 538, a three­Judge Bench consisting of P.N. Bhagwati, D.A.

Desai, and A.D. Koshal, JJ. decided the question of inter­corporate

dividends.
The correctness of this decision was taken up for

consideration before a Constitution Bench of Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J.,

P.N. Bhagwati, Amarendra Nath Sen, D.P. Madon, M.P. Thakkar, JJ.
in
Distributors (Baroda) Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.
, (1986) 1 SCC

43, in which the decision in M/s.
Cloth Traders (P) Ltd. v. Addl
.
CIT,

Gujarat
(supra), was overruled.             P.N. Bhagwati, J. delivered the

judgment for the Constitution Bench.
He was also the author of the

earlier judgment in M/s.
Cloth Traders (P) Ltd. v. Addl
.
CIT, Gujarat
(supra), which had been overruled. This Court has observed thus:
“19. But, even if in our view the decision in M/s.
Cloth Traders
         (P) Ltd. v. Additional C.I.T., Gujarat­I
, (1979) 3 SCC 538 is
         erroneous, the question still remains whether we should
17
overturn it. Ordinarily we would be reluctant to overturn a
decision given by a Bench of this Court, because it is essential
that there should be continuity and consistency in judicial
decisions and law should be certain and definite. It is almost
as important that the law should be settled permanently as
that it should be settled correctly. But there may be
circumstances where public interest demands that the
previous decision be reviewed and reconsidered. The doctrine
of stare decisis should not deter the Court from overruling an
earlier decision, if it is satisfied that such decision is
manifestly wrong or proceeds upon a mistaken assumption in
regard to the existence or continuance of a statutory provision
or is contrary to another decision of the Court.
It was Jackson,
J. who said in his dissenting opinion in Massachusetts v.
United States 333 US 611: “I see no reason why I should be
consciously wrong today because I was unconsciously wrong
yesterday.” Lord Denning also said to the same effect when he
observed in
Ostime v. Australian Mutual Provident Society
(1960) AC 549: “The doctrine of precedent does not compel
Your Lordships to follow the wrong path until you fall over the
edge of the cliff.” Here we find that there are overriding
considerations which compel us to reconsider and review the
decision in
Cloth Traders
case (supra).
In the first place, the
decision in
Cloth Traders
case (supra) was rendered by this
Court on May 4, 1979 and immediately thereafter, within a few
months,       Parliament     introduced
Section   80
­AA    with
retrospective effect from April 1, 1968 with a view to overriding
the interpretation placed on
Section 80
­M in
Cloth Traders
case (supra).
The decision in
Cloth Traders
case (supra) did not
therefore hold the field for a period of more than a few months,
and it could not be said that any assessee was misled into
acting to its detriment on the basis of that decision.
There was
no decision of this Court in regard to the interpretation of sub­
section (1) of
Section 80
­M prior to the decision in
Cloth
Traders
case (supra), and there was therefore no authoritative
pronouncement of this Court on this question of interpretation
on which an assessee could claim to rely for making its fiscal
arrangements.
The only decision in regard to the interpretation
of sub­section (1) of
Section 80
­M given by any High Court
prior to the decision in
Cloth Traders
case (supra), was that of
the Gujarat High Court in Addl.
CIT v. Cloth Traders Pvt. Ltd.
(1974) 97 ITR 140 (Guj.) and that decision took precisely the
same view which we are inclined to accept in the present case.
It is therefore difficult to see how any assessee can legitimately
complain that any hardship or inconvenience would be caused
to it if the decision in
Cloth Traders
case was overturned by us.
If despite the decision of the Gujarat High Court in Addl.
CIT v.
Cloth Traders Pvt. Ltd.
the assessee proceeded on the
assumption, now found to be erroneous, that the Gujarat High
Court decision was wrong and the deduction permissible
under sub­section (1) of
Section 80
­M was liable to be
calculated with reference to the full amount of dividend
18
received by the assessee, the assessee can have only itself to
         blame. Knowing fully well that the Gujarat High Court had
         decided the question of interpretation of sub­section (1) of
Section 80
­M in favour of the Revenue and there was no
         decision of this Court taking a different view, no prudent
         assessee could have proceeded to make its financial
         arrangements on the basis that the decision of the Gujarat
         High Court was erroneous.
Moreover, we find, for reasons we
         have already discussed, that the decision in
Cloth Traders
case
         is manifestly wrong because it has failed to take into account a
         very vital factor, namely, that the deduction required to be
         made under sub­section (1) of
Section 80
­M is not from the
         gross total income but from “such income by way of
         dividends”.
There is also another circumstance which makes it
         necessary for us to reconsider and review the decision in
Cloth
         Traders
case, and that is the decision in
Cambay Electric
         Supply Co.
case (1978) 2 SCC 644.
The decision in
Cloth
         Traders
case is inconsistent with that in
Cambay Electric
         Supply Co.
case. Both cannot stand together. If one is correct,
         the other must logically be wrong and vice versa.
It is therefore
         necessary to resolve the conflict between these two decisions
         and harmonise the law and that necessitates an inquiry into
         the correctness of the decision in
Cloth Traders
case.
It is for
         this reason that we have reconsidered and reviewed the
         decision in
Cloth Traders
case, and on such reconsideration
         and review, we have come to the conclusion that the decision
         in
Cloth Traders
case is erroneous and must be overturned.”



      This Court has observed that law should be settled permanently

and that it should be settled correctly. There may be circumstances

where public interest demands that the previous decision be reviewed

and reconsidered.      Thus, it is apparent that this is the consistent

practice of this Court that Judges who had rendered the earlier

decision have presided over or been part of the larger Bench.
22.
Petlad Turkey Red Dye Works Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income

Tax, Bombay North, Ahmedabad
(1963) Supp.
1 SCR 871 came up for

consideration in
Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax,
19
Bombay North, Ahmedabad
(1965) 2 SCR 908.                      The Constitution

Bench comprised of seven­Judges in Keshav Mills Co. Ltd., M.

Hidayatullah, J. was part of the Bench in both the matters. There are

other instances which have been cited indicating the practice of this

Court.
23.   Shri Mohan Parasaran learned Senior Counsel has submitted

that practice of the Court is the law of the Court and binding and

should normally be adhered to in the absence of rules to the contrary.
He referred to the decision of
Jamal Uddin Ahmad v. Abu Saleh

Najmuddin
, (2003) 4 SCC 257, which held thus:
“18. Sub­section (1) of the abovesaid provision required the
         election petition being presented to the Election Commission.
         Sub­section (2) provided for the election petition being
         delivered to the Secretary to the Commission or to such other
         officer as may be appointed by the Election Commission or
         even being sent by registered post and delivered to the
         Secretary to the Commission or the officer appointed so as to
         be deemed to have been presented to the Election
         Commissioner. While “High Court” has been substituted in
         place of Election Commission in sub­section (1), sub­section
         (2) of the erstwhile
Section 81
has been deleted without re­
         enacting a corresponding provision. The reason is more than
         obvious. Parliament knew that so far as the Election
         Commission is concerned, it was considered necessary to trust
         only the Secretary to the Commission or such other officer as
         may be appointed by the Election Commission entrusted with
         the responsibility of receiving the election petition presented to
         the Election Commission. So far as the High Court is
         concerned, such a provision was not required to be enacted
         into the Act. Jurisdiction to try an election petition has been
         conferred on the High Court in place of the Election Tribunal.
The High Court is a constitutional court which was pre­
         existing. It is a court of record and exercises plenary powers.
         The High Court being a pre­existing judicial institution also
         had rules, directions and practice already existing and
         prevalent and governing the reception of documents presented
         to it; the same would apply to election petitions. Cursus curiae
         est lex curiae — The practice of the Court is the law of the
20
Court. Every Court is the guardian of its own records and the
        master of its own practice; and where a practice has existed, it
        is convenient, except in cases of extreme urgency and
        necessity, to adhere to it, because it is the practice, even
        though no reason can be assigned for it; for an inveterate
        practice in law generally stands upon principles that are
        founded in justice and convenience. (See Broom's Legal
        Maxims, 10th Edn., p. 82.) Even in the absence of Chapter
        VIII­A in the Gauhati High Court Rules there would have been
        nothing wrong in the High Court or the Chief Justice
        authorizing any of its officers to receive the election petition
        presented to it so as to enable exercise of the jurisdiction
        conferred on the High Court by
Chapter II of the Act
. The
        Gauhati High Court thought it proper to incorporate Chapter
        VIII­A in its Rules in view of the amendment made in
Chapter
        II of the Act
.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
24.   Shri Mohan Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel has also relied

upon the decision of the Supreme Court of United States in John

Patrick LITEKY v. United States, 510 U.S. 540 (1994), where the

question of recusal based on “extrajudicial source” doctrine came up

for consideration. The Supreme Court of United States held:
“[5] [6] [7] The judge who presides at a trial may, upon completion
      of the evidence, be exceedingly ill disposed towards the defendant,
      who has been shown to be a thoroughly reprehensible person. But
      the judge is not thereby recusable for bias or prejudice, since his
      knowledge and the opinion it produced were properly and
      necessarily acquired in the course of the proceedings, and are
      indeed sometimes (as in a bench trial) necessary to completion of
      the judge’s task. As Judge Jerome Frank pithily put it: “Impartiality
      is not gullibility.     Disinterestedness does not mean child­like
      innocence. If the Judge did not form judgments of the actors in
      those courthouse dramas called trials, he could never render
      decisions.” In re J.P. Linahan, Inc., 138 F.2d 650, 654 (CA2 1943).
      Also not subject to deprecatory characterization as “bias” or
      “prejudice” are opinions held by judges as a result of what they
      learned in earlier proceedings. It has long been regarded as normal
      and proper for a judge to sit in the same case upon its remand, and
      to sit in successive trials involving the same defendant.
[8] [9] It is wrong in theory, though it may not be too far off the
      mark as a practical matter, to suggest, as many opinions have, that
      “extrajudicial source” is the only basis for establishing disqualifying
21
bias or prejudice. It is the only common basis, but not the exclusive
one, since it is not the exclusive reason a predisposition can be
wrongful or inappropriate.          A favourable or unfavourable
predisposition can also deserve to be characterized as “bias” or
“prejudice” because, even though it springs from the facts adduced
or the events occurring at trial, it is so extreme as to display clear
inability to render fair judgment. (That explains what some courts
have called the “pervasive bias” exception to the “extrajudicial
source” doctrine. See, e.g.,
Davis v. Board of School
Comm’rs of
Mobile County, 517 F.2d 1044, 1051 (CA5 1975), cert. denied, 425
U.S. 944,
96
S.Ct. 1685, 48 L.Ed.2d 188 (1976).
[13] [14] For all these reasons, we think that the “extrajudicial
source” doctrine, as we have described it, applies to § 455(a). As we
have described it, however, there is not much doctrine to the
doctrine. The fact that an opinion held by a judge derives from a
source outside judicial proceedings is not a necessary condition for
“bias or prejudice” recusal, since predisposition developed during
the course of a trial will sometimes (albeit rarely) suffice. Nor is it a
sufficient condition for “bias or prejudice” recusal, since some
opinions acquired outside the context of judicial proceedings (for
example, the judge’s view of the law acquired in scholarly reading)
will not suffice. Since neither the presence of an extrajudicial
source necessarily establishes bias, nor the absence of an
extrajudicial source necessarily precludes bias, it would be better to
speak of the existence of a significant (and often determinative)
“extrajudicial source” factor, than of an “extrajudicial source”
doctrine, in recusal jurisprudence.
[15] [16] [17] [18] The facts of the present case do not require us to
describe the consequences of that factor in complete detail. It is
enough for present purposes to say the following: First, judicial
rulings along almost never constitute a valid basis for a bias or
partiality motion. See
United States v. Grinnell Corp.
, 384 U.S., at
583, 86 S.Ct., at 1710. In and of themselves (i.e., apart from
surrounding comments or accompanying opinion), they cannot
possibly show reliance upon an extrajudicial source; and can only
in the rarest circumstances evidence the degree of favouritism or
antagonism required (as discussed below) when no extrajudicial
source is involved. Almost invariably, they are proper grounds for
appeal, not for recusal. Second, opinions formed by the judge on
the basis of facts introduced or events occurring in the course of the
current proceedings or of prior proceedings, do not constitute a
basis for a bias or partiality motion unless the display a deep­seated
favouritism or antagonism that would make fair judgment
impossible. Thus, judicial remarks during the course of a trial that
are critical or disapproving of, or even hostile to, counsel the
parties, or their cases, ordinarily do not support a bias or partiality
challenge. They may do so if they reveal an opinion that derives
from an extrajudicial source; and they will do so if they reveal such
a high degree of favouritism or antagonism as to make fair
judgment impossible.
An example of the latter (and perhaps of the
22
former as well) is the statement that was alleged to have been made
      by the District Judge in Berger v. United States, 255 U.
S. 22
,
41
S.Ct.230, 65 L.Ed.481 (1921), a World War I espionage case against
      German­American defendants; “One must have a very judicial mind,
      indeed, not [to be] prejudiced against the German Americans”
      because their “hearts are reeking with disloyality.” Id., at 28
      (internal quotation marks omitted).       Not establishing bias or
      partiality, however, are expressions of impatience, dissatisfaction,
      annoyance, and even anger, that are within the bounds of what
      imperfect men and women, even after having been confirmed as
      federal judges, sometimes display. A judge’s ordinary efforts at
      courtroom administration – even a stern and short­tempered judge’s
      ordinary efforts at courtroom administration – remain immune.
The term “extrajudicial source,” though not the interpretive doctrine
      bearing its name, has appeared in only one of our previous cases.
United States v. Grinnell Corp.
, 384 U.S. 563,
86
S.Ct.1698, 16
      L.Ed.2d 778 (1966). Respondents in Grinnell alleged that the trial
      judge had a personal bias against them, and sought his
      disqualification and a new trial under 28 U.S.C. § 144. That
      statute, like § 455(b)(1), requires disqualification for “bias or
      prejudice”.
In denying respondents’ claim, the Court stated that
      “[t]he alleged bias and prejudice to be disqualifying must stem from
      an extrajudicial source and result in an opinion on the merits on
      some basis other than what the judge learned from his participation
      in the case.” 384 U.S., at 583, 86 S.Ct., at 1710.”



     In LITEKY (supra), it has been held that it is desirable to have

the same Judge in the successive causes. They have to be faithful to

oath. Following observation has been made:
“To take a common example, litigants (like petitioners here) often
      seek disqualification based upon a judge’s prior participation, in a
      judicial capacity, in some related litigation. Those allegations are
      meritless in most instances, and their prompt rejection is important
      so the case can proceed. Judges, if faithful to their oath, approach
      every aspect of each case with a neutral and objective disposition.
      They understand their duty to render decisions upon a proper
      record and to disregard earlier judicial contacts with a case or
      party.
Some may argue that a judge will feel the “motivation to vindicate a
      prior conclusion” when confronted with a question for the second or
      third time, for instance, upon trial after a remand.          Ratner,
      Disqualification of Judges for Prior Judicial Actions, 3 How.L.J.
      228, 229­230 (1957).        Still, we accept the notion that the
      “conscientious judge will, as far as possible, make himself aware of
      his biases of this character, and, by that very self­knowledge, nullify
23
their effect.” In re J.P. Linahan, Inc., 138 F.2d 650, 652 (CA2 1943).
The acquired skill and capacity to disregard extraneous matters is
         one of the requisites of judicial office. As a matter of sound
         administration, moreover, it may be necessary and prudent to
         permit judges to preside over successive causes involving the same
         parties or issues. See Rules Governing Section 2255 Proceedings
         for the United States District Courts, Rule 4(a) (“The original motion
         shall be presented promptly to the judge of the district court who
         presided at the movant’s trial and sentenced him, or, if the judge
         who imposed sentence was not the trial judge, then it shall go to the
         judge who was in charge of that part of the proceedings being
         attacked by the movant”). The public character of the prior and
         present proceedings tends to reinforce the resolve of the judge to
         weigh with care the propriety of his or her decision to hear the case.
Out of this reconciliation of principle and practice comes the
         recognition that a judge’s prior judicial experience and contacts
         need not, and often do not, give rise to reasonable questions
         concerning impartiality.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
25.
In
State of W.B. v. Shivananda Pathak
, (1998) 5 SCC 513, this

Court has laid down that prejudging question of law, policy or

discretion, Judge is not disqualified to hear a case.                It was held as

under:
“25. Bias may be defined as a preconceived opinion or a
         predisposition or predetermination to decide a case or an issue in a
         particular manner, so much so that such predisposition does not
         leave the mind open to conviction. It is, in fact, a condition of mind,
         which sways judgments and renders the judge unable to exercise
         impartiality in a particular case.
26. Bias has many forms. It may be pecuniary bias, personal bias,
         bias as to subject­matter in dispute, or policy bias etc. In the
         instant case, we are not concerned with any of these forms of bias.
         We have to deal, as we shall presently see, a new form of bias,
         namely, bias on account of judicial obstinacy.
27. Judges, unfortunately, are not infallible. As human beings, they
         can commit mistakes even in the best of their judgments reflective
         of their hard labour, impartial things and objective assessment of
         the problem put before them. In the matter of interpretation of
         statutory provisions or while assessing the evidence in a particular
         case or deciding questions of law or facts, mistakes may be
         committed bona fide which are corrected at the appellate stage. This
         explains the philosophy behind the hierarchy of courts. Such a
24
mistake can be committed even by a judge of the High Court which
      are corrected in the letters patent appeal, if available.
28. If a judgment is overruled by the higher court, the judicial
      discipline requires that the judge whose judgment is overruled must
      submit to that judgment. He cannot, in the same proceedings or in
      collateral proceedings between the same parties, rewrite the
      overruled judgment. Even if it was a decision on a pure question of
      law which came to be overruled, it cannot be reiterated in the same
      proceedings at the subsequent stage by reason of the fact that the
      judgment of the higher court which has overruled that judgment,
      not only binds the parties to the proceedings but also the judge who
      had earlier rendered that decision. That judge may have his
      occasion to reiterate his dogmatic views on a particular question of
      common law or constitutional law in some other case but not in the
      same case. If it is done, it would be exhibitive of his bias in his own
      favour to satisfy his egoistic judicial obstinacy.
29. As pointed out earlier, an essential requirement of judicial
      adjudication is that the judge is impartial and neutral and is in a
      position to apply his mind objectively to the facts of the case put up
      before him. If he is predisposed or suffers from prejudices or has a
      biased mind, he disqualifies himself from acting as a judge. But
      Frank, J. of the United States in Linahan, In re, 138 F 2d 650 says:
“If, however, ‘bias’ and ‘partiality’ be defined to mean the total
         absence of preconceptions in the mind of the judge, then no one
         has ever had a fair trial and no one will. The human mind, even
         at infancy, is no blank piece of paper. We are born with
         predispositions…. Much harm is done by the myth that, merely
         by … taking the oath of office as a judge, a man ceases to be
         human and strips himself of all predilections, becomes a
         passionless thinking machine.”
         [See also Griffith and Street, Principles of Administrative Law
      (1973 Edn.), p. 155; Judicial Review of Administrative Action by de
      Smith (1980 Edn.), p. 272; II Administrative Law Treatise by Davis
      (1958 Edn.), p. 130.]
30. These remarks imply a distinction between prejudging of facts
      specifically relating to a party, as against preconceptions or
      predispositions about general questions of law, policy or discretion.
      The implication is that though in the former case, a judge would
      disqualify himself, in the latter case, he may not. But this question
      does not arise here and is left as it is.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
26.   In Asok Pande v. Supreme Court of India, (2018) 5 SCC 341,

question of allocation of work and roster of Benches came up for

consideration.    The Court has laid down that Chief Justice has to
25
consider specialization of each Judge and other factors.             The Court

observed:
“10. Recently, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Campaign for
Judicial Accountability and Reforms v. Union of India
, (2018) 1 SCC
      196, held that the principle which was noticed and recognised in
      the decision of this Court in
State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand
,
      (1998) 1 SCC 1, in relation to the jurisdiction and authority of the
      Chief Justice of the High Court “must apply proprio vigore as
      regards the power of the Chief Justice of India”. The position of the
      Chief Justice was reiterated with the following observations: (SCC
      pp. 199­200, paras 7 & 8)
             “7. The aforesaid position though stated as regards the High
         Court, we are absolutely certain that the said principle is
         applicable to the Supreme Court.
We are disposed to think so.
Unless such a position is clearly stated, there will be utter
         confusion. Be it noted, this has been also the convention of this
         Court, and the convention has been so because of the law. We
         have to make it clear without any kind of hesitation that the
         convention is followed because of the principles of law and
         because of judicial discipline and decorum. Once the Chief
         Justice is stated to be the Master of the Roster, he alone has the
         prerogative to constitute Benches. Needless to say, neither a
         two­Judge Bench nor a three­Judge Bench can allocate the
         matter to themselves or direct the composition for constitution of
         a Bench. To elaborate, there cannot be any direction to the Chief
         Justice of India as to who shall be sitting on the Bench or who
         shall take up the matter as that touches the composition of the
         Bench. We reiterate such an order cannot be passed. It is not
         countenanced in law and is not permissible.
8. An institution has to function within certain parameters
         and that is why there are precedents, rules and conventions. As
         far as the composition of Benches is concerned, we accept the
         principles stated in Prakash Chand, which were stated in the
         context of the High Court, and clearly state that the same shall
         squarely apply to the Supreme Court and there cannot be any
         kind of command or order directing the Chief Justice of India to
         constitute a particular Bench.”
12. Quite apart from the fact that the relief sought is contrary to
      legal and constitutional principle, there is a fundamental fallacy in
      the approach of the petitioner, which must be set at rest. The
      petitioner seeks the establishment of a binding precept under which
      a three­Judge Bench in the Court of the Chief Justice must consist
      of the Chief Justice and his two seniormost colleagues alone while
      the Constitution Bench should consist of five seniormost Judges (or,
      as he suggests, three “seniormost” and two “juniormost” Judges).
      There is no constitutional foundation on the basis of which such a
      suggestion can be accepted. For one thing, as we have noticed
      earlier, this would intrude into the exclusive duty and authority of
26
the Chief Justice to constitute Benches and to allocate cases to
them. Moreover, the petitioner seems to harbour a misconception
that certain categories of cases or certain courts must consist only
of the seniormost Judges in terms of appointment. Every Judge
appointed to this Court under
Article 124
of the Constitution is
invested with the equal duty of adjudicating cases which come to
the Court and are assigned by the Chief Justice. Seniority in terms
of appointment has no bearing on which cases a Judge should hear.
It is a settled position that a judgment delivered by a Judge speaks
for the Court (except in the case of a concurring or dissenting
opinion). The Constitution makes a stipulation in
Article 124(3)
for
the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court from the High
Courts, from the Bar and from amongst distinguished jurists.
Appointment to the Supreme Court is conditioned upon the
fulfilment of the qualifications prescribed for the holding of that
office under
Article 124(3).
Once appointed, every Judge of the
Court is entitled to and in fact, duty­bound, to hear such cases as
are assigned by the Chief Justice. Judges drawn from the High
Courts are appointed to this Court after long years of service.
Members of the Bar who are elevated to this Court similarly are
possessed of wide and diverse experience gathered during the
course of the years of practice at the Bar. To suggest that any Judge
would be more capable of deciding particular cases or that certain
categories of cases should be assigned only to the seniormost
among the Judges of the Supreme Court has no foundation in
principle or precedent. To hold otherwise would be to cast a
reflection on the competence and ability of other Judges to deal with
all cases assigned by the Chief Justice notwithstanding the fact that
they have fulfilled the qualifications mandated by the Constitution
for appointment to the office.
14. The Chartered High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta and
Madras have a long history of over a hundred and fifty years. Each
of them has marked its sesquicentennial. Many High Courts are not
far behind in vintage. Some are of a recent origin. Over the course of
their judicial history, High Courts have evolved conventions in
matters governing practice and procedure. These conventions
provide guidance to the Chief Justice in the allocation of work,
including in the constitution of Benches. The High Courts
periodically publish a roster of work under the authority of the
Chief Justice. The roster indicates the constitution of Benches,
Division and Single. The roster will indicate the subject­matter of
the cases assigned to each Bench. Different High Courts have their
own traditions in regard to the period for which the published roster
will continue, until a fresh roster is notified. Individual Judges have
their own strengths in terms of specialisation. The Chief Justice of
the High Court has to bear in mind the area of specialisation of
each Judge, while deciding upon the allocation of work. However,
specialisation is one of several aspects which weigh with the Chief
Justice. A newly appointed Judge may be rotated in a variety of
assignments to enable the Judge to acquire expertise in diverse
branches of law. Together with the need for specialisation, there is a
27
need for Judges to have a broadbased understanding of diverse
areas of law. In deciding upon the allocation of work and the
constitution of Benches, Chief Justices have to determine the
number of Benches which need to be assigned to a particular
subject­matter keeping in view the inflow of work and arrears. The
Chief Justice of the High Court will have regard to factors such as
the pendency of cases in a given area, the need to dispose of the
oldest cases, prioritising criminal cases where the liberty of the
subject is involved and the overall strength, in terms of numbers, of
the Court. Different High Courts have assigned priorities to certain
categories of cases such as those involving senior citizens, convicts
who are in jail and women litigants. These priorities are considered
while preparing the roster. Impending retirements have to be borne
in mind since the assignment given to a Judge who is due to demit
office would have to be entrusted to another Bench when the
vacancy arises. These are some of the considerations which are
borne in mind. The Chief Justice is guided by the need to ensure
the orderly functioning of the Court and the expeditious disposal of
cases. The publication of the roster on the websites of the High
Courts provides notice to litigants and lawyers about the
distribution of judicial work under the authority of the Chief
Justice. This Court was constituted in 1950. In the preparation of
the roster and in the distribution of judicial work, some of the
conventions which are adopted in the High Courts are also relevant,
subject to modifications having regard to institutional requirements.
15. Underlying the submission that the constitution of Benches and
the allocation of cases by the Chief Justice must be regulated by a
procedure cast in iron is the apprehension that absent such a
procedure the power will be exercised arbitrarily. In his capacity as
a Judge, the Chief Justice is primus inter pares: the first among
equals. In the discharge of his other functions, the Chief Justice of
India occupies a position which is sui generis.
Article 124(1)
postulates that the Supreme Court of India shall consist of a Chief
Justice of India and other Judges.
Article 146
reaffirms the position
of the Chief Justice of India as the head of the institution. From an
institutional perspective the Chief Justice is placed at the helm of
the Supreme Court. In the allocation of cases and the constitution
of Benches the Chief Justice has an exclusive prerogative. As a
repository of constitutional trust, the Chief Justice is an institution
in himself. The authority which is conferred upon the Chief Justice,
it must be remembered, is vested in a high constitutional
functionary. The authority is entrusted to the Chief Justice because
such an entrustment of functions is necessary for the efficient
transaction of the administrative and judicial work of the Court. The
ultimate purpose behind the entrustment of authority to the Chief
Justice is to ensure that the Supreme Court is able to fulfil and
discharge the constitutional obligations which govern and provide
the rationale for its existence. The entrustment of functions to the
Chief Justice as the head of the institution, is with the purpose of
securing the position of the Supreme Court as an independent
safeguard for the preservation of personal liberty. There cannot be a
28
presumption of mistrust. The oath of office demands nothing less.”

                                                     (emphasis supplied)



      Thus, rendering a decision on any issue of law and the corrective

procedure of it cannot be said to be ground for recusal of a Judge;
otherwise, no Judge can hear a review, curative petition, or a reference

made to the larger bench.
27.   There may not be even one Judge in this Court who has not

taken a view one way or the other concerning
Section 24
of the Act of

2013, either in this Court or in the High Court. If the submission is

accepted, no Judge will have the power to decide such a matter on the

judicial side.   We have to deal with the cases every day in which

similar or somewhat different questions are involved concerning the

same provision.     For having taken a view once, if recusal is to be

made, it would be very difficult to get a Judge to hear and decide a

question of law.     We have to correct the decision, apply the law,

independently interpret the provisions as per the fact situation of the

case which may not be germane in the earlier matter. A judgment is

not a halting­place, it is stepping stone.       It is not like a holy book

which cannot be amended or corrected. It may also work to the

advantage of all concerned if a Judge having decided the matter either

way is also a member of the larger bench. A Judge who had rendered

any decision in a smaller combination is not disqualified from being
29
part of a larger Bench when a reference is made to the larger bench.
Rather, it is a consistent practice prevailing in various High Courts as

well as of this Court to include the same Judge/Judges in larger

Benches. Shri Mohan Parasaran, learned senior counsel has referred

to Rule 8 of Delhi High Court Rules contained in Chapter 3; Part C

which reads as under:
“8. Judge or Judges who refer a case shall ordinarily sit on
         the bench which considers the reference – The Judges or a
         Bench by whom any question or case is referred shall
         ordinarily be members of the Division Bench or Full Bench, as
         the case may be appointed to consider such question or case.”


      The rule provides that a Judge who referred a case has to sit on

the larger Bench to consider the reference. In the present case also,

the reference has been made by me and my recusal has been sought.
Thus, based on the consistent practice, we find that no ground for

recusal is made out.
28.   Recusal has been prayed for on the ground of legal pre­

disposition. Where recusal is sought on the ground, various questions

arise for consideration. Firstly, legal pre­disposition is the outcome of

a judicial process of interpretation, and the entire judicial system

exists for refining the same. There is absolutely nothing wrong in

holding a particular view in a previous judgment for or against a view

canvassed by a litigant. No litigant can choose, who should be on the

Bench. He cannot say that a Judge who might have decided a case on
30
a particular issue, which may go against his interest subsequently or

is part of a larger Bench should not hear his case. Furthermore, if a

party or his Counsel can at length argue on the question of recusal of

the Judge before him, he can also successfully question the

correctness of a judgment rendered by him.       A litigant has got the

right to make arguments which suit his cause before a Judge/Judges

having taken a contrary view earlier. Moreover, if it is open to one

litigant to seek recusal and recusal is permitted, then the right has to

be given to the opposite party to seek recusal of a Judge who may

have decided a case against his interest. In case it is permitted to

either side, that would end judicial independence. Then parties will be

choosing Benches to their liking. In that case, the Judges holding a

view can be termed to be disqualified.     In case the submission of

recusal is accepted, the Judges having either side view, cannot hear

the matter and have to recuse from hearing.       In that case to find

neutral Judges would be difficult to find and that would be subvert to

the very concept of independent judicial system. If litigants are given

the right to seek recusal of a judge on the ground that in a smaller

Bench, a view has been taken by the Judge, the correctness of which

has to be decided by the larger Bench, which includes the same

Judge, then on a parity of reasoning recusal might be sought on the

ground of the judge having taken a view one way or the other even in a

different case in which similar issues are involved if the judge has
31
decided similar issues earlier, in the same Court or in a different

Court. This would open the flood gates of forum shopping. Recusal

upon an imagined apprehension of legal pre­disposition would, in

reality amount to acceding to the request that a Judge having a

particular view and leanings in favour of the view which suits a

particular litigant, should man the Bench. It would not only be

allowing Bench hunting but would also be against the judicial

discipline and will erode the confidence of the common man for which

the judicial system survives.
29.   The question that comes to the mind is whether one of us should

recuse in order to prevent the embarrassment caused to a Judge by a

member of the Bar, by seeking his recusal. Recusal would be the

easiest way to solve it. On the other hand, a larger question arises. If

request for recusal on the ground of legal pre­disposition in the form

of a judgment is acceded to, that would destroy the very edifice of an

independent judicial system.
30.   The entire judicial system is based on sound constitutional

principles. The roster making power is bestowed on the Chief Justice

of India so that litigants are not able to choose the Judges before

whom they have to argue a matter, and he is a constitutional

functionary who has been enjoined with this task at the highest
32
pedestal to exercise the power of roster making. He is the repository of

faith.    Once he has exercised his power, it is not for the Judges to

choose. As per their oath, they have to discharge their duties without

fear and favour and in a dispassionate manner without any ill will,

bias towards litigants, or a cause. The question which arises is

whether merely delivering a judgment of which correctness is to be

examined, would disqualifying a Judge from being part of the larger

Bench. The answer to the question has to be in the negative as there

is a consistent practice of this Court which has evolved that the

Judges who have rendered a decision earlier in smaller combination,

have also formed part of the larger Bench, and there are umpteen

occasions as mentioned above when Judges have overruled their own

view. In LITEKY (supra), the United States Supreme Court has held

that rather it may be advantageous to have them on a Bench hearing

the matter as judgments are rendered after hearing the arguments of

learned counsel for the parties. There is always a scope to further

develop the law and to correct the errors, and this can better be done

by having Judges on the Bench, who have earlier rendered judgments

with respect to the subject­matter to which of the parties the view

taken suits is not relevant.
31.      If requests for recusal are acceded to for the asking, litigants will

be unscrupulously taking over the roster making powers of the Chief
33
Justice and that would tantamount to interference with the judicial

system, by the mighty to have a particular Bench by employing several

means and putting all kinds of pressures from all angles all around. It

is the test of the ability of the judicial system to withstand such

onslaught made from every nook and corner. Any recusal in the

circumstances is ruled out, such prayer strengthens the stern

determination not to succumb to any such pressure and not to recuse

on the ground on which recusal sought because for any reason, such

a prayer is permitted, even once, it would tantamount to cowardice

and give room to big and mighty to destroy the very judicial system.
Moreover, recusal in such unjustified circumstances, would become

the norm.
32.   It was vehemently urged by learned senior counsel on behalf of

the respondents that they may feel embarrassed in arguing a

proposition of law which has been dealt with in the Indore

Development Authority elaborately. We find that given that arguments

on recusal, spilling for over a day, could be made vociferously, in a

belligerent fashion and with utmost ability, the submission that the

learned counsel would feel diffident in arguing a proposition of law on

merits, is difficult to accept. We feel that there is no dearth of talent

in this Court to argue a matter most effectively even against the tide.
The lawyers have compelled this Court time and again to change its
34
views and to refine the law. This Court is known for not a particular

view but for refining the law and that has been done with the help,

ability and legal ingenuity of the lawyers to convince this Court with

aplomb to correct its view. That is how the process goes on as the

entire system exists for the people of this country. Under the guise of

that, a reasonable man should not have even an iota of doubt as to the

impartiality of the Tribunal. If recusal is made, it would tantamount to

giving room to unscrupulous litigant to have a Judge of their choice

who can share the views which are to be canvassed by them. No such

right can be given to any person under the aforesaid guise; there is no

cause for any apprehension. There is no room to entertain the same.
The plea cannot be termed anything other than Bench hunting, if it is

said that until and unless the one which suits a litigant is found the

matters are not to be argued.
33.   It also passes comprehension whether in a Constitution Bench,

consisting of five Judges, prayer for recusal of a Judge who has taken

a particular view earlier, is justified? The Bench consists of five

Judges. Each Judge may have his own view. They would not succumb

to a view held by one of the judges. They may also have their own view

in the matter. Are they also to be disqualified? In case the petitioner's

prayer is to be allowed, then they may want a Bench of 5:0 in their

favour or 4 in favour and 1 against or 3 in favour and 2 against. That
35
is not how the system can survive. The very idea of seeking recusal is

inconceivable and wholly unjustified, and the prayer cannot be

acceded to.
34.   The decision in Supreme Court Advocates­on­Record
Association

& Anr. v. Union of India
(recusal matter), (2016) 5 SCC 808, has been

referred to. Recusal of Justice Khehar (as His Lordship then was) was

sought from the Constitution Bench. The principles have been

summarised by this Court. The first principle which this Court has

discussed is the impartiality of a Judge. It has been observed by

Justice Chelameswar that the first principle is that the Judge should

be impartial. Merely having a legal opinion has no connection with

impartiality. It may be within the purview of the legal correctness of

the opinion. The second test is Latin maxim nemo judex in re sua i.e.,

no man shall be a Judge in his own cause. A judgment rendered by a

Judge is not in his own cause. Grant Hammond, a former Judge of the

Court of Appeal of New Zealand has in his book ‘Judicial Recusal’,

which has been referred to, observed that English Common Law on

recusal was both simple and highly constrained; a Judge could only

be disqualified for a direct pecuniary interest or consanguinity,

affinity, friendship or enmity with a party or because he was or had

been a party’s advocate. The Court has discussed the matter thus:
36
“12. Grant Hammond, a former Judge of the Court of Appeal of New
Zealand and an academician, in his book titled Judicial Recusal
traced out principles on the law of recusal as developed in England in
the following words:
“The central feature of the early English common law on
        recusal was both simple and highly constrained: a Judge
        could only be disqualified for a direct pecuniary interest. What
        would today be termed ‘bias’, which is easily the most
        controversial ground for disqualification, was entirely rejected
        as a ground for recusal of Judges, although it was not
        completely dismissed in relation to jurors.
This was in marked contrast to the relatively sophisticated
       canon law, which provided for recusal if a Judge was
       suspected of partiality because of consanguinity, affinity,
       friendship or enmity with a party, or because of his
       subordinate status towards a party or because he was or had
       been a party’s advocate.”

He also pointed out that in contrast in the United States of America,
the subject is covered by legislation.
13. Dimes v. Grand Junction Canal, (1852) 3 HLC 759, is one of the
earliest cases where the question of disqualification of a Judge was
considered. The ground was that he had some pecuniary interest in
the matter. We are not concerned with the details of the dispute
between the parties to the case. Lord Chancellor Cottenham heard
the appeal against an order of the Vice­Chancellor and confirmed the
order. The order went in favour of the defendant Company. A year
later, Dimes discovered that Lord Chancellor Cottenham had shares
in the defendant Company. He petitioned the Queen for her
intervention. The litigation had a long and chequered history, the
details of which are not material for us. Eventually, the matter
reached the House of Lords. The House dismissed the appeal of
Dimes on the ground that setting aside of the order of the Lord
Chancellor would still leave the order of the Vice­Chancellor intact as
Lord Chancellor had merely affirmed the order of the Vice­
Chancellor. However, the House of Lords held that participation of
Lord Cottenham in the adjudicatory process was not justified.
Though Lord Campbell observed: (Dimes case, ER p. 315)
       “… No one can suppose that Lord Cottenham could be, in the
       remotest degree, influenced by the interest he had in this
       concern: but, my Lords, it is of the last importance that the
       maxim that no man is to be a Judge in his own cause should
       be held sacred. And that is not to be confined to a cause in
       which he is a party, but applies to a cause in which he has an
       interest. … This will be a lesson to all inferior tribunals to take
       care not only that in their decrees they are not influenced by
       their personal interest, but to avoid the appearance of
       labouring under such an influence.”
37
14. Summing up the principle laid down by the abovementioned
case, Hammond observed as follows:
“The ‘no­pecuniary interest’ principle as expressed in Dimes
       requires a judge to be automatically disqualified when there is
       neither actual bias nor even an apprehension of bias on the
       part of that judge. The fundamental philosophical
       underpinning of Dimes is therefore predicated on a conflict of
       interest approach.”
15. The next landmark case on the question of “bias” is R. v. Gough,
1993 AC 646. Gough was convicted for an offence of conspiracy to
rob and was sentenced to imprisonment for fifteen years by the trial
court. It was a trial by Jury. After the conviction was announced, it
was brought to the notice of the trial court that one of the jurors was
a neighbour of the convict. The convict appealed to the Court of
Appeal unsuccessfully. One of the grounds on which the conviction
was challenged was that, in view of the fact that one of the jurors
being a neighbour of the convict presented a possibility of bias on her
part and therefore the conviction is unsustainable. The Court of
Appeal noticed that there are two lines of authority propounding two
different tests for determining disqualification of a Judge on the
ground of bias:
(1) “real danger” test; and
(2) “reasonable suspicion” test.
The Court of Appeal confirmed the conviction by applying the “real
danger” test.
16. The matter was carried further to the House of Lords. Lord Goff
noticed that there are a series of authorities which are “not only large
in number but bewildering in their effect”. After analysing the
judgment in Dimes, Lord Goff held: (Gough case, AC p. 661 F­G)
        “In such a case, therefore, not only is it irrelevant that there
        was in fact no bias on the part of the tribunal, but there is no
        question of investigating, from an objective point of view,
        whether there was any real likelihood of bias, or any
        reasonable suspicion of bias, on the facts of the particular
        case. The nature of the interest is such that public confidence
        in the administration of justice requires that the decision
        should not stand.”
In other words, where a Judge has a pecuniary interest, no further
inquiry as to whether there was a “real danger” or “reasonable
suspicion” of bias is required to be undertaken. But in other cases,
such an inquiry is required and the relevant test is the “real danger”
test: (Gough case, AC pp. 661 G­H­662 A­B)
        “… But [in other cases], the inquiry is directed to the question
        whether there was such a degree of possibility of bias on the
        part of the tribunal that the court will not allow the decision to
        stand. Such a question may arise in a wide variety of
        circumstances. These include … cases in which the member of
        the tribunal has an interest in the outcome of the proceedings,
        which falls short of a direct pecuniary interest. Such interests
38
may vary widely in their nature, in their effect, and in their
       relevance to the subject­matter of the proceedings; and there
       is no rule … that the possession of such an interest
       automatically disqualifies the member of the tribunal from
       sitting. Each case falls to be considered on its own facts.”
17. The learned Judge examined various important cases on the
subject and finally concluded: (Gough case, AC p. 670 E­G)
      “… Finally, for the avoidance of doubt, I prefer to state the test
      in terms of real danger rather than real likelihood, to ensure
      that the court is thinking in terms of possibility rather than
      probability of bias. Accordingly, having ascertained the
      relevant circumstances, the court should ask itself whether,
      having regard to those circumstances, there was a real danger
      of bias on the part of the relevant member of the tribunal in
      question, in the sense that he might unfairly regard (or have
      unfairly regarded) with favour, or disfavour, the case of a party
      to the issue under consideration by him….”
18. Lord Woolf agreed with Lord Goff in his separate judgment. He
held: (Gough case, AC p. 673 F­G)
       “… There is only one established special category and that
       exists where the tribunal has a pecuniary or proprietary
       interest in the subject­matter of the proceedings as in Dimes v.
       Grand Junction Canal. The courts should hesitate long before
       creating any other special category since this will immediately
       create uncertainty as to what are the parameters of that
       category and what is the test to be applied in the case of that
       category. The real danger test is quite capable of producing the
       right answer and ensure that the purity of justice is
       maintained across the range of situations where bias may
       exist.”
19. In substance, the Court held that in cases where the Judge has a
pecuniary interest in the outcome of the proceedings, his
disqualification is automatic. No further enquiry whether such an
interest lead to a “real danger” or gave rise to a “reasonable
suspicion” is necessary. In cases of other interest, the test to
determine whether the Judge is disqualified to hear the case is the
“real danger” test.
20. The R. v. Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex p
Pinochet Ugarte (No.2), (2000) 1 AC 119, added one more category to
the cases of automatic disqualification for a Judge. Pinochet, a
former Chilean dictator, was sought to be arrested and extradited
from England for his conduct during his incumbency in office. The
issue was whether Pinochet was entitled to immunity from such
arrest or extradition. Amnesty International, a charitable
organisation, participated in the said proceedings with the leave of
the Court. The House of Lords held that Pinochet did not enjoy any
such immunity. Subsequently, it came to light that Lord Hoffman,
39
one of the members of the Board which heard Pinochet case, was a
Director and Chairman of a company (known as AICL) which was
closely linked with Amnesty International. An application was made
to the House of Lords to set aside the earlier judgment on the ground
of bias on the part of Lord Hoffman.
21. The House of Lords examined the following questions:
(i) Whether the connection of Lord Hoffman with Amnesty
International required him to be automatically disqualified?
(ii) Whether an enquiry into the question whether cause of Lord
Hoffman’s connection with Amnesty International posed a real
danger or caused a reasonable apprehension that his judgment is
biased — is necessary?
(iii) Did it make any difference that Lord Hoffman was only a member
of a company associated with Amnesty International which was in
fact interested in securing the extradition of Senator Pinochet?
22. Lord Wilkinson summarised the principles on which a Judge is
disqualified to hear a case. As per Lord Wilkinson: (Pinochet case, AC
pp. 132 G­H­133 A­C)
      “The fundamental principle is that a man may not be a Judge
      in his own cause. This principle, as developed by the courts,
      has two very similar but not identical implications. First it
      may be applied literally: if a Judge is in fact a party to the
      litigation or has a financial or proprietary interest in its
      outcome then he is indeed sitting as a Judge in his own cause.
      In that case, the mere fact that he is a party to the action or
      has a financial or proprietary interest in its outcome is
      sufficient to cause his automatic disqualification. The second
      application of the principle is where a Judge is not a party to
      the suit and does not have a financial interest in its outcome,
      but in some other way his conduct or behaviour may give rise
      to a suspicion that he is not impartial, for example because of
      his friendship with a party. This second type of case is not
      strictly speaking an application of the principle that a man
      must not be Judge in his own cause, since the Judge will not
      normally be himself benefiting, but providing a benefit for
      another by failing to be impartial.
In my judgment, this case falls within the first category
      of case, viz. where the Judge is disqualified because he is a
      Judge in his own cause. In such a case, once it is shown that
      the Judge is himself a party to the cause, or has a relevant
      interest in its subject­matter, he is disqualified without any
      investigation into whether there was a likelihood or suspicion
      of bias. The mere fact of his interest is sufficient to disqualify
      him unless he has made sufficient disclosure….”

And framed the question: (AC p. 134B­C)
      “… the question then arises whether, in non­financial
      litigation, anything other than a financial or proprietary
40
interest in the outcome is sufficient automatically to disqualify
      a man from sitting as Judge in the cause.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
He opined that although the earlier cases have
       “all dealt with automatic disqualification on the grounds of
       pecuniary interest, there is no good reason in principle for so
       limiting automatic disqualification”. (AC p. 135B)
23. Lord Wilkinson concluded that Amnesty International and its
associate company known as AICL, had a non­pecuniary interest
established that Senator Pinochet was not immune from the process
of extradition. He concluded that: (Pinochet case, AC p. 135C­D)
       “… the matter at issue does not relate to money or economic
       advantage but is concerned with the promotion of the cause,
       the rationale disqualifying a Judge applies just as much if the
       Judge’s decision will lead to the promotion of a cause in which
       the Judge is involved together with one of the parties.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
24. After so concluding, dealing with the last question, whether the
fact that Lord Hoffman was only a member of AICL but not a member
of Amnesty International made any difference to the principle, Lord
Wilkinson opined that: (Pinochet case, AC p. 132H­133A)
       even though a Judge may not have financial interest in the
       outcome of a case, but in some other way his conduct or
       behaviour may give rise to a suspicion that he is not
       impartial….
and held that: (AC p. 135 E­F)
       “… If the absolute impartiality of the judiciary is to be
       maintained, there must be a rule which automatically
       disqualifies a Judge who is involved, whether personally or as
       a Director of a company, in promoting the same causes in the
       same organisation as is a party to the suit. There is no room
       for fine distinctions….”
This aspect of the matter was considered in
P.D. Dinakaran (1) v.
Judges Inquiry Committee
, (2011) 8 SCC 380
25. From the above decisions, in our opinion, the following principles
emerge:
25.1. If a Judge has a financial interest in the outcome of a case, he
is automatically disqualified from hearing the case.
25.2. In cases where the interest of the Judge in the case is other
than financial, then the disqualification is not automatic but an
enquiry is required whether the existence of such an interest
disqualifies the Judge tested in the light of either on the principle of
“real danger” or “reasonable apprehension” of bias.
25.3. The Pinochet case added a new category i.e. that the Judge is
automatically disqualified from hearing a case where the Judge is
41
interested in a cause which is being promoted by one of the parties to
the case.
26. It is nobody’s case that, in the case at hand, Justice Khehar had
any pecuniary interest or any other interest falling under the second
of the abovementioned categories. By the very nature of the case, no
such interest can arise at all.
27. The question is whether the principle of law laid down in
Pinochet case is attracted. In other words, whether Justice Khehar
can be said to be sharing any interest which one of the parties is
promoting. All the parties to these proceedings claim to be promoting
the cause of ensuring the existence of an impartial and independent
judiciary. The only difference of opinion between the parties is
regarding the process by which such a result is to be achieved.
Therefore, it cannot be said that Justice Khehar shares any interest
which any one of the parties to the proceeding is seeking to promote.
28. The implication of Shri Nariman’s submission is that Justice
Khehar would be predetermined to hold the impugned legislation to
be invalid. We fail to understand the stand of the petitioners. If such
apprehension of the petitioners comes true, the beneficiaries would
be the petitioners only. The grievance, if any, on this ground should
be on the part of the respondents.
29. The learned Attorney General appearing for the Union of India
made an emphatic statement that the Union of India has no objection
for Justice Khehar hearing the matter as a Presiding Judge of the
Bench.
30. No precedent has been brought to our notice, where courts ruled
at the instance of the beneficiary of bias on the part of the
adjudicator, that a judgment or an administrative decision is either
voidable or void on the ground of bias. On the other hand, it is a well­
established principle of law that an objection based on bias of the
adjudicator can be waived. Courts generally did not entertain such
objection raised belatedly by the aggrieved party:
“The right to object to a disqualified adjudicator may be
       waived, and this may be so even where the disqualification is
       statutory. The court normally insists that the objection shall
       be taken as soon as the party prejudiced knows the facts
       which entitle him to object. If, after he or his advisors know of
       the disqualification, they let the proceedings continue without
       protest, they are held to have waived their objection and the
       determination cannot be challenged.”

In our opinion, the implication of the above principle is that only a
party who has suffered or is likely to suffer an adverse adjudication
because of the possibility of bias on the part of the adjudicator can
raise the objection.
42
31. The significant power as described by Shri Nariman does not
 inhere only to the members of the Collegium, but inheres in every
 Judge of this Court who might be called upon to express his opinion
 regarding the proposals of various appointments of the High Court
 Judges, Chief Justices or Judges of this Court, while the members of
 the Collegium are required to exercise such “significant power” with
 respect to each and every appointment of the abovementioned
 categories, the other Judges of this Court are required to exercise
 such “significant power”, at least with respect to the appointments to
 or from the High Court with which they were earlier associated with
 either as Judges or Chief Justices. The argument of Shri Nariman, if
 accepted would render all the Judges of this Court disqualified from
 hearing the present controversy. A result not legally permitted by the
 “doctrine of necessity”.
Justice J.S. Khehar, in his opinion, has observed thus:
“57. The reason that was pointed out against me, for seeking my
  recusal was, that I was a part of the 1 + 4 Collegium. But that
  should have been a disqualification for Anil R. Dave, J. as well.
  When he commenced hearing of the matters, and till 7­4­2015, he
  suffered the same alleged disqualification. Yet, the objection raised
  against me, was not raised against him. When confronted, Mr Fali
  S. Nariman vociferously contested, that he had not sought the
  recusal of Anil R. Dave, J. He supported his assertion with proof.
  One wonders, why did he not seek the recusal of Anil R. Dave, J.?
  There is no doubt about the fact, that I have been a member of the
  1 + 4 Collegium, and it is likely that I would also shortly become a
  Member of NJAC, if the present challenge raised by the petitioners
  was not to succeed. I would therefore remain a part of the selection
  procedure, irrespective of the process which prevails. That however
  is the position with reference to four of us (on the instant five­Judge
  Bench). Besides me, my colleagues on the Bench — J.
Chelameswar, Madan B. Lokur and Kurian Joseph, JJ. would in
  due course be a part of the Collegium (if the writ petitioners before
  this Court were to succeed), or alternatively, would be a part of
  NJAC (if the writ petitioners were to fail). In such eventuality, the
  averment of conflict of interest, ought to have been raised not only
  against me, but also against my three colleagues. But, that was not
  the manner in which the issue has been canvassed. In my
  considered view, the prayer for my recusal is not well founded. If I
  were to accede to the prayer for my recusal, I would be initiating a
  wrong practice, and laying down a wrong precedent. A Judge may
  recuse at his own, from a case entrusted to him by the Chief
  Justice. That would be a matter of his own choosing. But recusal at
  the asking of a litigating party, unless justified, must never to be
  acceded to. For that would give the impression, of the Judge had
  been scared out of the case, just by the force of the objection. A
  Judge before he assumes his office, takes an oath to discharge his
  duties without fear or favour. He would breach his oath of office, if
  he accepts a prayer for recusal, unless justified. It is my duty to
43
discharge my responsibility with absolute earnestness and sincerity.
It is my duty to abide by my oath of office to uphold the
        Constitution and the laws. My decision to continue to be a part of
        the Bench, flows from the oath which I took, at the time of my
        elevation to this Court.
(emphasis supplied)

      Justice Lokur, in his opinion, has observed:
“60. In my respectful opinion, when an application is made for the
        recusal of a Judge from hearing a case, the application is made to
        the Judge concerned and not to the Bench as a whole. Therefore,
        my learned brother Justice Khehar is absolutely correct in stating
        that the decision is entirely his, and I respect his decision.
65. The issue of recusal from hearing a case is not as simple as it
        appears. The questions thrown up are quite significant and since it
        appears that such applications are gaining frequency, it is time that
        some procedural and substantive rules are framed in this regard. If
        appropriate rules are framed, then, in a given case, it would avoid
        embarrassment to other Judges on the Bench.”

       It has been held that decision to recuse is that of the Judge

concerned, and unjustified pressure should never be allowed.
35.    Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, has relied upon

the decision in
Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of India & Ors.
, (2014) 8

SCC 470. Recusal of the Bench was sought by way of filing a petition.
The embarrassment which is caused by such a prayer, concept of

correction of a mistake, if any, recognition of mistake and its

rectification have also been considered. This Court has observed:
“7. Now the embarrassment part. Having gone through the
        pleadings of the writ petition we were satisfied that nothing
        expressed therein could be assumed as would humiliate or
        discomfort us by putting us to shame. To modify an earlier order
        passed by us for a mistake we may have committed, which is
        apparent on the face of the record, is a jurisdiction we regularly
        exercise under
Article 137
of the Constitution of India. Added to
        that, it is open to a party to file a curative petition as held by this
        Court in
Rupa Ashok Hurra v. Ashok Hurra
, (2002) 4 SCC 388.
44
These jurisdictions are regularly exercised by us, when made out,
       without any embarrassment. Correction of a wrong order would
       never put anyone to shame. Recognition of a mistake, and its
       rectification, would certainly not put us to shame. In our considered
       view, embarrassment would arise when the order assailed is
       actuated by personal and/or extraneous considerations, and the
       pleadings record such an accusation. No such allegation was made
       in the present writ petition. And therefore, we were fully satisfied
       that the feeling entertained by the petitioner, that we would not
       pass an appropriate order, if the order impugned dated 4­3­2014
       was found to be partly or fully unjustified, was totally misplaced.”
36.
In
Subrata Roy Sahara
(supra) this Court has also referred to the

decision of Mr. R.K. Anand’s case (supra) in which it has been

observed that the path of recusal is very often a convenient and a soft

option as a Judge has no vested interest in doing a particular matter.
It is the Constitution of India which enjoins a Judge to duly and

faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge, and judgment,

perform the duties of his office without fear or favour. Affronts, jibes,

and consciously planned snubs should not deter us from discharging

our onerous responsibility. This Court has observed:
“10. We have recorded the above narration, lest we are accused of
       not correctly depicting the submissions as they were canvassed
       before us. In our understanding, the oath of our office required us
       to go ahead with the hearing. And not to be overawed by such
       submissions. In our view, not hearing the matter, would constitute
       an act in breach of our oath of office, which mandates us to perform
       the duties of our office, to the best of our ability, without fear or
       favour, affection or ill will.
11. This is certainly not the first time when solicitation for recusal
       has been sought by the learned counsel. Such a recorded
       peremptory prayer was made by Mr R.K. Anand, an eminent Senior
       Advocate, before the High Court of Delhi seeking the recusal of Mr
       Justice Manmohan Sarin from hearing his personal case. Mr
       Justice Manmohan Sarin while declining the request made by Mr
       R.K. Anand, observed as under:
45
“The path of recusal is very often a convenient and a soft
     option. This is especially so since a Judge really has no vested
     interest in doing a particular matter. However, the oath of
     office taken under
Article 219
of the Constitution of India
     enjoins the Judge to duly and faithfully and to the best of his
     knowledge and judgment, perform the duties of office without
     fear or favour, affection or ill will while upholding the
     Constitution and the laws. In a case, where unfounded and
     motivated allegations of bias are sought to be made with a
     view of forum hunting/Bench preference or brow­beating the
     Court, then, succumbing to such a pressure would
     tantamount to not fulfilling the oath of office.”

The above determination of the High Court of Delhi was assailed
before this Court in R.K. Anand v. Delhi High Court, (2009) 8 SCC
106. The determination of the High Court whereby Mr Justice
Manmohan Sarin declined to withdraw from the hearing of the case
came to be upheld, with the following observations: (SCC p. 192,
para 263)

     “263. The above passage, in our view, correctly sums up what
     should be the court’s response in the face of a request for
     recusal made with the intent to intimidate the court or to get
     better of an ‘inconvenient’ Judge or to obfuscate the issues or to
     cause obstruction and delay the proceedings or in any other
     way frustrate or obstruct the course of justice.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)

In fact, the observations of the High Court of Delhi and those of this
Court reflected exactly how it felt, when the learned counsel
addressed the Court at the commencement of the hearing. If it was
the learned counsel’s posturing antics, aimed at bench­hunting or
bench­hopping (or should we say, bench­avoiding), we would not
allow that. Affronts, jibes and carefully and consciously planned
snubs could not deter us from discharging our onerous
responsibility. We could at any time during the course of hearing
walk out and make way for another Bench to decide the matter, if
ever we felt that that would be the righteous course to follow.
Whether or not it would be better for another Bench to hear this
case will emerge from the conclusions, we will draw, in the course of
the present determination.
131. We shall now deal with the substance, and the import, of the
judgments relied upon. It is not the case of the petitioner that we
have any connection with either the two Companies under
reference, or any other company/firm which constitutes the Sahara
Group. We may state, that neither of us has even a single share
with the two Companies concerned or with any other company/firm
comprising of the Sahara Group. In order to remove all ambiguity in
the matter we would further state, that neither of us, nor any of our
dependent family members, own even a single share in any
46
company whatsoever. Neither of us has been assisted in this case,
for its determination on merits by any law clerk, intern or staff
member, while hearing, dealing with or deciding the controversy.
Nor has any assertion in this behalf been made against us by the
petitioner or his learned counsel. Accordingly, the factual position,
which was the basis of the decisions relied upon by the learned
counsel, is not available in the facts and circumstances of this case.
In the above view of the matter, it is but natural to conclude, that
none of the judgments relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel
for the petitioner, on the subject of bias, are applicable to the facts
and circumstances of this case. We are satisfied that none of the
disguised aspersions cast by the learned Senior Counsel, would be
sufficient to justify the invocation of the maxim, that justice must
not actually be done, but must also appear to be done. As already
noticed above, even though our combination as a Bench, did not
exist at the time, when the present petition was filed, a Special
Bench, with the present composition, was constituted by the
Hon’ble the Chief Justice, as a matter of his conscious
determination. No litigant can be permitted to dissuade us in
discharging the onerous responsibility assigned to us by the Hon’ble
the Chief Justice.
135. Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior Counsel also accused us of
having a predisposition in respect of the controversy. This
predisposition, according to him, appeared to be on the basis of a
strong commitment towards the “other side”. This assertion was
repeated several times during the hearing. But, which is the other
side? In terms of our order dated 31­8­2012 the only gainer on the
other side is the Government of India. The eighth direction of our
order dated 31­8­2012, reads as under: (SCC p. 172, para 326)
     “326.8. SEBI (WTM) if, after the verification of the details
     furnished, is unable to find out the whereabouts of all or any of
     the subscribers, then the amount collected from such
     subscribers will be appropriated to the Government of India.”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)

If the “other side”, is the Government of India, there is certainly no
substance in the aspersion cast by the learned counsel. Just the
above aspect of the matter is sufficient to burst the bubble of all the
carefully crafted insinuations, systematically offloaded, by the
learned counsel for effect and impact.
137. The observations recorded in the above judgment in
Jaswant
Singh v. Virender Singh
, 1995 Supp (1) SCC 384, are fully applicable
to the mannerism and demeanour of the petitioner Mr Subrata Roy
Sahara and some of the learned Senior Counsel. We would have
declined to recuse from the matter, even if the “other side”, had
been a private party. For, our oath of office requires us to discharge
our obligations, without fear or favour. We therefore also commend
to all courts, to similarly repulse all baseless and unfounded
insinuations, unless of course, they should not be hearing a
47
particular matter, for reasons of their direct or indirect involvement.
The benchmark, that justice must not only be done but should also
       appear to be done, has to be preserved at all costs.”
37.
In
R.K. Anand v. Registrar, Delhi High
Court, (2009) 8 SCC 106, it

was observed:
264. We are constrained to pause here for a moment and to express
       grave concern over the fact that lately such tendencies and
       practices are on the increase. We have come across instances where
       one would simply throw a stone on a Judge (who is quite
       defenceless in such matters!) and later on cite the gratuitous attack
       as a ground to ask the Judge to recuse himself from hearing a case
       in which he would be appearing. Such conduct is bound to cause
       deep hurt to the Judge concerned but what is of far greater
       importance is that it defies the very fundamentals of administration
       of justice. A motivated application for recusal, therefore, needs to be
       dealt with sternly and should be viewed ordinarily as interference in
       the due course of justice leading to penal consequences.”
38.
In
Kamini Jaiswal v. Union of India & Anr.
, (2018) 1 SCC 156,

this Court has dealt with the matter of recusal thus:
“24. There is no conflict of interest in such a matter. In case a
       Judge is hearing a matter and if he comes to know that any party is
       unscrupulously trying to influence the decision­making or indulging
       in malpractices, it is incumbent upon the Judge to take cognizance
       of such a matter under the
Contempt of Courts Act
and to deal with
       and punish such person in accordance with law as that is not the
       conflict of interest but the purpose for which the entire system
       exists. Such things cannot be ignored and recusal of a Judge
       cannot be asked on the ground of conflict of interest, it would be the
       saddest day for the judicial system of this country to ignore such
       aspects on the unfounded allegations and materials. It was highly
       improper for the petitioner to allege conflict of interest in the
       petition filed that the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India should not hear
       on judicial side or allocate the matter on the administrative side. It
       appears that in order to achieve this end the particular request has
       been made by filing successive petitions day after the other and
       prayer was made to avoid the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India to
       exercise the power for allocation of cases which was clearly an
       attempt at forum hunting and has to be deprecated in the strongest
       possible words. Making such scandalous remarks also tantamount
       to interfering with administration of justice, an advocate cannot
       escape the responsibility on the ground that he drafted the same in
       his/her personal capacity as
laid down in
Shamsher Singh Bedi v.
       High
Court of Punjab & Haryana, (1996) 7 SCC 99.
In
Charan Lal
       Sahu v. Union of India
, (1988) 3 SCC 255, this Court has observed
48
that in a petition filed under
Article 32
in the form of PIL attempt of
mudslinging against the advocates, Supreme Court and also against
the other constitutional institutions indulged in by an advocate in a
careless manner, meaningless and as contradictory pleadings,
clumsy allegations, contempt was ordered to be drawn. The Registry
was directed not to entertain any PIL petition of the petitioner in
future.
27. This Court considered various categories of forum shopping in
Union of India v. Cipla Ltd.
, (2009) 8 SCC 106. Even making
allegations of a per se conflict of interest require the matter could be
transferred to another Bench, has also been held to be another form
of forum hunting. This Court has considered various decisions
thus: (SCC pp. 318­20, paras 146­155)

   “146. The learned Solicitor General submitted that Cipla was
   guilty of forum shopping inasmuch as it had filed petitions in
   the Bombay High Court, the Karnataka High Court and also an
   affidavit in the Delhi High Court as a member of the Bulk Drug
   Manufacturers Association and had eventually approached the
   Allahabad High Court for relief resulting in the impugned
   judgment and order dated 3­3­2004. It was submitted that since
   Cipla had approached several constitutional courts for relief, the
   proceedings initiated in the Allahabad High Court clearly
   amount to forum shopping.
147. We are not at all in agreement with the learned Solicitor
   General. Forum shopping takes several hues and shades and
   Cipla’s petitions do not fall under any category of forum
   shopping.
148. A classic example of forum shopping is when a litigant
   approaches one Court for relief but does not get the desired relief
   and then approaches another Court for the same relief. This
   occurred in Rajiv Bhatia v. State (NCT of Delhi), (1999) 8 SCC
525. The respondent mother of a young child had filed a petition
   for a writ of habeas corpus in the Rajasthan High Court and
   apparently did not get the required relief from that Court. She
   then filed a petition in the Delhi High Court also for a writ of
   habeas      corpus    and    obtained     the    necessary     relief.
Notwithstanding this, this Court did not interfere with the order
   passed by the Delhi High Court for the reason that this Court
   ascertained the views of the child and found that she did not
   want to even talk to her adoptive parents and therefore the
   custody of the child granted by the Delhi High Court to the
   respondent mother was not interfered with. The decision of this
   Court is on its own facts, even though it is a classic case of
   forum shopping.
149.
In
Arathi Bandi v. Bandi Jagadrakshaka Rao
, (2013) 15
   SCC 790, this Court noted that jurisdiction in a court is not
   attracted by the operation or creation of fortuitous
   circumstances. In that case, circumstances were created by one
   of the parties to the dispute to confer jurisdiction on a particular
   High Court. This was frowned upon by this Court by observing
49
that to allow the assumption of jurisdiction in created
circumstances would only result in encouraging forum
shopping.
150. Another case of creating circumstances for the purposes
of forum shopping was
World Tanker Carrier Corpn. v. SNP
Shipping Services (P) Ltd.
, (1998) 5 SCC 310, wherein it was
observed that the respondent­plaintiff had made a deliberate
attempt to bring the cause of action, namely, a collision between
two vessels on the high seas within the jurisdiction of the
Bombay High Court. Bringing one of the vessels to Bombay in
order to confer jurisdiction on the Bombay High Court had the
character of forum shopping rather than anything else.
151. Another form of forum shopping is taking advantage of a
view held by a particular High Court in contrast to a different
view held by another High Court.
In
Ambica Industries v. CCE
,
(2007) 6 SCC 769, the assessee was from Lucknow. It challenged
an order passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal (“CESTAT”) located in Delhi before the Delhi
High Court. CESTAT had jurisdiction over the State of Uttar
Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and the State of Maharashtra. The Delhi
High Court did not entertain the proceedings initiated by the
assessee for want of territorial jurisdiction. Dismissing the
assessee’s appeal this Court gave the example of an assessee
affected by an assessment order in Bombay invoking the
jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court to take advantage of the law
laid down by
the Delhi High Court or an assessee affected by an
order of assessment made at Bombay invoking the jurisdiction of
the Allahabad High Court to take advantage of the law
laid down
by
it and consequently evade the law
laid down by
the Bombay
High Court. It was said that this could not be allowed and
circumstances such as this would lead to some sort of judicial
anarchy.
152. Yet another form of forum shopping was noticed in
Jagmohan Bahl v. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2014) 16 SCC 501,
wherein it was held that successive bail applications filed by a
litigant ought to be heard by the same learned Judge, otherwise
an unscrupulous litigant would go on filing bail applications
before different Judges until a favourable order is obtained.
Unless this practice was nipped in the bud, it would encourage
unscrupulous litigants and encourage them to entertain the idea
that they can indulge in forum shopping, which has no sanction
in law and certainly no sanctity.
153. Another category of forum shopping is approaching
different courts for the same relief by making a minor change in
the prayer clause of the petition.
In
Udyami Evam Khadi
Gramodyog Welfare Sanstha v. State of U.P.
, (2008) 1 SCC 560, it
was noticed by this Court that four writ applications were filed
by a litigant and although the prayers were apparently different,
the core issue in each petition centred round the recovery of the
amount advanced by the bank. Similarly, substituting some
petitioners for others with a view to confer jurisdiction on a
50
particular court would also amount to forum shopping by that
          group of petitioners.
154. Finally and more recently, in Supreme Court Advocates­
          on­Record
Assn. v. Union of India (Recusal Matter
), (2016) 5 SCC
          808, Khehar, J. noticed yet another form of forum shopping
          where a litigant makes allegations of a perceived conflict of
          interest against a Judge requiring the Judge to recuse from the
          proceedings so that the matter could be transferred to another
          Judge.
155. The decisions referred to clearly lay down the principle
          that the Court is required to adopt a functional test vis­à­vis the
          litigation and the litigant. What has to be seen is whether there
          is any functional similarity in the proceedings between one court
          and another or whether there is some sort of subterfuge on the
          part of a litigant. It is this functional test that will determine
          whether a litigant is indulging in forum shopping or not.”
39.
In
Bal Kishan Giri v. State of Uttar Pradesh
, (2014) 7 SCC 280,

this Court has considered derogatory remarks and efforts to destroy

the system. The relevant portions are extracted hereunder:
“12. This Court in
M.B. Sanghi v. High
Court of Punjab and
       Haryana, (1991) 3 SCC 600, while examining a similar case
       observed: (SCC p. 602, para 2)
            “2. … The foundation of [judicial] system which is based on
            the independence and impartiality of those who man it will be
            shaken if disparaging and derogatory remarks are made
            against the presiding judicial officers with impunity. It is high
            time that we realise that the much cherished judicial
            independence has to be protected not only from the executive
            or the legislature but also from those who are an integral part
            of the system. An independent judiciary is of vital importance
            to any free society.”
13.
In
Asharam M. Jain v. A.T. Gupta
, (1983) 4 SCC 125, while
       dealing with the issue, this Court observed as under: (SCC p. 127,
       para 3)
             “3. … The strains and mortification of litigation cannot be
             allowed to lead litigants to tarnish, terrorise and destroy the
             system of administration of justice by vilification of Judges. It
             is not that Judges need be protected; Judges may well take
             care of themselves. It is the right and interest of the public in
             the due administration of justice that has to be protected.”
14. In Jennison v. Baker, (1972) 2 QB 52, All ER p. 1006d, it was
       observed: (QB p. 66 H)
51
“… ‘The law should not be seen to sit by limply, while those
             who defy it go free, and those who seek its protection lose
             hope.’”
40.    The decision in
All India Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prof.

Kaushal K. Verma
, (2015) 220 DLT 446 (W.P. [C] No.4103/2014),

rendered by one of us, Ravindra Bhat, J., has also been referred, thus:
“25. Before ending this unusually prolix order, which can run into
        the danger of self­vindication, the Court observes that requests for
        recusal are to be based on reasonable apprehensions; they cannot
        be speculative or fanciful suppositions. An observation that needs to
        be emphasized is that recusals generally, and especially those
        fuelled by unjustified demands can be burdensome on the judges
        who are eventually called upon to decide the cause. Whenever
        made, the concerned court or judge so charged is bound to take it
        seriously, as it undermines what is the bedrock of justice delivery­
        impartiality. To borrow the words of Beverely Mclachlin (Chief
        Justice of Canada) ("Judging in a Democratic State") :
"…judges are not living Oracles. They are human beings,
             trained in the law, who struggle to understand the situations
             before them and to resolve them in accordance with the law
             and their consciences. And judges must learn to live with
             being wrong. As human beings, judges learn early in their
             career to deal with criticism. Every new judge dons the judicial
             robes resolved never to make a mistake. And every new judge
             fails. Decisions must sometimes be made without the
             opportunity for full reflection. The law may not be entirely
             clear. The truth may be elusive. In the result, even the best
             judges inevitably are found to have erred. The errors are
             publicly identified by appellate judges and laid plain for all to
             see. The fact that appellate judges themselves have been
             known to err may provide only limited consolation."
If one may add, the greater the experience of the judge, the more
        acutely she or he is aware of her or his fallibility and the pitfalls of
        acting on impulse or prejudice. The journey, which begins with
        certainty, later leads to a path of many grey areas. Given that
        language itself is an imperfect medium, words are but vessels giving
        shape to ideas and that no human being is perfect, no judge can
        claim to be perfect in communicating ideas. The emphasis on a
        phrase here or an expression there, bereft of anything more, would
        not ipso facto disclose a predilection, or pre­disposition to decide in
        a particular manner.”


      There is a concurring opinion thus:
52
“1. I have seen the draft of the order, prepared by my brother S.
      Ravindra Bhat, J., on the request of recusal by the Division Bench
      headed by him. I fully concur with the conclusions reached by him
      and the reasoning leading thereto. I would only add that the request
      for recusal by the Bench ignores the fact that it comprises of two
      Judges each of whom have an independent mind to apply. The
      presence of another Judge with equal say strengthens the rigor of
      the judicial scrutiny and cannot be undermined.”
41.   Mr. Shyam Diwan, learned senior counsel has referred to the

foreign Rules stating “what is at stake is the confidence which the

courts in a democratic society must inspire in the public. Accordingly,

any judge in respect of whom there is a legitimate reason to fear a lack

of impartiality must withdraw”. In support of his submission, he has

referred to
Section 47
of Title 28, Judiciary and Judicial Procedure,

1948 of United States of America; and Rule 24(5)(b) of Rules of Court

of the European Union, stating that there is a statutory bar on any

judge presiding over cases where judgments delivered by him are to be

adjudicated upon in appeal.
42.   The decisions and rules relating to the appeal against Chamber

Judge are not at all relevant. There is no appeal within the Supreme

Court. It has a totally different structure, and has its own corrective

mechanism, need not be gainsaid. There is no room for reasonable

apprehension to be entertained by the clientele of the respondent’s

counsel. There is no question of recusal on pre­disposition as to the

legal issue or as to the relief to be granted, such an apprehension also
53
is baseless. The ultimate test is that it is for the Judge to decide and

to find out whether he will be able to deliver impartial justice to a

cause with integrity with whatever intellectual capacity at his

command and he is not prejudiced by any fact or law and is able to

take an independent view.        The answer would lie in examining

whether without having any bias or without any pressure or not even

irked by such a prayer for recusal, can he decide the case impartially.
In case the answer is that he will be able to deliver justice to the

cause, he cannot and must not recuse from any case as the duty

assigned by the Constitution has to be performed as per the oath and

there lies the larger public interest. He cannot shake the faith that

the common man reposes in the judiciary as it is the last hope for

them.
43.   Having surveyed the precedents cited at the Bar, and having

considered the arguments, it is my considered view that a judge

rendering a judgment on a question of law would not be a bar to her

or his participation if in a larger Bench if that view is referred for re­

consideration.   The previous judgment cannot constitute bias, or a

pre­disposition ­ nor can it seem to be such, so as to raise a

reasonable apprehension of bias.        Nor can expressions through a

judgment (based on the outcome of arguments in an adversarial

process) be a “subject matter” bias on the merits of a norm or legal
54
principle, or provisions. The previous decisions and practice of this

court have clearly shown that there can be and is no bar as the

respondents’ senior counsel argue.      Accepting the plea of recusal

would sound a death knell to the independent system of justice

delivery where litigants would dictate participation of judges of their

liking in particular cases or causes.
44.   Recusal is not to be forced by any litigant to choose a Bench. It

is for the Judge to decide to recuse. The embarrassment of hearing the

lengthy arguments for recusal should not be a compelling reason to

recuse. The law
laid down in
various decisions has compelled me not

to recuse from the case and to perform the duty irrespective of the

consequences, as nothing should come in the way of dispensation of

justice or discharge of duty as a Judge and judicial decision­making.
There is no room for prejudice or bias. Justice has to be pure,

untainted, uninfluenced by any factor, and even decision for recusal

cannot be influenced by outside forces. However, if I recuse, it will be

a dereliction of duty, injustice to the system, and to other Judges who

are or to adorn the Bench/es in the future. I have taken an informed

decision after considering the nitty­gritty of the points at issue, and

very importantly, my conscience. In my opinion, I would be

committing a grave blunder by recusal in the circumstances, on the

grounds prayed for, and posterity will not forgive me down the line for
55
setting a bad precedent. It is only for the interest of the judiciary

(which is supreme) and the system (which is nulli secundus) that has

compelled me not to recuse.
……………………..J.
                                                 (Arun Mishra)


NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 23, 2019.
56
REPORTABLE
         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.9036-9038 OF 2016


INDORE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY                  ...PETITIONER

                                VS.
MANOHARLAL AND ORS. ETC.                      ...RESPONDENTS

                                WITH
[C.A.NO.19532-19533/2017, SLP (C) NO.9798-9799/2016,
SLP (C) NO.17088-17089/2016, SLP (C) NO. 37375/2016,
SLP (C) NO.37372/2016, SLP (C) NO.16573-16605/2016,
SLP   (C)...CC        NO.15967/2016,         C.A.NO.19356/2017,
C.A.NO.19362/2017,             C.A.NO.19361/2017,       C.A.NO.
19358/2017,    C.A.NO.19357/2017,        C.A.NO.    19360/2017,
C.A. NO.19359/2017, SLP(C) NO. 34752-34753/2016, SLP
(C)           NO.15890/2017,                 C.A.NO.19363/2017,
C.A.NO.19364/2017,               C.A.NO.19412/2017,           MA
NO.1423/2017     IN     C.A.     NO.   12247/2016,    SLP     (C)
NO.33022/2017, SLP (C) NO.33127/2017, SLP (C) NO.
33114/2017, MA NO.1787/2017 IN C.A.NO. 10210/2016, MA
NO.1786/2017 IN C.A.NO.10207/2016, MA NO.45/2018 IN
C.A.NO.6239/2017,       SLP      (C)   NO.16051/2019,    DIARY
NO.23842/2018     &      SLP     (C)   NO.    30452/2018,     CA
NO.4835/2015 & SLP (C) NO.30577-30580/2015]
57
ORDER
1.   We have gone through the draft opinion circulated by

Arun Mishra J. An application for recusal is dealt with- and

has been dealt with, in this case, by the concerned

member of the Bench whose participation is sought to be

objected to.
2.   The approach to be adopted by other members of the

Bench to this sensitive issue- in such cases, is best

summarized in the view of Justice Madan B. Lokur Supreme

Court
Advocates-on-Record-Association and Ors. vs. Union

of India
2016 (5) 808 where it was stated as follows:
“In my respectful opinion, when an application is
      made for the recusal of a judge from hearing a
      case, the application is made to the concerned
      judge and not to the Bench as a whole.
Therefore, my learned brother Justice Khehar is
      absolutely correct in stating that the decision is
      entirely his, and I respect his decision.
539. In a detailed order pronounced in Court on
      its own motion v. State and Ors. reference was
      made to a decision of the Supreme Court of the
      United States in Jewell Ridge Coal Corporation v.
      Local No. 6167, United Mine Workers of America
      325 US 897 (1945), wherein it was held that a
      complaint as to the qualification of a justice of
      the Supreme Court to take part in the decision of
      a cause cannot properly be addressed to the
58
Court as a whole and it is the responsibility of
each justice to determine for himself the
propriety of withdrawing from a case.
540. This view was adverted to by Justice
Rehnquist in Hanrahan v. Hampton 446 US 1301
(1980) in the following words:
‘Plaintiffs-Respondents and their counsel
       in these cases have moved that I be
       recused from the proceedings in this
       case for the reasons stated in their 14-
       page motion and their five appendices
       filed with the Clerk of this Court on April
       3, 1980. The motion is opposed by the
       state-Defendant Petitioners in the
       action. Since generally the Court as an
       institution leaves such motions, even
       though they be addressed to it, to the
       decision of the individual Justices to
       whom they refer, see Jewell Ridge Coal
       Corporation v. Mine Workers 325 U.S.
       897 (1945) (denial of petition for
       rehearing) (Jackson, J., concurring), I
       shall treat the motion as addressed to
       me individually. I have considered the
       motion, the Appendices, the response of
       the state Defendants, 28 U.S.C. 455
       (1976 ed. And Supp. II), and the current
       American Bar Association Code of
       Judicial Conduct, and the motion is
       accordingly denied.’
541. The issue of recusal may be looked at
 slightly differently apart from the legal nuance.
What would happen if, in a Bench of five judges,
 an application is moved for the recusal of Judge
 A and after hearing the application Judge A
 decides to recuse from the case but the other
 four judges disagree and express the opinion
59
that there is no justifiable reason for Judge A to
       recuse from the hearing? Can Judge A be
       compelled to hear the case even though he/she
       is desirous of recusing from the hearing? It is to
       get over such a difficult situation that the
       application for recusal is actually to an
       individual judge and not the Bench as a whole.
542. As far as the view expressed by Justice
       Kurian Joseph that reasons should be given
       while deciding an application for recusal, I
       would prefer not to join that decision. In the
       first place, giving or not giving reasons was not
       an issue before us. That reasons are presently
       being given is a different matter altogether.
Secondly, the giving of reasons is fraught with
       some difficulties. For example, it is possible
       that in a given case, a learned judge of the
       High Court accepts an application for his/her
       recusal from a case and one of the parties
       challenges that order in this Court. Upon
       hearing the parties, this Court comes to the
       conclusion that the reasons given by the
       learned judge were frivolous and therefore the
       order is incorrect and is then set aside. In such
       an event, can this Court pass a consequential
       order requiring the learned judge to hear the
       case even though he/she genuinely believes
       that he/she should not hear the case.”
3.   In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the

view of Mishra, J, to reject the application for recusal, is not

a matter that can be commented upon by us.
4.   With respect to the observations by Mishra, J in his

opinion, regarding the legal principles applicable, we are of
60
the considered view that there is no legal impediment or

bar to his participation to hearing the reference on the

merits in the present Bench.
5.   We notice that his order has cited several previous

instances where judges who rendered decisions in smaller

bench compositions, also participated in larger bench

formations when the reasoning (in such previous decisions)

was doubted, and the issue referred to larger benches, for

authoritative pronouncement.
6.   For those and other reasons mentioned in the order of

Mishra, J, we concur with his reasoning and conclusions

that no legal principle or norm bars his participation in the

present Bench which is to hear the reference; the

precedents cited and the practice of the court, point to the

contrary, i.e. that the judge who decided a previous cause,

finally, can – and very often has- participated in the later,

larger bench to which such previous decision is referred for

reconsideration.
61
7.   For the above reasons, and having regard to the

reasons contained in Mishra, J’s order, outlining the

rejection of the request for his recusal, we are of the

considered opinion that this Bench should proceed to hear

and decide the reference made to it, on its merits.
........................................J.
                              [INDIRA BANERJEE]


                            ........................................J.
                              [VINEET SARAN]


                            ........................................J.
                               [M.R. SHAH]


                            ........................................J.
                               [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]

New Delhi,
October 23, 2019.
62