[Cites
6
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajasthan State Road Transport ... vs Danish Khan . on 4 October, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 5028, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1175, 2020 LAB IC 424, 2019 (12) ADJ 26 NOC, (2019) 13 SCALE 609, (2019) 163 FACLR 824, (2019) 3 CURLR 1032, (2019) 3 ESC 798, 2019 (3) SCC (CRI) 894, (2019) 4 RAJ LW 2789, (2019) 4 SCT 570, (2019) 4 TAC 353, 2019 (9) SCC 558, (2020) 1 SERVLJ 49, (2020) 1 SERVLR 497
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Non-Reportable

         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              Civil Appeal No. 7802 of 2019
            (Arising out of SLP (C) No.4772 of 2017)

RAJASTHAN STATE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION.

                                               .... Appellant(s)
                              Versus

DANISH KHAN

                                            …. Respondent (s)
                             With

                Civil Appeal No. 7803 of 2019
            (Arising out of SLP (C) No.13139 of 2017)


                        JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
1.   The Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation (for

short, ‘the Corporation’) has filed the above Appeal

aggrieved by the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court of

Judicature, Jaipur Bench by which Regulation 4(3) of the

Rajasthan       State     Road         Transport    Corporation

Compassionate Appointment Regulations, 2010 (for short,

‘the Regulations’) has been declared as violative of
Article

14
of the Constitution of India.
1
2.    The Respondent’s father Mohd. Shahid who was

working as a Helper in the Appellant-Corporation died in a

motor accident.         He was travelling in a bus of the

Appellant-Corporation which collided with another bus. A

claim was made by the Respondent before the Motor

Accident Claim Tribunal, Tonk (for short, ‘the Tribunal’)

under
Section 166
and
140
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988

(for short, ‘the Act’). An amount of Rs.1,35,50,000/- was

claimed, but the Tribunal awarded a compensation of

Rs.22,95,775/-.
3.    The Respondent made a representation to the Chief

Manager     of      the      Appellant-Corporation   seeking

compassionate      appointment.            The   request   for

compassionate appointment was rejected on the ground

that the Respondent was not entitled in light of
Regulation

4(3)
of the Regulations. Dissatisfied with the rejection of

the   request     for     compassionate   appointment,     the

Respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court

challenging the constitutionality of
Regulation 4(3)
.      The

High Court allowed the Writ Petition by a judgment dated

29.08.2016 on the ground that
Regulation 4(3)
of the




                                                           2 | Page
Regulations is discriminatory and violative of
Article 14
of

the Constitution.
4.    The High Court held that the object of compassionate

appointment is to mitigate the hardship of the family

members     of   the   bread-winner     and   for   that   reason

compassionate appointment should be provided to the

family in distress.    According to
Regulation 4(3)
of the

Regulations, claim for both compassionate appointment

and compensation under the Act cannot be made against

the Corporation in case of death of an employee while

travelling in the vehicle of the Appellant-Corporation.
Regulation 4(3)
was found to be discriminatory because

compassionate       appointment   can    be   provided     to   an

employee who dies in an accident while travelling in a

vehicle not belonging to the Corporation though he had

claimed compensation either from the owner of the vehicle

or the insurance company, under the Act.
5.    Before proceeding further, it is relevant to take note

of
Regulation 4(3)
of the Regulations which is as follows:
“On the occasion of death of any employee of the

     Corporation while performing his duty or a vehicular death

     by the vehicle belonging to the Corporation.    If the legal


                                                                3 | Page
     representatives     of   the   deceased    employee        seek

     compensation from the Corporation by filing a claim petition

     before the accident tribunal and the same is awarded or the

     matter remains pending before the tribunal. In such a case

     the Legal representatives of the deceased employee shall

     have no right to seek appointment on compassionate

     ground, if compensation is awarded or the matter remains

     pending before the tribunal. If on the death of an employee

     of the Corporation his Legal representative at the time of

     compassionate appointment files an application for the

     same in the prescribed format then the application for

     appointment    on    compassionate    ground   has    to    be

     supplemented with an Affidavit on a non-judicial stamp

     paper of Rs.10/- by the legal representative that no claim

     petition against the corporation has been filed before any

     competent court and also that no such claim shall be filed in

     the future and if in future even if any of the legal

     representatives files a claim petition before MACT then the

     employer/ Corporation shall have right to cancel my

     appointment without any notice and that I won’t file any

     case against such dismissal before any competent court.”
6.    According to the said Regulation, the death of an

employee of the Corporation while travelling in a vehicle

belonging to the Appellant-Corporation cannot give rise to


                                                                  4 | Page
compensation under the Act as well as a claim for

compassionate appointment in the Appellant- Corporation.

The question that arises for our consideration is whether

the High Court was right in holding that
Regulation 4(3)
is

discriminatory       and   violative     of
Article   14
of   the

Constitution. The reason given by the High Court to hold it

unconstitutional is that whereas the dependents of the

employee who died in an accident while on a vehicle

owned by the Appellant-Corporation are not entitled for

compassionate appointment after claiming compensation

under Act, the dependents of an employee who died in an

accident while travelling in a vehicle not owned by the

Appellant-Corporation are entitled to get compensation

under the Act against the owner of the vehicle or the

insurance company as the case may be, as well as a right

to claim compassionate appointment.             The High Court was

of the opinion that the dependents of employees of the

Corporation who died due to an accident while travelling in

a vehicle of the Corporation cannot be treated differently

from dependents of employees who died in an accident

while   travelling    in   a   vehicle    not   belonging    to   the

Corporation.
5 | Page
7.    The Corporation has carved out two classes of

dependents of the deceased employees in respect of

claims for compassionate appointment. The reason for the

disqualification of the dependents of an employee who

died in an accident involving the vehicle of the Corporation

is to avoid extra burden on the Appellant- Corporation. In

such cases, the Appellant- Corporation has to pay the

compensation    under    the    Act   and   also   to   provide

compassionate appointment to the dependents of the

deceased employee.      In a case where the vehicle of the

Appellant- Corporation is not involved in the accident, the

compensation under the Act is not the liability of the

Appellant- Corporation.        It cannot be said that the

dependents of an employee who claim both compensation

under the Act and compassionate appointment from the

Appellant- Corporation are on the same footing as the

dependents of the deceased employee whose claim under

the Act against a private owner or an insurance company,

and    compassionate      appointment       from    Appellant-

Corporation.
8.    The dependents of a deceased employee who claim

compensation from the Corporation under the Act and


                                                            6 | Page
compassionate             appointment           from      the      Appellant-

Corporation from a separate class.                  It is well-settled that

though
Article 14
forbids class legislation, it does not forbid

reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation.

When any impugned rule or statutory provision is assailed

on the ground that it contravenes
Article 14
, its validity

can be sustained if two tests are satisfied. The first test is

that the classification on which it is founded must be based

on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or

things grouped together from others left out of the group;

and the second test is that the differentia in question must

have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be

achieved by the rule or statutory provision in question.1
9.       Having held that the classification                     of the two

categories of dependents of deceased employees is

reasonable, what remains to be examined is whether there

is a rationale nexus of the classification with the objective

sought to be achieved by the Regulations 4(3).                           The

intention with which
Regulation 4(3)
is made is to obviate

the liability of the Corporation in payment of compensation

under the Act and to provide compassionate appointment

to the same person.               We find there is a rational nexus
1
State of Mysore & Anr vs P. Narasing Rao
, 1968 SCR (1) 407


                                                                          7 | Page
between the basis of classification and the object sought to

be achieved by the Regulation.
10. It is useful to refer to a judgment of this Court in
National Insurance Company Limited v. Rekhaben

and Others.2            The
question that arose for consideration

of this Court related to the deduction of salary that was

earned by the claimant therein after being appointed on

compassionate             grounds     while     calculating   the

compensation payable to her under the Act for the death

of her husband.           It was held that the salary earned by

compassionate appointment cannot be deducted from the

compensation which the claimant is entitled under the Act.

However, it was made clear that the salary which flowed

from the compassionate appointment that was provided by

the tortfeasor was liable to be deducted if the employer

was the owner of the offending vehicle and thus liable to

pay compensation under the Act.               In other words, the

employer who has provided compassionate appointment

can claim deduction of the salary of the dependent while

calculating if he is liable to pay compensation under the

Act, being the owner of the offending vehicle.
2
(2017) 13 SCC 547


                                                              8 | Page
11. The two categories of dependents i.e. dependents of

employees who have died in an accident while travelling in

a vehicle belonging to the Corporation and dependents of

the employees who died while travelling in a vehicle not

belonging to the Corporation are not similarly situated in

respect of their claims against the Corporation.          They

cannot be treated as equals. Therefore,
Regulation 4(3)
cannot be said to be discriminatory. In the aforementioned

view, we are not in agreement with the judgment passed

by the High Court that
Regulation 4(3)
is violative of
Article

14
of the Constitution.
12. As the Respondent has received the compensation

under the Act, he is not entitled for compassionate

appointment under the Regulations.
13. In view of the above, the judgment of the High Court

is set aside the Appeal is allowed.
Civil Appeal No. 7803 of 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.13139 of 2017)




     The   application    preferred   by   the   Respondent   for

compassionate appointment was rejected by the Corporation

as being not maintainable under
Regulation 4(3)
of the


                                                              9 | Page
Regulations, due to the fact that the Respondent has filed a

claim petition under the Act. The High Court allowed the Writ

Petition as being covered by a judgment in Civil Writ Petition

No.13862 of 2014.    The Appeal filed by the Corporation is

allowed in terms of the judgment in Civil Appeal No. 7802 of

2019 (@ S.L.P.(C) No.4772 of 2017).
..…................................J.
                                     [L. NAGESWARA RAO]



                                   ..…................................J.
                                      [HEMANT GUPTA]
New Delhi,
October 04, 2019




                                                               10 | P a g e