[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Baiju K.G vs Dr. V. P. Joy on 13 May, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CP(C) 244/2021
                                                          1


                                                                                    Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           INHERENT JURISDICTION

                                    Contempt Petition (Civil) No 244 of 2021
                                                          in
                                       Writ Petition (Civil) No 213 of 2011



     Baiju K G & Ors                                                           ... Petitioner(s)

                                                    Versus


     Dr V P Joy                                                                ... Respondent(s)




                                                    JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J




                      1   A contempt petition has been instituted before this Court by the residents of

                          Kasargod district in Kerala who were affected by the use of a toxic pesticide

                          called Endosulfan. The use of the pesticide led to a spread of mental and

                          physical ailments among residents of areas that were impacted by its use. A

                          writ petition was instituted before this Court by the persons affected by the
Signature Not Verified    use of Endosulfan. This Court by its order dated 10 January 2017 directed
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.05.16
11:08:46 IST
Reason:
CP(C) 244/2021
2
the State Governments to compensate all the affected persons by

            distributing an amount of Rs 5 lakhs to each affected person within three

            months. This Court also directed the State Governments to consider the

            feasibility of providing medical facilities and treatment for life-long ailments

            arising from the effects of Endosulfan, considering the larger number of

            affected persons. It is submitted by the petitioners, whose names are

            mentioned in the list of Endosulfan victims prepared by the Government of

            Kerala, that the Government has failed to comply with the order. The

            petitioners are yet to be compensated and the medical facilities have not

            been improved because of which the affected persons in Kasargod District

            are compelled to travel to Trivandrum, about 600 kms away for their

            treatment.
2     A compliance report dated 9 May 2022 has been filed by the Chief Secretary

            to the Government of Kerala. The report indicates that on 16 March 2022, the

            Chief Secretary convened a meeting in connection with the need for

            disbursing compensation to the victims of Endosulfan, in compliance with the

            judgment of this Court dated 10 January 2017. A team of officials from the

            Health and Revenue departments has been constituted to visit the homes of

            3704 victims to whom compensation is yet to be provided. Of these victims,

            102 are found to be bedridden, 326 to be mentally disabled, 201 to be

            physically disabled, 119 to be afflicted with cancer while 2966 fall in the

            residual category. The Government of Kerala has done virtually nothing for

            five years. Besides the fact that the delay is appalling, the inaction is in
CP(C) 244/2021
3
breach of the orders of this court.
3    The State Government has now taken a decision on 15 January 2022 by

            issuing GO(Rt) No 1877/2022/Fin to authorize the disbursal of an additional

            amount of Rs 200 crores for providing compensation to the victims of

            Endosulfan. As of date, an amount of Rs 5 lakhs has been disbursed only to

            eight persons who are the petitioners who have moved these contempt

            proceedings. We fail to understand the logic or the rationale of the State

            Government in disbursing compensation only to those who have the ability to

            move this Court.
4    There are a large number of victims to whom no compensation has been

            provided despite the passage of over five years since the date of the

            judgment of this Court. Most of the victims, as the data before the Court

            indicates, are from the marginalized segments of society. Many of the victims

            are in a serious condition to whom compensation on an urgent basis has to

            be provided.
In
Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa1
, this Court had

            discussed the basis of awarding compensation in public law proceedings.

            This Court had observed that the onus of a public wrong can be attributed to

            the State if it fails to protect the fundamental rights of the citizenry and

            compensation can be awarded in such cases.           Justice AS Anand in his

            concurring opinion had observed that:
“34. The public law proceedings serve a different purpose
                       than the private law proceedings. The relief of monetary

1   (1993) 2 SCC 746
CP(C) 244/2021
4
compensation, as exemplary damages, in proceedings
                 under
Article 32
by this Court or under
Article 226
by the
                 High Courts, for established infringement of the
                 indefeasible right guaranteed under
Article 21
of the
                 Constitution is a remedy available in public law and is
                 based on the strict liability for contravention of the
                 guaranteed basic and indefeasible rights of the citizen.
The purpose of public law is not only to civilize
                 public power but also to assure the citizen that
                 they live under a legal system which aims to
                 protect their interests and preserve their rights.
                 Therefore, when the court moulds the relief by
                 granting “compensation” in proceedings under
Article 32
or 226 of the Constitution seeking
                 enforcement or protection of fundamental rights, it
                 does so under the public law by way of penalising
                 the wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the public
                 wrong on the State which has failed in its public
                 duty to protect the fundamental rights of the
                 citizen. The payment of compensation in such
                 cases is not to be understood, as it is generally
                 understood in a civil action for damages under the
                 private law but in the broader sense of providing
                 relief by an order of making ‘monetary amends’
                 under the public law for the wrong done due to
                 breach of public duty, of not protecting the
                 fundamental rights of the citizen. The compensation
                 is in the nature of ‘exemplary damages’ awarded against
                 the wrongdoer for the breach of its public law duty and is
                 independent of the rights available to the aggrieved party
                 to claim compensation under the private law in an action
                 based on tort, through a suit instituted in a court of
                 competent jurisdiction or/and prosecute the offender
                 under the penal law.
35. This Court and the High Courts, being the protectors
                 of the civil liberties of the citizen, have not only the power
                 and jurisdiction but also an obligation to grant relief in
                 exercise of its jurisdiction under
Articles 32
and
226
of
                 the Constitution to the victim or the heir of the victim
                 whose fundamental rights under
Article 21
of the
                 Constitution of India are established to have been
                 flagrantly infringed by calling upon the State to repair the
                 damage done by its officers to the fundamental rights of
                 the citizen, notwithstanding the right of the citizen to the
CP(C) 244/2021
5
remedy by way of a civil suit or criminal proceedings…”

                                                         (emphasis supplied)

            The inordinate delay by the State Government in compensating the persons

            affected by the use of Endosulfan not only reflects its failure to comply with

            the order of this Court but also further compounds the violation of the

            fundamental rights of such persons. The failure to redress the infringement

            of their fundamental rights becomes more egregious with each passing day.

      5     That apart, in the order of this Court dated 10 January 2017, the State

            Government was directed to consider the feasibility of providing medical

            facilities or treatment to deal with life-long health issues arising out of the

            effects of Endosulfan, particularly having regard to the large number of

            persons involved. The State Government has not disclosed what steps it has

            taken to provide for medical treatment and rehabilitation to these victims.

            The right to health is an integral part of the right to life under
Article 21
of

            the Constitution. Without health, the faculties of living have little meaning.

            We would be justified in taking recourse to the coercive arm of law. However,

            our immediate concern is providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims

            who are suffering. We accordingly issue the following directions:
(i)   Since the payment of compensation has been made, though belatedly

                  to eight petitioners who have moved these proceedings, costs

                  quantified at Rs 50,000 each shall be paid over in addition to each of

                  the eight persons within a period of three weeks from the date of this
CP(C) 244/2021
6
order;
(ii)   The Chief Secretary shall hold monthly meetings to ensure that the

                   judgment of this Court dated 10 January 2017 is diligently implemented

                   by undertaking the process of (a) identifying the victims of Endosulfan

                   and drawing up a list of beneficiaries; (b) ensuring the disbursement of

                   compensation of Rs 5 lakhs to each of the victims; and (c) taking steps

                   for ensuring due medical facilities within reasonable distance from their

                   places of residence in terms of the earlier directions of this Court.
(iii) An affidavit of compliance shall be filed before this Court indicating the

                   progress which has been made between the date of this order and the

                   next date of listing.
6     List the Contempt Petition on 18 July 2022.
…………...…...….......………………........J.
                                                    [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [Surya Kant]

New Delhi;
May 13, 2022
CKB
CP(C) 244/2021
7
ITEM NO.29                          COURT NO.4                          SECTION PIL-W

                     S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
                               RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
CONMT.PET.(C) No.244/2021 in W.P.(C) No.213/2011


BAIJU K.G & ORS.                                                    Petitioner(s)

                                   VERSUS

DR. V.P. JOY                                                       Respondent(s)

(With IA No.30400/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)


Date : 13-05-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.


CORAM :
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
                 HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURYA KANT


For Petitioner(s)            Mr.   P.N. Ravindran, Sr. Adv.
Mr.   P.S. Sudheer, AOR
                             Mr.   Rishi Maheshwari, Adv.
Ms.   Shruti Jose, Adv.
Mr.   Bharat Sood, Adv.
For Respondent(s)            Mr. Nishe Rajen Shonker, AOR
                             Mrs. Anu K. Joy, Adv.
Mr. Alim Anvar, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                     O R D E R

      1          In terms of the signed reportable judgment, the following directions are

      issued:
CP(C) 244/2021
8
(i)     Since the payment of compensation has been made, though belatedly

                    to eight petitioners who have moved these proceedings, costs

                    quantified at Rs 50,000 each shall be paid over in addition to each of

                    the eight persons within a period of three weeks from the date of this

                    order;
(ii)    The Chief Secretary shall hold monthly meetings to ensure that the

                    judgment of this Court dated 10 January 2017 is diligently implemented

                    by undertaking the process of (a) identifying the victims of Endosulfan

                    and drawing up a list of beneficiaries; (b) ensuring the disbursement of

                    compensation of Rs 5 lakhs to each of the victims; and (c) taking steps

                    for ensuring due medical facilities within reasonable distance from their

                    places of residence in terms of the earlier directions of this Court.
(iii) An affidavit of compliance shall be filed before this Court indicating the

                    progress which has been made between the date of this order and the

                    next date of listing.
2           List the Contempt Petition on 18 July 2022.
(CHETAN KUMAR)                (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
                   A.R.-cum-P.S.                   Court Master
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)