[Cites
0
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Ragupathi vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 12 May, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
B.R. Gavai
,
A.S. Bopanna
NON­REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3913 OF 2022
         [Arising out of SLP(C) No. 9214 of 2022]
                                [@Diary No. 17212 of 2020]


K. RAGUPATHI                              ...APPELLANT(S)
                          VERSUS

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
AND OTHERS                              ...RESPONDENT(S)


                         JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.      Delay condoned.
2.      Leave granted.
3.      The appellant­K. Ragupathi has approached this

Court being aggrieved by the impugned order dated 23 rd May

2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,

thereby dismissing the writ petition being Writ­A No. 51962

of 2014 filed by the appellant, thereby challenging the

communication of the respondent No.3 ­ Registrar, Gautam

Buddha University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter
1
referred to as the “said University”) dated 12 th August 2014

informing   the   appellant     that   his   services    stands

discontinued.
4.      The facts in brief giving rise to the present appeal are

as under:
In response to the advertisement issued by              the

respondent No.3, the appellant had applied to the post of

Senior Scientific Officer.    After undergoing due selection

process, the appellant came to be selected and appointed as

Senior Scientific Officer on contractual basis in the said

University vide its order dated 3rd August 2011.        The said

appointment was initially for a period of two years.        The

appellant’s services were extended for another period of one

year by the said University vide its order dated 7 th August

2013. However, vide communication of the said University

dated 12th August 2014, the appellant was informed that the

period of his contractual appointment had expired on 11 th

August 2014 and he was directed to complete the formalities

regarding relieving from the service. Being aggrieved thereby,

the appellant approached the High Court of Judicature at

Allahabad by filing writ petition being Writ­A No. 51962 of
2
2014.   Vide the impugned order dated 23 rd May 2018, the

High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dismissed the said

writ petition. Hence, the present appeal.
5.         We have heard the appellant­in­person and Shri

Vibhav Mishra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondents.
6.         The appellant has submitted that he was appointed

after following the due selection process, and as such, his

services could not have been terminated without holding an

enquiry.     He   further   submitted   that   though   vide

communication of the said University dated 12th August

2014, the appellant has been relieved, in effect it would

amount to punitive termination. He further submitted that

the aforesaid communication is passed in a mala fide

manner.
7.         Shri Mishra, on the contrary, submitted that the

appellant’s appointment was purely contractual, and as

such, the appellant did not have any right to continue in

service after the expiry of the contractual period.      He

therefore submitted that no interference is warranted in the
3
impugned order      of   the High      Court   of Judicature    at

Allahabad.
8.      Shri   Mishra    further    submitted   that   since   the

appellant was indulging into certain activities, which were

detrimental to the interest of the said University, it was

found that the appellant’s continuation in service was not in

the interest of the said University.
9.      It will be apposite to refer to the relevant part of the

supplementary counter affidavit filed on behalf of the said

University before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad:
“5. That Clause (6) of the Amendment Act of
     2008 substituted Section 29(1) of the Gautam
     Budh University Act, 2002. The amended Section
     29(1) reads as under:
“(1)    Every employee in the first
           instance shall be appointed under a
           written contract, which shall be lodged
           by the University and the copy of which
           shall be furnished to the employee
           concerned.”
6. That consequent to the aforesaid amendment
     made by the State of U.P., in the statute of the
     Univesity, it is obligatory on the University to
     initially appoint employees only on contractual
     basis.
4
7. That it is also necessary to clarify at this stage
that even though the University is appointing its
employees on contractual basis, the method of
selection and thereafter appointment of these
employees is the same as that which is followed
in the case of regular appointment of its
employees.
8. That for every post which is vacant and
which is proposed to be filled up, the
University publishes an open advertisement
inviting applications from all interested
candidates. Applications so received are then
placed before a duly constituted Selection
Committee, which holds interviews of the
applicants/candidates for the various posts.
It is on the basis of the recommendations
made by the duly constituted Selection
Committee       that   appointment     letters
appointing the employees on contractual basis
are issued by the University.
9. That these employees, though technically
appointed on contract, get all benefits and
allowances, as per the Rules applicable. They
are placed in a regular pay­scale and extended
annual     increments,     leaves,    EPF/GPF
deductions/contributions and other benefits.
But for permanency in tenure, their terms and
conditions of appointment are identical to
those of any regularly appointed candidate.
10. That it may be stated that since 2011, the
University has not regularized any candidate on a
teaching post. All the teaching employees are
continuing on contractual basis.
11.    That for considering regularization, the
University is finalizing detailed guidelines. These
guidelines have been approved by the Board of
5
Management in its meeting dated 18­5­2015.
These guidelines are pending approval from the
      Board of Governors of the University, which is its
      apex body.
12. That till such time as the guidelines are
      finally approved by the Board of Governors of the
      University, the University shall not be in a
      position to regularize any of its employees.”
                                      [emphasis supplied]
10.      As per the affidavit of the said University, it could

thus clearly be seen that, for every vacant post, the said

University   publishes    an   open   advertisement    inviting

applications from all the interested candidates. It would

further show that the appointments are made only after the

candidates are selected by the Selection Committee.         It is

thus clear that though the nomenclature given to the

appointment is contractual, candidates are required to

undergo the entire selection process. It could further be seen

that as per the affidavit of the said University itself, though

the employees are technically appointed on a contractual

basis, they get all the benefits and allowances as per the

Rules applicable. The affidavit would further show that even

according to the said University, for permanency in tenure,
6
their terms and conditions of appointment are identical to

those of regularly appointed candidates.
11.     It is thus clear that the appellant was appointed

after he underwent the entire selection process. Even as per

the University, though the appointment shows that it is on a

contractual basis, for all the purposes, it is on a regular

basis. It could thus be seen that even for the appointment

on a contractual basis in the said University, a candidate is

required to undergo the entire selection process. Though he

is appointed on a contractual basis, his terms and conditions

are almost like a regular employee. It will be relevant to note

that the Annual Performance Assessment Report (for short

“APAR”) of the appellant during the period 2012­13 show his

performance to be outstanding. Every other parameter in his

APAR is shown as excellent. With regard to his integrity, it is

mentioned that there is nothing against the appellant

adversely reflecting his integrity. It is further stated in his

APAR that he enjoys a good reputation and his integrity is

good.
12.     It will be further relevant to refer to the counter

affidavit filed before this Court on behalf of respondent Nos.
7
2 to 4. It is stated in paragraph (4) that the reasons for the

appellant not being continued in the service are at Annexure

P­9 (Page 116­120) and Annexure P­26 (Page 165­166).
13.      Insofar as Annexure P­9 is concerned, it is an APAR

to which we have already referred hereinabove. As such, the

same cannot be a ground for non­continuation of the services

of the appellant. As a matter of fact, thereafter, the

appellant’s services have been continued for another one year

vide order dated 7th August 2013.
14.      Insofar as the document at Annexure P­26 is

concerned, it is an administrative warning issued to the

appellant by the Dean of the said University on 10 th January

2014, which reads thus:
“Office of Dean, Planning & Research

      GBU­013 /Dplng/09/2014­21           Dated: 10/1/14

                   Administrative Warning

      It has been observed that you write on files simply
      "Put up file on such and such date". You have been
      continuing to do this even after my several verbal
      communications and warning against this. This is
      not only against ethics and official decorum but also
      against administrative norms. In response to my
      objections you told me that you have been
      instructed by the finance officer and the earlier
8
officiating registrar, Mr. Pankaj Sharma to do so.
You have put this noting even on dates when I have
       been on leave. Photocopies of such recent notings
       are being attached herewith as evidence. There is
       also an overwriting in the date mentioned in one of
       the notings. All your above mentioned activities
       amount to gross irregularity in your work and also
       expose your conspirational character. This definitely
       makes you unfit to work on any responsible
       position.
You are being served this warning in writing to
       provide you an opportunity to improve your official
       working and conduct.
S/d
                                              Anuradha Mishra
                                                  Dean P & R
       CC:
1. Registrar for information and record
2. PS to Hon’ble Vice­Chancellor for information”
15.         It   could   thus     be   seen      that   though   the

communication of the said University dated 12 th August 2014

states that the appellant’s contractual period has expired, in

the facts of the present case, it would reveal that his services

were discontinued on account of the allegation made against

him by the Dean of the said University. Since even according

to    the    said   University,   though   the    employment     was

contractual but the employee was entitled to get all the

benefits of a regular employee, we find that in the facts of the

present case, the appellant’s services could not have been
9
terminated without following the principles of natural justice.

We therefore find that the present appeal deserves to be

allowed on this short ground.
16.     In the result, the impugned order dated 23 rd May

2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,

thereby dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant and

the communication passed by the said University dated 12 th

August 2014, thereby discontinuing the services of the

appellant, are quashed and set aside.
17.     The appellant is directed to be reinstated with

continuity in service. However, the appellant would not be

entitled to any back wages.
18.     The appeal is allowed in the above terms. Pending

application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in the above

terms. No order as to costs.
……..….......................J.
                                      [L. NAGESWARA RAO]



                                        …….........................J.
                                                   [B.R. GAVAI]

NEW DELHI;
MAY 12, 2022.
10