[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Harnek Singh vs Gurmit Singh on 18 May, 2022
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4126-4127/2022
                                 Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10782-10783/2020


          HARNEK SINGH & ORS.                                           ...APPELLANT(S)


                                                       VERSUS


          GURMIT SINGH & ORS.                                        …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                      ORDER
1.             Leave granted.
2.             These appeals arise out of the decision of the National Consumer

          Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi 1 dismissing the appeal of the

          complainant and allowing the appeal of the doctor and the hospital by

          holding that no medical negligence was proved. Having examined the

          evidence, medical records and the report of the ethics committee of the

          Medical Council of India 2, we have concluded that a case of deficiency of

          service is made out against the doctor and the hospital, Respondents 1 and

          2, herein for medical negligence. Allowing the appeal of the complainants,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.05.19
18:34:45 IST
Reason:
1 hereinafter referred to as ‘the NCDRC’.
2 hereinafter referred to as ‘the MCI’.
Page 1 of 21
we have directed payment of compensation. We will first refer to the facts

leading to this case.
Facts:
3.     Facts as stated in the complaint filed before State Consumer Disputes

Redressal Commission 3 are as follows. Appellant 1, the complainant, is a

retired Semi-Government employee and his wife Late Mrs. Manjit Kaur,

aged 47 years had been working as a Government teacher. Mrs. Manjit

Kaur, the patient, developed abdominal pain for which an ultrasound

examination was done and it revealed the presence of gall bladder stones.

On 13.07.2004 the patient approached Respondent 1, a laparoscopic surgeon

at Preet Surgical Centre & Maternity Hospital, Respondent 2. After due

examinations and medical tests, Respondent recommended surgery for

removing the gall bladder stones and prescribed certain tests to be carried

out in advance.
4.     The complainant got the advised investigations done and showed the

results to Respondent 1. He then asked the complainant to get yet another

USG examination from a specific centre as he was not satisfied with the

earlier USG dated 14.7.2004. The complainant complied with this

instruction of Respondent 1 and again medical tests were done from a

specific USG centre on 23.7.2004. Respondent 1 was satisfied with the

results and advised the complainant to get the opinion of a cardiologist as
3 hereinafter referred to as ‘the SCDRC’.
Page 2 of 21
the tests revealed the patient’s blood pressure to be slightly high. On

26.07.2004, Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi, the cardiologist cleared the patient for

surgery.
5.   On the morning of 28.07.2004, Respondent 1 performed a laparoscopic

cholecystectomy and placed a drain in the patient’s abdomen. On

29.07.2004, the patient complained of abdominal pain and distension. The

drainage tube was showing a discharge of fluid which was slightly green in

colour, which later on turned greenish-brown. When the complainant

informed Respondent 1 about this, he was told that such fluid was expected

and that is why the tube had been inserted. Respondent 1 also informed the

complainant that he had reviewed the operative CD and assured that there

was no indication of any injury, even in the operative video.
6.   On the next day, the patient became very serious and the abdominal

distension and pain was compounded by difficulty in breathing.

Respondent 1 reassured the complainants and started oxygen infusion to the

patient and prescribed some blood tests and ultrasound examination. The

request for a second opinion or referral to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala

attached to Medical College was dismissed by a further assurance that the

patient was in safe hands. Later that evening, Respondent 1 informed the

complainants the cause of the problem was acute pancreatitis and that there

was nothing wrong with the surgery. However, the complainants remained
Page 3 of 21
unconvinced, especially because of the dirty brown discharge coming

through the drain and the persistent pain, distension and breathlessness

which were indicative of some major intestinal or bile duct injury, which the

staff of Respondent 1 had hinted. The complainant again requested

Respondent 1 to seek another opinion or shift the patient to another hospital.
7.   At around 9 P.M. on 30.07.2004, Respondent 1 decided to shift the

patient to Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, Respondent

No. 4 herein and refer the patient to Dr. Atul Mishra, Respondent No. 3

herein. Respondent 1 declined the request by the complainant to give

detailed patient records and operation notes by stating that the patient’s

condition had been adequately explained to Respondent 3. Dr. Punit Gupta

was the doctor on duty when the patient was admitted. As per his

assessment, there was suspicion of an iatrogenic injury to the bile duct and

possibly also to the intestine, during the previous surgery. He advised an

urgent abdomen CT scan to get a clearer picture. A CT scan was done and as

per the report, the small and large intestines were normal. However, it

revealed moderate intra-abdominal and sub-phrenic collection. Respondent

3 examined the patient and the CT scan report the next morning at 9 A.M.

Since the patient was suffering from multiple ailments like pneumonia, high

blood pressure and coagulopathy, immediate surgical intervention was not

advised.
Page 4 of 21
8.   On 02.08.2004, the patient’s condition became critical and she showed

signs of colonic perforation. The bilious drain fluid became feculent and

foul-smelling. On 03.08.2004, an emergency laparotomy was performed.

Respondent 3 informed the complainants that there was a large collection of

intestinal contents in the abdomen due to an injury to the colon and in

addition to that there was also a bile duct injury, which would be repaired in

a subsequent surgery. The patient's condition kept deteriorating and she

went into multi-organ failure including failure of the respiratory system,

cardiovascular system and renal failure.
9.   The patient died on 11.08.2004.
10. The complainant discussed the cause of death and the need for autopsy

with Respondent 3, however, he was told that the patient died due to intra-

operative injuries to the colon and bile duct resulting in Peritonitis,

Peritoneal Collection, Septicaemia and Multi-Organ failure.

Proceedings before the State Commission :
11. It is in the above-referred circumstances that the complainant filed a

consumer complaint before the SCDRC, Punjab on 14.02.2005, which was

subsequently transferred to State Consumer Commission, U.T. Chandigarh.

The complainant prayed for monetary compensation quantified at

Rs. 62,85,160 from the Respondents for negligence and deficiency of

services.
Page 5 of 21
12. Respondents 1 and 2 filed a reply stating that Respondent 1 is an

experienced surgeon and has performed more than 2,500 laparoscopic

operations successfully. It was explained that the patient's surgery was

performed with proper care, but after the surgery, she developed epigastrial

pain and slight distension in the abdomen. Immediately conservative

treatment was started and the patient got some relief from the same.

However, on the night of 30.07.2004, the patient's condition got critical, as

a result of which she was referred to Respondent 4 hospital to be treated by

Respondent 3.
13. Respondents 3 and 4 in their reply denied the allegations of negligence

and stated that the hospital provided due and proper care to the patient. It

was further stated that most of the iatrogenic injuries to the bile duct during

the cholecystectomy were not recognised in the operating room but were

detected after a few days as biliary fistula or bile peritonitis. It was stated

that the initial response of Respondent 3 was to not operate immediately as

it was decided to evaluate the nature of the leak and attempt to control the

fistula. Also, conducting the operation earlier was not medically advised.

The operation was conducted on 03.08.2004 to tackle perforation in the

large bowel.
14. A reply was also filed by Dr. Dharamvir Gandhi, the cardiologist who

stated that the patient was 47 years old and was referred to him by
Page 6 of 21
Respondent 1. It was found that she was a patient of hypothyroidism and

was taking treatment for the same for the last three years. She complained

of chest pain and breathlessness for which she was treated with due care.

Her cardiovascular status was stable.
15. Both Respondents 1 and 3 were duly cross-examined by counsel of the

complainant on 06.07.2006. The complaint also cross-examined Dr. Inderjit

Singh and Dr. Navdeep Singh as experts before the SCDRC.
16. The SCDRC after considering the evidence and hearing both the

parties, allowed the complaint and held Respondents 1 and 2 negligent and

exonerated Respondents 3 and 4. Respondents 1 and 2 were directed to pay

Rs. 15,44,000 jointly and severally and Rs. 10,000 as costs.
17. The SCDRC found that the CT scan which was performed on

31.07.2004 showed pneumo peritoneum which meant a significant amount

of free air in the abdomen outside the intestines was present which is not

normally present. During laparoscopic surgery, gas is introduced into the

peritoneal cavity and all the gas does not get removed at the end of the

surgery. It is a known fact that this residual gas gets absorbed and does not

stay in the abdomen for more than 24 hours. The only other area from where

the gas can enter the peritoneal cavity is the intestines if they are ruptured at

any place. The CT scan was performed three days after the laparoscopic

surgery and significant air was present even after three days which is a clear
Page 7 of 21
sign of an intestinal injury. There was also some subphrenic abscess found

below the diaphragm which has to be removed, otherwise, diaphragm

movements cannot be restored. SCDRC found that it was the direct

consequence of the intra-operative injury to the bile duct and colon caused

by Respondent 1 during the laparoscopic cholecystectomy that later led to

the death of the patient. With respect to Respondent 3, the only allegation

was a delay in operating on the patient. SCDRC found that Respondent 3

could not detect any important sign of bowel perforation on 31.07.2004 or

01.08.2004 and therefore he decided against any surgical intervention at that

point of time and hence there was no negligence on the part of Respondent
3.
18. The complainants filed an appeal before the NCDRC. Simultaneously

Respondents 1 and 2 also filed an appeal for dismissal of the Complaint.

Proceedings before the MCI :
19. It is necessary to mention at this stage that while the proceedings were

pending before the SCDRC, the complainants also made a complaint to the

Punjab State Medical Council against the professional misconduct of the

Respondents, which was summarily disposed of on 13.06.2006. The

complainants filed an appeal to the MCI. The MCI considered the appeal of

the complainant and asked Respondents 1 and 3 to appear before the Ethics

Committee. Both the Respondents submitted their detailed replies. The
Page 8 of 21
Ethics Committee considered the matter and held Respondent 1 medically

negligent and issued a strict warning to be more careful during the

procedure and to be more diligent in treating and monitoring his patients

during and after the operation. Respondent 3 was exonerated as no medical

negligence was proved against him.
Proceedings before the NCDRC :
20.   Coming back to the appeal before NCDRC, it heard both the appeals

together, i.e. the appeal filed by the complainants as well as Respondents 1

and 2. The NCDRC observed that the patient was operated on by

Respondent 1 on 28.07.2004 and the injuries were detected after six days.

The CT scan report of 31.07.2004 ruled out any evidence of injury or

perforation peritonitis and therefore Respondent 1 did not ignore any signs

of biliary and fecal peritonitis. Further, the complainant relied on the

paramedic staff of the Respondent 2 hospital who informed him about the

operative injury, it was held that there was no evidence in this regard. There

was no negligence found on the part of Respondents 1 and 2.
21. In the case of Respondents 3 and 4, it was found that the patient was

not fit for diagnostic laparoscopy immediately since there were no signs of

any obstructive lesion or proximal dilation. On 02.08.2004, there was a

sudden deterioration in the patient's general condition and she was then

diagnosed with bowel leak with peritonitis. She was operated on 03.08.2004
Page 9 of 21
to repair the colonic perforation. The patient’s condition started weakening

and she died on 11.08.2004 due to cardiac arrest. It was held that

Respondents 3 and 4 acted with due care and hence there was no

negligence.
22. The NCDRC by way of the impugned decision on 05.06.2020 allowed

the appeal of Respondents 1 and 2 and set aside the order of the SCDRC

holding that negligence was not proved by the complainants. It is from this

decision that the present appeals arise.
Submissions :
23. In these appeals, we have heard Mr. Raj Kiran Talwar learned advocate

for the Appellants and Dr. Sushil Kumar Gupta, Ms. Suruchi Suri and

Mr. Anuj Chauhan, learned advocates for the Respondents.
24. Mr. Raj Kiran Talwar, learned advocate for the Appellants made the

following submissions. At the outset, he would submit, that the patient

suffered two iatrogenic injuries during her first surgery, one to the colon and

the other to the bile duct. From these two injuries, fluids from the bile

started to accumulate in the peritoneal cavity of the patient while the

overflowing fluid started to come out of the drain. Secondly, after the

patient became critical, Respondent 1 referred the patient to Respondents 3

and 4 at Ludhiana which is at a distance of 100 KMs instead of a local

hospital at a nearer distance. Thirdly, strong reliance was placed on the
Page 10 of 21
statement                                                of

Respondent 1 in his cross, where he categorically stated that it did not occur

to his mind that the injuries could take place. Fourthly, Respondent 3

negligently delayed the re-exploration surgery even after receiving the CT

scan report. Finally, the NCDRC gave its decision without referring to the

MCI findings.
In support of his submission, he relied on a judgment of this

Court in
Maharaja Agrasen Hospital and Ors. v. Master Rishabh Sharma

and Ors.
4
25. On the other hand, Dr. Sushil Kumar Gupta, learned counsel appearing

for Respondents 1 and 2 made the following submissions. The presence of a

biliary leak does not signify injury of a bile duct as it can occur from the

liver bed from the cholecycto-hepatic duct, slippage of a clip from cystic

duct stump which are not injuries. Second, for there to be a presence of a

leakage from the large intestine, there are some specific symptoms which

were not shown and therefore leakage of the colon was ruled out. Finally,

since there was no bile duct or colon injury, the presence of rent in the

hepatic flexure of the colon may be either a result of delayed manifestation

due to thermal injury because of the electro-cautery, or it may be a rare case

of injury to the hepatic flexure of the colon because of the drainage tube.
26. Ms. Suruchi Suri, learned counsel appearing for Respondents 3 and 4

submitted that, the only allegation is of the delay in diagnosis of colonic
4
Maharaja Agrasen Hospital and Ors. v. Master Rishabh Sharma and Ors.
(2020) 6 SCC 501.
Page 11 of 21
perforation and corrective surgery. This according to her is proved incorrect

as per the findings of the MCI, SCDRC and the NCDRC as well. Second,

the surgery was performed diligently and with due care. The bile leak

coming out of the drain after the gall bladder surgery had occurred during

the first surgery performed by Respondent 1. The patient was already

critical when she was admitted to Respondent 4 hospital and therefore

immediate surgical intervention was not called for. However, when the fecal

matter leak was found in the drain, the patient was immediately operated on.

Analysis:
27. The primary question is whether the complainant has established

professional negligence on the part of Respondents as per the standards

governing the duty to care of a medical practitioner. The SCDRC in its

detailed decision considered the oral and documentary evidence including

medical journals and concluded that Respondents 1 and 2 acted negligently

in performing the operation. SCDRC also held that there is no evidence of

negligence in so far as Respondents 3 and 4 are concerned.
28. What we have noticed in the impugned decision of the NCDRC is that

a substantive part of the decision refers only to judicial precedents on the

question of medical negligence. Reference is made to the decisions in the

case of
Kusum Sharma & Others v. Batra Hospital & Medical Research
Page 12 of 21
Centre and others
5;
Jacob Mathew v. State of Punjab
6;
Achutrao Haribhau

Khodwa and others v. State of Maharashtra and others
7; and
S.K.

Jhunjhunwala v. Dhanwanti Kaur
8. Apart from the case laws on facts, the

NCDRC devoted its attention substantially to the allegations against

Respondent 3 who was anyway exonerated by the SCDRC. In so far as

Respondent 1 is concerned, the NCDRC did not meet the specific

allegations of negligence in the performance of the surgery.
29. There was sufficient material indicative of large bowel perforation after

the laparoscopic operation. It is true that it may not have manifested

immediately in the normal course. However, there were sufficient indicators

to a diligent professional, to detect and take immediate steps for restitution.
Instead of examining the material that was placed on record, NCDRC

seemed satisfied with raising and rejecting the plea of res ipsa loquitur and

holding that it is impermissible to assume that any sensible professional

would intentionally commit an act which would result in an injury to the

patient. In these proceedings for damages due to professional negligence,

the question of intention does not arise. Unfortunately, the NCDRC did not

even refer to the report of the MCI. In fact, a reference to the MCI report

would have been sufficient to come to the right conclusion.



5
Kusum Sharma & Ors. v. Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre & Ors.
, (2010) 3 SCC 480.
6
Jacob Mathew v. State of Punjab & Anr.
(2005) 6 SCC 1.
7
Achutrao Haribhau Khodwa and Others v. State of Maharashtra and others
(1996) 2 SCC 634.
8
S.K. Jhunjhunwala v. Dhanwanti Kaur & Anr.
(2019) 2 SCC 282.
Page 13 of 21
30. The MCI examined the matter in the context of an appeal filed by the

complainants against the decision of the Punjab Medical Council dated

13.6.2006. MCI referred the appeal filed by the complainant to the Ethics

Committee. The Committee recorded the statement of the complainant, and

the doctors Respondents 1 and 3. The Ethics Committee also sought the

opinion of Experts on the conduct of these Respondents. The two Experts

were Professors and HODs of AIIMS, New Delhi and KGMC, Lucknow. We

will now refer to each of their opinions.
31. In the opinion of Professor and HOD, Department of Surgery, AIIMS,

extracted in the MCI report is as under:
“The findings at laparotomy confirmed it to be a case of
         large bowel perforation, which could be iatrogenic,
         related to the laparoscopic procedure . Appropriate
         surgical intervention was done on a by now very sick
         patient. Patient died on 11.8.2004.
Comment: It appears on the basis of available records
         that the diagnosis and operative intervention for
         generalised peritonitis as a result of bowel perforation
         was significantly delayed first at the local hospital and
         subsequently at DMC Ludhiana and lead to the
         unfavourable outcome.”
32. In the opinion of Professor and HOD, Surgery, KGMC Lucknow,

extracted in the MCI report is as under:
“In case of Dr. Gurmit Singh also, as per records it
         appears that he is not negligent his duties towards Mrs.
         Manjeet Kaur during her stay in his hospital and has
         given care to best of his proficiency and available
         facilities. However, following relevant observations are
         made: -
Page 14 of 21
1. Pre-operative clearance from Cardiologist was taken.
2. Pre-operative correction of anaemia by three unit of
            blood done.
3. Pre-operative consent paper has been signed which
            mentions the possibility of fatality and likelihood of
            complication.
4. Post-operative second opinion was taken by Dr.
            Gurmit Singh.
5. Records of Preet Hospitals are present in document
            sent by you, but recorded CD of Surgery is not
            available.
6. In his statement of complaint, he mentions that both
            Dr. Gurmit Singh and Dr. Atul Mishra are qualified
            medical professionals.
7. Shifting of patient was done in distant hospital where
            better GI and ventilatory facilities are claimed.
However, availability of these facilities in local city is
            matter of survey, which should be sought for.
8. Minor bile leak during surgery is accepted by Dr.
            Gurmit Singh, which kept on increasing in post-
operative period.
9. Bowel perforation and bile duct injuries were noted in
            surgery done by Dr. Atul Mishra at Ludhiana.”
33. After considering the material on record as well as the opinions of the

Professors as indicated above, MCI concluded as under:-
“In addition to that the Ethics Committee has decided to
         request Prof. & HOD of Surgery, AIIMS, New Delhi and
         Prof. & HOD of Surgery, KGMC, Lucknow to kindly
         assist the Ethics Committee by going through all the
         records of the case and give their opinion regarding this
         matter. Accordingly, Prof. & HOD of Surgery, AIIMS,
         New Delhi has given his opinion in writing and also
         Prof. & HOD, KGMC, Lucknow has sent his opinion.
The Ethics Committee after perusal of all the above
         documents have come to the conclusion that –
Page 15 of 21
1. In the case of Dr. Atul Mishra, no case of medical
            negligence can be established against him. Therefore,
            the Ethics Committee decided to drop the matter
            against Dr. Atul Mishra and exonerate him from the
            charges.
2. Ethics Committee found that Dr. Gurmit Singh has
            failed to exercise adequate medical competence in
            treating the patient as is apparent from the following
            points: -
(a)There was a large bowel perforation after the
                laparoscopic operation. This complication which
                though not known in the normal course of time,
                had occurred in this particular case. This
                complication could have been prevented if care
                had been exercised during the procedure by Dr.
                Gurmit Singh.
(b)More important Dr. Gurmit has failed to suspect
                the occurrence of complications despite following
                warning, signs/symptoms-
i)the patient not recovering after the operation.
ii)the patient increasingly deteriorating.
iii)there was a strong indication of a complication
                occurring after the procedure. Thereafter, his
                failure to detect all these conditions led to delay in
                diagnosis all perforation of the bowel and has to
                lead a situation of avoidable delay which causes
                increased deterioration of the patient.”
34. In view of the clear findings, the MCI decided to issue a strict warning

to Respondent 1 to be more careful during the procedure and to be more

diligent in treating and monitoring his patients during and after the

operation. As against Respondent 3, the MCI dropped the case and

exonerated him.
35. So far as present proceedings are concerned, as they arise out of a claim

for compensation on the basis of medical negligence, the opinion and
Page 16 of 21
findings of the MCI regarding the professional conduct of Respondent 1

have great relevance. The findings of the Medical Council, which is a

statutory regulator have been extracted hereinabove, may be formulated as

under:
1.       Existence of Generalized peritonitis as a result of bowel
         perforation. (per the opinion of Professor & HOD, Department of
         Surgery, AIIMS).
2.   There was a significant delay in its diagnosis and operative
         intervention, first at the local hospital and subsequently at DMC,
         Ludhiana. (per the opinion of Professor & HOD, Department of
         Surgery, AIIMS).
3.   This has led to the unfavourable outcome. (per the opinion of
         Professor & HOD, Department of Surgery, AIIMS).
4.   Shifting of the patient by Respondent 1 was done in a distant
         hospital where better GI and ventilatory facilities are claimed.
However, the availability of these facilities in the local city is a
         matter of survey, which should be sought for. (per the opinion of
         Professor & HOD, Department of Surgery, KGMC, Lucknow).
5.   Minor bile leak during surgery is accepted by Dr. Gurmit Singh.
This kept on increasing in the post-operative period. Bowel
         perforation and bile duct injuries were noted in surgery done by
         Dr. Atul Mishra at Ludhiana. (per the opinion of Professor &
         HOD, Department of Surgery, KGMC, Lucknow).
6.   Dr. Gurmit Singh has failed to exercise adequate medical
         competence in treating the patient as is apparent from the facts.
         (Experts Common Opinion)
7.      There was a large bowel perforation after the laparoscopic
         operation. (Experts Common Opinion)
Page 17 of 21
8.   The complication which though not known in the normal course of
         time, had occurred in this particular case. This complication could
         have been prevented if care had been exercised during the
         procedure by Dr. Gurmit Singh. (Experts Common Opinion)
9.   Dr. Gurmit Singh failed to suspect the occurrence of the
         complication despite warning signs/symptoms. (Experts Common
         Opinion)
10. Dr. Gurmit Singh ignored the following factors namely,
(a) the patient was not recovering after the operation,
(b) the patient’s condition was increasingly deteriorating, and
(c) there was a strong indication of a complication occurring after
            the procedure. (Experts Common Opinion)
11. Failure of Dr. Gurmit Singh to detect the warning signs/symptom
        led to a delay in diagnosis of bowel perforation and this has, in
        turn, led to a situation of avoidable delay which eventually cause
        increased deterioration of the patient. (Experts Common Opinion)
36. The above-referred findings of the MCI on the conduct of Respondent

1 leave no doubt in our mind that this is certainly a case of medical

negligence leading to deficiency in his services. NCDRC, except referring to

the general principles of law as
laid down in
the judgments of this Court has

not attempted to draw its conclusion from the oral and documentary

evidence available on record.
37. Apart from the facts that clearly emerge from the report of the MCI,

there is sufficient evidence to reiterate the same findings of deficiency. In

the oral evidence, the following answers were elicited from Respondent 1 in

the cross-examination which fortify the report given by the MCI.
Page 18 of 21
Q) Did you consider during your investigation that there
         was possible intra-operative injury to bile duct or
         intestines?
A) No it did not occur to my mind . In-fact there was no
         such injury while the patient was in my hospital.
Q)     Did    you     think   it   necessary  to   take
         opinion/consultation of another Surgeon?
A) I did not think it necessary in the circumstances of
         this case to consult another surgeon.
Q) Why did you consider it proper to refer the patient to
         another Surgeon instead of a Chest Specialist as
         according to your opinion, the patient was not having
         any surgical problem but was having chest problem.
         A) The patient was referred to a Surgeon because we
         wanted to know that why the abdomen pain has
         developed as also why there was excessive discharge
         from the drain.”
38. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that the

NCDRC has committed an error in reversing the findings of the SCDRC and

not adverting to the evidence on record including the report of the MCI. The

decision of the NCDRC deserves to be set aside and we hold that the

complainants have made out a case of medical negligence against

Respondents 1 and 2 and are entitled to seek compensation on the ground of

deficiency of service.
39. The State Commission as well as the National Commission and even

the MCI have not found Respondents 3 and 4 negligent in performing their

services, and we are in agreement with such findings and therefore, confine
Page 19 of 21
our conclusion and directions to Respondents 1 and 2. To this extent, we

reject the appeal of the complainant against all except Respondents 1 and 2.
40. In view of the findings as indicated above we are of the opinion that

the appeal filed by the complainants deserves to be allowed. The

complainants had claimed an amount of Rs. 62,85,160/- on various counts

such as amounts paid to the doctors and the hospitals for treatment, loss of

income of the patient who was a Government servant with the salary of Rs.

37,150 per month with 10 years remaining service, damages for trauma and

shock and on certain other grounds. Having considered the matter in detail,

we are of the opinion that the interest of justice would be subserved if

Respondents 1 and 2 are directed to pay to the complainants a total amount

of Rs. 25,00,000 (Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs only) with interest @ 6% per

annum from the date of SCDRC order as compensation. Respondents 1 and

2 will be entitled to adjust any amount already paid or deposited in favour

of the complainants pending proceedings. The amount shall be deposited

within a period of 6 months from today, failing which it shall carry an

interest of 9% per annum.
Page 20 of 21
41. For the reasons stated above, these appeals are allowed and the

judgment of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New

Delhi in Appeal No. 108/2008 and Appeal No. 120/2008 is hereby set aside.

Parties shall bear their own costs.
……………………………….J.
                                           [UDAY UMESH LALIT]


                                         ……………………………….J.
                                            [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]


                                         ……………………………….J.
                                 [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]

NEW DELHI;
MAY 18, 2022
Page 21 of 21