[Cites
16
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Matin Mallick vs Subrata Bhattacharjee on 5 May, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3499 OF 2022

         Abdul Matin Mallick                                         …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

         Subrata Bhattacharjee (Banerjee) and Ors.                   …Respondent(s)

                                                  WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3500 OF 2022


         Abdul Matin Mallick                                         …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

         Subrata Bhattacharjee (Banerjee) and Ors.                   …Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order passed by the High Court of Calcutta in C.O. NO. 4266 of

         2016 by which the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition

         preferred by the appellant herein and has confirmed the order passed by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.05.05
the first Appellate Court allowing the application submitted by the
16:46:49 IST
Reason:
1
respondents    herein –    pre-emptors,   the   original   respondents      –

revisionists before the High Court, the appellant herein - pre-emptee has

preferred the present appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 5394 of 2022.


1.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court of Calcutta in C.O. NO. 1153 of

2016 by which the High Court has allowed the said writ petition preferred

by the respondents herein and has revived the execution case filed by

the respondents for implementing the pre-emption order and has further

directed that the executing court shall direct possession to be handed

over to the pre-emptors in respect of the property in question positively

within 31.08.2021, the appellant herein – pre-emptee has preferred the

present appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 4261 of 2022.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in nutshell are as under:-
2.1   That the disputed property in question, which was the subject

matter of application for pre-emption before the Appropriate Authority

under the
West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to

as the “Act, 1955”) belonged to one Khudiram Bhattacharya, who died

on 17.04.2001 leaving behind him, surviving his widow Purnima

Bhattacharya who also died on 14.08.2001 and three sons namely

Subrata, Debabrata and Ratan (the pre-emptors herein) and two

daughters Kalyani and Alpana, the vendors of the pre-emptee (appellant
2
herein). On the death of Khudiram Bhattacharya and his widow, the

aforesaid three sons and two daughters inherited the property in

question each having undivided 1/5 th share therein. The daughters of the

original owner - Khudiram Bhattacharya sold their undivided 2/5 th share

in the property in question to the appellant herein - pre-emptee - Abdul

Matin Mallick vide registered sale deed dated 23.11.2011. The sale in

favour of the appellant by the daughters of the said Khudiram

Bhattacharya was sought to be pre-empted by the sons of said

Khudiram Bhattacharya on the ground that their sisters have transferred

their undivided share in the property in question to the appellant, a

stranger to the said property without serving statutory notice under Sub-

Section (5) of
Section 5
of the Act, 1955. The said application under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955 was registered as Misc. Pre-emption Case

No. 8 of 2012 before the learned Trial Court.
2.2   The learned Trial Court dismissed the said application for pre-

emption as not maintainable mainly on the ground that since the vendors

of the pre-emptee had transferred their entire share in the suit property,

the application for pre-emption under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955 is not

maintainable.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order

passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the pre-emption

application, pre-emptors preferred the appeal before the First Appellate
3
Court being Misc. Appeal No. 7 of 2014. The Appellate Court allowed

the said appeal and set aside the order passed by the learned Trial

Court and consequently allowed the application for pre-emption holding

that even when a co-sharer of a plot of land transfers his entire share to

any person other than a raiyat in the said plot of land, the application for

pre-emption under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955 would be maintainable.

2.4   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the

First Appellate Court allowing the pre-emption application, the purchaser

– pre-emptee filed the present revision application before the High Court.

2.5   By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has

dismissed the said revision application and has not interfered with the

judgment and order passed by the First Appellate Court, however, has

granted the time to the pre-emptors to deposit the balance consideration

money together with further sum of 10% of that amount by further period

of 30 days.
2.6   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court, the purchaser – pre-emptee has

preferred the present appeals.
3.    Shri Anand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the

case, the High Court has committed a grave error in dismissing the

revision application and not interfering with the order passed by the First

Appellate Court allowing the pre-emption application.
4
3.1   It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the appellant that as such there was a non-compliance of the

mandatory requirement of the deposit of the entire sale consideration

with a further sum of 10% of the sale consideration as required under
Section 8
of the Act. It is contended that it is an admitted position that at

the time of submitting the application for pre-emption, the pre-emptors

did not make any full deposit of the sale consideration with further 10%

of the sale consideration alongwith the application for pre-emption.

3.2   It is urged that before any application for pre-emption is considered

and further enquiry is conducted as required under
Section 9
of the Act,

deposit of the entire sale consideration with 10% more of the sale

consideration is a condition precedent. That unless and until the said

condition is satisfied and/or fulfilled the pre-emption application shall not

be maintainable at all; that only thereafter the further enquiry as

contemplated under
Section 9
of the Act, 1955 shall have to be

conducted. That in the present case, there is non-compliance of the

statutory mandatory requirement as per
Section 8
of the Act, 1955.

Therefore, the pre-emption application was liable to be rejected.

3.3   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has heavily

relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Barasat Eye

Hospital and Ors. Vs. Kaustabh Mondal
, (2019) 19 SCC 767 (paras

23 to 33).
5
3.4   Making the above submissions and relying upon
the above

decision
, it is prayed to allow the present appeals.
4.    Present appeals are opposed by Shri Mainak Bose, learned Senior

Advocate appearing on behalf of the contesting respondents.          It is

vehemently submitted that as such the learned Trial Court dismissed the

pre-emption application as not maintainable on the ground that since the

vendors of the pre-emptee have transferred their entire share in the suit

property, the application for pre-emption under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955

would not be maintainable. It is submitted that however, in view of the

binding decision of the High Court in the case of
Sk. Sajhan Ali & Ors.

Vs. Sk. Saber Ali & Anr.
reported in 2016 (1) W.B.L.R (Cal) 133 by

which it has been held that even when the entire share of a co-sharer in

the plot of a land is transferred to any person other than a raiyat in the

said plot of land, the application for pre-emption under
Section 8
of the

Act, 1955 would be maintainable. It is therefore submitted that the First

Appellate Court rightly set aside the order passed by the learned Trial

Court and allowed the pre-emption application, which is rightly not

interfered with by the High Court.
4.1   It is submitted that whether an application under
Section 8
would

be maintainable when a co-sharer of a plot of land transfers his entire

share to any person other than a raiyat in the said plot of land, is

answered in the affirmative by the Larger Bench of the High Court in the
6
case of
Naymul Haque and Ors. Vs. Allauddin Sk. and Ors.
reported

in 2019(1)CLJ(CAL)488.
4.2   Now, so far as the submission /contention on behalf of the

appellant that as the pre-emptors did not deposit the entire sale

consideration with 10% higher than the sale consideration and therefore,

the pe-emption application was not maintainable is concerned, it is

vehemently submitted that as such the said contention was not raised

either before the Courts below and/or even before the High Court, and it

has been raised for the first time before this Court.

4.3   It is further submitted that alongwith the pre-emption application,

the pre-emptors did not deposit the entire sale consideration with 10%

additional sale consideration as the pre-emptors bonafide believed that

the sale consideration mentioned in the sale deed was on a higher side.

It is submitted that thereafter the entire sale consideration with additional

10% has been deposited by the pre-emptors pursuant to the order

passed by the High Court. Therefore, even the condition mentioned in
Section 8
has now been complied with; therefore, the contention raised

now regarding non-deposit of the entire sale consideration with 10%

additional sale consideration shall no longer be available to the

appellant.
4.4   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present

appeals.
7
5.    We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at

length.
6.    At this outset, it is required to be noted that pre-emptors submitted

the application before the learned Trial Court under
Section 5
of the Act,

1955, in respect of the share sold by their sisters.          Therefore, the

contesting respondents herein – the original pre-emptors sought to

exercise their right as pre-emptors under the provisions of the Act, 1955.

The right of the pre-emption has been elaborately dealt with and

considered by a Four Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Bishan

Singh Vs. Khazan Singh
, AIR 1958 SC 838, wherein at paragraph 11,

it is observed and held as under: -
“11. … (1) The right of pre-emption is not a right to the
      thing sold but a right to the offer of a thing about to be
      sold. This right is called the primary or inherent right. (2)
      The pre-emptor has a secondary right or a remedial right
      to follow the thing sold. (3) It is a right of substitution but
      not of re-purchase i.e. the pre-emptor takes the entire
      bargain and steps into the shoes of the original vendee.
      (4) It is a right to acquire the whole of the property sold
      and not a share of the property sold.
(5) Preference being
      the essence of the right, the plaintiff must have a superior
      right to that of the vendee or the person substituted in his
      place. (6) The right being a very weak right, it can be
      defeated by all legitimate methods, such as the vendee
      allowing the claimant of a superior or equal right being
      substituted in his place.”


6.1   Thus, as observed and held by this Court in the aforesaid

judgment, the right of pre-emption is “a very weak right”. That being the
8
character of the right, any provision to enforce such a right must, thus,

be strictly construed. [
Barasat Eye Hospital and Ors.
(supra)]


6.2   The submission/contention on behalf of the pre-emptee that, as in

the present case, alongwith the pre-emption application, the pre-emptors

did not deposit the entire sale consideration with 10% additional sale

consideration, and therefore their pre-emption application was not

required to be further considered and no further enquiry as contemplated

under
Section 9
of the Act, 1955 would be maintainable is concerned,

identical question came to be considered by this Court in the case of
Barasat Eye Hospital and Ors.
(supra) wherein at paragraphs 23 to

33, it is observed and held as under: -
“23. The historical perspective of this right was set forth
      by the Constitution Bench of this Court, as far back as in
      1962, in Bhau Ram case [Bhau Ram v. Baij Nath Singh,
      AIR 1962 SC 1476].
The judgment in
Bishan Singh
case [
Bishan Singh v. Khazan Singh
, AIR 1958 SC 838]
      preceded the same, where different views, expressed in
      respect of this law of pre-emption, have been set out, and
      thereafter the position has been summarised. There is no
      purpose in repeating the same, but, suffice to say that the
      remedial action in respect of the right of pre-emption is a
      secondary right, and that too in the context of the “right
      being a very weak right”. It is in this context that it was
      observed that such a right can be defeated by all
      legitimate methods, such as a vendee allowing the
      claimant of a superior or equal right to be substituted in its
      place. This is not a right where equitable considerations
      would gain ground. In fact, the effect of the right to pre-
      emption is that a private contract inter se the parties and
      that too, in respect of land, is sought to be interfered with,
9
and substituted by a purchaser who fortuitously has land
in the vicinity to the land being sold. It is not a case of a
co-sharer, which would rest on a different ground.
24. The second aspect of importance is that given the
aforesaid position, even the time period for making the
deposit, under
Section 8(1)
of the said Act, has been held
to be sacrosanct, in view of the judgment of this Court
in Gopal Sardar case [
Gopal Sardar v. Karuna Sardar
,
(2004) 4 SCC 252]. The very provision of
Section 8(1)
of
the said Act came up for consideration and, as held
in that
case
, if the time period itself cannot be extended and if
Section 5
of the Limitation Act would not apply, while
interpreting
Section 8
of the said Act, then the
requirement of deposit of the amount along with the
application, within the time stipulated is sacrosanct. The
amount to be deposited is not any amount, as that would
give a wide discretion to the pre-emptor, and any pre-
emptor not able to pay the full amount, would always be
able to say that, in his belief, the consideration was much
lesser than what had been set out. If we read the
judgment in
Gopal Sardar
case [
Gopal Sardar v. Karuna
Sardar
, (2004) 4 SCC 252], in its true enunciation and
spirit, there is sanctity attached to both, the amount and
the time-frame. There cannot be sanctity to the time-
frame, incapable of extension even by the
Limitation Act
,
and yet, there be no sanctity to the amount.
25. In the context of the
Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of
Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961
,
the recent view of this Court, in the context of the relevant
provision (now repealed [ Vide Section 2 of the Bihar
Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 2019.]), itself puts a
precondition for the exercise of the right of pre-emption,
by requiring the deposit of the full stated purchase money
and 10% of the purchase amount. In our view, it makes
no difference that the proviso in
Section 16(3)
of that Act
states that “… no such application shall be entertained
10
…”, in the context of filing of applications, without the
deposit of the full amount. We may say so because, if we
turn to
Section 8(1)
of the said Act, the right of pre-
emption is activated “on deposit of the consideration
money together with the further sum of 10% of that
amount”. Thus, unless such a deposit is made, the right of
a pre-emptor is not even triggered off. The provisions of
Section 8
are explicit and clear in their terms.
26. Now turning to
Section 9
of the said Act, from which,
apparently, some judgments of the Calcutta High Court
have sought to derive a conclusion that an inquiry into the
stated consideration is envisaged. However, the
commencement of sub-section (1) of
Section 9
is with “on
the deposit mentioned in sub-section (1) of
Section 8
being made…” Thus, for anything further to happen under
Section 9
of the said Act, the deposit as envisaged under
Section 8
of the said Act has to be made. It is only then
that the remaining portion of
Section 9
of the said Act
would come into play.
27. The question now is as to what would be the nature of
inquiry which has been envisaged to be carried out by the
Munsif. If
Section 9
, as it reads, is perused, then first, the
amount as mentioned in the sale transaction is to be
deposited, as per sub-section (1) of
Section 8
of the said
Act. Once that amount is deposited, the next stage is for
the Munsif to give notice of the application to the
transferee. The transferee thereafter, when enters
appearance within the time specified, can prove the
consideration money paid for the transfer “and other
sums”. Such other sums, if any, are as “properly paid by
him in respect of the land including any sum paid for
annulling encumbrances created prior to the day of
transfer, and rent or revenue, cesses or taxes for any
period”. The inquiry, thus envisaged, is in respect of the
amount sought to be claimed over and above the stated
sale consideration in the document of sale because, in
that eventuality further sums would have to be called for,
11
from the pre-emptor. In that context, the additional
amount would have to be deposited. Even in the event
that a pre-emptor raises doubts regarding the
consideration amount, enquiry into the said aspect can be
done only upon payment of the full amount, along with the
application. In this aspect, the phrase “the remainder, if
any, being refunded to the applicant” would include to
mean the repayment of the initial deposit made along with
the application, if considered to be excess. To give any
other connotation to these sections would make both, the
latter part of
Section 8
of the said Act and the inception
part of
Section 9
of the said Act, otiose. We do not think
such an interpretation can be countenanced.
28. In our view, when the inquiry is being made by the
Munsif, whether in respect of the stated consideration, or
in respect of any additional amounts which may be
payable, the pre-requisite of deposit of the amount of the
stated consideration under
Section 8(1)
of the said Act
would be required to be fulfilled. The phraseology “the
remainder, if any, being refunded to the applicant” would
have to be understood in that context. The word
“remainder” is in reference to any amount which, on
inquiry about the stated consideration, may be found to
have been deposited in excess, but it cannot be left at the
own whim of the applicant to deposit any amount, which
is deemed proper, but the full amount has to be
deposited, and if found in excess on inquiry, be refunded
to the applicant.
29. We are, thus, firmly of the view that the pre-requisite
to even endeavour to exercise this weak right is the
deposit of the amount of sale consideration and the 10%
levy on that consideration, as otherwise,
Section 8(1)
of
the said Act will not be triggered off, apart from making
even the beginning of
Section 9(1)
of the said Act otiose.
30. We are not inclined to construe the aforesaid
provisions otherwise only on the ground that there are no
12
so-called “penal provisions” included. The provisions of
Sections 8
and
9
of the said Act must be read as they are.
In fact, it is a settled rule of construction that legislative
provisions should be read in their plain grammatical
connotation, and only in the case of conflicts between
different provisions would an endeavour have to be made
to read them in a manner that they co-exist and no part of
the rule is made superfluous. [
British India General
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Itbar Singh
, AIR 1959 SC 1331] The
interpretation, as we have adopted, would show that
really speaking, no part of either
Section 8
, or
Section 9
of
the said Act is made otiose. Even if an inquiry takes place
in the aspect of stated consideration, on a plea of some
fraud or likewise, and if such a finding is reached, the
amount can always be directed to be refunded, if
deposited in excess. However, it cannot be said that a
discretion can be left to the pre-emptor to deposit
whatever amount, in his opinion, is the appropriate
consideration, in order to exercise a right of pre-emption.
The full amount has to be deposited.
31. We may also note that, as a matter of fact, the pre-
emptor in the present case i.e. the respondent has not
filed any material to substantiate even the plea on the
basis of which, even if an inquiry was held, could a
conclusion be reached that the stated consideration is not
the market value of the land.
32. We also believe that to give such a discretion to the
pre-emptor, without deposit of the full consideration,
would give rise to speculative litigation, where the pre-
emptor, by depositing smaller amounts, can drag on the
issue of the vendee exercising rights in pursuance of the
valid sale deed executed. In the present case, there is a
sale deed executed and registered, setting out the
consideration.
33. We are of the view that the impugned order and the
view adopted would make a weak right into a “speculative
13
strong right”, something which has neither historically, nor
      in judicial interpretation been envisaged.”

6.3   Therefore, deposit of the entire sale consideration with additional

10% of the sale consideration alongwith the pre-emption application is a

statutory and mandatory requirement and it is a pre-condition before any

further enquiry as contemplated under
Section 9
of the Act is held. In

the present case, admittedly, the pre-emptors had not deposited the

entire sale consideration with additional 10% of the sale consideration

alongwith the pre-emption application. The aforesaid aspects have not

been considered either by the First Appellate Court or even by the High

Court in this case.
7.    Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the pre-emptors that

they bonafidely believed that the sale consideration mentioned in the

sale deed is in favour of the vendee, who is an outsider (outside the

family) was higher than the actual sale consideration and therefore, they

did not deposit the entire sale consideration with additional 10% of the

sale consideration alongwith the pre-emption application is concerned, it

is to be noted that the aforesaid cannot be a ground not to comply with

the condition of deposit as required under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955. At

the most, such a dispute can be the subject matter of an enquiry

provided under
Section 9
of the Act. As observed hereinabove, the

enquiry under
Section 9
with respect to the sale consideration in the sale
14
deed would be only after the condition of deposit of entire sale

consideration with additional 10% as provided under
Section 8
of the Act

has been complied with.
8.    Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the pre-emptors that

the contention of non-deposit of the entire sale consideration with

additional 10% of the sale consideration by the pre-emptors was not

raised before the Courts below and has been raised for the first time

before this Court, and therefore the same be not considered/permitted to

be raised now, is concerned, it is to be noted that the said contention

would go to the root of the matter on maintainability of the pre-emption

application as without complying with the statutory requirements as

mentioned under
Section 8
of the Act, 1955, the same is not

maintainable. It is an admitted position that the pre-emptors had not

deposited the entire sale consideration with additional 10% of the sale

consideration along with the pre-emption application as required under
Section 8
of the Act in the instant case.
In view of the aforesaid admitted position, we have considered the

submission on behalf of the appellant on non-fulfillment of the condition

mentioned in
Section 8
of the Act.
9.    At this stage, it is required to be noted that even the High Court in

the impugned judgment and order has permitted the pre-emptors to

deposit the balance sale consideration.        However, faced with the
15
decision of this Court in the case of
Barasat Eye Hospital and Ors.
(supra) and in light of the observations made by us hereinabove that

alongwith the pre-emption application, the pre-emptors have to deposit

the entire sale consideration with additional 10% and only thereafter the

further enquiry can be conducted as per
Section 9
of the Act, 1955 and

therefore, unless and until the same is complied with, the pre-emption

application would not be maintainable, the High Court is not justified in

permitting the pre-emptors to now deposit the balance sale consideration

with additional 10% while deciding the revision application. Such a

direction/permission/liberty would go against the intent of
Section 8
of

the Act, 1955.
9.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present

appeals succeed. The impugned judgments and orders passed by the

High Court and that of the First Appellate Court are hereby quashed and

set aside. Consequently, the pre-emption application submitted by the

original pre-emptors – respondent Nos. 1 to 3 herein stands dismissed.

Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 – original pre-emptors are permitted to withdraw

the amount, which they might have deposited either alongwith the pre-

emption application and/or any subsequent deposit pursuant to the

orders passed by the High Court.
Present appeals are allowed accordingly. However, in the facts

and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Pending application(s), if any also stands disposed of.
16
………………………………….J.
                        [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;           ………………………………….J.
May 05, 2022.          [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
17