[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Samarpan Varishtha Jan Parisar vs Rajendra Prasad Agarwal on 6 May, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3520 OF 2022
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) NO. 19303 OF 2021)


          Samarpan Varishtha Jan Parisar & Ors.                          .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

          Rajendra Prasad Agarwal & Ors.                              .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                             JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.             The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 01.10.2021 whereby the

                         revision petition filed by the plaintiffs-respondents was allowed and

                         interim injunction was restored, as was granted by the learned Trial

                         Court.
2.             The Municipal Corporation, Lucknow has constructed an old age home

                         named Samarpan at Adil Nagar, Ring Road, Lucknow. In terms of the

                         advertisement published on 05.12.2004, the appellant was granted
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
lease for running such old age home initially for 15 years from
Date: 2022.05.06
15:58:33 IST
Reason:
01.09.2005, but with a condition of renewal for a further period of 15
1
years. One of the conditions in the lease was that an Advisory Board

     shall be constituted by the lessee i.e., the appellant. The appellant

     framed rules and regulations for grant of services at the old age home.

     Such rules and regulations contemplated that the cooperation fund

     deposited by the inmates shall be used for accommodation, food, bed

     and other essential services of living and general treatment but

     expensive medical treatment and expenditure was to be borne by the

     inmates themselves. It also provided that if any rules of the complex

     are violated by any inmate, the Administration has got full right to

     expel him and dismiss his membership by issuing him one month

     period’s notice. The relevant clause reads thus:
“21. If the Rules of the Complex are violated by any inmate
           person, the Administration has got full right to expel him and
           dismiss his membership by issuing him one month period’s
           advance notice. The Management reserves its right to do so.”
3.   It was on 23.04.2016, the plaintiffs-respondents filled up an admission

     form to stay in the old age home giving the details about his four

     children, one son and three daughters. Two of the daughters stay at

     Lucknow and one son and one daughter are staying in Faizabad. The

     plaintiffs had also executed affidavits to comply with the rules and

     regulations as mentioned above.
4.   There is a dispute as to whether the plaintiff no.2 is a psychiatric

     patient and misbehaves with the other inmates and staff, but without

     going into that fact, the question required to be answered is that what

     is the right of the inhabitant of an old age home to stay in such old age
2
home.
5.   It is stated that in terms of the conditions of the lease, the Committee

     held its meeting on 26.10.2019. In the said meeting, the stand of the

     plaintiffs was that if the administration has received any complaint

     against them, then they may be pardoned and they ensured that no

     such complaint would be received in the future. It was pointed that in

     difficult time of old age, the approach of the appellant should be

     compassionate with due generosity. It was decided by the Committee

     to allow one month’s more time to the plaintiffs so as to observe their

     behaviour. If no reforms were visible then, they would be told to leave

     the premises in terms of Rule 21.
6.   Since no behavioral change was visible, the appellant cancelled the

     membership of the plaintiffs on 22.11.2019. It is thereafter, the

     plaintiffs filed a suit for injunction before the Civil Court, accompanied

     by an application for ad-interim injunction. On such application for

     interim injunction, the trial Court passed an order on 17.12.2019 that

     the plaintiffs should not be dispossessed during the pendency of the

     suit. However, in appeal, such order was vacated by the Court of

     Additional District Judge, Lucknow, on 20.10.2020. In further revision

     preferred by the plaintiffs, the order was set aside.
7.   The plaintiffs have filed a counter affidavit before this Court, inter alia

     demanding an inquiry into the financial irregularities, embezzlement,

     internal mis-management of old age home and their miseries, extortion
3
and torture. It is the stand of the plaintiffs-respondents that they acted

      as a whistle blower to highlight the financial misappropriations,

      misdeeds and inhumane attitude. The complaint was made regarding

      quality of food, facilities or medical treatment, misuse of donated

      vehicles etc.
8.    In a separate affidavit filed by Shri Sunil Kumar Sharma, ACP Gazipur, it

      is stated that the plaintiffs are old-aged parents who have been

      abandoned by their own children. There are 24 other inmates but no

      such complaint has been made by them in the police station. It was

      also mentioned therein that as against security of Rs.25,000/-, the

      appellant has sought the deposit of Rs.75,000/-. It may be stated that

      Station House Officer was not a party to this suit but was impleaded by

      the plaintiffs before the High Court in the revision petition under
Article

      227
of the Constitution.
9.    In a rejoinder affidavit filed by the appellant, the assertions made by

      Shri Sharma have been denied.        It has been pointed out that two

      daughters Shikha Agarwal and Ruchika Agarwal visit their parents and

      have given affidavits that they will act as guardian of their parents and

      will take care of their medical needs. It is also pointed that Shri Harpal

      Singh, the Supervisor of the District Social Welfare Department visited

      the old age home on 08.11.2020 and offered an alternative old age

      home of Social Welfare Department free of cost to the plaintiffs.
10.   The learned counsel appearing for Municipal Corporation and the State
4
submitted that they have nothing to add in the present appeal.
11.      We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the issue

         required to be examined herein is that what is the status of the

         inmates in the old age home, are they licensee and/or they have a

         right to stay in the old age home for the lifetime as a matter of right.
12.      Law recognizes three types of possession. One as that of an owner,

         including co-owners; second as a tenant, when a right is created in the

         property; and thirdly permissive possession, the possession which

         otherwise would be illegal or that of as a trespasser. In the present

         appeal, we are concerned with the possession falling in third category.
This Court in a judgment reported as
Associated Hotels of India v.

         R.N. Kapoor1
has held that in case of a licensee, the legal possession

         continues with the owner as in terms of
Section 52
of the Indian

         Easements Act, 1882, grant of a mere right to do upon the property of

         another, something which would in the absence of such right be

         unlawful. Thus, this is the essential characteristic which distinguishes

         a license from a lease.
13.
In
Sohan Lal Naraindas v. Laxmidas Raghunath Gadit2
, it has

         been held that a lease creates an interest in the property whereas a

         license creates no estate or interest in the immovable property of the

         grantor. It was held as under:
“8. A licence confers a right to do or continue to do something

1     AIR 1959 SC 1262
2     (1971) 1 SCC 276
5
in or upon immovable property of grantor which but for the grant
               of the right may be unlawful, but it creates no estate or interest
               in the immovable property of the grantor. A lease on the other
               hand creates an interest in the property demised.”
14.
In
Maganlal Radia v. State of Maharashtra3
, a lessee filed a

         petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution for the writ of Certiorari to

         quash and set aside the orders passed by the Collector, Bombay calling

         him to vacate a plot situated on the Chowpatty Foreshore. One of the

         questions examined was whether the petitioner had a right to continue

         in possession for as long as possible. It was held as under:
“1. …As a matter of substantive law, therefore, the petitioner
               has no colour of right to remain in possession of the suit
               premises and has no answer to the respondents’ claim that he
               should vacate the land in question, and the present petition
               appears to have been filed merely for the purpose of gaining
               time and remaining in possession as long as possible.”
15.      The High Court declined to entertain the petition on the ground that

         the petitioner was merely a licencee. It was held that the injustice that

         would have been caused if the present petition was entertained would

         be greater in view of the fact that the licence was for a purely

         temporary purpose.
16.
In a later judgment reported as
Conrad Dias of Bombay v. Joseph

         Dias of Bombay4
, the father filed a suit against his son for injunction

         restraining the defendant from entering or remaining in the suit

         premises. It was held that the son who is residing with the parents in

         the house cannot claim any legal character much less, the character of

3     1971 Mh.L.J. 57
4     1994 SCC OnLine Bom 528
6
a licensee as defined in
Section 52
of the Easements Act.                    He is

         residing simpliciter as a member of the family and nothing more and

         nothing less.        It was also held that the son has not claimed either

         tenancy or a licence and, thus, he has no legal character or status,

         except staying in the house as a member of the family. In view of the

         findings recorded, the appeal preferred by the son was dismissed.
17.      In Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority (HMDA) &

         Ors. v. M/s. Hotel Malligi Pvt. Ltd.5, the respondent was granted a

         licence by the appellant over the land admeasuring 2500 square

         meters.    The Court reiterated the principle that unlike a lessee, the

         legal incidence of a licence, in normal parlance, is that the licensee has

         no right to possession of the demised property as the legal possession

         always remains with the licensor. Thus, it was held as under:
“26. The concept of a licence, being wholly different from that of
                a lease, it is not open to the licensee to assert any leasehold
                rights over the licensed premises after expiry of the licence
                period and seek to prolong its occupation thereof. Its status upon
                expiry of the licence period is that of a trespasser. In any event,
                even if the licensee is in a position to establish that it was
                lawfully deprived of the benefits of the licence during its
                subsistence, the only relief that it can seek is in the form of
                compensation/damages. There is no legal and tenable basis for a
                licensee to assert a right to continue in occupation of the
                licensed premises after expiry of the licence period. The Court
                below seems to have been unmindful of the distinction between
                a licence and a lease, as is clear from the order dated
                29.09.2016 passed in Arbitration O.P. No. 2229 of 2016, where it
                used the terms licence and lease interchangeably.”
18.      The Division Bench of Madras High Court in a judgment reported as
5     2017 SCC OnLine Hyd 1
7
General Merchant Association rep. by Secretary and Treasurer

       & Ors. v. The Corporation of Chennai, rep. by its Commissioner,

       Chennai6 held that appellants were allottees of a shop in the

       Corporation Fruit Market. The shopkeepers challenged the action of the

       Corporation terminating their licence and calling upon the licencees to

       vacate and surrender possession of the respective shops in their

       occupation. It was held, while dismissing the writ petitions, as under:
“24. The entire case law on the subject revolves around the
             cardinal touch stone at which the relationship between the
             parties who claim to be licensors or licensees or lessors or
             lessees has to be decided is whether the grant creates an
             interest or estate in the property within the subject matter of the
             agreement. Delivery of exclusive possession, as has been held
             would not be conclusive to hold that the grant is a lease. The
             surrounding circumstances and the conduct of the parties as in
             the present case show that no interest in the property have not
             been created at any point of time in favour of the writ
             petitioners/licensees of the Municipal Corporation stalls and the
             claims of the petitioners that they are lessees is far-fetched and
             cannot be sustained.
xx                 xx                   xx
26. It is also equally well settled the position of a licensee after
             termination becomes unlawful and the licensee is not entitled to
             any injunction restraining the licensor from evicting him as
             unlike a tenant a licensee does not have judicial possession and
             the possession always remains with the licensor and what was
             granted is a privilege in terms of the licence, which in the
             absence of such a grant becomes unlawful.
27. The occupation of the writ petitioners with respect to the
             stalls/shops in public market is referable to the licence originally
             granted as their status is that of a licensee. Once such a licence
             is terminated, the possession of the stalls become unlawful as
             they have no right and the possession of such possession after
6   1998 SCC OnLine Mad 848
8
termination is not protected by any statutory provision. In terms
                of
Section 63
of the Easements Act 1982, where licence is
                revoked the licensee is entitled to reasonable time to leave the
                property for removing all his goods which he has been allowed to
                place. A person continuing in the premises after the termination
                of licence, his status is as already pointed out is unlawful and he
                has no semblance of any right to continue in the premises.”
19.      A three-Judge Bench of this Court in a judgment reported as Rame

         Gowda (Dead) by LRs. v. M. Varadappa Naidu (Dead) by LRs. &

         Anr.7 was considering the question of ad-interim injunction.             It was

         held that the person in peaceful possession is entitled to retain his

         possession and in order to protect such possession, he may even use

         reasonable force to keep out a trespasser. It was further held that it is

         the settled possession or effective possession of a person without title

         which would entitle him to protect his possession even as against the

         true owner. It was held as under:
“9.     …The “settled possession” must be ( i) effective, (ii)
                undisturbed, and (iii) to the knowledge of the owner or without
                any attempt at concealment by the trespasser. The phrase
                “settled possession” does not carry any special charm or magic
                in it; nor is it a ritualistic formula which can be confined in a
                straitjacket. An occupation of the property by a person as an
                agent or a servant acting at the instance of the owner will not
                amount to actual physical possession.”
20.      Another three-Judge Bench in a judgment reported as
Maria

         Margarida Sequeira Fernandes & Ors. v. Erasmo Jack De

         Sequeira (Dead
) through LRs8 was examining the question of


7     (2004) 1 SCC 769
8     (2012) 5 SCC 370
9
injunction between the plaintiff – brother, who was given the property

in question as a caretaker, the owner being sister of the plaintiff. An

argument was raised before this Court that the possession of a

caretaker can never be a possession in one's right and no suit for

injunction under
Section 6
of the Specific Relief Act was maintainable.

It was held as under:
“83. Grant or refusal of an injunction in a civil suit is the most
      important stage in the civil trial. Due care, caution, diligence and
      attention must be bestowed by the judicial officers and Judges
      while granting or refusing injunction. In most cases, the fate of
      the case is decided by grant or refusal of an injunction.
      Experience has shown that once an injunction is granted, getting
      it vacated would become a nightmare for the defendant.
xx                  xx                   xx
97. Principles of law which emerge in this case are crystallised
      as under:
(1) No one acquires title to the property if he or she was allowed
      to stay in the premises gratuitously. Even by long possession of
      years or decades such person would not acquire any right or
      interest in the said property.
(2) Caretaker, watchman or servant can never acquire interest in
      the property irrespective of his long possession. The caretaker or
      servant has to give possession forthwith on demand.

      (3) The courts are not justified in protecting the possession of a
      caretaker, servant or any person who was allowed to live in the
      premises for some time either as a friend, relative, caretaker or
      as a servant.
(4) The protection of the court can only be granted or extended
      to the person who has valid, subsisting rent agreement, lease
      agreement or licence agreement in his favour.

      (5) The caretaker or agent holds property of the principal only on
10
behalf of the principal. He acquires no right or interest
                whatsoever for himself in such property irrespective of his long
                stay or possession.”
21.      In view of such finding, the appeal was allowed and possession of the

         suit premises was directed to be handed over to the appellant, the

         owner.
22.
In another judgment reported as
Behram Tejani & Ors. v. Azeem

         Jagani9
, the respondent in appeal filed a suit claiming injunction,

         restraining the defendants from dispossession of the plaintiff from the

         suit premises. This Court held as under:
“14. Thus, a person holding the premises gratuitously or in the
                capacity as a caretaker or a servant would not acquire any right
                or interest in the property and even long possession in that
                capacity would be of no legal consequences. In the
                circumstances, the City Civil Court was right and justified in
                rejecting the prayer for interim injunction and that decision
                ought not to have been set aside by the High Court. We,
                therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the judgment under appeal
                and restore the order dated 29-4-2013 passed by the Bombay
                City Civil Court in Notice of Motion No. 344 of 2013 in Suit No.
                408 of 2013.”
23.      Now, adverting to the facts of the present appeal, the Respondent Nos.
1 and 2 – plaintiffs were permitted to stay in the old age home subject

         to certain payments to meet the necessary expenses of food and minor

         medical care. The possession of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 in a room

         of an old age home is that of a licensee permitted to enjoy the

         possession, but without creating any interest in the property.            The
9     (2017) 2 SCC 759
11
appellants found the behavior of respondent nos. 1 and 2 not

      conducive to the fellow inmates and the staff of the old age home.

      This Court will not exercise a judicial review about the opinion of the

      appellants. On the legal issue, respondent Nos. 1 and 2, as licensees

      have a legal right to stay in the room of the old age home only so long

      as they comply with the terms and conditions of such license. Since

      respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had no legal right to protect their possession

      without complying with the corresponding obligations, as their

      possession is not a legal possession but only a permissive possession,

      they cannot seek any injunction to restrain the management of the old

      age home not to dispossess them.
24.   It is an unfortunate situation when the parents cannot be taken care of

      by the children, but the fact remains that abandonment of parents by

      their children is now a hard fact of life. Parents do find it difficult to

      reconcile the situation that at that age they have to stay in old age

      home. Therefore, one can understand the mental trauma which the

      parents face in the evening of their life but the agony suffered by a

      parent cannot be a cause of disturbance to the other inmates or to the

      organizers who have resolved to take care and run the old age home.

      The inmates in the old age home are licensees and are expected to

      maintain a minimum level of discipline and good behaviour and not to

      cause disturbance to the fellow inmates who are also senior citizens.

      Therefore, if one parent is the cause of disruption of peace of other
12
inmates in the old age home, the administration of the old age home is

      at liberty to terminate the license and ask the inmate to vacate the

      room allotted to them. Even if the organizers of the old age home are

      not able to meet the expectation or requirements of the plaintiffs, that

      would not confer a cause to the plaintiffs to disturb the other inmates.

      As a licensee, the plaintiffs have no right to stay in the accommodation

      allotted which is purely an approach to a human problem faced by the

      people in old age. The plaintiffs have even been offered alternative

      accommodation as well.
25.   As a licensee, the plaintiffs cannot seek an injunction to stay in the old

      age home unless they allow other inmates, a peaceful co-existence.

      Therefore, we find that the injunction granted by the High Court suffers

      from patent illegality. Therefore, the injunction granted by the High

      Court is not warranted in law.
26.   The appellant shall arrange an alternative old age home for respondent

      nos. 1 and 2, as one offered by the Social Welfare Department.
27.   However, we observe that it is open to the Municipal Corporation or the

      Social Welfare Department to examine the living conditions of the

      inmates in the old age home so that the inmates live in as comfortable

      conditions as are possible at that age.
28.   We also direct the Uttar Pradesh State Legal Services Authority to

      depute a para-legal volunteer to visit the old age home on such

      intervals as is possible and the Member Secretary of the District Legal
13
Services Authority to visit the old age home at least once a month

      initially to find out the difficulties being faced by the inmates and to

      take redressal steps, including to provide legal aid if required by the

      inmates of the old age home.
29.   With the aforesaid directions and liberty, the present appeal is allowed

      and ad-interim injunction sought by the plaintiffs–respondents stand

      dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                               (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                          .............................................J.
                                                    (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 06, 2022.
14