[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gomantak Mazdoor Sangh vs The State Of Goa on 10 May, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2982 OF 2022

         Gomantak Mazdoor Sangh                                    …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

         State of Goa & Anr.                                       …Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order dated 01.08.2016 passed by the High Court of Judicature of

         Bombay at Goa in Writ Petition No. 710 of 2016 by which the High Court

         has dismissed the writ petition preferred by the appellant herein in which

         the appellant herein challenged the validity of the Errata Notification

         dated 14.07.2016 issued by the State of Goa modifying/correcting its

         earlier notification dated 23/24.05.2016 by which the State of Goa fixed

         the rates of minimum wages in various sectors, the appellant has

         preferred the present appeal.
2.              The State of Goa issued a notification dated 23/24.05.2016 in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Natarajan
Date: 2022.05.10
17:24:45 IST
Reason:
section 3 read with clause (i) of sub-section (1) of Section 4 and sub-
1
section (2) of
Section 5
of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (hereinafter

referred to as the “Act, 1948”) determining the minimum rates of wages

payable to the various categories of the employees employed in various

trades in the Scheduled Employment, which included the basic rates of

wages plus special allowance. The revised minimum rates of wages as

per the said notification is as under:-
“a) Basic rates of wages as set out in Columns (3) of the
      Schedule, annexed to this notification and payable to the
      categories of employees mentioned against them in
      Column (2) thereof; and
b) Government also hereby introduce payment of special
      allowance (hereinafter referred to as variable dearness
      allowance) in addition to the revised minimum rates of
      wages as notified above at the rate of Rs. 0.95 paise for
      every point rise or fall beyond 269 points of All India
      Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers base year
      2001=100. Commissioner, Labour and Employment,
      Panaji shall calculate, adjust and notify such special
      allowance first time on and from 01-10-2016 based on the
      average All India Consumer Price Index for Industrial
      workers (2001=100) for the period 1st January to 30th
      June, 2016. Thereafter, Commissioner, Labour and
      Employment, Panaji shall periodically adjust and notify
      the rate of special allowance once in every six months on
      1st April and 1st October every year based on the
      average of All India Consumer Price Index (2001=100) for
      the period from July to December and January to June of
      the preceding period respectively."
2.1   That thereafter the State Government issued the impugned Errata

Notification dated 14.07.2016 under which it corrected the earlier

notification dated 23/24.05.2016. The word clause (i) was substituted as

clause (iii). The relevant part of the said Notification reads as under:-
2
“PUBLISHED IN OFFICIAL GAZETTE- GOVERNMENT
OF GOA, (EXTRAORDINARY N0.3) SERIES I No. 15
DATED 14TH JULY 2016

                        Department of Labour

                                 Errata

      24/21/2009-LAB-ll/472

      In the Notifications from the Labour Department published
      in the Official Gazette, Series I No. 7 (Extraordinary No.
3) dated 24-5-2016 regarding revision of minimum rates
      of wages, the following may be corrected: -
(1) At page 311, the word "clause (i)" may be read as
      "clause (iii)".
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx”

      At this stage, it is required to be noted that the Act, 1948 allows the

State Government under
Section 4(1)
to fix the rates of minimum wages

in three different ways as under:-
"(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at a
      rate to be adjusted, at such intervals and in such manner
      as the appropriate Government may direct, to accord as
      nearly as practicable with the variation in the cost of living
      index number applicable to such workers; or
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of living
      allowance, and the cash value of the concessions in
      respect of supplies of essential commodities at
      concession rates, where so authorised; or
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the
      cost of living allowance and the cash value of the
      concessions, if any."
3
2.2   The State Government while issuing the notification dated

23/24.05.2016 chose the first option and fixed the minimum rates of

wages plus special allowance. Now, as per the Errata notification dated

14.07.2016, the State Government fixed the minimum rates of wages as

per
Section 4(1)(iii)
namely an all-inclusive rate, the result and effect

would be that instead of the basic rate of wages plus special allowance,

as per the Errata Notification dated 14.07.2016, there shall be no

minimum wages plus special allowance, but as per the Errata

Notification, the minimum wages would be the basic rate of tax – an all-

inclusive rate excluding the special allowance.


2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the Errata notification

dated 14.07.2016, the appellant herein preferred the writ petition before

the High Court. It was the case on behalf of the State before the High

Court that there was a mistake while issuing the notification dated

23/24.05.2016 and instead of clause (iii) clause (i) was mentioned and

therefore, by the subsequent Errata Notification, the same has been

corrected. The High Court accepted the same and by the impugned

judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition.



2.4   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court dismissing the writ petition, the

original writ petitioner has preferred the present appeal.
4
3.    Shri Mayank Pandey, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant has vehemently submitted that the High Court has committed a

grave error in holding that there was a mistake while issuing the first

notification dated 23/24.05.2016 in which by mistake instead of clause
(iii), clause (i) was mentioned.
3.1   It is submitted that as such the notification dated 23/24.05.2016

was issued after following due procedure as required under
Section 4
read with
Section 5
of the Act, 1948. It is submitted that as such there

was a conscious decision, as after the draft notification was published,

objections were invited and considered and thereafter the notification

was issued determining the minimum rates of wages, which included the

basic rates of wages plus special allowance.        In support of above,

learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has heavily relied

upon paras 8 and 9 of the counter filed before this Court. It is submitted

that in that view of the matter and as there was no mistake either clerical

and/or arithmetical, even in exercise of power under
Section 10
of the

Act, 1948, the same could not have been corrected unless a fresh

procedure as required under
Section 4
/
5
has been followed. Reliance is

placed on
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act.
3.2   It is submitted that according to the respondent State, there was a

clerical error, which has been corrected vide Errata Notification dated
5
14.07.2016.    It is submitted that if the original notification dated

23/24.05.2016 is considered, it can be seen that a conscious decision

was taken while determining the minimum wages and the minimum

wages were fixed as per
Section 4(1)(i)
. It is contended that therefore,

once a conscious decision was taken, it cannot be said that there was

any clerical mistake, which could have been corrected in exercise of the

powers under
Section 10
of the Act, 1948.
3.3   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has heavily

relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Master

Construction Co. (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Orissa and Anr.
, (1966) 3 SCR

99 on what can be said to be an arithmetical and/or clerical error.
Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present

appeal.
4.    Shri Abhay Anil Anturkar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondent State has tried to support the impugned judgment and

order passed by the High Court as well as the Errata Notification dated

14.07.2016.
4.1   It is submitted that as such when the draft notification was issued,

clause (iii) of
Section 4(1)
was under consideration.        However, by
6
mistake, thereafter when the notification was issued clause (i) of
Section

4(1)
was mentioned and therefore, the same was corrected in exercise

of the powers under
Section 10
of the Act, 1948. It is urged that
Section

10
of the Act, 1948 permits the correction of a clerical or arithmetical

mistake in any order fixing or revising the minimum rates of wages. It is

submitted that therefore the High Court has rightly dismissed the writ

petition.
5.    We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective

parties at length.
6.    Vide Notification dated 23/24.05.2016, the State Government

determined the minimum wages, which included the basic rates of

wages and the special allowance. The notification specifically stated

that the said notification has been issued in exercise of powers conferred

by clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 3
read with clause (i) of sub-

section (1) of
Section 4
and sub-section (2) of
Section 5
of the Act, 1948.

As can be seen from the contents of the said notification, the said

notification was issued in consultation with the Minimum Wage Advisory

Board and thereafter the minimum wages were revised.            Thus, the

minimum wages were revised under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of
Section 4
after following the due procedure as required under
Section 5
.
7
Sections 4
and
5
, which are relevant for our purpose are extracted as

under:-
“4. Minimum rate of wages.—(1) Any minimum rate of
     wages fixed or revised by the appropriate Government in
     respect of scheduled employments under Section 3 may
     consist of—
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance at a
              rate to be adjusted, at such intervals and in such
              manner as the appropriate Government may direct,
              to accord as nearly as practicable with the variation
              in the cost of living index number applicable to such
              workers (hereinafter referred to as the “cost of living
              allowance”); or
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of
              living allowance, and the cash value of the
              concessions in respect of supplies of essential
              commodities at concession rates, where so
              authorised; or
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the
               cost of living allowance and the cash value of the
               concessions, if any.
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of
     the concessions in respect of supplies of essential
     commodities at concession rates shall be computed by the
     competent authority at such intervals and in accordance
     with such directions as may be specified or given by the
     appropriate Government.
5. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum
     wages.—(1) In fixing minimum rates of wages in respect
     of any scheduled employment for the first time under this
     Act or in revising minimum rates of wages so fixed, the
     appropriate Government shall either—
(a) appoint as many committees and sub-committees
             as it considers necessary to hold enquiries and
             advise it in respect of such fixation or revision, as the
             case may be, or
8
(b) by notification in the Official Gazette, publish its
           proposals for the information of persons likely to be
           affected thereby and specify a date, not less than
           two months from the date of the notification, on
           which the proposals will be taken into consideration.
        (2) After considering the advice of the committee or
     committees appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1)
     or, as the case may be, all representations received by it
     before the date specified in the notification under clause
(b) of that sub-section, the appropriate Government shall,
     by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, or, as the case
     may be, revise the minimum rates of wages in respect of
     each scheduled employment, and unless such notification
     otherwise provides, it shall come into force on the expiry of
     three months from the date of its issue:
Provided that where the appropriate Government
     proposes to revise the minimum rates of wages by the
     mode specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1), the
     appropriate Government shall consult the Advisory Board
     also.”
7.   Therefore,   once    the   minimum    wages    were    revised   and

determined, which included the basic rates of wages and the special

allowance as per
Section 4(1)(i)
of the Act, 1948, thereafter it cannot be

said that there was any clerical and/or arithmetical mistake in mentioning

clause (i). The minimum wages were revised and determined even after

consultation with the Minimum Wage Advisory Board as required under
Section 5
of the Act, 1948. Therefore, once there was no mistake, the

same could not have been corrected in exercise of powers under
Section 10
of the Act, 1948.
9
7.1   Even as per
Section 10
, only the clerical or arithmetical mistakes in

any order fixing or revising minimum rates of wages can be corrected.
Section 10
of the Act, 1948 reads as under:-
“10. Correction of errors.—(1) The appropriate
      Government may, at any time, by notification in the
      Official Gazette, correct clerical or arithmetical mistakes in
      any order fixing or revising minimum rates of wages under
      this Act, or errors arising therein from any accidental slip
      or omission.
(2) Every such notification shall, as soon as may be after
      it is issued, be placed before the Advisory Board for
      information.”


7.2   What can be said to be an arithmetical or clerical error has been

dealt with and considered by this Court in the case of
Master

Construction Co. (P) Ltd.
(supra).        It is observed and held that an

arithmetical mistake is a mistake of calculation; a clerical mistake is a

mistake in writing or typing. An error arising out of or occurring from an

accidental slip or omission is an error due to a careless or inadvertent

mistake or omission unintentionally made.
7.3   In the present case, as observed hereinabove, a conscious

decision was taken by the State Government after consultation with the

Minimum Wage Advisory Board and thereafter the minimum wages were

revised and determined in exercise of power under
Section 4(1)(i)
.

Therefore, it cannot be said that there was any arithmetical and/or
10
clerical mistake, which could have been corrected in exercise of powers

under
Section 10
of the Act, 1948.
7.4   At this stage, it is required to be noted that in the Errata

Notification dated 14.07.2016, as such nothing has been mentioned as

to under which provision of law, the said notification has been issued.

Only from the submission on behalf of the State before the High Court,

the State has come out with a case that there was a clerical mistake,

which is corrected by the Errata Notification. Therefore, we presume

that the Errata notification has been issued in exercise of powers under
Section 10
of the Act, 1948. As observed hereinabove, as such, there

was no clerical mistake at all and a conscious decision was taken while

issuing the notification dated 23/24.05.2016 and therefore, the same

could not have been corrected in exercise of powers under
Section 10
of

the Act, 1948.
8.    Even from the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent

before this Court, it is crystal clear that when the earlier notification dated

23/24.05.2016 was issued, the same was issued after due application of

mind and after the draft notification was issued in which the minimum

wages were sought to be revised as per
Section 4(1)(iii)
. However, after

the objections and suggestions were invited, the Labour Union submitted
11
their representations and then a final decision was taken to revise the

minimum wages as per
Section 4(1)(i)
. In paragraphs 8,9 and 10, it is

stated as under:-
“8. That, the Respondent No. 1 in exercise of the powers
      conferred by clause (b) of Sub-Section (1) of
Section 3
,
      read with clause (iii) of Sub-Section (1) of
Section 4
and
Section 5 (1) (b)
of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948,
      published a Draft Notification in the Official Gazette,
      Series I, No. 9, dated 28/05/2015 in Order to consider
      objections, suggestions, and representations by the
      Respondent No. 1 from all the concerned stakeholders.
9. That, I state that at this stage, the representatives of
      the Labour Union objected to the draft Notification by
      putting forth their views for introduction of a special
      allowance in the form of 'Variable Dearness Allowance'
      (VDA). That, the deliberations continued over a long
      period of time thereby resulting in delay in issuing the
      Final Notification for minimum wages.
10. That, I further state that taking into consideration the
      demand and need for introduction of special allowances
      in the form of Variable Dearness. Allowance (VOA) and
      the delay caused in the deliberations resulting in hike in
      Consumer Price Index and to avoid any further delay, the
      State Government had in the Final Notification raised the
      minimum rates of wages proposed in Draft Notification
      and also provided for introduction of VOA to be notified for
      the first time in October 2016, and the same was to be
      revised every six months i.e. in the month of October and
      April each year.”



8.1   Therefore, considering paragraphs 8 to 10 of the counter, even

according to the State, after the representation of the Labour Union,
12
which objected to the draft notification by putting forth their views for

introduction of a special allowance in the form of ‘Variable Dearness

Allowance’ and after due deliberations for a longer period of time, the

final notification was issued determining the minimum wages with special

allowance.   Therefore, subsequent case on behalf of the State that

under the notification dated 23/24.05.2016, there was a clerical mistake

by mentioning clause (i), which was corrected by issuing the subsequent

Errata Notification cannot be accepted.
9.   Even by applying
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act and

assuming that the State was having power to amend, vary or rescind the

notification
,
in that case
also such power can be exercised in a like

manner, namely after following the procedure, which was followed while

issuing the original notification.    Therefore, in the present case,

assuming that the State was having the power to amend, vary or rescind

the notification in exercise of powers under
Section 21
of the General

Clauses Act
,
in that case
also, when the earlier notification dated

23/24.05.2016 was issued after following the due procedure as required

under
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act, 1948, the same procedure ought to

have been followed even while varying and/or modifying the notification.

Hence, the notification dated 23/24.05.2016 could not have been

modified by such an Errata Notification which was issued in purported

exercise of
Section 10
of the Act, 1948.
13
10.   Therefore, we are of the opinion that the Errata Notification dated

14.07.2016 was wholly without jurisdiction and contrary to the relevant

provisions of the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
, which ought to have been

set aside by the High Court. The High Court has erred in dismissing the

writ petition challenging the Errata Notification dated 14.07.2016 by

accepting the case on behalf of the State that there was a clerical

mistake, which is subsequently corrected by the Errata Notification.
11.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, present

appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court dismissing the writ petition is hereby quashed and set aside. The

subsequent Errata Notification dated 14.07.2016 is hereby quashed and

set aside and the earlier notification dated 23/24.05.2016 revising and

determining the minimum wages, which included the basic rates of

wages plus special allowance is hereby restored.
Present appeal is allowed accordingly. However, in the facts and

circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                           [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                              ………………………………….J.
MAY 10, 2022.                             [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
14