[Cites
0
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
M.L. Patil (Dead) vs The State Of Goa on 20 May, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4100 OF 2022


         Shri M.L. Patil (Dead) Through LRs                       …Appellant(s)


                                               Versus


         The State of Goa and Anr.                              …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned final

                         judgment and order dated 11.02.2020 passed by the High

                         Court of Bombay at Goa in Writ Petition No. 961/2015, by

                         which, though the High Court has allowed the said writ

                         petition by holding that the respective writ petitioners
Signature Not Verified   ought to have been superannuated/retired at the age of 60
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.05.23
16:07:25 IST
Reason:                  years instead of 58 years, the High Court has refused

                         arrears of pension and has observed that the pension at
1
the revised rates will become payable only from 1 st

     January, 2020, the original writ petitioner has preferred

     the present appeal.
2.   That the appellant – original writ petitioner of writ petition

     No. 961/2015 and others filed the writ petitions before the

     High Court challenging the action of the respondents in

     superannuating/retiring them at the age of 58 years.

     According to them, the retirement age was 60 years. By the

     impugned judgment and order, the High Court has held

     that the retirement age of the respective original writ

     petitioners   was     60   years   and   they   were   wrongly

     superannuated/retired at the age of 58 years. However, as

     the respective writ petitioners approached the High Court

     belatedly, the High Court has held that none of the writ

     petitioners shall be entitled to any salary/back wages for

     the period of two extra years they would have got in

     service. The High Court has also observed that though the

     writ petitioners would be entitled to the pension on the

     basis that they continued in service until they attain the

     age of 60 years, they would not be entitled to any arrears of
2
pension and the pension at the revised rates will become

      payable only from 1st January, 2020.
2.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court to the extent

      denying the back wages for the period of two extra years

      and observing and directing that original writ petitioner will

      not be entitled to any arrears of pension and the pension at

      the revised rates will become payable only from 1 st January,

      2020, the original writ petitioner of Writ Petition No.

      961/2015 has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Having heard Shri Rahul Gupta, learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the appellant and Shri Ravindra Lokhande,

      learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent –

      State of Goa and considering the fact that even by the

      impugned judgment and order, the High Court has held

      that action of the State Government in requiring the

      original petitioners to retire at the age of 58 years or not

      permitting them to continue in their service upto the age of

      60 years is illegal and null and void, we are of the view that

      the High Court has erred in observing that the appellant

      will not be entitled to any arrears of pension and the
3
pension at the revised rates will become payable only from

     1st January, 2020. As such, the High Court may be right

     and/or justified in denying any salary for the period of two

     extra years to the writ petitioners if they would have

     continued in service, on the ground of delay. However, as

     far as the pension is concerned, it is a continuous cause of

     action.   There is no justification at all for denying the

     arrears   of   pension     as   if   they   would   have   been

     retired/superannuated at the age of 60 years. There is no

     justification at all by the High Court to deny the pension at

     the revised rates and payable only from 1 st January, 2020.

     Under the circumstances, the impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court is required to be modified

     to the aforesaid extent.
4.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present Appeal Succeeds in Part. The impugned judgment

     and order passed by the High Court to the extent of

     denying any arrears of pension and holding that the

     appellant shall be entitled to the pension at the revised

     rates only from 1st January, 2020 is hereby quashed and

     set aside. It is held and ordered that the appellant –
4
original writ petitioner shall be entitled to pension at the

     revised rates from the date he attains the age of 60 years.

     Now the arrears accordingly shall be paid to the appellant

     within a period of four weeks from today. Present Appeal is

     Partly Allowed to the aforesaid extent. In the facts of the

     case, there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                    [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                          ………………………………….J.
May 20, 2022                        [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
5