[Cites
38
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mp High Court Adv. Bar Assocn. vs Union Of India Ministry Of Environment ... on 18 May, 2022
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
[REPORTABLE]

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 433_OF 2012

         Madhya Pradesh High Court Advocates
         Bar Association and Anr.                              Petitioner(s)

                                              Versus


         Union of India and Anr.                               Respondent(s)



                                         J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
1.              Through this writ petition filed under
Article 32
of

         the Constitution of India, the petitioners who are the

         Madhya Pradesh High Court Advocates Bar Association and

         the District Bar Association, both with their registered

         offices at Jabalpur, have raised a challenge to the vires

         of the
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
(hereinafter

         referred to as “the
NGT Act
”), and pray for the following

         reliefs: -
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JAGDISH KUMAR
“(a) Issue an appropriate writ of certiorari or any
                         other writ of similar nature directing that the Bench
Date: 2022.05.18
17:06:48 IST
Reason:
of National Green Tribunal be set up at all the
Page 1 of 37
places where the principal seat of High Court is
    situated.
(b) Hold and declare that the proposed sitting up of
    Bench of NGT at Bhopal is not constitutionally and/or
    sustainable,
(c) Declare the provision of
Section 14
r/w 22 of
    the
National Green Tribunal Act
, as unconstitutional
    insofar as they purport to exclude the writ
    jurisdiction of High Court under Article 226/227 of
    the Constitution of India.”
2. The issues to be considered in this writ petition

are:-
A. Whether   the   National   Green      Tribunal   (hereinafter
   referred to as “the NGT”) ousts the High Court’s
   jurisdiction under
Sections 14
&
22
of the NGT Act?
B. Whether a seat of the NGT should be in every State?
   If yes, should they invariably be established at the
   principal seat of High Court, which in this case would
   be Jabalpur instead of Bhopal?
C. Whether the remedy of direct appeal to the Supreme
   Court from the decisions of the NGT under
Section 22
of the NGT Act is ultra vires to the Constitution?
   Whether an appeal mechanism be provided to the High
   Courts from the decisions of the NGT?
D. Whether
Section 3
of the NGT Act is ultra vires to
Page 2 of 37
the    Constitution       as      suffering         from    the   vice     of
       excessive delegation?
3. We have heard Mr. Siddhartha R. Gupta, the learned

counsel       for    the   petitioners.              The   Union   of    India   is

represented by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, the learned Attorney

General for India together with Ms. Aishwarya Bhati,

learned Additional Solicitor General. The State of Madhya

Pradesh (respondent No. 2) is represented by Mr. Sunny

Choudhary, learned counsel.
Arguments on behalf of Petitioners

4.1 The petitioners, who are espousing the cause of the

Jabalpur based lawyers practicing before the High Court

and the Civil Courts, contend that the Bhopal Bench of

the     NGT     is   located     arbitrarily           and   the   decision       is

inconsistent with the direction in
S.P. Sampath Kumar vs.

Union      of    India1
where      this      Court      observed      that    for

ensuring the efficacy and efficiency of any Tribunal, its

seat should be at a place where the principal seat of the

High Court is situated.                 As the Bench of the NGT is set


1   (1987) 1 SCC 124, Para. 8.
Page 3 of 37
up at Bhopal for catering to the environment related

cases   covering      three    States             i.e.,   Madhya      Pradesh,

Chhattisgarh, and Rajasthan, the petitioners pray for

setting up the Benches of the NGT at the principal seats

of the High Courts in each of the three States and for

their State of MP, the petitioners want it at Jabalpur.

4.2 According      to     the           petitioners,           environmental

litigation is predominantly related to local factors and

therefore, an easily accessible and available forum is

necessary   to   be     constituted,              without   requiring      the

litigants   to     move       to       distant        places     to    secure

environmental justice.
4.3 The petitioners argue that through incorporation of
Section 14
and
Section 22
in the
NGT Act
, the jurisdiction

and the role of the High Courts under Article 226/227 is

extinguished. This, therefore, has impacted the basic

feature of the Constitution and as such the provisions

of
Section 14
read with
Section 22
of the NGT Act should

be struck down to the extent they divest the High Courts

of their power as a superior Court.
Page 4 of 37
4.4 Adverting to the power of the Central Government to

identify the ordinary place of sitting of the NGT and

specifying   their    respective             territorial       jurisdiction

under
Section 4(3)
of the NGT Act, the petitioners argue

that such power being unguided, suffers from the vice of

excessive delegation. Laying stress on location of the

NGT Bench at Jabalpur where adequate infrastructure is

available, the petitioners question the choice of the

seat at Bhopal instead of at Jabalpur, which is the

principal    seat    of     the      Madhya         Pradesh    High   Court.

According to the petitioners, this impacts the right of

the litigant in the field of environmental law, to access

justice.
4.5 The remedy of appeal to the Supreme Court under
Section 22
of the NGT Act in the petitioner’s perception,

practically amounts to denial of access to justice for

the   economically        vulnerable             litigants    and   this   is

contended to defeat the inherent objective of access to

justice by bypassing the conveniently accessible remedy

before the High Courts under
Article 226
and
227
of the

Constitution of India.
Page 5 of 37
4.6 The petitioners next argue that the NGT does not

enjoy the authority and autonomy available to judges in

the High Courts and bearing in mind the conditions of

service, tenure, and other aspects of the judicial and

non-judicial    members    of   the        NGT,   according   to    the

petitioners,    it   is    neither         an     effective   nor   an

appropriate substitute of the High Courts, which were

entertaining environmental disputes through respective

Green Benches, prior to the enactment of the
NGT Act
.

More specifically, the process of appointment, service

conditions and other related provisions for appointment

of presiding members of the NGT are not at par with the

judges of the High Court and therefore, the NGT can only

play a “supplemental or subservient role instead of being

an effective and appropriate substitute for the High

Courts.”

               Arguments on behalf of Respondent


5.1 Per contra, Mr. K K Venugopal, the learned Attorney

General    leading   the   arguments        for    the   respondent’s

project that the NGT was set up because of the prodding
Page 6 of 37
and recommendations made by the Supreme Court while

dealing with environmental cases and the Parliament was

repeatedly entreated by the Court to create specialized

environmental court with qualified judges and technical

experts on the Bench. The learned Attorney General refers

to the exhortations made by the Supreme Court in
M.C.

Mehta v. Union of India2
, Indian Council for
Enviro-Legal

Action v. Union of India3
,
Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum

v. Union of India4
,
A.P. Pollution Control Board v. Prof.

M.V. Nayudu5
and
A.P. Pollution Control Board II v. Prof.

M.V. Nayudu6
and their acceptance by the Parliament,

following the 186th Report of the Law Commission which

lead to the establishment of environmental courts. The

Law Commission suggested in its Report that appeals from

the environmental courts should lie before the Supreme

Court.            It is in this backdrop the learned AG submits

that the
NGT Act
was enacted and the environmental cases

which were hitherto heard by green benches in the High



2   (1986)   2   SCC   176, Para. 22.
3   (1996)   3   SCC   212, Para. 6.
4   (1996)   5   SCC   647, Para. 25.
5   (1999)   2   SCC   718, Para. 23, 42, 47, 48, 52.
6   (2001)   2   SCC   62, Para. 73.
Page 7 of 37
Court, were ordered to be transferred to the NGT by the

Supreme Court itself as the same would help in rendering

expeditious and specialized justice in the field of

environment.
5.2 Insofar as the creation and setting up of the NGT and

the location of their Benches, the learned AG submits

that this was done under the active supervision of the

Supreme Court and only after the proposed places of

sitting recommended by the Central Government received

the concurrence of this Court, the concerned Benches and

their    place   of    sitting     was     notified     by   the   Central

Government.           It is therefore argued that the related

notification had the imprimatur of the Supreme Court.

The     respondents     point     out      that   the    Supreme    Court

monitored and oversaw the implementation of the
NGT Act
and setting up of its Benches in
Union of India Vs. Vimal

Bhai (SLP(C) No.
12065 of 2009) and the various orders

passed on 19.9.2011, 6.12.2012 and 15.3.2013 by this

Court would reflect that individual Bench of the NGT was

set up to cater to multiple States and the location so
Page 8 of 37
chosen for the NGT at Bhopal, also had the approval of

the Supreme Court.
5.3 The learned Attorney General next contends that the

remedy before the High Court for a litigant under
Article

226
and
227
continues to be available notwithstanding the

enactment of the
NGT Act
and the provision for appeal to

the Supreme Court under
Section 22
of the NGT Act. It is

specifically submitted by the learned AG that the High

Court’s power of judicial review remains unaffected by

the
NGT Act
as it is a part of the basic structure of our

constitution, as was declared in
L Chandra Kumar v. UOI7
.
BACKDROP OF THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL
6.       The precursor to the
NGT Act
was the 186th Report of

the Law Commission of India dated 29.3.2003 which came

after       the    Supreme   Court   repeatedly      urged   Parliament

through        various   judgments       to     establish    specialized

environmental courts, with qualified judges and technical

experts on the bench. The Supreme Court also put forward

that there should be direct appeals to the Supreme Court
7
1997 (3) SCC 261.
Page 9 of 37
from such environmental courts. The Law Commission then

recommended creation of a specialized court to deal with

the environmental issues. The Law Commission expressed

the view that it is not convenient for the High Courts

and the Supreme Court to make local inquiries or to

receive evidence.             Moreover, the superior Courts will not

have       access     to      expert   environmental   scientists   on

permanent basis to assist them. The NGT was conceived as

a complementary specialized forum to deal with all multi-

disciplinary environmental issues, both as original as

well as an appellate authority. The specialized forum was

also made free from the rules of evidence applicable to

normal courts and was permitted to lay down its own

procedure to entertain oral and documentary evidence,

consult experts etc., with specific mandate to observe

the principles of natural justice.
7.
In order to understand the objective of the
NGT Act
,

we may usefully extract the following from the
Municipal

Corporation of Greater Mumbai vs. Ankita Sinha & Ors.8
8   2021 SCC Online SC 897.
Page 10 of 37
where the following was stated by one of us (Justice

Hrishikesh Roy) for the 3 Judges Bench: -
“24 The Statement of Objects and Reasons of
     the NGT Act will now require attention.
     Paras 2,3,4,5 and 6 of the Statement of
     Objects and Reasons being relevant are
     extracted hereinbelow: -
“2. India is a party to the
           decisions taken at the United
           Nations Conference on the Human
           Environment held at Stockholm in
           June,   1972,    in   which    India
           participated, calling upon the
           States to take appropriate steps
           for the protection and improvement
           of the human environment. The
           United   Nations    Conference    on
           Environment and Development held at
           Rio de Janeiro in June, 1992, in
           which India participated, has also
           called upon the States to provide
           effective access to judicial and
           administrative         proceedings,
           including redress and remedy, and
           to develop National laws regarding
           liability and compensation for the
           victims of pollution and other
           environmental damage.
3. The right to healthy environment
           has been construed as a part of the
           right to life under
article 21
of
           the Constitution in the judicial
           pronouncement in India.
4.
The National Environment Tribunal
           Act, 1995
was enacted to provide
           for strict liability for damages
           arising   out   of   any   accident
Page 11 of 37
occurring     while    handling    any
hazardous substance and for the
establishment      of    a    National
Environmental        Tribunal      for
effective and expeditious disposal
of    cases    arising     from   such
accident, with a view to giving
relief and compensation for damages
to   persons,     property   and   the
environment.           However,    the
National    Environment      Tribunal,
which had a very limited mandate,
was not established.
The National
Environment     Appellate    Authority
Act, 1997
was enacted to establish
the National Environment Appellate
Authority to hear appeals with
respect to restriction of areas in
which any industries, operations or
processes or class of industries,
operations or processes shall not
be carried out or shall be carried
out subject to certain safeguards
under the
Environment (Protection)
Act,    1986
.          The    National
Environment Appellate Authority has
a limited workload because of the
narrow scope of its jurisdiction.
5. Taking into account account the
large number of environmental cases
pending in higher courts and the
involvement of multidisciplinary
issues in such cases, the Supreme
Court requested the Law Commission
of India to consider the need for
constitution     of     specialized
environmental courts.   Pursuant to
the same, the Law Commission has
recommended the setting up of
environmental courts having both
Page 12 of 37
original and appellate jurisdiction
      relating to environmental laws.
6. In view of the foregoing
      paragraphs, a need has been felt to
      establish a specialized tribunal to
      handle the multidisciplinary issues
      involved in environmental cases.
Accordingly, it has been decided to
      enact a law to provide for the
      establishment of the National Green
      Tribunal    for    effective    and
      expeditious disposal of civil cases
      relating      to      environmental
      protection and conservation of
      forests and other natural resources
      including enforcement of any legal
      right relating to environment.”
25.   A reading of the Statement of Objects
and Reasons shows that paragraph 4 thereof
refers to the
National Environmental Tribunal
Act, 1995
(NET) which provided for strict
liability   and   damages  arising   out   of
accidents occurring while handling hazardous
substances.    In the same context it was
observed that the NET had a very limited and
narrow mandate and jurisdiction. Thereafter,
in Para 5 it has been recorded that a large
number of environmental cases are pending in
higher    Courts    which   involve    multi-
disciplinary issues and, in such cases, the
Supreme   Court   had   requested   the   Law
Commission of India to consider the need for
constitution of specialized environmental
Courts.
26. Significantly, the Statement of Objects
and Reasons also refers to right to a healthy
environment being a part of the right to life
under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
Page 13 of 37
This   was   consistent  with   the   earlier
mentioned   186th   Law   Commission   Report
highlighting that the body so created, would
aim to “achieve the objectives of
Article 21
,
47
, 48A
, 51A (g)
of the Constitution of India
by means of a fair, fast and satisfactory
judicial procedure”. An institution concerned
with a significant aspect of right to life
necessarily should be given the most liberal
construction.
27.   The paragraph 2 of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons refers to the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment
held at Stockholm in June 1972 which called
upon governments and peoples to exert common
efforts for the preservation and improvement
of the human environment when it involved
people and for their posterity. Therefore,
the municipal law enacted with such a
laudatory objective of not only preventing
damage to the environment but also to protect
it, must be provided with the wherewithal to
discharge its protective, preventive and
remedial function towards protection of the
environment. The mandate and jurisdiction of
the NGT is therefore conceived to be of the
widest amplitude and it is in the nature of a
sui generis forum.
28.     The United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held at Rio De
Janeiro    in   June,   1992    where   India
participated, impressed upon the States to
provide effective access to judicial and
administrative proceedings, lay out redress
and remedy and to develop national laws
regarding liability and compensation for the
victims of pollution and other environmental
damage. The Preamble of the Act significantly
emphasized on construing the right to healthy
environment as a part of the Right to Life
Page 14 of 37
under
Article 21
of the Constitution which
            was    accepted    by    various     judicial
            pronouncements in India. The National Green
            Tribunal was born in our country with such
            lofty dreams to deal with multi-disciplinary
            issues, relating to the environment.
29. The limited mandate conferred on the
            earlier forum i.e. the NET and the narrow
            scope of jurisdiction of the National
            Environment Appellate Authority along with
            the involvement of multi-disciplinary issues
            arising in environmental cases, were intended
            to be addressed through the constitution of
            the NGT.”
8.     Explaining the purpose to constitute the specialized

court        to   deal    with   environmental    issues,   in   Mantri

Techzone (P) Ltd. vs. Forward Foundation9, Justice S.

Abdul Nazeer writing for the three Judges Bench made the

following pertinent observation, on the status of the

NGT: -
“40. The Tribunal has been established
               under a constitutional mandate provided
               in Schedule VII List I Entry 13 of the
               Constitution of India, to implement the
               decision taken at the United Nations
               Conference     on     Environment     and
               Development.    The    Tribunal    is   a
               specialised judicial body for effective
               and   expeditious   disposal    of  cases
               relating to environmental protection and
               conservation   of   forests   and   other
9. (2019)   18 SCC 494.
Page 15 of 37
natural resources including enforcement
              of any legal right relating to the
              environment.   The   right  to   healthy
              environment has been construed as a part
              of the right to life under
Article 21
by
              way    of    judicial    pronouncements.
Therefore, the Tribunal has special
              jurisdiction    for    enforcement    of
              environmental rights.”
9.      The NGT is set up under the constitutional mandate

under Entry 13 List I of Schedule VII to enforce
Article

21
in regard to the environment and the Tribunal was

conferred         special      jurisdiction         for   enforcement   of

environmental rights.              It thus appears that the role of

the NGT was not simply adjudicatory, but it also had the

equally vital role which is preventive, ameliorative, or

of the remedial category.                 The functional capacity of the

NGT was intended to leverage wide powers to do full

justice in the field of environment. The NGT came into

existence as a sui generis institution established for

the enforcement of environmental rights emanating from
Article 21
of the Constitution10.
10   2021 SCC OnLine 897, Para. 44, 98.
Page 16 of 37
10.      After      the    NGT      was   set         up,   the   Supreme   Court

pertinently directed the transfer of environmental cases

pending before the High Courts to the NGT for expeditious

and specialized justice for all concerned. The Supreme

Court also actively oversaw the implementation of the Act

and creation of the NGT itself through various Orders11.

Those also pertained to, inter-alia, the location of the

NGT benches. In other words, the Supreme Court was not

only conscious of the location of the benches of the NGT

but also had given its imprimatur to the NGT’s creation

and other aspects.
11. With the above prefatory contexts in mind, we may

now look at the challenge.
ISSUE WISE DISCUSSION

     A. Whether the NGT ousts the High Court’s jurisdiction
       under
Sections 14
&
22
of the NGT Act?
12. Insofar as the contention of the petitioners that

there is ouster of jurisdiction of the High Courts under
Article       226
and
227
of    the     Constitution       because   of



11   SLP (C) 12065 of 2009.
Page 17 of 37
Sections 14
&
22
of the NGT Act, it must be recalled that

in
L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India
[supra], it has

been categorically declared that the power of judicial

review under
Articles 226
, 227
, and
32
are part of the

basic structure of our constitution and the same is

inviolable. The following pertinent opinion rendered by

the 7 Judges’ bench of this Court must be remembered on

this aspect: -
“78………We, therefore, hold that the power of
      judicial review over legislative action
      vested in the High Courts under
Article 226
and in this Court under
Article 32
of the
      Constitution is an integral and essential
      feature of the Constitution, constituting
      part of its basic structure. Ordinarily,
      therefore, the power of High Courts and the
      Supreme Court to test the constitutional
      validity of legislations can never be ousted
      or excluded.
79. We also hold that the power vested in
      the High Courts to exercise judicial
      superintendence over the decisions of all
      courts and tribunals within their respective
      jurisdictions is also part of the basic
      structure of the Constitution. This is
      because a situation where the High Courts
      are divested of all other judicial functions
      apart    from   that    of    constitutional
      interpretation, is equally to be avoided.”
Page 18 of 37
13. Apart from the clear enunciation on legal position

to the effect that the NGT is within the purview of
Article 226
and
227
jurisdiction of the High Courts, the

learned Attorney General on behalf of the Union of India

has also made submissions consistent with
L. Chandra

Kumar
[supra] and conceded the legal position.
14. It can further be noted that in terms of the above

ratio in
L. Chandra Kumar
[supra], the High Courts have

been entertaining petitions under
Article 226
and
227
of

the       Constitution         against    orders          of   the   NGT.
While

exercising             such   jurisdiction,         the    Courts    necessarily

exercise due discretion on whether to entertain or to

reject the petition, as per the test broadly
laid down

in
Whirlpool Corpn. Vs. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai

and Others12
;
“14. The power to issue prerogative writs
                under
Article 226
of the Constitution is
                plenary in nature and is not limited by
                any other provision of the Constitution.
                This power can be exercised by the High
                Court not only for issuing writs in the
                nature   of  habeas   corpus,   mandamus,
12
(1998) 8 SCC 1.
Page 19 of 37
prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari
            for the enforcement of any of the
            Fundamental Rights contained in Part III
            of the Constitution but also for “any
            other purpose”.
15. Under
Article     226
of     the
            Constitution, the High Court, having
            regard to the facts of the case, has a
            discretion    to   entertain   or   not   to
            entertain a writ petition. But the High
            Court has imposed upon itself certain
            restrictions one of which is that if an
            effective and efficacious remedy is
            available, the High Court would not
            normally exercise its jurisdiction. But
            the    alternative     remedy    has    been
            consistently held by this Court not to
            operate as a bar in at least three
            contingencies, namely, where the writ
            petition    has    been   filed   for    the
            enforcement of any of the Fundamental
            Rights or where there has been a violation
            of the principle of natural justice or
            where the order or proceedings are wholly
            without jurisdiction or the vires of an
            Act is challenged. There is a plethora of
            case-law on this point but to cut down
            this circle of forensic whirlpool, we
            would rely on some old decisions of the
            evolutionary era of the constitutional
            law as they still hold the field.”
15. It is also noteworthy that nothing contained in the
NGT   Act
either   impliedly      or      explicitly,   ousts   the
Page 20 of 37
jurisdiction of the High Courts under
Article 226
and
227
and the power of judicial review remains intact and

unaffected   by    the
NGT     Act
.      The    prerogative   of    writ

jurisdiction of High Courts is neither taken away nor it

can be ousted, as without any doubt, it is definitely a

part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The High

Court’s exercise their discretion in tandem with the law

depending on the facts of each particular case. Since the

High Court’s jurisdiction remain unaffected, the first

question   is     answered     in     the       negative,   against   the

petitioners.
B. Whether a seat of the NGT should be in every State?
 If yes, should they invariably be established at the
 principal seat of High Court, which in this case would
 be Jabalpur instead of Bhopal?
16. The    petitioners         in     pleading for a NGT Bench in

each state, place heavy reliance on
S.P. Sampath
[supra].

To appreciate this, the Court’s following observation

needs consideration in the context of administrative

tribunals: -
Page 21 of 37
“8. I may also add that if the Administrative
      Tribunal is to be an equally effective and
      efficacious substitution for the High Court on
      the basis of which alone the impugned Act can be
      sustained, there must be a permanent or if there
      is not sufficient work, then a Circuit Bench of
      the Administrative Tribunal at every place where
      there is a seat of the High Court. I would,
      therefore, direct the government to set up a
      permanent Bench and if that is not feasible
      having regard to the Vol. of work, then at least
      a circuit Bench of the Administrative Tribunal
      wherever there is a seat of the High Court, on
      or before March 31, 1987. That would be necessary
      if the provisions of the impugned Act are to be
      sustained. So far as rest of the points dealt
      with in the judgment of Ranganath Misra, J. are
      concerned, I express my entire agreement with
      the view taken by him.”
17.   As   is   seen,    Justice       Bhagwati          made   the   above

observation in the case where the Supreme Court was

concerned with the Central Administrative Tribunal [in

short,     “CAT”]    where    the     volume        of    litigation    is

substantially       higher.   This     is     why   the     direction   to

establish permanent benches or circuit benches in every

State is predicated on assessing feasibility by reference

to the volume of litigation. Here we must follow the

principle of proportionality. To underscore the issue,

the CAT have 17 Benches and 21 Circuit Benches as opposed
Page 22 of 37
to only five Benches of the NGT. The NGT caters to a

limited number of cases unlike the CAT, where the volume

of cases is substantially higher. As per the report13

tabled in Rajya Sabha                by the Parliamentary Standing

Committee         on    Personnel,       Public        Grievances,   Law   and

Justice, the CAT have over 48,000 cases pending as on 6th

March, 2020.
18. While on this, we may also notice the data available

on the website of the National Green Tribunal14 which

reflects the pendency of cases before the NGT as on

28.02.2022: -
ZONE WISE Pendency as on
                                   28/02/2022
                  Bench                          Pendency
Principal Bench                621
(Delhi)
SZB(Chennai)                   517
CZB(Bhopal)                    107
WZB(Pune)                      694
EZB(Kolkata)                   298
Total:                         2237


13   100_2020_9_11.pdf (rajyasabha.nic.in)
14   National Green Tribunal
Page 23 of 37
19. As is apparent from the above chart the volume of

cases handled by the NGT and the CAT are not comparable.
Looking at the large volume of service-related cases, it

was suggested that the Benches of the CAT should be

located at the seat of each High Court. But such logic

cannot apply to the NGT, where the zone wise pendency in

aggregate is only 2237 cases as on 31.3.2022 from the

date of its inception. Therefore, the ratio in
S.P.

Sampath
[supra] does not aid the petitioners who want the

NGT Bench to be relocated from Bhopal to Jabalpur, where

the Madhya Pradesh High Court is located.
20. It is also worthy of attention that the total disposal

by all Benches of the NGT is 2799 cases during 12 months

i.e., March, 2021 to February, 2022. The pendency figure

for this period is 2237 only. The rate of disposal being

higher than the pendency, no major backlog issue is seen

before the NGT. The strikingly small 107 cases in the

NGT’s Bhopal Bench must also receive our due attention.

These data do not provide for a reasonable basis to

entertain a prayer for a NGT Bench at Jabalpur or for
Page 24 of 37
that matter, an individual NGT Bench in each of those

three States.
21. With the low case load, if the NGT Benches are set

up in all 28 States and 8 union territories                           as is

suggested    by   the    petitioners,          the   judges     and   other

members in these forums might be left twiddling their

thumbs. Accordingly, no basis is seen to allow one NGT

bench in every State.
22. With the above answer to the first part of the issue

B, the second part becomes superfluous. However, since

earnest submission is made by the petitioner’s counsel,

the issue needs to be decided. The petitioner put forth

that the seat of the NGT must be at Jabalpur where the

principal    seat   of   the    Madhya         Pradesh   High    Court   is

located as per the dicta in
S.P. Sampath
[supra]. On this

aspect, the cited case is entirely inapplicable as the

Bhopal Bench caters to multiple States.                         In such a

situation,   the    location      of     the    Bench    to   the     extent

possible,    should      be    convenient         and    accessible      to

litigants of all three States. Here the respondents
Page 25 of 37
project that Bhopal is centrally located in relation to

Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, & Chhattisgarh.                 Moreover,

Bhopal being the capital of Madhya Pradesh, is well

connected and accessible without much difficulty. This

would commend to us that Bhopal is a sound locational

choice for the NGT which caters to the litigants from

three States.
23. The low case load in the Bhopal Bench, do not match

with the strident plea of the petitioners to locate the

Bench at Jabalpur. This is therefore perceived as an

attempt by the petitioners (who are practicing lawyers

in Jabalpur), to primarily espouse their professional

interest.   No   other   rational      basis   is   seen    for   the

Association’s plea for relocation of the NGT Bench to

Jabalpur from Bhopal. We see no justification to grant

such relief to the petitioners and the second segment of

issue B is accordingly answered against them.

   C. Whether the remedy of direct appeal to the Supreme
   Court from the decisions of the NGT under
Section 22
of the NGT Act is ultra vires to the Constitution?
   Whether an appeal mechanism be provided to the High
   Courts from the decisions of the NGT?
Page 26 of 37
24.    The petitioners have also pleaded that instead of

appeal to the Supreme Court under
Section 22
from the

orders passed by the NGT, an appeal mechanism as a

matter of right should also be provided before the

concerned High Courts.              According to them, appeal to

the Supreme Court is inadequate and unaffordable and

therefore inaccessible. On this aspect it needs to be

observed that even when a direct appeal to the Supreme

Court is provided by a statute15 against the decision

of a tribunal16, the remedy under
Article 226
or 227

before the High Court remains unextinguished. Moreover,

the Appeal under
Section 22
of the NGT Act, is limited

to the grounds under
Section 100
of the CPC and the

Supreme Court does not function as a regular first

appellate Court. However, under
Article 226
or 227,

remedies on issues of jurisdiction and also under the

principles set out in Associated Provincial Picture

Houses Ltd. vs. Wednesbury Corporation17, are available



15 Inter alia,
Electricity Act, 2003
;
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
Act, 1997
.
16 Inter alia, Armed Forces Tribunal under the
Armed Forces Tribunal Act,

2007
.
17 [1948] 1 KB 223.
Page 27 of 37
for an aggrieved party.            Subject to discretion being exercised,

the      affected      litigants        can     move   High   Court   under
Article 226
or 227 and in such cases, a SLP under
Article         136
of    the     Constitution        could    also    be

maintained to the Supreme Court from the High Court’s

verdict.
25.       Also importantly, the right to appeal before the

High Court is a creature of the statute and is not an

inherent right. The provision for appeal to High Court

should not therefore be created by issuing a writ of

Mandamus as that would be legislating through judicial

order, and would impinge upon the well-founded concept

of separation of powers18.
26. The options available to a litigant to either move to

the Supreme Court in a case where a substantial question

of law arises or proceed under
Article 226
or 227 must

not also be overlooked. If necessary, a party can also

approach this Court by way of an
Article 136
petition.

With       such    choices     being      available     for   a   party   no


18   (2017) 7 SCC 221, Para. 36.
Page 28 of 37
rational        justification   is     found      for   striking    down
Section 22
of the Act which provides for a direct appeal

to the Supreme Court.
27.       A litigating party must also realise that in any

event, if the opposite side approaches the Supreme

Court, the litigant on the other side would have to

defend his case before this Court and at that stage

they cannot be complaining about the distance to Delhi.

Thus, the remedy of direct appeal to the Supreme Court

under the
NGT Act
from the NGT’s decision cannot be

seen as denial of access to justice to the litigants

in the field of environmental law.
28.       The issue of direct appeals to the Supreme Court,

or       entertaining    petitions        under
Article    136
to

challenge tribunal’s decision, was considered in the

case of
R.K. Jain v. Union of India19
. In paragraph 76

of
the said judgment
, this Court addressed similar

submission to the effect that appeal mechanism should

be provided from a tribunal’s decision, to a division


19   (1993) 4 SCC 119.
Page 29 of 37
bench of the High Court. The three Judges bench of this

Court,         however,     expressly      refrained        from     issuing

direction for creation of appeal provisions to the

High Courts, which was perceived to be an impermissible

judicial function. So far, the legislature has not acted

on the recommendation of this Court but then that issue

is within the policy domain of the legislative wing of

the State.
29.      The     implication      of    the       Supreme    Court    being

conceived as the first appellate forum was considered

in
Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Ltd.20
, and
in that

case
the Union Government was directed to do a study on

the effect of direct appeals to the Supreme Court and

place the resultant report before Parliament.
But even

in
Rojer     Mathew
[supra],   the        Supreme   Court    had   no

occasion to say that direct appeals to the Supreme

Court is constitutionally impermissible.
30.       It must also be underscored that the ground raised

by       the     Petitioners      about           Supreme   Court      being


20   (2020) 6 SCC 1, Para. 218.
Page 30 of 37
inaccessible, would equally apply to litigants, from

all across the country, who have to travel to the Supreme

Court, either by way of
Article 136
or
Article 32
or

any   other   provision.      Despite         the    provision    under
Article 130
of the Constitution, the Supreme Court has

no other bench away from Delhi. In these circumstances

by pleading inaccessibility, the petitioners are also

incidentally questioning, the location of the Supreme

Court at New Delhi.         Such a contention on the face of

it would be irrational and not acceptable.
31.   It   cannot    also   be     overlooked        that   it   is   the

Supreme Court itself which had recommended the setting

up of environmental court with direct appeals to the

Supreme Court. This would also support the proposition

on constitutional validity of
Section 22
of the NGT Act

and that it is not ultra vires to the Constitution.

Consequently,       the   answer    to        both   aspects     of   the

question C is answered in favour of the respondents.


 D. Whether
Section 3
of the NGT Act is ultra vires to
 the Constitution as suffering from the vice of excessive
 delegation?
Page 31 of 37
32.   Adverting next to the argument of the petitioners

that
Section 3
is a case of excessive delegation to the

Union Government. It must be borne in mind that the

operationalization of the NGT, including the location

of its Benches, was closely monitored by the Supreme

Court. It is further seen that the Union Government is

to specify the ordinary place of sitting of NGT and its

territorial jurisdiction under
Section 3
of the NGT Act

being mindful of the demand for environment litigation

within a particular territorial area. The Government

is also to be guided by the objects of the Act as also

the directions given by the Supreme Court from time to

time. Since, the Government is acting on the issue with

the guidance of this Court, and the Government is

obliged   to   follow   the    objectives          of     the
NGT   Act
,

adequate safeguards are seen to guide the government.

We are therefore of the opinion that
Section 3
of the

NGT Act is not a case of excessive delegation.
33. The   petitioners    are      seen        to   have    founded    their

contentions with considerable reliance on the decision
Page 32 of 37
in
Madras Bar Association vs. Union of India and Anr.21
to argue that the NGT is neither accessible nor it is

independent in dealing with environmental cases. In the

relied case, this Court struck down certain provisions

of the
National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005
(for short, ‘
NTT

Act
’) but this must be appreciated in the context of that

case. Moreover, one must not overlook the distinction

between the operation of the
NTT Act
vis-à-vis the
NGT

Act
.       To be specific, the
NTT Act
provided that the NTT

would ordinarily sit at New Delhi.
The NGT Act
however

provides for the creation of benches across the country.

Additionally,            the   NTT     was     vested    with    the    power   of

adjudicating appeals arising from orders passed by the

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal on substantial questions

of law. This was a jurisdiction that the High Courts were

exercising under
Article 227
in certain cases, and in that

context,        it      was    found     that      the   NTT    was    indirectly

impinging on the jurisdiction of the High Courts under
Article 227.
The jurisdiction exercised by the NGT is

however distinct, and different, and not comparable. Also


21   (2014) 10 SCC 1.
Page 33 of 37
glaring was the fact that Union Government had the power

to transfer members of the NTT from one bench to another.

No such provision exists in the
NGT Act
. Besides, the NTT

was constituted only to determine substantial questions

of law and it was unclear how accountants and other

technical members with no legal training would deal with

the issues raised in such matters. Those troubling issues

do not arise in the
NGT Act
. One must also be cognizant

of the fact that the Selection Committee under
Section 7
of the NTT Act was dominated by two secretaries of the

Government, as opposed to the Selection Committee for the

NGT under the
Tribunal Reforms Act
which clearly has

judicial dominance.
34.    Taking into account all the striking distinctions

between the operation of the
NGT Act and the NTT Act
,

the petitioners’ reliance on the NTT judgment, which

was rendered in the context of the provisions of the
NTT Act
, is found to be wholly misplaced.
35.    Addressing next, the argument of the petitioners

that   the   NGT   does   not     enjoy         the   same   status   and
Page 34 of 37
independence as the High Courts on account of the

conditions of service and tenure etc., it would be

appropriate to say that although in paragraph 33 of the

written submissions, the petitioners deal with specific

provisions of the
Tribunal Reforms Act, 2021
and the

Rules framed, those were neither raised in the petition

nor any relief is claimed in reference to the
Tribunal

Reforms Act
. Conspicuously, those were also not argued

during the oral hearing. Therefore, we need not delve

into those aspects as the same is beyond the scope of

the instant proceeding.
36. It must also be borne in mind that the question of

validity of the
Tribunal Reforms Act
, is pending in

this Court in a batch of cases tagged with WP(C)

1018/2021
Madras Bar Association v. Union of India
. Few

similar issues like the present have also been raised

in the pending cases where the Union of India has filed

counter affidavit indicating their stand. As those

issues are under consideration in the pending case, the

same is left to be decided in those matters.
Page 35 of 37
37. For all the aforesaid reasons,
section 3
of the NGT

Act is found to be intra vires to the Constitution of

India. However, it is clarified that our conclusion is

based on the specific facts of this case, and we make

no comments on the issues which are sub-judice in the

WP(C) 1018/2021
Madras Bar Association v. Union of

India
.
Conclusions
38. In consequence         of     the           above   analysis,      our

conclusions are,

  A. The National Green Tribunal under
Section 14
&
22
of   the   NGT   Act   does       not        oust   the   High   Court’s

    jurisdiction under
Article 226
& 227
as the same is

    a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.

  B. The remedy of direct appeal to the Supreme Court

    under
Section 22
of the NGT Act is intra vires the

    Constitution of India.
C.
Section 3
of the NGT Act is not a case of excessive

    delegation of power to the Central Government.

  D. The seat of the NGT benches can be located as per
Page 36 of 37
exigencies and it is not necessary to locate them in

    every State. The prayer for relocating the Bhopal

    NGT to Jabalpur is unmerited and is rejected.
39. With the foregoing conclusions, the Writ Petition is

found devoid of merit and is dismissed. The parties to

bear their own cost.
…………………………………………J.
                                        [K.M. JOSEPH]



                                        …………………………………………J.
                                        [HRISHIKESH ROY]
NEW DELHI
MAY 18, 2022
Page 37 of 37