[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pooja Bhuneshwar Prasad Sharma vs Ashish Vinaybhai Mishra on 9 May, 2022
Author:
B.V. Nagarathna
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
1

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                      TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO.618 OF 2021


      POOJA BHUNESHWAR PRASAD SHARMA                                                         Petitioner

                                                            VERSUS

      ASHISH VINAYBHAI MISHRA                                                                Respondent

                                                            WITH

                                  TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1268 OF 2021


                                                            ORDER
Transfer    Petition     No.    618   of     2021     has   been   filed     by   the

      petitioner who is the wife of the respondent seeking transfer of

      Matrimonial Petition being H.M.P. No. 11 of 2021 titled as
“Ashish

      Vinaybhai Mishra Vs. Pooja Bhuneshwar Prasad Sharma”
pending on the

      file                 of   the    learned     Principal         Judge,     Family     Court,     Bharuch,

      District Bharuch, Gujarat to the Court of competent jurisdiction in

      District Dhamtari, Chhattisgarh.
Transfer Petition No. 1268 of 2021 has been filed by the

      husband seeking transfer of MJC No. 54 of 2021, titled as “Pooja

      Sharma Versus Ashish Vinay Mishra” pending on the file of the

      learned Principal Judge, Family Court, Dhamtari, District-Dhamtari,

      Chhattisgarh                    to    the   Court    of       Principal     Judge,     Family    Court,

      Bharuch, District-Bharuch, Gujarat.
Signature Not Verified
Since, these transfer petitions have been filed by the parties
Digitally signed by Dr.
inter se, they have been connected together and have been heard and
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.05.12
19:28:59 IST
Reason:
disposed of by this common order.
2
Learned      counsel       for    the     respective         parties       submitted      that

during the pendency of these petitions, the matter was referred to

the Supreme Court Mediation Centre and parties have arrived at a

mediated     settlement     which       is     submitted         by     the    Supreme       Court

Mediation Centre. They further submitted that as per the terms of

settlement      dated    13.12.2021,         the    parties        have    decided      to    seek

dissolution of their marriage by a decree of divorce by mutual

consent     under
Section       13-B
of     the      Hindu       Marriage       Act,

1955(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ for the sake of brevity).

They further submitted that the parties are present before this

Court and hence, these transfer petitions may be disposed of in

terms of the settlement arrived at between them by excercising

jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India.

    The parties are present before this Court. They have been

identified by their respective advocates. When querried by this

Court, they submitted          that they have indeed arrived at an amicable

settlement.     They    have     decided      to        dissolve      their    marriage       by   a

decree     of   divorce     by       mutual        consent       on     certain    terms       and

conditions.
The     petitioner-wife          stated        that    one     of    the    terms    of    the

settlement is payment of a sum of Rs. 28 lakhs (Rupees Twenty eight

lakhs) by the respondent-husband to her, which she has received in

two installments . She has no objection for this Court to dissolve

the marriage by a decree of divorce by mutual consent. Petitioner-
wife has also stated that she has received a necklace set from the

husband and that she has no further claim whatsoever against her

respondent-husband.
3
The petitioner in the connected petition who is the husband

also submitted that he has no objection for these cases to be

disposed      of     by   granting      divorce        by   mutual      consent       between      the

parties.
It is also stated at the Bar that certain cases which have

been    filed       by    the    parties     against        each     other      shall       also    be

withdrawn within fifteen days from the date of disposal of these

petitions. The details of the said cases are mentioned in paragraph

10     of    the     said   Settlement          Agreement.         In    the        circumstances,

settlement          agreement        dated   13.12.2021       arrived          at    between       the

parties is taken on record.
Learned counsel for the respective parties submitted that the

marriage between the parties may be dissolved by granting divorce

by mutual consent under
Section 13-B
of the Act read with
Article

142
of the Constitution.
In     the     circumstances,         the       settlement       agreement       which       is

appended to the Transfer Petition No. 618 of 2021 is taken on

record and perused.
It is noted that though the settlement agreement has been

arrived at between the parties for seeking dissolution of their

marriage by a decree of divorce by mutual consent is dated 13th

December, 2021, nevertheless, the parties have been at loggerheads

and the petitions have been filed by them, inter se, seeking inter-

alia,       restitution         of   conjugal      rights,     maintenance            and    also    a

criminal proceeding is pending. It is also noted that the parties

are living separately and there is no possibility of the parties
4
reconciling their disputes and co-habiting together.
Learned counsel for the respective parties also submitted that

the stipulation of six months’ period indicated in Sub-section (2)

of
Section 13-B
of the Act may also be dispensed with and in this

regard, they placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the

Case of “Amardeep Singh Versus Harveen Kaur” – [2017 (8) SCC 746].

Having regard to the aforesaid judgment, stipulation of six months

as stated Sub-
section 2
of
Section 13-B
of the Act is dispensed

with.
On perusal of the terms of settlement, I find that they are

lawful     and    there   is   no   reason       as   to    why   the    same   cannot   be

accepted.
In the circumstances, by exercising jurisdiction under
Article

142
of    the    Constitution,     the     marriage        solemnized      between     the

parties on 24.11.2017 in Bharuch is dissolved by a decree of mutual

consent in terms of
Section 13-B
of the Act.
It is needless to mention that the said settlement agreement

shall be read as part and parcel of this order.
Registry to draw up a decree in the aforesaid terms.

      Consequently,        these      transfer             petitions      are    rendered

infructuous and are disposed of accordingly.
…………………………………………J
                                                                        (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
NEW DELHI;
9th MAY, 2022