[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Naman Verma vs Director The Indian Institute Of ... on 11 May, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL No.3886 OF 2022
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No.24683 of 2018)

      NAMAN VERMA                                                             Appellant

                                                         VERSUS

      THE DIRECTOR, THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
      BOMBAY & ORS.                                                           Respondents




                                                    O R D E R
1.                  This   appeal     challenges    the     judgment   and    order    dated

      17.04.2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in

      Writ Petition No.6818 of 2013.
2.                  Claiming    to    be   suffering   from    ‘learning     disabilities’

      known                 as    “Dyscalculia”,       the      appellant        preferred    the

      aforestated                    writ   petition     praying    for   following   principal

      relief:
“(a) this Hon’ble Court may please issue a writ of
                               mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or
                               direction under
Article 226
of the Constitution
                               of India directing the Respondent to take the
                               petitioner into course of Master Design in 2013
                               batch.”
3.                  Under the interim orders passed by the High Court, her
Signature Not Verified
candidature was directed to be considered and the appellant was
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.05.14
15:17:09 IST
Reason:
admitted to the course of Master in Design.
2
4.    With   the    passage    of     time,   the     appellant     completed     the

course successfully.
5.    However, when the writ petition was taken up for final

disposal, after considering various issues, the entitlement of

the    appellant     under     the     provisions      of   the     Persons      with
Disabilities       (Equal    Opportunities,         Protection    of    Rights    and

Full Participation) Act, 1995
(“1995 Act” for short) was not

accepted.
6.    The High Court was then confronted with the issue as to

what would be the fate and what directions can be passed when

the    appellant     had    completed     the    course     under      the   interim

directions.    While        dealing    with     the   issue,     the    High   Court

observed as under:
“We are of the view that although the petitioner may
      be entitled to be declared successful in the course
      we are unable to grant her any further relief in this
      petition for want of necessary powers under
Article
      226
to declare the petitioner as having passed M Des
      program held by IDC.”
7.    We have heard Mr. Anand Verma, learned Advocate in support

of    the appeal,     and Ms.       Aishwarya Bhati,        learned Additional

Solicitor General for the respondent.
3
8.   At the outset, it must be mentioned that 1995 Act now

stands replaced by the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act,

2016
(“2016 Act” for short).
9.   It is submitted that considering the provisions of the

2016 Act in any event of the matter, the entitlement of the

appellant is certainly made out. We need not go into this

issue.
10. Though we affirm the view taken by the High Court on the

issues of law which came up for determination by the High

Court, considering the fact that the appellant has completed

the course, we are not persuaded to cancel her candidature so

as to put her qualification in jeopardy.
11. We, therefore, exercise our power under
Article 142
of the

Constitution   of   India   and   declare   that   the   appellant   has

successfully completed the course of Master in Design and that

the qualification shall hold good for all practical purposes

hereafter.
12. However, at the cost of repetition we make it clear that

the judgment rendered by the High Court on questions of law is

affirmed and as and when the entitlement of the appellant under

the provisions of the 2016 Act is to be considered, the same

shall be considered purely in accordance with law.
4
13. The appropriate steps including handing over of the degree

and all other testimonials to the appellant shall be completed

within four weeks from today.
14. With these observations, the appeal is disposed of, with

no order as to costs.
............................J.
                                (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                ............................J.
                                (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                                ............................J.
                                (SUDHANSHU DHULIA)
New Delhi,
May 11, 2022