[Cites
3
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Dilip (Dead) Th. Lrs. vs Satish on 13 May, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Indira Banerjee
NON-REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 810 OF 2022
                 (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CRL.) NO. 8917 OF 2019)

      DILIP(DEAD) THROUGH LRS.                                                             APPELLANT(S)

                                                              VERSUS

      SATISH & OTHERS                                                                      RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     J U D G M E N T
INDIRA BANERJEE J.
Leave granted.
No one has appeared on behalf of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, in

      spite               of    notice.    The     Respondent-State       has   appeared    through   the

      learned standing counsel.
This   appeal     is     against    a   final    judgment   and    order   dated

      21.06.2019 passed by the Aurangabad Bench of the High Court of

      Judicature at Bombay allowing Criminal Application No. 215 of 2019

      and quashing the FIR No. 394/2018 filed by the appellant, arraying

      Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as accused.
The Appellant is the owner of House No. 463 situated at Darzi

      Bazar,               Bhazi       Market     Road,     Cantonment,    Aurangabad,      Maharashtra,

      which is hereinafter referred to as the “said premises”.                                        The

      father of the Respondent No. 1 was inducted as a tenant of a shop

      at the said
Signature Not Verified                 premises.         In 1984, the appellant and his family
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
members
Date: 2022.07.07
16:11:17 IST
Reason:
filed   a   suit    for    eviction.       While   the   said   suit   was

      pending, the appellant along with his mother inherited the said

      premises.
2
It is not necessary for this Court to go into the details of

how the ownership of the said premises devolved on the Appellant.
Suffice it to mention that the Respondent No. 1 and his mother

filed a petition under Section 17 of the Hyderabad Rent Control Act

in the Court of the Rent Controller, Aurangabad, seeking directions

on the Appellant to provide electricity connection at the said

shop.
The     application    was    rejected      on   the   ground    that    from    the

inception of the tenancy the said shop was run with a petromax.
Electricity had never been provided.                    The Respondent No. 2 later

applied for supply of electricity in his own name on the basis of a

“No     Objection”        letter     dated    15.07.2006       and     got     supply    of

electricity to the said shop in his own name.
It is the case of the Appellant that the no objection letter

had     been    fabricated     and    the     signatures      thereon    of     Shantilal

Maniklal       Jaiswal,    brother    of     the   Appellant    had    been    forged    by

Respondent No. 1.            An FIR was lodged, the relevant portions of

which are extracted hereinbelow :-
“***********
8. Thereafter on 3/12/2018 the Deputy Executive Engineer of
          Maharashtra State Electricity Board had taken action about
          taken illegal electric connection and disconnected the
          electric connection taken from Pavan Jaiswal in House No.
          484 and this was intimated to the complainant by their
          letter dated 4/12/2004. The complainant was also intimated
          that Pavan has assured that henceforth he would not supply
          electricity after pay Rs. 25/- for reconnection the
          electricity was again started.    This copy is annexed on
          Exhibit-G.
9.   The complainant had a doubt that the accused is attempting
           to file application to Maharashtra State Electricity Board
           for getting new electric connection.     Hence to prevent
           giving electric connection he raised objection on the
3
application of the accused and filed his application. Copy
    of the said objection application is annexed on Exhibit-H.
10. In August 2006 the complainant came to know that when all
    attempts of the accused No. 1 for getting illegally the
    electric connection were failed, the accused No. 1 has
    illegally obtained new electric connection. In this regard
    when the complainant made inquiry with Maharashtra State
    Electricity Board, the complainant named Shantilal Maniklal
    Jaiswal and submitted to Maharashtra Stat Electricity Board
    on 1/8/2006 and on that basis new connection was given to
    him.
11. No sooner the complainant came to know about the illegal act
    of the accused he filed application with Maharashtra Sate
    Electricity Board on 9/8/2006 under
Right to Information Act
for getting concerned papers to find out as to how the new
    connection was received.   Accordingly it was informed that
    with the held of Accused No. 4 for Maharashtra State
    Electricity Board with the help of Vendor Sayyed Shafi
    (accused No 3) on 15/7/2006 stamp paper of Rs. 20/- was
    purchased on which fake signature of Shantilal Maniklal
    Jaiswal was made and fake No Objection Letter was prepared.
It was notarized from the Notary Advocate M.P. Varkat
    (Accused No. 4) License No. 665.       The complainant also
    noticed that the stamp paper was purchased from the Accused
    No 4 Sayyed Shafi and on the stamp paper of Rs. 20/- the
    accused No. 1 prepared agreement on which after making
    signature it was mentioned that after taking the electric
    connection if anything illegal is observed the Maharashtra
    State Electricity Board would full authorized to disconnect
    the same.   In this way the same was notarized by Notary
    Advocate M.P. Varkad (accused No. 4). Along with all paper
    got by the complainant the fake No Objection Letter prepared
    on bond paper is also annexed on Exhibit-I.
12. Thereafter immediately on 12/8/2006 and on 14/8/2006 the
    complainant and his brother Shantilal Maniklal Jaiwal filed
    complaint with the office of Maharashtra Sate Electricity
    Board and Cantonment Police Station as well as with Police
    Commissioner against the illegal act committed by accused
    No. 1 requesting therein that requisite legal action is to
    be taken against all participants of this illegal act; but
    so far no any action has not been taken against the accused
    persons. Copy is annexed on Exhibit-J.
13. As the police did not take any action against the accused
    hence on 29/8/2006 brother of the complainant Shantilal
    Maniklal Jaiswal filed complaint against the accused No. 1
    at Cantonment Police Station, Police Commissioner and
    Cantonment Aurangabad; but till today no any action has been
    taken by them against the accused.        Copy of the said
    complaint dated 29/8/2006 is annexed on Exhibit-C.
14. On 4/6/2006 was the Democracy Day on which the complainant
    has filed application No 1185 in the office of District
    Collector, Aurangabad. Accordingly on 4/9/2006 as per the
4
order letter No 443 of District Collector Maharashtra State
    Electricity Board was ordered to take action against the
    accused.    Thereafter on 1/11/2006 vide letter No 5125
    Maharashtra State Electricity Board informed the complainant
    that the papers of No Objection Letter have been given to
    Cantonment Police Station. It was also informed that if the
    said bond is found as fake the electric connection would be
    disconnected.    Copy of this letter dated 1/11/2006 with
    application is on Exhibit-L.
15. The complainant knew that against the accused on the
    complaint of the complainant police did not take any action.
    Hence on 3/9/2016 the complainant filed last complaint to
    the police officer; but they said that they would not be
    able to take any action on the complaint of the complainant
    and asked him to file complaint with Maharashtra State
    Electricity Board.
16. Hence on 15/9/2016 the complainant filed complaint before
    Maharashtra State Electricity Board and requested them to
    take necessary action; but they did not take any action
    against the accused. This complaint is annexed on Exhibit-
    N.
17. On 14/3/2017 again the complainant made complaintsat
    Maharashtra State Electricity Board for taking necessary
    action against the accused; but no action, was taken. The
    complaint dated 14/3/2017 is annexed on Exhibit-O.
18. On 18/3/2017 regarding complaint of the complainant the
    Superintending Engineer of Maharashtra State Electricity
    Board sent a letter to the Executive Engineer and ordered
    that as per the Company rules necessary action is to be
    taken and its report is to be submitted to their Department.
    This application is annexed on Exhibit-P.
19. As per the letter dated 18/3/2017 of Superintending Engineer
    of Maharashtra State Electricity Board the Executive
    Engineer did not take any action and did not submit their
    report. Hence on 27/6/2017 the Superintending Engineer sent
    letter   to  the   Executive  Engineer   and   called  their
    explanation ordering that as per the Company rules the
    inquiry is to be made and report is to be submitted. This
    letter dated 27/6/2017 is annexed on Exhibit-O.
20. The Executive Engineer of Maharashtra State Electricity
    Board did not take any action. Hence again on 19/12/2017,
    30/12/2017, 4/1/2018 the complainant gave written complaints
    to the Senior Officers of Maharashtra State Electricity
    Board; but till today no any action has been taken against
    the accused and the complainant has not been informed by any
    letter. These complaints are annexed on Exhibit-R. In this
    regard no any action was taken and the complainant was no at
    all informed. These complainants are annexed on Exhibit-5.
21. It is the fact that brother of the complainant Shantilal
    Maniklal Jaiswal did not purchase any bond from the accused
5
and never given in writing the No Objection Letter to the
       accused.  Hence in this matter there is need of detailed
       inquiry.
22. The accused made fake signature of brother of complainant
       named Shantilal Maniklal Jaiswal and prepared fake bond of
       No Objection and with an intention of causing deception to
       the complainant taken electric connection from Maharashtra
       State Electricity Board.       However, Maharashtra State
       Electricity Board has taken criminal action against the
       accused.”


    As observed above, the said FIR has been quashed by the High

Court by the judgment and order impugned in this special leave

petition.   The High Court held as hereunder :-
“4)   It is not disputed that applicant No. 1 has obtained the
   connection of electricity.     The submissions made show that
   applicant No. 1 is in possession of the shop and he is running a
   saloon shop.   It is clear that he needs electricity for doing
   this business, but the first informant was not giving no
   objection certificate. He took every step to see that applicant
   No. 1 does not get supply of electricity for his business. It
   is not the case of the Applicant No. 1 that as per the agreement
   between him and landlord, the landlord, the landlord is bound to
   supply the electricity. Further, the Electricity Board seeks no
   objection of landlord only to verify that the possession of the
   tenant is authorised.      There is no other purpose behind
   obtaining such no objection from landlord. The landlord cannot
   prevent the tenant from availing such facility at his own cost.
5)    The aforesaid circumstances need to be kept in mind and
   then the definition of forgery, cheating, etc. given in the
IPC
needs to be seen. It cannot be said in the present matter that
   false record if any created has caused any harm to the property
   or person of the first informant. In view of this circumstance,
   it cannot be said that applicant No. 1 or his associate
   committed aforesaid offences by taking connection of electricity
   on the basis of such no objection certificate. This Court holds
   that it will be misuse of process of law if the applicants are
   directed to face the trial for aforesaid offences.       In the
   result, the application is allowed.    The relief is granted to
   the applicants in terms of prayer caluse ‘B’.      Rule is made
   absolute in those terms.”


    It is now well settled proposition of law that electricity is

a basic amenity of which a person cannot be deprived. Electricity

cannot be declined to a tenant on the ground of failure/refusal of

the landlord to issue no objection certificate.          All that the
6
electricity supply authority is required to examine is whether the

applicant       for    electricity     connection      is     in    occupation    of   the

premises in question.
Be that as it may, the High Court clearly fell in error in

quashing    the       FIR.    It    cannot    be    said    that    fabrication    and/or

creation of records and/or forging a signature does not constitute

an offence under the
Indian Penal Code
.                     The High Court completely

overlooked the definition of cheating in
Section 415
of the IPC.
The impugned order cannot be sustained and the same is set

aside.
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
It   is    however     made   clear     that    electricity      supply    granted,

shall not be discontinued, subject to compliance by the Respondents

of   the   terms       and   conditions      of    supply    of    electricity    by   the

electricity department including payment of charges for the same.
……………………………………………. J.
[INDIRA BANERJEE]




                                                                  ……………………………………………. J.
[C.T. RAVIKUMAR]


NEW DELHI;
MAY 13, 2022