[Cites
2
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh Chandra vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 13 May, 2022
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
NON­REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO.1242 OF 2021

                                                    IN

                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) No.7628 of 2019


                SURESH CHANDRA & ORS.                             ….PETITIONERS

                                                    v.

                STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                            ….RESPONDENT
                ­­­­­­­­­­
                SIYA RAM                                            ….APPLICANT


                                               ORDER
The Special Leave Petition was filed by showing the applicant

                – Siya Ram as the first petitioner along with four other petitioners,

                for taking exception to the judgment and order dated 26 th October

                2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in

                Criminal Appeal No.1815 of 1986. The Sessions Court had

                convicted the petitioners under Section 302 r/w 149 of the
Indian

                Penal Code
, 1860. The High Court, by the impugned judgment,
Signature Not Verified
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.05.17
scaled down the offence to the one under
Section 304
­Part­I of the
Digitally signed by
15:32:55 IST
Reason:
Indian Penal Code
. The petitioners were sentenced to undergo
1
rigorous imprisonment for ten years and pay a fine of Rs.15,000/­

each.
2.   By the order dated 29th April 2019, the learned Chamber

Judge rejected the application for grant of exemption from

surrendering. The learned Chamber Judge, by the order dated 15 th

July 2019, granted time of two weeks to the applicant (first

petitioner in the Special Leave Petition) to surrender, failing which

the Special Leave Petition qua the first petitioner/applicant herein,

was to stand dismissed for non­prosecution without further

reference to the Court.
3.   The applicant did not surrender within the extended time,

and therefore, the Special Leave Petition stood dismissed insofar as

the applicant is concerned. By the order dated 23th August 2019,

the said Special Leave Petition was dismissed qua the other

petitioners.
4.   After the application for grant of exemption from surrendering

was rejected by this Court on 29th April 2019, the applicant/first

petitioner did not surrender. Therefore, the Sessions Court,

Etawah, Uttar Pradesh passed an order directing the petitioners to

be taken into custody. As disclosed in the Affidavit filed by the Jail

Superintendent of the District Jail at Ghaziabad, State of Uttar
2
Pradesh, the applicant was taken into custody on 04 th October

2019. The applicant, through his present advocate, filed Special

Leave Petition bearing Diary No.20835 of 2020 against the same

judgment. The Registry of this Court brought to the notice of the

advocate that the applicant/first petitioner along with four others

had earlier filed the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019

(Diary No.11324 of 2019) for challenging the same judgment.

According to the case made out in this application, the present

advocate for the applicant enquired with the applicant through his

son whether he had filed the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628

of 2019. The applicant informed his advocate that he had not filed

any such petition. Therefore, the advocate for the applicant

addressed a letter on 18th January 2021 to the Superintendent of

Jail at Etawah, requesting him to enquire. According to the

applicant, the Superintendent of Jail at Etawah informed the

Advocate by his letter dated 27th January 2021 that after enquiring

from the second to fifth petitioners in the Special Leave Petition

(Crl.) No.7628 of 2019, it was revealed that the applicant – Siya

Ram had not filed the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019

along with other petitioners.
5.   On the application made by the advocate for the applicant,
3
the learned Chamber Judge permitted the advocate to inspect the

file of the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019. On 30 th

June 2021, when the advocate inspected the file, he noted that the

signature of the applicant appearing on the Vakalatnama filed in

the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019, was in Hindi

language. The applicant has stated that he being an illiterate

person, used to put his thumb impression. Reliance is placed on

Vakalatnama in Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Diary No.20835 of

2020 filed by the applicant which bears his thumb impression.

Even a reliance is placed on the Custody Certificate dated 20 th

December 2019, issued by the Jail Superintendent of District Jail

at Etawah, which bears the left thumb impression of the applicant.

In short, the contention is that the Special Leave Petition (Crl.)

No.7628 of 2019 was not filed by the applicant and therefore, a

prayer has been made for recalling the order dated 15 th July 2019

passed in the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019.
6.   On 07th January 2022, the learned Chamber Judge noted the

contentions raised by the applicant and passed the following order:
“……This court has no difficulty in recalling the
        order if the Applicant/petitioner­ Siya Ram has not
        filed the special leave petition and has also not
        authorized filing of the same. It is however,
        necessary to find out the true facts under which
        Mr.S(name masked), Advocate­on­Record came to
4
file the special leave petition. This is necessary to
         protect him as well as other Advocates­on­Records
         who could be approach by unauthorized persons for
         filing the special leave petitions. Under these
         circumstances, we would direct the Registry to
         enquire into the matter and submit a report. As
         notice has not been issued in the matter, we do not
         have the advantage of asking the Counsel for the
         State of U.P. to enquire into the matter and get
         information. Let a copy of the SLP paper book with
         the Interlocutory applications be served on the
         standing counsel of Uttar Pradesh for getting the
         necessary information.
The enquiry officer shall also discuss the matter
         with the President of Supreme Court Advocates on
         Record Association.
List these I.A’s after report from the Registry.”
7.   Accordingly, Mr Mahesh T. Patanakar, Additional Registrar of

this Court, was appointed as an Inquiry Officer. He recorded

statements of Mr.S(name masked), AOR who had filed the Special

Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019 and his advocate colleague

Mr.R(name masked). The Inquiry Officer also interacted with the

office   bearers   of   the   Supreme   Court   Advocates­on­Record

Association (SCAORA) on the issue. The conclusion drawn by the

Inquiry Officer vide his report dated 29th January 2022 is that it

does not seem probable that somebody impersonated accused –

Siya Ram in presence of the other four co­accused. However, the

Inquiry Officer noted that the only fact in favour of the applicant is

that the vakalatnama bears his signature and not his thumb
5
impression. He has taken a note of various suggestions made by

the President and the Vice­President of SCAORA to avoid such

controversy in future.
8.   By the order dated 08th April 2022, this Court sought the

assistance of the learned counsel representing the State of Uttar

Pradesh. Accordingly, the affidavit dated 04 th May 2022 of the Jail

Superintendent of District Jail at Ghaziabad has been filed on

record by the learned counsel appearing for the State of Uttar

Pradesh. After the applicant was taken into custody on 04 th

October 2019, he has been detained in the said District Jail at

Ghaziabad. Along with the affidavit, the Jail Superintendent has

annexed a photocopy of the statement of the applicant dated 25 th

April 2022 as well as the statement of the second to fifth

petitioners in the Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019. The

statement of the applicant bears his thumb impression, in which

he has clearly stated that he has not filed the Special Leave

Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019. He has also stated that he is an

illiterate person.
9.   Thus, after making an inquiry, there is an affidavit filed by

the Jail Superintendent at Etawah. The statement of the applicant

annexed to the affidavit records that he being an illiterate person,
6
is unable to sign and therefore, he is affixing his thumb impression

on documents.
10. I have perused the statement of Mr.S, AOR recorded by the

Inquiry Officer, in which he has stated that the applicant had met

Mr.R, an advocate working with him and that he had not met any

of the petitioners. I have also gone through the statement of Mr.R,

who claims that the petitioners had approached him through their

local advocate at Allahabad. He stated that all of them visited his

office­cum­residence and signed the Vakalatnama in his presence.

He stated that the applicant signed the affidavit in support of the

Special Leave Petition as he was the first petitioner. It is not the

case made out by Mr.R that he knew the applicant or for that

matter, any other petitioners.    He has not stated that anyone

personally known to him had introduced the applicant to him. He

has not stated that he had verified the identity of the applicant

after perusing his Aadhaar or PAN Card. He has not stated that the

affidavit in support of the Special Leave Petition was affirmed by

the applicant in presence of a Notary Public.
7
11. When Mr.R did not personally know the petitioners and when

they were not accompanied by a local advocate or anyone who was

known to him, it was his duty to verify the identity of the

petitioners who came to his office on the basis of the documents

such as Adhaar card or PAN card.
12. At this stage, it is necessary to note clauses (a) and (b) of Rule

7 under Order IV of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 (for short, ‘the

said Rules’), which read thus:
“7.(a)      An advocate­on­record shall, on his filing a
            memorandum of appearance on behalf of a party
            accompanied by a vakalatnama duly executed by
            the party, be entitled–
(i)    to act as well as to plead for the party in the
            matter and to conduct and prosecute before the
            Court all proceedings that may be taken in
            respect of the said matter or any application
            connected with the same or any decree or order
            passed therein including proceedings in taxation
            and applications for review; and
(ii)   to deposit and receive money on behalf of the said
            party.
(b) (i)      Where the vakalatnama is executed in the
            presence of the Advocate­on­Record, he shall
            certify that it was executed in his presence.
(ii)   Where the Advocate­on­Record merely accepts
            the vakalatnama which is already duly executed
            in the presence of a Notary or an advocate, he
            shall make an endorsement thereon that he has
            satisfied himself about the due execution of the
            vakalatnama.”

                                          (underline supplied)
8
13. I have perused the Vakalatnama in the Special Leave Petition

(Crl.) No.7628 of 2019. As required by sub­clause (ii) of clause (b)

of Rule 7, it was the duty of Mr.S to make an endorsement on the

Vakalatnama that he has satisfied himself about the due execution

of the Vakalatnama. It was his duty to make an endorsement as

required by clause (b)(ii) of Rule 7 of the said Rules.
14. Thus, if the Vakalatnama is executed in presence of the

Advocate­on­Record himself, it is his duty to certify that the

execution was made in his presence. This certification is not an

empty formality. If he knows the litigant personally, he can certify

the execution. If he does not personally know the litigant, he must

verify the identity of the person signing the Vakalatnama from the

documents such as Adhaar or PAN card. If the client has not

signed the Vakalatnama in his presence, the AOR must ensure

that it bears his endorsement as required by clause (b)(ii) of Rule 7.
Compliance with Clause (b)(ii) of Rule 7 of the said Rules is very

important. It is not an empty formality and therefore, it is the duty

of AORs to ensure that due compliance is made with the said

requirement. Though we find that in many cases, hypertechnical

objections are being raised by the Registry, non­compliance with
9
clause (b)(ii) of Rule 7 is being completely overlooked.         The

Vakalatnama of the applicant, in this case, did not bear

certification as required by sub­clauses (i) or (ii) of clause (b) of

Rule 7 of the said Rules.
15. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the contention raised by

the applicant that he did not sign the Vakalatnama in the Special

Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019 and that he did not sign the

affidavit in support thereof, will have to be accepted. However, the

action of taking the applicant into custody cannot be nullified.

Accordingly, the application is disposed of by holding that the

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7628 of 2019 was not filed by the

applicant and that the same shall be treated as a Special Leave

Petition filed only by second to fifth petitioners.
16. It will be advisable if the Registry issues a Circular inviting

the attention of the Advocates­on­Record to this order as well as to

the requirement of making compliance with clause (b) of Rule 7 of

Order IV of the said Rules.
10
17. The Miscellaneous Application is disposed of in the above

terms.
….…......................J.
                                       (ABHAY S. OKA)


New Delhi;
May 13th, 2022.
11
ITEM NO.1501                    COURT NO.12                       SECTION II
(For order)

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F                I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Miscellaneous    Application     No.      1242/2021         in   SLP(Crl)      No.
7628/2019
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 23-08-
2019 in SLP(Crl) No. No. 7628/2019 passed by the Supreme Court
Of India)

SURESH CHANDRA & ORS.                                        Petitioner(s)

                                       VERSUS

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                   Respondent(s)
----------
SIYA RAM                                                      Applicant(s)

Date   :  13-05-2022   This   Application             was     called     on    for
pronouncement of order today.


For Petitioner(s)     Mr.   Vikas K Singh, Adv.
                      Mr.   Vikram Singh, Adv.
                      Mr.   Sham Chand, Adv.
                      Mr.   T. N. Singh, AOR

For Respondent(s)     Mr. Ankit Goel, AOR
                      Mr. Satyam Pandey, Adv.


     Hon’ble    Mr.   Justice   Abhay    S.     Oka   pronounced        the   non-

reportable order.
The Miscellaneous Application is disposed of in terms of

the non-reportable order.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
12
(NISHA KHULBEY)                          (PREETHI T.C.)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT               COURT MASTER (NSH)
(signed non-reportable order is placed on the file)
13