[Cites
29
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Reddy Veeranna vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 5 May, 2022
Author:
Vineet Saran
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
,
Vineet Saran
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3636 OF 2022
                 [ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 19035 OF 2021]


          REDDY VEERANA                                                    …APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND OTHERS                           ...RESPONDENTS


                                                      WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3637 OF 2022
                         [ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 5500/2022]

          NEW OKHLA INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
          AUTHORITY                                                        …APPELLANT


                                                 VERSUS


          REDDY VEERANA AND OTHERS                                    …RESPONDENTS


                                            JUDGMENT
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The present Civil Appeals arise out of the judgment dated
Signature Not Verified
28.10.2021,   passed   by    High   Court   of   Judicature   at
Digitally signed by
Rachna
Date: 2022.05.06
16:49:56 IST
Reason:
Allahabad in Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 2272 of
1
2019 filed by appellant Reddy Veerana (co­petitioner), by

     which,   the   High   Court   intervened   in   the   award   of

     compensation dated 31.01.2011, passed by Additional

     District Magistrate (Land Acquisition) for acquired land of

     appellant, admeasuring 2.18.00 bighas of Khasra Nos. 422

     and 427, situated in village Chhalera Bangar and disposed­

     off the petition.
3.   Assailing the said order, both the parties are before this

     Court. Briefly stated, facts are that vide sale deed dated

     24.04.1997, appellant along­with two others purchased the

     scheduled property land in Khasra No. 422 admeasuring 3

     bighas 9 biswas and in Khasra No. 427 admeasuring 2

     bighas 4 biswas and 10 biswansi (i.e., total of 13757.8 sq.

     meters) in village Chhalera Bangar, Gautam Buddh Nagar

     district for a total sale consideration of Rs. 1,00,00,000/­

     (One crore only). However, through the prior land acquisition

     proceedings in year 1979­1980, a portion of the purchased

     land to the extent of 1 bigha 5 biswas 15 biswansi in Khasra

     No. 427 and 1 bigha in Khasra No. 422 was acquired by

     State. Thus, the property which remained unacquired with

     the appellant was 2 bigha 18 biswa 10 biswansi (i.e. total of
2
7400 sq. meters) in both the aforesaid khasra numbers (in

     short be called as scheduled piece of land).
4.   As is borne out of the record, pursuant to purchase of land

     by appellant, since early 2000s, employees of NOIDA were

     interfering with the peaceful possession of the appellant

     (land­owner), which resultantly led into Civil Suit No.

     416/1998 being filed by appellant for permanent injunction

     against NOIDA, with a prayer to not interfere with the

     possession. For the purpose to demonstrate the utility and

     value of land, the averments made in the written statement

     filed by NOIDA inter­alia categorically contended, were as

     thus:
“…..the land in dispute is situated in the centre of
             development of authority and the use of land has
             been   prescribed    to   be   used    for   commercial.
             Therefore, this land is very costly. Since………the land
             of village Chhalera Bangar under the provisions of Section
             2 of Act No. 6 of 1976 is declared as industrial area and
             construction on this land without the permission of
             defendant is illegal.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
5.   The Trial Court, after due deliberation on the contentions

     raised by both the parties, vide order dated 16.02.2000,

     partly decreed the suit in favour of appellant (Reddy
3
Veerana)    herein    and     restrained     NOIDA      from        taking

     possession of land which was not the subject matter of the

     prior acquisition in year 1979­1980. Further, the Court also

     declared the appellant as the owner of the remaining portion

     of land of Khasra No. 422 and 427 which was purchased

     vide sale deed as mentioned earlier.
6.   Being aggrieved by aforesaid order, NOIDA preferred Civil

     Appeal No. 61 of 2020 before District Judge, which also

     came to be dismissed vide order dated 30.03.2001 with

     certain observations made in the following manner –

          “The lower court has not committed any error in decreeing
          the suit of permanent injunction of plaintiff produced in
          regard to the land admeasuring 02­09­00 bigha of Khasra
          no. 422 and land admeasuring 00­09­10 bigha of Khasra
          No. 427 of village Chhalera Bangar, Tehsil Dadri, District –
          Gautam      Buddh    Nagar    against   appellant.     The
          defendant/appellant even now is free to acquire the
          remaining land of the aforesaid Khasra Nos. but
          until and unless the land is not acquired, till then
          the decree of permanent injunction issued by the
          lower court shall remain applicable.”
                                                (emphasis supplied)


     The judgment and decree granting permanent injunction

     passed by District Judge, confirming the order of Trial Court

     has not been assailed and therefore, it has become final.
4
Moreover, despite the decree of permanent injunction being

operative, NOIDA in the year 2003 floated a tender for

development of large piece of land including the remaining

piece of land of Khasra No. 422 and Khasra No. 427 which is

the subject matter of this case. The said tender was widely

advertised     by   NOIDA    in   various     newspapers      and

subsequently, nine reputed developers including MGF,

Unitech, Sun City, Sahara India and Omex purchased the

bid documents. It was a known fact that out of the large

piece of the land, the scheduled piece of land was in dispute

and hence, all the reputed developers abstained from

bidding for the tender. Be that as it may, on the closing date

of tender i.e. 9.03.2004, only one tender on behalf of

respondent No. 7 herein, i.e., M/s DLF Universal Ltd.

(hereinafter referred to as DLF) was received and evaluated

by Technical Committee, whereafter, respondent No. 7

quoted   the    rate   and   qualified   in   the   said   tender.

Consequently, the large piece of land as mentioned above

was allotted to DLF vide order dated 12.04.2004, including

the scheduled piece of land for which, the decree of

permanent injunction was in operation.
5
7.   After the allotment of land to respondent No. 7, a

     preliminary notification dated 02.09.2005 was issued by

     NOIDA under Section 4(1) read with Section 17(1) of the

     ‘
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
’ (hereinafter referred to as 1894

     Act), followed by a notification dated 22.11.2005 under
Section 6
of the 1894 Act, to acquire the scheduled piece of

     land measuring 0.7400 hectare in Khasra No. 422 and 427

     at village Chhalera Bangar, Dadri, NOIDA. The possession of

     the scheduled piece of land was taken on 20.01.2006 as per

     order   passed     by   Additional     District   Collector       (Land

     Acquisition) Noida.
8.   The aforesaid notifications were challenged by the appellant

     before High Court of Allahabad in Civil Miscellaneous Writ

     Petition No. 75152 of 2005 and Civil Miscellaneous Writ

     Petition No. 70088 of 2006. As per interim orders of the High

     Court in the aforesaid petitions, Revenue Inspector visited

     the scheduled piece of land on 05.08.2008 and in his report

     noted as under –

          “In accordance to the spot, the land of Khasra No. 422 and
          427 which in present has been converted in Sector 18 in
          regards to demarcation, has no identification spot
          because the NOIDA authority has been fully
6
developed and in absence of any fixed identification,
    demarcation of land is not possible.”


The High Court vide order dated 10.12.2009 disposed­off the

matter and held as under –

     “Perusal of record shows that the notification under
Section 4
of the Act was issued on 2.9.2005 and in this
     notification under
Section 4
of the Act a direction was also
     issued under
Section17(4)
of the Act to the effect that the
     provision of
Section 5
­
A of the Act
shall not apply. A
     notification under
Section 6
of the Act as contained in
     Annexure No. 2 to the instant writ petition was issued on
     22.11.2005 and the urgency clause was invoked under
Section 17(1)
of the Act.
Mr. S.D. Kautilya, learned counsel for the petitioners made
     a statement at bar that the petitioners do not press the
     relief claimed in the instant writ petitions and only pray
     that their compensation be determined and be paid to
     them in accordance with law and also keeping in mind the
     Judgement of High Court of Uttaranchal rendered in
     Bhopendra Singh and others Vs. Awas Vikas Parishad
     and others, reported in 2005(2) Uttaranchal Decision, 295.
     According to him this statement is being made keeping in
     mind the Commissioner's report that the land cannot be
     demarcated and the petitioners cannot get back the land.
     Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, but
     without prejudice to the merits of the case, the writ
     petition is disposed of with the direction to the
     SLAO to determine the compensation according to
     law as laid down in the judgement rendered in
     Bhopendra Singh and others (Supra). The payment
     of the compensation shall be made preferably within
     a period of one month. However, it is further provided
     that if as per policy of NOIDA any land is to be given to the
     petitioners, same shall be expedited for rehabilitation of
     the petitioner. Writ petition is disposed of.”
                                            (emphasis supplied)
7
It may not be out of context to state that, the appellant (land­

     owner) gave the concession before the Court in view of the

     observation made by Revenue Inspector in the report that the

     land was fully developed by NOIDA and demarcation was not

     possible.   Therefore,   the   direction   for   determination   of

     compensation as per the judgment rendered in the case of

     ‘Bhopendra Singh and Others Vs. Awas Evam Vikas

     Parishad and Others, 2005 (2) Uttaranchal Decision,

     295; MANU/UC/0270/2005’ was only prayed.
9.    Being aggrieved, NOIDA challenged the aforesaid judgment

      in Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 20196­20197 of 2010

      (later admitted and converted into Civil Appeal No. 731­732

      of 2013). During the pendency of the aforesaid appeal, this

      Court vide order dated 10.01.2011, issued notice while

      observing that ‘in the meanwhile, there shall be stay of

      operation of the impugned judgment and order dated

      10.12.2009 passed by High Court’. It is the specific case of

      the appellant (land­owner) that NOIDA did not even inform

      the Court about passing of award under
Section 11
of the

      1894 Act during the pendency of the said appeal.
8
10. Be that as it may, after almost delay of 5 years, an award

    dated   31.01.2011      was    passed      by   Additional     District

    Magistrate (Land Acquisition), NOIDA, Gautam Buddh

    Nagar, under
Section 11
of 1894 Act. In the said award, the

    compensation was determined by the authority in the

    following manner –

         “…… a decision was reached in the meeting on the basis
         of general acquisition process to pay them compensation
         at the rate of Rs. 181.87 per square yard on the basis of
         sell letter dated 04.02.2005 for the land sold in village
         Sadarpar of this circle, whose borders touch the borders of
         village Chhalera Bangar against the land sold in village
         Chhalera three years before the advertisement of this Act
         on 02.09.2005 under
Section 4(1)
,
17
and were not found
         suitable for getting compensation, the approval of which
         was given by Commissioner, Meerut Division, Meerut
         through his official letter No. 452/891/2004­06 dated
         18.01.2006.”


    Regarding the pending litigation before this Court, the award

    dealt with the same as under –

         “With reference to the disposal of Civil Misc. Writ Petition
         No. 75152/2005 – Vishnu Pradhan Vs. NOIDA & Ors.,
         Hon. High Court of Allahabad on 10.12.2009 ordered to
         dispose the compensation on the basis of minimum
         determined circle rate by the District Collectors as per the
         order passed by the Hon. High Court, Uttaranchal, against
         the petition filed for compensation, determination and
         payment by Bhopendra Singh and Others Vs. Resident
         Development Council and Others, but against the orders of
         Hon. High Court, a Special Petition No. CC 20196­
         20197/2010 was filed in the Hon. Supreme Court of India
9
by Naveen Okhla Udyog Vikas Pradhikaran, Noida versus
     Vishnu Pradhan and others, in which the enforcement
     of the orders of Hon. High Court dated 10.12.2009
     was stopped on 10.01.2001. Due to the postponement
     order issued by Hon. Supreme Court of India, the
     determined rate of Rs. 181.87 per square yard remains
     effective for the uncontracted lands as per the decision
     taken in the said meeting convened under the
     chairmanship of District Collector, Gautam Buddh Nagar
     and the decision of acquired land will be taken on this
     basis only.”


Finally, the award was passed in following terms subject to

the decision of this court and compensation was computed

as under –

     “Therefore, for the 0.828 ha, land acquired by New Okhla
     Industrial Development Authority for planned industrial
     development in village Chhalera Bangar, Pargana Dadri,
     Tehsil Dadri, District – Gautam Buddh Nagar, the
     compensation is Rs. 18,00,481.00 and 30% solatium
     payable on it amounts to Rs. 5,40,144.00 and 12%
     payable   on   the    compensatory      amount        is   Rs.
     53,866.00     which   amounts    to     a    total    of   Rs.
     23,94,491.00 (Rupees Twenty­Three Lacs Ninety­
     Four Thousand Four Hundred Ninety­One only) and
     the decision upon it is being declared today on
     31.01.2011.    This   decision   will   be    as     per   the
     obedience of the order issued by the Hon. Supreme
     Court of India against Special Petition No. CC
     20197­20197/2010 – NOIDA versus Vishnu Pradhan
     and others.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)


Thereafter, on 04.11.2015, the appeal of NOIDA before this

Court was dismissed for being devoid of merits.
10
11. It is also relevant to note that, vide order dated 04.11.2015,

     this Court also dismissed the Civil Appeal No. 1107 of 2009,

     which assailed the judgment of High Court of Uttaranchal in

     Bhopendra Singh (supra). In view of the aforesaid order,

     Deputy Chief Executive of NOIDA addressed a letter dated

     11.05.2016      to   Additional     District      Magistrate       (Land

     Acquisition) to comply with the order of High Court of

     Judicature at Allahabad and Supreme Court of India. In the

     meanwhile, the appellant herein preferred representations

     before   the    concerned     authority     and     thereby    sought

     compensation in terms of the aforesaid orders passed by this

     Court, however, in vain. The District Magistrate, Gautam

     Buddh Nagar on 08.01.2018, dismissed the representation

     of the appellant (land­owner) and observed as under –

          “In view of the aforesaid, it is clear that when the matter
          was pending adjudication before the Hon. Supreme Court,
          then in such circumstances, the award/decision
          dated 31.01.2011 was not be announced/passed by
          then      Additional    District     Magistrate     (Land
          Acquisition), Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar and the
          Additional District Magistrate (Land Acquisition),
          Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, in the matter has to
          wait for the final orders of Hon. Supreme Court. The
          award/decision dated 31.01.2011 of Additional District
          Magistrate (Land Acquisition) is not the compliance of
          order dated 10.12.2009 passed by Hon. High Court
11
and stay order dated 10.01.2011 passed by Hon.
           Supreme Court, but because this award/decision has
           already been passed/declared by then Additional District
           Magistrate (Land Acquisition) Noida, Gautam Buddh
           Nagar, therefore, legally it is not appropriate to dispose­off
           this point at the level of District Magistrate.”


      Being aggrieved by the order passed by District Magistrate,

      the appellant preferred Contempt Petition (C) Nos. 1841­

      1842 of 2018 in Civil Appeal Nos. 731­732 of 2013. This

      Court vide order dated 22.10.2018, dismissed the aforesaid

      contempt as withdrawn and granted liberty to the petitioner

      to avail appropriate remedy before the High Court.
12.   In view of the order passed in Contempt Petition by this

      Court, the appellant (land­owner) again approached the High

      Court in Writ Petition No. 2272 of 2019, wherein the High

      Court vide impugned judgment and order dated 28.10.2021,

      with regard to question of title of appellant on the scheduled

      land, the High Court held as under –

           “31. We would first be dealing with the issue as to
                whether the writ petition filed by the sole petitioner
                to claim compensation of land measuring 2.18.00
                bighas of Khasra Nos. 422 and 427 is maintainable.
                The respondents have produced a copy of the order
                dated 12.09.2002 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior
                Division), Gautam Buddha Nagar to deny
                acceptance of compromise and accordingly,
                allegations have been made about suppression of
12
aforesaid fact. It is also that no compromise deed or
          decree has been issued by the competent Court and
          for that reason, one co­owner of the land, namely,
          Vishnu Pradhan contested the case separately to
          challenge the acquisition of the land. We, however,
          find that petitioner has produced a copy of the
          Khatauni of Fasli Year 1407­ 1412 when the
          land was recorded solely in the name of the
          petitioner. It was pursuant to the order dated
          01.09.2010 in Suit No. 2441 of 2010 under
Section 34
of the Land Revenue Act, 1996 and
          the judgment of Civil Judge (Senior Division)
          dated 17.06.2010 to record entire land of
          Khasra Nos. 422 and 427 in the name of the
          present petitioner. A copy of the Khatauni was
          submitted     alongwith      the    supplementary
          affidavit,    thereby       the     objection     on
          maintainability of the writ petition in the
          hands of the petitioner is not tenable rather
          the   petitioner   became    sole   owner   of   the
          property in dispute after an order under
Section 34
of the Land Revenue Act and the
          judgment of the Civil Court dated 17.06.2010.
          His name was accordingly entered in the khatauni.
          The respondents have ignored the subsequent
          orders by which land was entered in the name of
          the petitioner alone.”


Further, on the aspect of whether the schedule property was

an agriculture land or commercial land, the High Court

referred to the pleadings of respondents themselves in Suit

No. 416 of 1998 and provisions of Uttar Pradesh Industrial

Development Act, 1976, to conclude that the schedule land
13
was a commercial property and the compensation shall be

determined accordingly.
Regarding the deduction towards development charges, the

High Court held as follows –

     “63. The respondents were expected to take into account
          the circle rate of the land in question and thereupon
          to make reasonable deductions towards the
          development which may be between 20% and 50%
          as per the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
          Viluben Jhalejar Contractor (supra).
64.   If the proposition of law laid down by the Apex
           Court in the judgment cited above is applied, then
           determination of compensation should have been
           made after taking the circle rate of Rs.1,10,000/­
           per square meter of the land in question and
           thereupon to make deduction towards the
           development. The development charges can be
           maximum to the extent of 50% of it and accordingly
           respondents should have taken Rs.55,000/­ per
           square meter to be the market value of the land.
65.   The official respondents while doing it could have
           noticed that the land was allotted to respondent
           no.7 one and half years back prior to the notification
           under
Section 4
of the Act of 1894. It was by the
           allotment letter dated 12.04.2004. The circle rate
           was determined thereupon on 16.04.2004. The
           allotment of land to the respondent no.7 was 8
           times bigger than the land of the petitioner and it
           was one and half years back. While applying the
           judgment of the Apex Court, the market value
           should have been taken @ Rs.55,000/­ per square
           meter. However, due to the interim order of the Apex
           Court dated 11.01.2011 against the judgment dated
           10.12.2009, the respondents did not determine the
14
compensation as per the direction given by this
                 Court.”


     And lastly, the High Court disposed­off the petition with the

     following directions –

          “69.   Accordingly, we find reasons to cause interference
                 in the award dated 31.01.2011 and direct the
                 respondents to    determine the compensation as
                 under –
1.     The respondents are directed to take into
                 consideration the circle rate of Sector – 18 since
                 16.04.2004 given in Annexure – 7 of supplementary
                 counter affidavit filed by the respondent no. 5. It
                 was Rs. 1,10,000/­ per square meter for Sector – 18.
2.     After making 50% deduction towards the
                 development charges, it would come to Rs. 55,000/­
                 per square meter and accordingly the compensation
                 would be determined on the aforesaid rate for the
                 land admeasuring 2.18 bighas.
3.     The addition of solatium of 30% would be made
                 thereupon. The amount arrived as per the direction
                 in paras (1) and (2) would be payable with interest
                 @ 9% per annum for one year from the date of
                 possession i.e. February, 2005 and thereupon 15%
                 per annum as per the Proviso to
Section 34
of the Act
                 of 1894.
4.     The amount deposited in the year 2017 would earn
                 interest @ 15% only till it was deposited. The
                 amount so deposited would be paid to the petitioner
                 with the interest earned on it.
5.     The amount of compensation         would   be   paid
                 thereupon to the petitioner.”
13. The High Court on the issue of applicability of
Section 24
of

     ‘Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
15
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013’

(hereinafter referred to as 2013 Act), held that, the argument

of lapsing of acquisition for an award passed beyond a

period prescribed under
Section 11(a)
cannot be accepted in

view of the ratio of judgment of this Court in ‘Indore

Development Authority Vs. Manohar Lal & Ors., 2020

(8) SCC 129’. After going through the said judgment, it is

clear that
Section 24(1)(a)
of 2013 Act, starts with non­

obstante      clause    and    states     that    in   case   where    the

proceedings have been initiated under 1894 Act, but, the

award has not been made under
Section 11
, the provisions

of    the   2013       Act   relating    to      the   determination    of

compensation would apply. In the case at hand, the award

was made on 31.01.2011 after grant of stay on 10.01.2011

in Civil Appeal No. 731­732 of 2013, though it was by a

delay of 5 years. By the final order passed on 04.11.2015,

the    said     appeals       were      dismissed.      Thereafter,    the

representation         was    made      by    the      appellant   asking

compensation at the rate of Rs. 1,10,000/­ per sq. mtrs. as

directed by High Court inter­party relying upon judgment of
16
Bhopendra Singh (supra) was rejected vide order dated

08.01.2018. Thereafter, the contempt petitions were filed

alleging non­compliance of the order of the High Court

which were dismissed as withdrawn while granting the

liberty to appellant to avail appropriate remedy. Thus, on the

date of commencement of the 2013 Act, the possession was

taken and the award was passed, though as alleged it was

non­est. In our opinion, by the impugned order, the

determination of compensation as per circle rate of Rs.

1,10,000/­ per sq. mtrs for commercial land was the

question res­integra in the light of Bhopendra Singh

(supra) judgment and the award, whether rightly or wrongly

passed, was in existence on the date of commencement of

2013 Act. Therefore, in our considered opinion, the High

Court has rightly refused to interfere on the issue of

applicability of 2013 Act for determination of compensation

and   rightly   relied   upon   the   judgment   on   Indore

Development Authority (supra).
17
14. Being aggrieved by the impugned order, the appellant (land­

    owner) and NOIDA have filed separate appeals, which are

    heard analogously.
Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Counsel for appellant,

     in addition to the point of applicability of
Section 24
of 2013

    Act as discussed above, contended as under –

    a.   That, the award dated 31.01.2011 passed by District

         Magistrate was in violation of order of this Court as well

         as the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad;

    b.   The award itself acknowledged that it was contingent in

         nature;
c.   There was no personal hearing granted to the appellant,

         even though NOIDA knew about the interest of the

         appellant in the scheduled property;
d.   The impugned award was a void exercise since the

         public notice of the same was given two days after the

         designated date of hearing under
Section 9
of the 1894

         Act;
e.   The award itself was passed after a delay of 5 years

         since the date of hearing, which violates the mandate
18
under Section 11A of the 1894 Act. Therefore, the date

           of award of compensation should be shifted          or in

           alternate, since the compensation was deposited in the

           year 2017, therefore, the amount of compensation be

           determined as per the provisions of 2013 Act.

      f.   Deduction with respect to development charges could

           not be levied as the plot was already developed even

           before the acquisition;
g.   NOIDA illegally sold the schedule property even before

           the acquisition which is a clear­cut violation of right to

           property under
Article 300A
of the Constitution. Such

           Constitutional tort should not be allowed to be left

           unpunished and the respondent authorities should not

           take benefit of their own wrongful acts.
15.   Per contra, Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor

      General appearing on behalf of NOIDA, contended as under–

      a.   Appellant cannot be entitled for a compensation more

           than Rs. 31,850/­ which was the price tendered by

           respondent no. 7 (DLF);
19
b.   The said price of Rs. 31,850/­ has been adjudicated by

     this Court in
‘Anil Kumar Srivastava Vs. State of

     U.P.
, (2004) 8 SCC 671’ to be reasonable;

c.   It has been conceded that allotment to respondent no. 7

     (DLF) was prior to the date of acquisition of the

     scheduled land;
d.   Appellant (land­owner) acquired the property in year

     1997 for a sale consideration of Rs. 1 crore. One of the

     earlier land owners namely Vishnu Vardhan had entered

     into an agreement to sale dated 07.06.2006, for a sale

     consideration of Rs. 3 crores only. These transactions

     indicate that the aforesaid land was an agricultural plot,

     however, the scheduled land has to be characterized as

     agriculture land or at best residential;

e.   Jurisdiction of reference court constituted under
Section

     18
of 1894 Act has been by­passed by the High Court

     while determining the compensation;
f.   Development charge amounting to 75% has to be

     deducted instead of 50%;
20
g.   Compensation granted by the High Court would amount

           to unjust enrichment for the appellant which cannot be

           sustained under the law.
16.   Mr. Rayzada, Additional Advocate General appearing for the

      State has submitted that, the subject land was bought as

      benami property and hence, appellant is only entitled for

      1/3rd of the amount.
17.   Learned counsel for respondent no. 7 has submitted that,

      the dispute is inter­se NOIDA and appellant herein and

      respondent no. 7 has nothing to add other than to state that

      the allotment of land was subject matter of litigation before

      this Court in
Anil Kumar Srivastava
(supra), which has

      upheld the allocation through the process of auction.

      However, the compensation, if any, enhanced, may be

      directed only against NOIDA.
18.   Before adverting to the merits of the rival contentions raised

      by both parties, at the outset it is relevant to mention that,

      the legality and validity of judgment dated 10.12.2009

      passed by High Court in Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition

      No. 75152/2005 has sustained the scrutiny of this Court
21
and has been upheld vide order dated 04.11.2015 in Civil

Appeal No. 731­732 of 2013. The judgment has attained

finality inter­se the parties. It is not the case of respondents

that the previous judgment as well as the impugned order

has been rendered by an incompetent authority.
In other

words
,
the said judgment
has effectively put the controversy

inter­se the parties to rest. Thus, incidentally, what remains

in the matter is mere observance of those directions given by

the High Court in the light of prevailing law. Therefore, the

contention   disputing    the   payment     of   compensation

altogether for the acquired land is untenable and cannot be

entertained at this stage. The conclusion arrived at by High

Court has been given seal of affirmation by this Court and

hence, the right of the appellant herein to get compensation

in terms of determination as directed has been crystallized

and cannot be interfered with. It would be unjust and

improper to allow re­agitation of issues and vexing the

appellant twice when the matter has already been put to rest

by impugned judgment inter­se the parties.
22
19.   At this juncture, we consider it appropriate to refer
‘R.

      Unnikrishnan and Another Vs. V.K. Mahanudevan and

      Others
, (2014) 4 SCC 434’, wherein para 19, the Court

      while dealing with finality to binding judicial decisions

      observed as follows –

           “19. It is trite that law favours finality to binding
                judicial decisions pronounced by courts that
                are competent to deal with the subject­matter.
                Public interest is against individuals being
                vexed twice over with the same kind of
                litigation.   The     binding    character      of    the
                judgments      pronounced       by    the   courts     of
                competent      jurisdiction     has    always        been
                treated as an essential part of the rule of law
                which is the basis of the administration of
                justice in this country.
We may gainfully refer to
                the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court
                in
‘Daryao v. State of U.P.
[AIR 1961 SC 1457]’
                where the Court succinctly summed up the law in
                the following words:
9.   …It is in the interest of the public at large that a
                     finality should attach to the binding
                     decisions      pronounced        by    courts     of
                     competent jurisdiction, and it is also in
                     the public interest that individuals should
                     not be vexed twice over with the same kind
                     of litigation.
***
11. …The       binding   character      of   judgments
                    pronounced by courts of competent jurisdiction
                    is itself an essential part of the rule of law, and
                    the rule of law obviously is the basis of the
23
administration of justice on which           the
                     Constitution lays so much emphasis.”
20.   Therefore, in view of settled legal position with respect to

      binding nature of the judgment that has attained finality,

      there is no iota of doubt that NOIDA is under mandatory

      obligation to determine the compensation as per law
laid

      down in
Bhopendra Singh (supra). The relevant extracts

      from Bhopendra Singh (supra) are being reproduced herein

      below for ready reference –

           “4.   Learned reference court has assessed the market
                 value of similar land @ of Rs. 6/­ per square feet on
                 the ground that other land of the same area which
                 was acquired with land in question was also valued
                 at the said rate by the Special Land Acquisition
                 Officer. However, learned Counsel for the Appellants
                 argued that the land in question is adjoining to the
                 main road unlike the land which was taken into
                 consideration by the reference court. It is further
                 argued that the land in question should not have
                 been valued less than Rs. 50/­ Square feet. On
                 perusal of the oral evidence adduced by the parties
                 we found that P.W.­1 Smt. Raj Dulari has stated
                 that in the year 1976 value of land in question was
                 Rs. 50/­ per square feet. P.W.­2 Arvind Singh, P.W.­
                 3 Ranvir Singh and P.W.­4 Harpal Singh have also
                 made the similar statements. But in the matters
                 of Land Acquisition, best way to assess the
                 market value is to examine the value in the
                 light of price paid by the purchaser of similar
                 land in the neighbourhood of the land in
                 question. Such transaction if nearer the date
                 of notification of acquisition, facilitates the
24
court to assess the more accurate market
value of the land. However, in the present case
none of the above witnesses have adduced any
evidence    as   to   the   exemplar    sale   deed
pertaining to the nearby similar land. In
absence of such sale, deeds we are compelled
to see the valuation of the surrounding land
made by the Collector Nainital under Rule 340­
A of the U.P. Stamp (first amendment) Rules,
1976. Paper No. 44­C/1 is copy of the Circle
rate showing market value assessed by the
Collector for the purposes of registration of
instrument of sale. The said documents shows
that the circle rate of the land in question for
imposing the stamp duty over the documents is
Rs. 95/­ to Rs. 135/­ per sq. meter as market
value of the land adjoining to road and Rs.
67/­ to Rs. 80/­ per sq. meter for the land away
from the road. From the evidence on record, it is
clear that the land in question was near the main
road. As such the market value as per the circle rate
was treated for the purpose of realizing stamp duty
not less than Rs. 95/­ per sq. meter. It would be
injustice to the owner of land if for realizing the
stamp duty we apply the circle rate and deny at­
least the said rate in making payment of
compensation on acquisition of his land. The total
area of the land in question is 2900 sq. yard. The
learned reference court has erred in law by
multiplying the rate mentioned per sq, feet with area
in terms of sq. yard. That is why due to
miscalculation the amount has been stuck at
meager Rs. 17,400/­. Area measuring 0.6 acre is
equal to 2900 Sq, yard which is equal to 2397 sq.
meter. If we assess the market value relying on the
circle rate it would be Rs. 95/­ per sq. meter, the
market value of the land in the year 1976 comes out
to be Rs. 95/­ A – 2397.80 sq. meters = 2,27,791/­.
xxx          xxx          xxx
25
12.   The market value determined for the circle, is the
                 minimum statutory market value, in accordance with
                 the statutory rules framed under the
Stamp Act
, as
                 amended by the U.P. Act, on the basis of which,
                 stamp duty is paid as per schedule appended to
Section 3
and sale deed is to be entertained only
                 after the payment of the stamp duty paid on the
                 said minimum market value and if in the opinion of
                 the Registering Authority the value of the property is
                 more than the minimum value determined as per the
                 rules, he may refer the matter to the Authority who
                 may further proceed to require the vendee to pay
                 more stamp duty. And if not paid they may impound
                 the sale deed. Thus, the basis of exercise of power,
                 is the minimum market value determined according
                 to rule. If for the augmentation of the revenue,
                 government fixes the market value of the property in
                 a circle why that not be taken as minimum market
                 value of the property for the purpose of
Land
                 Acquisition Act
. The procedure of determination
                 of market value provided under
Section 23
of
                 Land Acquisition Act is pari­materia to the
                 rules framed under the
Stamp Act
. Therefore,
                 we hold that while avoiding compensation for
                 land acquired under the
Land Acquisition Act
,
                 the compensation cannot be paid at a lesser
                 rate than that of market value determined for
                 the purpose of payment of stamp duty under
                 the
Stamp Act
.”

                                                 (emphasis supplied)
21.   Bare perusal of the aforesaid makes it clear that, the

      determination of the compensation has to be made by taking

      into consideration the circle rate which has been determined

      as per the market value. The market value of a property is
26
the price that a willing purchaser would pay to a willing

      seller for it, taking into account its current condition, all

      existing advantages, and potential possibilities when led out

      in the most advantageous manner, while excluding any

      benefit resulting from the implementation of the scheme for

      which the property is compulsorily acquired. Therefore, the

      market value is to be determined in the light of price paid by

      the purchaser of similar land in the neighbourhood of the

      land in question and in cases, where no records for such

      transaction/purchase is available, the minimum statutory

      value in accordance with
Stamp Act
must be taken as

      market value for circle rate.
22.   In the instant case, since the title of the appellant on the

      scheduled piece of land has not been contested by the

      respondents and the adjudication is confined only to the

      quantum of compensation, we deem it appropriate not to

      interfere with the findings of the High Court with respect to

      the ownership. Be that as it may, moving further, the order

      dated 27.03.2004 passed by District Magistrate, Gautam

      Buddh Nagar notifying the circle rate to be Rs. 1,10,000/­
27
per   sq.   mt.    as      applicable    on   commercial   properties,

residential properties etc., situated in Noida is also on

record. Further, the nature of acquired land is also not in

dispute for the reason that, NOIDA while contesting the Civil

Suit No. 416/1998 filed by appellant herein seeking

permanent injunction, itself admitted that the land has been

determined for use of commercial purposes and hence, it is

a valuable land. This fact is also fortified by the Revenue

Inspector’s       report     dated      05.08.2008,   submitted    in

compliance of interim order passed by High Court in Writ

Petition No. 75152 of 2005. By the said report, it is apparent

that, on spot the land of Khasra No. 422 and 427 was

converted into a part of Sector 18, for which demarcation is

not possible because of absence of any fixed identification

points for demarcation since the land is fully developed.

Thus, NOIDA cannot turn around to say in this case that the

land is either agricultural or at best residential. Thus, the

arguments as advanced is contrary to record, far from truth

and cannot be countenanced.
28
23.   Now, the argument advanced by learned Additional Solicitor

      General for State and counsel for respondent no. 7 relying

      upon the judgment of
Anil Kumar Srivastava
(supra),

      which was a PIL filed before the Allahabad High Court and

      later transferred to this Court, is also required to be

      analyzed. This Court in the aforesaid case dealt with the

      challenge made to tender floated by NOIDA in 2003 and

      dismissed the said PIL while observing as thus –

          “7.   In reply, respondent no. 2 has pointed out that the
                impugned Scheme was given wide publicity;
                that the development of the plot admeasuring
                54,320.18     sq.    m.   became     necessary    to
                decongest Sector 18 where car parking has
                become an acute problem; that decongestion
                could be achieved by constructing shopping
                malls with matching parking facility; that
                although the area of the plot in question is
                54,320.18 sq. m., FAR is restricted to 150 and
                ground cover is restricted to 30% unlike the
                instances of plots submitted by the petitioner where
                for a smaller plot of 6000­7000 sq. m., FAR is 150
                and for still smaller plots of 600 sq. m., FAR is 250
                (see Annexure P­1). That by offering the said plot
                admeasuring 54,320.18 sq. m., the Authority is
                saving on internal development for amenities,
                parking, etc……..
xxx           xxx        xxx
9.   Mr. L. Nageswara Rao, learned Senior Counsel
                appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that
                the reserve price fixed by respondent no. 2 at the
                rate of Rs 27,500 per sq. m. is contrary to clause
29
2(e) of the Board resolution dated 10­7­2003; that
      under the said clause, the reserve rate of
      commercial plots admeasuring 5001 sq. m. or more
      was one­and­a­half times the sector rate; that the
      sector rate was Rs 90,000 per sq. m.; that the
      reserve price of Rs 27,500 per sq. m. for the plot
      admeasuring 54,320.18 sq. m., without sub­
      division,     was      abysmally      low     and
      understated……….It was submitted that transfer
      of the said plot admeasuring 54,320.18 sq. m.
      at such a low reserve price of Rs 27,500 per sq.
      m. would result in causing huge loss of Rs 340
      crores to the State exchequer.
xxx          xxx         xxx
14.   Applying the above tests to the facts of this case, we
      find that there is no material on record to show that
      the tender price of Rs 31,850 per sq. m. is a low
      price. The entire edifice of the petition is based on
      the challenge to the reserve price of Rs 27,500 per
      sq. m. As stated above, fixation of the reserve price
      is to facilitate the conduct of the sale. It was open
      to the petitioner to challenge the tender price
      of Rs 31,850 per sq. m. as understated,
      notwithstanding the fixation of the reserve
      price. No comparative sales instances, with similar
      parameters of ground cover of 30% and 150 FAR,
      have been placed before us. No figures of cost of
      2800 ECS have been placed before us as such costs
      would increase the reserve price. On the other hand,
      we find that the reserve price has been fixed by
      taking into account several factors. Firstly, in the
      past tenders invited for relatively smaller plots with
      higher reserve price had failed. It is important to
      bear in mind that the tender process is an expensive
      exercise. To resort repeatedly to this exercise is a
      costly affair. Secondly, in the present case, the
      reserve price was fixed by taking into account the
      comparative     offers/sales     in   the    adjoining
      sectors……..
30
15.   Reading of the said clause indicates that the figure
                 of Rs 90,000 is not mentioned. It is a figure alleged
                 by the petitioner. As stated above, there is a
                 difference between the circle rate and the sector
                 rate. The petitioner has confused the two. The circle
                 rate is notified by the Government for the guidance
                 of the Sub­Registrar. They are notified for revenue
                 purposes. There is nothing to show that Rs 90,000
                 per sq. m. was the sector rate. In the present case,
                 we are concerned with a larger plot of 54,320.18 sq.
                 m. with different variables of 30% ground cover and
                 150 FAR. Keeping in mind all these factors, the
                 Authority has fixed the reserve price. In the present
                 case, undue importance has been given to the
                 fixation of the reserve price. As stated above,
                 notwithstanding the reserve price, the petitioner
                 could have brought before the Court material, if any,
                 to show undervaluation. In the present case, the
                 tender price is Rs 31,850 per sq. m. It is higher than
                 the reserve price. There is no material to show
                 whether the tender price is understated. In the
                 circumstances, there is no merit in the contention of
                 the petitioner that the land is sold at an abysmally
                 low price.”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
24.   From reading of the aforesaid judgment, it is clear that in

      the PIL, petitioner had only challenged the reserve rate as

      being abysmally low and did not challenge the tender price

      of Rs. 31,850 per sq. mtrs. Further, the PIL petitioner inter­

      alia had not led any evidence to show exemplar deeds as to

      the actual market value of the plot or the circle rate

      determined under the
Stamp Act
. On the pleadings and
31
evidence as existed before it, this Court concluded that the

reserve price of land was reasonable and accordingly

dismissed the PIL. It was fairly admitted by the learned

Additional Solicitor General appearing for NOIDA that, at the

time of arguments before this Court, NOIDA had not

revealed this fact that they were intending to auction third

party lands without there being formal acquisition as such.

It is not out of place to mention that, emphasis in the PIL

was on the act of handing over of the land by NOIDA to

respondent no. 7 being arbitrary. While in the present case,

the emphasis is on grant of compensation for the land of

third party, whose land has been malafidely and forcefully

handed over to respondent no. 7 in contravention of the

decree    of   permanent     injunction,    without       any   formal

acquisition, though made subsequently. In the said PIL,

what     may    be   the   just   and    reasonable       amount    of

compensation was not the question for determination.

Therefore,     the   emphasis     made     by   learned    Additional

Solicitor General relying on the judgment of
Anil Kumar

Srivastava
(supra) in this regard is bereft of any merit.
32
25.   As discussed above, with regard to determination of the

      compensation    in   the   present   case,   the   judgment   of

      Bhopendra Singh (supra), wherein the circle rate showing

      market value assessed by the Collector for the purpose of

      registration of instrument of sale was made valid. The said

      judgment was not interfered with by this Court thereafter. In

      the case of the land owner itself, the High Court by order

      dated 10.12.2009 passed in Writ Petition No. 75152 of 2005,

      directed the Special Land Acquisition Officer to determine

      the compensation according to the law as laid down in

      judgment rendered in Bhopendra Singh (supra), which is

      sustained by this Court. Therefore, the issue of basis of

      determination of compensation has been settled inter­party

      and also un­interfered by this Court.
Now, on the said issue,

      relying upon the judgment of
Anil Kumar Srivastava
(supra) cannot be interfered with in this case. In no event,

      the compensation can be paid at a rate lesser than that of

      market value as determined for the purpose of payment of

      stamp duty under
Stamp Act
.
33
26.   As previously stated, the land in dispute was not only

      designated for commercial use, rather it was also declared to

      be   part   of   industrial   development   plan   area.   After

      development, even a mall has been constructed on it. In our

      view, the High Court in the impugned order has rightly

      determined payment of compensation at the rate of Rs.

      1,10,000/­ per square meter as per circle rate. We,

      therefore, confirm the findings of High Court for grant of

      compensation with rate Rs. 1,10,000/­ per sq. mt.
27.   In the light of the preceding discussion, the only question

      that remains now for our consideration is with regard to

      deduction of development charges to the extent of 50% made

      by High Court in impugned order. On the said issue, there is

      no straight jacket formula to arrive at the quantum of

      deduction of development charge and same must be

      assessed based on the facts of the individual case after due

      consideration of all the factors which might affect such

      quantum. As evident, the High Court did not take into

      consideration all the factors encircling the issue and

      routinely proceeded with the maximum deduction of 50%
34
development charge. We say so because, on perusal of the

      impugned judgment, it is clear that the High Court has

      inter­alia highlighted the glaring mischiefs played by NOIDA

      in the whole acquisition proceedings but at the same time, it

      has failed to accord a substantial reason for maximum

      deduction of development charges. It is further observed

      that, it is not for the first time that NOIDA is in cross­roads

      before this Court for playing hand­in­glove with large

      developers.
28.   Be as it may, it is uncontroverted from the material available

      on record that, the scheduled piece of land was allotted by

      NOIDA to respondent no. 7 in absence of formal acquisition,

      whereafter, the said scheduled land was developed in the

      line of commercial hub and even a mall was constructed on

      it. Hence, in our considered opinion, the quantum of

      deduction     of   development   charges   should   have   been

      evaluated by High Court from the contextual perspective of

      all the relevant factors, which clearly has not been done in

      the instant case. Nevertheless, to cure the anomaly, it is trite

      at this juncture to refer to the doctrine enunciated by this
35
Court in case of ‘Bhagwathula Samanna Vs. Special

Tahsildar and Land Acquisition Officer, (1991) 4 SCC

506’, wherein while dealing with the question of principle of

deduction in the land value, this Court held as follows –

     “11. The principle of deduction in the land value covered
          by the comparable sale is thus adopted in order to
          arrive at the market value of the acquired land. In
           applying the principle, it is necessary to
           consider all relevant facts. It is not the extent
           of the area covered under the acquisition
           which is the only relevant factor. Even in the
           vast area there may be land which is fully
           developed having all amenities and situated in
           an advantageous position. If smaller area
           within the large tract is already developed and
           suitable for building purposes and have in its
           vicinity     roads,      drainage,      electricity,
           communications etc. then the principle of
           deduction simply for the reason that it is part
           of the large tract acquired, may not be
           justified.
12.   ….. The land involved in these cases is of even level
           and fit for construction without the necessity of
           levelling or reclamation. The High Court has itself
           concluded on the evidence that the lands covered by
           the acquisition are located by the side of the
           National Highway and the Southern Railway Staff
           Quarters with the town planning trust road on the
           north. The neighbouring areas are already
           developed ones and houses have been constructed,
           and the land has potential value for being used as
           building sites. Having found that the land is to
           be valued only as building sites and having
           stated the advantageous position in which the
36
land in question lies though forming part of
      the larger area, the High Court should not
      have applied the principles of deduction. It is
      not in every case that such deduction is to be
      allowed. Where the acquired land is in the
      midst      of   already       developed      land     with
      amenities       of   roads,    electricity    etc.,    the
      deduction in the value of the comparable land
      is not warranted.
13.   The proposition that large area of land cannot
      possibly fetch a price at the same rate at which
      small plots are sold is not absolute proposition and
      in given circumstances it would be permissible to
      take into account the price fetched by the small
      plots of land. If the larger tract of land because of
      advantageous position is capable of being used for
      the purpose for which the smaller plots are used
      and is also situated in a developed area with little
      or no requirement of further development, the
      principle of deduction of the value for purpose of
      comparison is not warranted. With regard to the
      nature of the plots involved in these two cases,
      it   has   been      satisfactorily   shown     on     the
      evidence on record that the land has facilities
      of road and other amenities and is adjacent to
      a developed colony and in such circumstances,
      it is possible to utilize the entire area in
      question as house sites. In respect of the land
      acquired for the road, the same advantages
      are available, and it did not require any
      further development. We, are, therefore, of the
      view that the High Court has erred in applying
      the principle of deduction and reducing the
      fair market value of land from Rs 10 per sq.
      yard to Rs 6.50 per sq. yard. In our opinion, no
      such deduction is justified in the facts and
      circumstances of these cases. The appellants,
      therefore, succeed.”
37
29.   Further, this Court in
‘Trishala Jain Vs. State of

      Uttaranchal
, (2011) 6 SCC 47’, while dealing with

      determination      of    compensation            and    deduction    of

      development charges held as under –

           “44. It is thus evident from the above enunciated
                 principle that the acquired land has to be
                 more or less developed land as its developed
                 surrounding areas, with all amenities and
                 facilities and is fit to be used for the purpose
                 for which it is acquired without any further
                 expenditure,    before    such        land   could   be
                 considered for no deduction. Similarly, the sale
                 instances even of smaller plots could be considered
                 for determining the market value of a larger chunk
                 of land with some deduction unless, there was
                 comparability in potential, utilization, amenities and
                 infrastructure with hardly any distinction. On such
                 principles each case would have to be considered on
                 its own merits.
Further, this Court in
‘Kasturi and Ors. Vs. State of

      Haryana
, (2003) 1 SCC 354’, while dealing with various

      factual factors to be taken into consideration while applying

      the cut in payment of compensation towards developmental

      charges held as under –

           “7.   ........However, in cases of some land where
                 there are certain advantages by virtue of the
                 developed    area    around,     it    may    help   in
                 reducing the percentage of cut to be applied,
                 as the developmental charges required may be
38
less on that account. There may be various
          factual factors which may have to be taken
          into consideration while applying the cut in
          payment        of      compensation         towards
          developmental charges, maybe in some cases it
          is more than 1/3rd and in some cases less than
          1/3rd. It must be remembered that there is difference
          between a developed area and an area having
          potential value, which is yet to be developed. The
          fact that an area is developed or adjacent to a
          developed area will not ipso facto make every land
          situated in the area also developed to be valued as
          a building site or plot, particularly when vast tracts
          are acquired, as in this case, for development
          purpose.”


The aforesaid judgments postulate general factors that are

to be taken into consideration for deciding the quantum of

deduction of development charges. As iterated above, such

factors majorly include the nature of land to be acquired, the

extent of area to be acquired, the extent of development in

the adjoining land as well as land proposed to be acquired,

the commercial potentiality and so on. Therefore, deduction

of development charge in the instant case should have been

made while considering the said factors. However, it is made

clear that this observation is being made in peculiar facts of

the present case and not in general.
39
30.   Applying the ratio of said judgments in the facts of the case

      at hand, as per the stand taken by NOIDA, the scheduled

      piece of land is a costly land, being situated at the centre of

      development of authority and has commercial use. On spot,

      the demarcation was not possible because the land was fully

      developed. In the backdrop, without acquisition, the piece of

      land belonging to appellant was transferred to respondent

      no. 7. The acquisition was made subsequently in view of the

      observations made by the District Court confirming the

      decree of permanent injunction for the said piece of land. At

      the time of taking over of possession, the amount of

      compensation was not made and now, the appellant is

      running from pillar to post to receive the adequate

      compensation. Even after settling the dispute for payment of

      compensation at the circle rate of Rs. 1,10,000/­ inter­party

      in the previous round of litigation, the NOIDA in its own

      volition neither determined the compensation nor paid to the

      appellant. The possession of scheduled piece of land, though

      taken long back in year 2004­2005, but till date, the

      appellant   has   not   been   able   to   reap   the   fruits   of

      compensation and kept litigating before courts even up to
40
subsequent rounds. Considering all this aspect, deduction

      made to extent of 50% in by High Court in the said cannot

      be sustained and is set aside without touching the findings

      on the point of payment of solatium.
31.   As determined hereinabove, the compensation at the circle

      rate of Rs. 1,10,000/­ per sq. meter be payable               to the

      appellant – Reddy Veerana.          Now, the issue of interest is

      required to be looked into in the context          of provisions of
Section 34
of 1894 Act, which reads as thus:
“34. Payment of interest ­ When the amount of such
            compensation is not paid or deposited on or before taking
            possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the amount
            awarded with interest thereon at the rate of [nine per
            centum] per annum from the time of so taking possession
            until it shall have been so paid or deposited:
[Provided that if such compensation or any part thereof is
            not paid or deposited within a period of one year from the
            date on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of
            fifteen per centum per annum shall be payable from the
            date or expiry of the said period of one year on the amount
            of compensation or part thereof which has not been paid
            or deposited before the date of such expiry.]”


      On perusal, it is clear that if amount of compensation is not

      paid or deposited on or before taking possession of the land,

      interest @   9% p.a.     leviable    from the time of taking of

      possession until it shall have been so paid or deposited. It

      further provides that if the amount of compensation has not
41
been paid or deposited within one year, the interest would

be payable @ 15% p.a. on expiry of the period of one year.

On perusal of the aforesaid, it is clear that if the amount of

compensation is not paid or deposited, 9% interest would be

leviable and payable.     In case the said amount is not

deposited or paid within one year, then interest would be

payable @ 15% p.a. In the case at hand, as discussed above,

the land was given initially in the year 2003 to respondent

No. 7 and the acquisition was made subsequently. The

additional award was passed on 31.1.2011 after a delay of

five years from the date of taking over of possession. The

amount was deposited in the year 2017 by a delay of

approximately 14 years.    In the peculiar facts of this case,

in our view, the civil right of appellant Reddy Veerana is

violated in breach of Article 300­A of the Constitution of

India.    Such action of the NOIDA clearly amounts to

constitutional tort. In the context of acquisition as made in

this case in violation of Article 300­A of the Constitution of

India, judgment of this Court in the case of ‘Kalyani (Dead)

Through Lrs. & Ors. Vs. Sulthan Bathery Municipality
42
& Ors., Civil Appeal No. 3189 of 2022’ is relevant,

wherein it was observed as under –

     “20.
Article 300A
clearly mandates that no person shall
          be deprived of his property save by authority of law.
          In the present case, we do not find, under which
          authority of law, the land of the appellants was
          taken and they were deprived of the same. If the
          Panchayat and the PWD failed to produce any
          evidence that appellants have surrendered their
          lands voluntarily, depriving the appellants of the
          property would be in violation of Article 300­A of the
          Constitution.
21.   A Constitution Bench of this Court in this case of
‘K.T. Plantation Private Limited Vs. State of
           Karnataka
, 2011 (9) SCC 63’, apart from others,
           dealt with an issue relating to payment of
           compensation where a person is deprived of his
           property after deletion of
Article 31(2).
It laid down
           that there are two requirements to be fulfilled while
           depriving a person of his property. Requirement of
           public purpose is a pre­condition and right to claim
           compensation is also inbuilt in Article 300­A. While
           answering the reference in paragraph 221 (e), it
           provided as follows –
                 “221.   We, therefore, answer the reference
                         as follows:
xxxxxx
(e) Public purpose is a precondition
                             for deprivation of a person from
                             his property under Article 300­A
                             and     the    right  to    claim
                             compensation is also inbuilt in
                             that Article and when a person is
                             deprived of his property, the
                             State has to justify both the
                             grounds which may depend on
                             scheme of the statute, legislative
43
policy, object and purpose of the
                                legislature and other related
                                factors.”
32.   Taking note of the aforesaid and in the peculiar facts of this

      case, we are of the view that in addition to the statutorily

      paid interest, the additional amount of penal interest must

      be paid in place of shifting the date for determination of the

      amount of compensation or to determine the compensation

      as per 2013 Act, as demanded by the appellant Reddy

      Veerana.   It is not out of place to mention here that the

      nature of interest is essentially a consideration paid either

      for the use of money or forbearance from demanding it after

      it has fallen due.     Interest, whether it is statutory or

      otherwise, represents the profit, the creditor may have made

      if he had used the money or from the loss, he may have

      suffered because he could not use the amount. Therefore, in

      the present case, on the amount of compensation, in our

      view, the amount of compensation be payable along with

      statutory interest, as directed by the High Court and 3%

      penal interest, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the

      case, is directed.
44
33.   In view of the foregoing, Civil Appeal No. 3636 of 2022,

      preferred by NOIDA is dismissed, whereas the Civil Appeal

      No. 3637 of 2022 filed by appellant Reddy Veerana is hereby

      allowed in part with the following directions:
1.   Respondents are directed to compute the amount of

           compensation by taking the circle rate of Sector­18,

           i.e., Rs. 1,10,000/­ per square meter;
2.   The judgment of the High Court directing 50%

           deduction towards development charge stands set­

           aside. In the peculiar facts of the present case, the

           respondents are directed not to make any deduction

           towards      the      development        charge   while

           computing/calculating the amount of compensation as

           per circle rate, specified in para 1 above;
3.   As directed by the High Court, the amount of solatium

           of 30% in terms of
Section 23(2)
of 1894 Act is also

           payable;
4.   The statutory interest on the amount of compensation

           shall be payable @ 9% from the date of taking over of

           possession, i.e., February, 2005 for a period of one
45
year. Thereafter, @ 15% p.a. be paid as per the proviso

      of
Section 34
of 1894 Act.       In addition to the said

      statutory interest, 3% penal interest is further directed

      to be paid in the peculiar facts of this case.
5.   It is made clear here that the amount so deposited in

      the year 2017 would also earn the interest at the same

      rate, as directed in para 4 above till the date of

      realization.
6.   Since, the acquisition of the land in question was made

      by NOIDA which was purchased by respondent No. 7 in

      public auction, therefore, the liability to pay the

      amount of compensation would be of NOIDA.            The

      entire amount shall be paid within a period of six

      weeks from the date of this judgment.
………..………………...J.
                                     (VINEET SARAN)




                                      ….………………………J.
                                     (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
New Delhi;
May 5, 2022.
46