[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Balwant Singh vs Union Of India on 2 May, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                    WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.261 OF 2020

                          BALWANT SINGH                                     Petitioner

                                                          VERSUS

                          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                             Respondents



                                                    O R D E R
The basic facts leading to the filing of the instant writ

                          petition were noted in the order dated 24.03.2022 as under:
“1. For having assassinated the then Chief Minister
                              of Punjab, the petitioner along with co-accused was
                              tried in respect of offences punishable under
Sections 302
/
307
/
120-B
of the Indian Penal Code,
                              1860 and
Sections 3
and
4
of the Explosive
                              Substances Act in Sessions Case No.2-A of 1995.
2.   After recording conviction under the aforestated
                              offences, the Trial Court sentenced the petitioner
                              and co-accused, Jagtar Singh Hawara to death
                              sentence.
3.   Thereafter, Murder Reference No.6 of 2007 as
                              well as Criminal Appeal No.731-DB of 2007 preferred
                              by the co-accused Jagtar Singh Hawara and others,
                              were considered by the High Court vide its judgment
                              dated 12.10.2010.
4.   It must be noted here that the petitioner had
                              not challenged his death sentence nor had he
                              preferred any appeal from the decision of the Trial
                              Court.
5.   The High Court found substance in the appeal
                              preferred by the co-accused Jagtar Singh Hawara and
Signature Not Verified        substituted the death sentence to imprisonment for
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
life. However, the order of conviction and sentence
Date: 2022.05.05
18:16:34 IST
Reason:
as awarded to the petitioner was affirmed by the
                              High Court.
2
6.   Insofar as the conviction and sentence awarded
       to the co-accused Jagtar Singh Hawara is concerned,
       Criminal Appeal No.1013 of 2013 at his instance
       along with other connected matters is pending
       consideration in this Court.   During such pendency,
       a letter was written by the Ministry of Home
       Affairs, Government of India on 27.09.2019 to the
       Chief Secretaries of the Governments of Punjab,
       Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka and NCT of Delhi on the
       occasion of commemoration of 550th Birth Anniversary
       of Guru Nanak Dev Ji proposing special remission and
       release of prisoners.
7.   We are now concerned in this writ petition with
       the alleged inaction on part of the concerned
       authorities in not commuting the death sentence
       awarded to the petitioner in keeping with the
       aforestated communication dated 27.09.2019. It is in
       this light that the present writ petition prays that
       the mercy petition preferred by the petitioner on
       25.03.2012 be taken up for disposal immediately and
       his death sentence be commuted to imprisonment for
       life.
8.   Notably, the prosecution in the instant crime
       was conducted by the Central Bureau of Investigation
       and as such, the authority to consider the issues
       regarding commutation and remission would be the
       Central Government.”

       It   must     be   stated   here   that   the   petitioner     never

preferred any appeal, that is to say, no appeal was preferred

by him either before the High Court or before this Court.
The order then adverted to the earlier order passed by

this    Court   on    04.12.2020   and    following    observations   made

therein were also quoted:
“On a query made by the Court, Mr. K.M. Nataraj,
       learned Additional Solicitor General appearing on
       behalf of the Union of India stated that the
       proposal has not been sent in view of the pending
       appeals of the co-accused in this Court. It is not
       denied that the petitioner has himself not filed any
       appeal against his sentence. Therefore, there is no
       question of awaiting the outcome of any appeal
       pending before this Court.   It is obvious that the
       factum of the appeals pending at the behest of other
       co-accused would have no relevance to the proposal
3
intended to be sent for consideration under
Article
      72
of the Constitution of India.
Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG, therefore, seeks time
      to   make  a   statement  about   the   proposal  as
                                         th
      contemplated in the letter dated 27 September, 2019
      to be sent for processing under
Article 72
of the
      Constitution of India.”


      Thereafter, certain directions were issued so that the

grievance     raised       by    the        petitioner      could    be    addressed

immediately.
Affidavits      in   response         have    since    then   been    filed   on

behalf   of      respondent          no.1     and    the     Central      Bureau    of

Investigation (“CBI” for short).                   According to the CBI, it has

already sent its comments to the Home Secretary on 05.04.2022

in   response    to    the      DO   letter     dated       29.03.2022     issued   by

respondent no.1.
The response filed by respondent no.1 states as under:
“18. After    taking   inputs   from   the   concerned
      stakeholders and keeping in view the appeal filed by
      CBI [Criminal Appeal No.2277/2011] and appeal filed
      by    Jagtar     Singh   Hawara    [Criminal    Appeal
      No.1013/2013] which are pending for consideration.
      The case was examined in the Ministry of Home
      Affairs and the proposal was submitted to His
      Excellency President of India for his consideration
      on 20th April 2022 recommending the following:
a.    that the decision on the mercy petitions
                  filed on behalf of convict Balwant singh
                  Rajoana   under
Article   72
of the
                  Constitution may be considered after the
                  verdict of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
                  in the above mentioned two appeals.”
4
Two basic submissions advanced by the learned counsel for

respondent no.1 are as under:
I.    Since    the    appeal      of    the       co-accused        is    presently

      pending    consideration           by       this     Court,        the     mercy

      petition preferred on behalf of the petitioner would

      logically be ripe for consideration only after the

      disposal of the appeal.
In    response,         it    is    submitted          by     the

      counsel    for       the   petitioner         that      the    order       dated
04.12.2020 passed by this Court was quite clear and

      the respondents were obliged to consider the mercy

      petition       despite      the        pendency         of     the        appeal

      preferred on behalf of the co-accused.
II.   It was submitted that the petitioner himself did not

      prefer     any         mercy      petition,             though           certain

      organizations had preferred mercy petitions on his

      behalf.
In response, it is submitted on behalf of

      the petitioner that said mercy petition has always

      engaged the attention of the concerned authorities

      and the communications addressed by the authorities

      to the petitioner indicate that such mercy petition

      is under consideration.
Without getting into the issue whether the petitioner

himself   had    preferred        the    mercy       petition,           considering     the

communications        on    record      as    well       as    the       fact     that   the

petitioner has preferred the instant writ petition, in our
5
view, there would be no embargo in considering the matter in

the light of the directions issued by this Court in its order

dated 04.12.2020.   Furthermore, as the order had made it quite

clear, the matter could be and had to be considered despite

the pendency of the appeal preferred by the co-accused.

    In the circumstances, we direct as under:
a.   In terms of the direction issued by this Court

          in its order dated 04.12.2020, the matter be

          considered by the concerned authorities without

          being influenced by the fact that the appeal

          preferred on behalf of the co-accused is still

          pending consideration before this Court.
b.   Let the decision be taken as early as possible

          and preferably within two months from today.
List the matter for further consideration on 22.07.2022.
............................J.
                              (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                              ............................J.
                              (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)



                             ............................J.
                             (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)

New Delhi,
May 02, 2022