[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sudhir Ranjan Patra (Dead) Through Lrs vs Himansu Sekhar Srichandan on 17 May, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3641 OF 2022

          Sudhir Ranjan Patra (Dead) thr. LRs. & Anr.                ..Appellant (S)

                                                Versus

          Himansu Sekhar Srichandan & Ors.                          ..Respondent (S)

                                                 With

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3642 OF 2022


                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 04.02.2022 passed by the High

                         Court of Orissa at Cuttak in CMP No. 1423/2019, by

                         which, though the High Court has confirmed the order

                         passed by the learned Trial Court setting aside the ex­

                         parte decree in exercise of powers under
Order IX Rule 13

                         of Code of Civil Procedure
(
CPC
), the High Court has

                         observed and held that appellants herein – defendant Nos.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2022.05.17
16:47:08 IST
Reason:
2 and 3 cannot be permitted to file their written statement,
1
the appellants herein – original defendant Nos. 1 to 3 have

      preferred the present appeals.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are

      as under: ­


2.1   That respondent No. 1 herein – original plaintiff instituted

      a suit for declaration of his right, title, interest and

      possession over the suit schedule land being Civil Suit No.

      1783/2011. The original plaintiff also prayed for a decree

      to declare that original defendant No. 2 has no authority to

      alienate the suit land and also to declare that the two

      registered sale deeds bearing Nos. 3530 and 3533 of 2000

      are not binding on the plaintiff as well as proforma

      defendant Nos. 4 and 5. A relief of permanent injunction

      against original defendant Nos. 1 to 3 was also sought for.

      The appellants herein – original defendant Nos. 2 and 3

      appeared in the suit on 20.03.20212 and filed a petition

      for time to file their written statement. However, in spite of

      several adjournments, they did not file written statement.

      That the appellants herein – original defendant Nos. 2 and

      3 did not file their written statement. Thereafter, the issues
2
were framed by the learned Trial Court. On 27.03.2017,

the plaintiff filed their evidence in examination in chief by

an affidavit. On 04.07.2017, when the suit was called on

for hearing, appellants herein – original defendant Nos. 2

and 3 were absent and therefore, were set ex­parte.

Thereafter, on behalf of the plaintiff, PW­1 came to be

examined.   The   case   was       posted    to   15.07.2017   for

argument. On that date, original defendant Nos. 1 to 3 also

filed an application for adjournment for which the suit was

adjourned to 17.07.2017, on which date, the argument

was heard and judgment was pronounced on 18.07.2017.

The learned Trial Court passed an ex­parte decree.
Subsequently,    the       appellants   herein   –   original

defendant Nos. 2 and 3 filed CMA No. 31/2018 under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
to set aside the ex­parte decree

along with an application under
Section 5
of the Limitation

Act to condone the delay in filing the CMA. The appellants

herein – original defendant Nos. 2 and 3 also prayed to

allow the filing of written statement and to take up the suit
3
on merits. By order dated 05.12.2019, the learned Trial

      Court allowed the CMA by condoning the delay.


2.2   Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   order   dated

      05.12.2019 passed by the learned Trial Court allowing

      CMA No. 31/2018, the original plaintiff – respondent No. 1

      herein filed CMP No. 1423/2019 before the High Court. By

      the impugned judgment and order, though the High Court

      has confirmed the order passed by the learned Trial Court

      condoning the delay and setting aside the ex­parte decree,

      the High Court has also passed an order that on setting

      aside the ex­parte decree and consequently the suit being

      restored to file, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 cannot be

      permitted to file their written statement and that they can

      only take part in the hearing of the suit without

      propounding their own case. The High Court has also

      observed that they can advance their argument on the

      basis of the materials available on record only.


2.3   Feeling aggrieved with the judgment and order passed by

      the High Court to the extent of observing that defendant

      Nos. 2 and 3 cannot be permitted to file their written
4
statement and that they can only take part in the hearing

      of the suit without propounding their own case, original

      defendant Nos. 1 to 3 – appellants herein have preferred

      the present appeals.
3.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants

      herein – original defendant Nos. 2 and 3 has vehemently

      submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case

      the High Court has committed a grave error in passing the

      order that appellants herein ­ defendant Nos. 2 and 3

      cannot be permitted to file their written statement.


3.1   It is vehemently submitted that once the suit was restored

      to file by setting aside the ex­parte decree which has been

      upheld by the High Court, thereafter, it was not open for

      the High Court to pass a further order that on setting

      aside the ex­parte decree and restoring the suit to file,

      defendant Nos. 2 and 3 cannot be permitted to file their

      written statement.
3.2   It is submitted that what was challenged before the High

      Court was the order passed by the learned Trial Court
5
condoning the delay and setting aside the ex­parte decree.
It is submitted that therefore, the impugned order passed

      by the High Court observing that defendant Nos. 2 and 3

      cannot be permitted to file their written statement is

      beyond the scope and ambit of CMP filed before the High

      Court.
3.3   It is submitted that once the suit was restored to file by

      setting aside the ex­parte decree and no order was passed

      by the learned Trial Court on whether the written

      statement be permitted to be taken on record or not, the

      High Court ought not to have observed anything on the

      same and ought to have left it to the learned Trial Court.



3.4   It is submitted that in the present case no order was

      passed by the learned Trial Court on whether the written

      statement be taken on record or not, the decisions relied

      upon by the High Court in the case of
Sangram Singh Vs.

      Election Tribunal, Kotah and another
; AIR 1955 SC 425

      and Arjun Singh Vs. Mohindra Kumar and others; AIR
6
1964 SC 993 shall not be applicable to the facts of the

      case on hand.
4.    Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Nitesh

      Bhandari,   learned    counsel   appearing      on   behalf   of

      respondent No. 1 herein – original plaintiff.

4.1   It is submitted that despite the fact that a number of

      opportunities were given to defendant Nos. 2 and 3 to file

      their written statement between 2012 to 2017 (till the ex­

      parte decree was passed). Hence, the High Court was

      justified in passing the impugned order by observing that

      defendant Nos. 2 and 3 cannot be permitted to file their

      written statement on setting aside the ex­parte decree.


4.2   It is submitted that as held by this Court in the case of
Sangram Singh
(supra) and Arjun Singh (supra) when an

      ex­parte decree is set aside and the suit is restored to file,

      the defendants cannot be relegated back to the position

      prior to the date of hearing of the suit and he would be

      debarred from filing any written statement in the suit.
It is

      submitted that therefore, the impugned order passed by

      the High Court is absolutely in consonance with the law
7
laid down by this Court in the case of
Sangram Singh
(supra) and Arjun Singh (supra).
5.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties at length.
6.   At the outset it is required to be noted that when the

     appellants – original defendant Nos. 2 and 3 filed CMA No.

     31/2018 under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
they prayed to

     condone the delay as well as to set aside the ex­parte

     decree and also to allow filing of the written statement and

     to take up the suit on merits. By order dated 05.12.2019,

     the learned Trial Court allowed CMA No. 31/2018 and

     condoned the delay and set aside the ex­parte decree

     subject to cost of Rs. 25,000/­ each to be paid to the

     plaintiff. From order dated 05.12.2019, it does not appear

     that any further order was passed by the learned Trial

     Court on whether by setting aside the ex­parte decree,

     defendant Nos. 2 and 3 may be permitted to file written

     statement or not.
The order passed by the learned Trial

     Court condoning the delay and setting aside the ex­parte
8
decree has been confirmed by the High Court by passing

the impugned judgment and order. However, the High

Court has observed that on setting aside the ex­parte

decree and restoring the suit to file, defendant Nos. 2 and

3 cannot be permitted to file the written statement.

Reliance is placed upon the decisions of this Court in the

case of
Sangram Singh
(supra) and Arjun Singh (supra).
However, it is true that as per the law laid down by this

Court in the case of
Sangram Singh
(supra) and Arjun

Singh (supra) when an ex­parte decree is set aside and the

suit is restored to file, the defendants cannot be relegated

to the position prior to the date of hearing of the suit when

he was placed ex­parte. He would be debarred from filing

any written statement in the suit, but then he can

participate in the hearing of the suit inasmuch cross­

examine   the   witness   of   the   plaintiff   and   address

arguments.
However, in our view, in the facts and

circumstances of the case, the decisions of this Court in

the case of
Sangram Singh
(supra) and Arjun Singh

(supra) shall not be fully applicable. In the present case by
9
filing the CMA under Order IX Rule 13, appellants herein –

original defendant Nos. 2 and 3 not only prayed to set

aside the ex­parte decree but also prayed to allow them to

file written statement. As observed above, there was no

order and/or decision by the learned Trial Court on the

second prayer, namely, to allow defendant Nos. 2 and 3 to

file written statement or not.
Therefore, once the ex­parte

decree is set aside and the suit is restored to file and even

as per the decisions of this Court in the case of
Sangram

Singh
(supra) and Arjun Singh (supra) the defendants

cannot be relegated back to the position prior to the date

of hearing of the suit in that case also, it should have been

left to the learned Trial Court to consider the prayer of

defendant Nos. 2 and 3 whether to allow them to file

written statement or not, which was also prayed in CMA

No. 31/2018.
As observed hereinabove, there was no order passed by

the learned Trial Court on the specific prayer made by

defendant Nos. 2 and 3 to allow them to file written

statement. The learned Trial Court while passing order
10
dated 05.12.2019 condoned the delay and set aside the ex­

     parte decree and the said order of condonation of delay

     and setting aside the ex­parte decree was the subject

     matter before the High Court. Therefore, the further

     observations made by the High Court that defendant Nos.

     2 and 3 cannot be permitted to file their written statement

     can be said to be beyond the scope and ambit of the CMP

     filed before the High Court. Under the circumstances, the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court to

     the extent of observing that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 cannot

     be   permitted   to   file        their   written   statement   is

     unsustainable and the issue/question whether defendant

     Nos. 2 and 3 may be allowed to file their written statement

     or not, shall have to be remanded to the learned Trial

     Court.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court to

     the extent of observing that though the ex­parte decree is

     set aside, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 cannot be permitted to

     file their written statement is hereby quashed and set
11
aside. The learned Trial Court to consider the prayer of

      defendant Nos. 2 and 3 whether to allow/permit them to

      file their written statement or not and as and when such

      question/issue is considered by the learned Trial Court, it

      will be open for respondent No. 1 – original plaintiff to

      resist the same and the learned Trial Court to consider the

      question/issue whether on setting aside the ex­parte

      decree, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 may be allowed/permitted

      to file their written statement, in accordance with law and

      on its own merits for which we have not expressed

      anything in favour of either party. The learned Trial Court

      to consider the issue/question with respect to the prayer

      of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 to allow them to file their written

      statement within a period of three months from the first

      date of hearing of the suit, which shall be within a period

      of one month from today. The present appeals are allowed

      to the aforesaid extent. In the facts of the case, there shall

      be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)

New Delhi,                            …………………………………J.
17th May, 2022                        (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
12
13