[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maha P. vs The State Of Kerala on 18 May, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
Surya Kant
,
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Reportable


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                Civil Appeal No. 3654 of 2022



          Maha P. & Ors                                            ....Appellants

                                           Versus

          The State of Kerala & Ors.                            .... Respondents
And with

                                Civil Appeal No. 3655 of 2022
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.05.18
17:11:02 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT



    Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



1               These appeals arise from a judgment dated 8 April 2022 of a Division

    Bench of the Kerala High Court, by which a writ petition seeking a direction to

    grant time for fresh registration in the Non-resident Indian 1 quota in NEET-UG in

    unaided private medical colleges in the State of Kerala was dismissed. At the

    core of the dispute is whether the seats reserved for the NRI quota in private

    medical colleges in the State of Kerala can be transferred to the unreserved

    category.
2               The National Testing Agency invited online applications for NEET-UG

    2021-22 from 1 June 2021 to 21 June 2021. The last date for submitting

    applications        was extended to 24 June 2021. A notification was issued on 25

    June 2021 granting an opportunity to candidates to make corrections to their

    applications. The candidates were allowed to rectify defects from 11 September

    2021 to 17 September 2021. Two extensions for the submission of documents

    were given. The Government issued orders permitting the NRI candidates to cure

    defects in attestation by 31 March 2022.
3               The private institutions reserve 15% of the total seats for the NRI category.

    The unaided private medical colleges in the State of Kerala have a total of 358

    seats in the NRI quota. The rank list of the eligible NRI quota candidates in

    NEET-UG 2021-22 was exhausted after two rounds of counselling conducted by
1
“NRI”
2
the Commissioner for Entrance Examination 2. However, even after the

exhaustion of the NRI rank list, 57 seats were vacant.                      The Kerala Private

Medical College Management Association 3 made a representation to the CEE on

17 March 2022, requesting the authority to invite fresh applications to fill up the

vacant seats in the NRI quota on the ground that many students were unable to

submit the required documents before the cut-off date due to the Covid-19

pandemic. A writ petition was instituted on 24 March 2022 seeking a direction to

grant time to candidates to register for the NRI quota seats before the

commencement of the mop-up counselling. By an order dated 29 March 2022,

the Single Judge of the Kerala High Court directed the CEE to consider the

representation filed by the respondent association. Pursuant to the judgment of

the Single Judge, the respondent association made another representation to the

CEE on 30 March 2022. The CEE considered the representation and by an order

dated 31 March 2022 held that no further extension of time could be provided

since candidates had been given sufficient time to apply for the NRI quota:
“During this year, the applicants had been given sufficient
                  time to apply for NRI quota. After two phases of
                  allotments there are about 300 students remaining in the
                  NRI category list and awaiting for allotment. The mop up
                  counselling process is going on and the allotment is
                  scheduled to be published on 02.04.2022. As per MCI
                  schedule, the admission to MBBS course has to be
                  completed before 05.04.2022.
In these circumstances, it is not possible to invite fresh
                  applications for NRI quota. Hence, your demand in the
                  representation could not be considered.”
2
“CEE”
3
“respondent association”
3
The CEE transferred 47 vacant NRI seats in private medical institutions to the

    general state quota for the mop-up round. The Single Judge of the Kerala High

    Court dismissed the writ petition on 4 April 2022 observing that:
(i)      Out of the 358 NRI seats in the State of Kerala, 300 seats were filled

                       up before the second allotment. At the time of the filing of the writ

                       petition, about 57 seats in the NRI quota were vacant. After the

                       interim order dated 29 March 2022, a few more students exercised

                       their options. As of date, there are 46 vacant NRI quota seats;
(ii)     Sufficient time was granted to the NRI quota candidates to exercise

                       their options. The classes have commenced. The last date for

                       admission is 5 April 2022; and
(iii)    The CEE would be at liberty to transfer vacant seats in accordance

                       with clause 5.5.4 of the Prospectus for admission to Kerala

                       Engineering, Architecture, and Medical courses 4. There is no

                       challenge to the prospectus. If any further extension is granted for

                       fresh registration, it would disrupt the academic schedule.
4             The writ appeal against the judgment of the Single Judge was dismissed

    by the Division Bench by its impugned judgment on 8 April 2022 on the following

    grounds:
(i)      Clause 5.5.4 of the Prospectus provides that the vacant seats in the

                       ‘special reservation’ category, including the quota for persons with

                       disabilities will be transferred to the ‘mandatory reservation’ quota.
4
“prospectus”
4
Clause 5.5.4 is an inclusive provision that includes the NRI quota

                      seats within the phrase ‘special reservation’; and
(ii)    The CEE need not seek the permission of the members of the

                      respondent association before converting the vacant NRI seats as

                      per clause 5.5.4 of the prospectus; and
(iii)   The last date for admission to MBBS courses is 8 April 2022.
Therefore, time for fresh registration in the NRI quota cannot be

                      granted. The NRI quota candidates were granted sufficient time to

                      exercise their options. The rank list was published on 24 December

                      2021. Thus, it can be assumed that no eligible NRI candidate is

                      available to exercise the options for the vacant seats.

5             The appellants are candidates who have qualified in the NEET exam and

    had applied for the MBBS seats under the NRI category. The appellants were not

    parties before the High Court. Mr Dushyant Dave and Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi,

senior counsel appearing for the appellants made a three-fold submission: one,

    the NRI quota seats do not fall within the purview of ‘special reservation’ under

    clause 5.5.4 of the Prospectus. Thus, vacant NRI quota seats cannot be

    transferred; second, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Modern Dental

    College & Research Centre v. State of MP
5, held that vacant NRI seats in

    unaided institutions cannot be transferred to the State following the earlier

    decisions of this court; and third, the admission of the unreserved category

    candidates to the 46 NRI seats in the mop-up and stray vacancy counselling

    rounds is contrary to law and thus stands vitiated.
5
“Modern Dental College”, (2009) 7 SCC 751
5
6         Mr Jaideep Gupta, senior counsel appearing for the State of Kerala

    submitted that the representation of the respondent association to the CEE for

    inviting fresh applicants for the NRI quota had been rejected after due

    consideration. It was submitted that none of the 7 appellants whose names found

    a place in the NRI list had exercised their options with respect to the 45 vacant

    NRI seats that were transferred. Further, the senior counsel argued that the

    judgment of the three-Judge Bench in
Modern Dental College
(supra) is not

    applicable to the facts in the present case since the appellants had neither

    challenged the prospectus nor the information bulletin which stipulates that

    vacant NRI seats shall be transferred.
7         The State of Kerala submitted a status report on 23 April 2021 pursuant to

    an interim direction of this Court. The status report states as follows:
(i)    Admission to various professional degree courses is conducted in

                 terms of the Prospectus. By a notification dated 31 May 2021, CEE

                 invited online applications for professional degree courses from 1

                 June 2021 to 21 June 2021. Clause 7 of the notification stipulates

                 that the documents and certificates will have to be uploaded along

                 with the online applications. Clause 7(iv) of the notification states

                 that documents necessary for applying to the NRI quota will have to

                 be submitted by the applicants. By a Notification dated 26 June

                 2021, the time for uploading the online application was extended to

                 26 June 2021, and to upload the documents to 30 June 2021;
(ii)   By a notification dated 30 October 2021, those who had applied for

                 admission to MBBS and BDS courses, were provided a further
6
extension of time from 30 October 2021 to 8 November 2021 for

        uploading the documents. The candidates who had not claimed

        reservation, including under the NRI quota for admission to medical/

        allied courses were again granted an extension from 4 December

        2021 to 10 December 20201 for uploading the relevant documents.

        On the direction of the Admission Supervisory Committee, the CEE

        granted candidates applying under the NRI quota seats, one

        month’s time from the date of counselling or two days before the

        second allotment for submitting attested documents from the

        Embassy/Consulate. Therefore, the Respondent has provided

        sufficient time for the submission of documents to candidates

        seeking to apply under the NRI quota;
(iii)   For the academic year of 2021-22, 385 seats were earmarked for

        the NRI quota in 19 private self- financing private colleges in the

        State. The CEE published a list of 614 candidates in the NRI

        category;
(iv)    According to the Medical Council of India Guidelines, options

        exercised by the candidates for the Mop-up round are to be

        considered final and will be used for filing up any stray vacancies

        that may arise. Due to a lack of options filed by the candidates for

        the final phase of counselling, 45 NRI quota seats were converted to

        the ‘State Merit seats’ for mop-up allotment;
(v)     The Information Bulletin published by the Medical Counselling

        Committee provides that the vacant seats have to be converted
7
during the Mop-up round. According to the conversion algorithm

         mentioned in the Information Bulletin, the unavailed NRI seats have

         to be converted to the unreserved category. Therefore, given the

         procedure provided under the Information Bulletin, the 45 NRI seats

         were converted to State merit seats;
(vi)     Only two vacant seats are available in Private Medical Colleges for

         MBBS courses in the State after the first stray vacancy round. A

         second round for stray vacancy allotment was published on 18 April

         2022 to fill the two vacant seats in the self-financing colleges.

         Among the two allotted candidates, one did not join the allotted

         college. Thus, one seat is lying vacant in the All India Merit category

         in Karuna Medical College, Palakkad as of 20 April 2022;
(vii)    According to the schedule of the Medical Counselling Committee,

         admission to the MBBS courses ought to have been completed by

         the second week of April 2022. Fresh applications from the

         candidates for the NRI quota cannot be invited when the counselling

         process is nearing completion; and
(viii)   Of the 38 petitioners, the names of 7 candidates find a place in the

         NRI category list published by the Respondent. 12 candidates were

         excluded from the final NRI category list due to the lack of proper

         documentation and 19 candidates did not claim NRI quota seats at

         any stage of the admission process. Of the 7 candidates, only 4

         candidates had registered options for NRI seats in self-financing
8
medical colleges. None of the candidates had provided the option

                  for NRI seats during the mop-up round.
8         Clause 2 of the prospectus categorizes the seats in colleges. Clause 2.2

    states that the categorization of seats in self-financing colleges run by institutions

    under Government control and other private self-financing colleges will be notified

    separately:
“The categorization of seats in self-financing colleges run
                  by institutions under Govt. control and other Private Self-
                  financing colleges will be notified separately. As per the
                  orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India dated:
09.05.2017       on   WP(C)       No.     267/2017,     the
                  allotments/admissions to the State Quota seats in all the
                  Government as well as Private Self Financing Medical
                  and Dental colleges shall be done through a Common
                  Counselling to be conducted by the Commissioner for
                  Entrance Examinations. The Common Counselling will
                  include NRI seats in Self-Financing Medical & Dental
                  Colleges and Minority Community Quota seats in Private
                  Self Financing Medical & Dental Colleges having Minority
                  Status.”

    Clause 4 of the prospectus provides a list of reservations. Clauses 4.1.4 and

    4.1.5 define ‘Special reservation’ and ‘mandatory reservation’ respectively:
“[…]
                  4.1.1 (ii) Reservation for All India Quota for
                  MBBS/BAMS/BSMS/BUMS Courses in Self-Financing
                  Medical/Ayurveda/Sidda/Unani colleges:-
Fifteen percent of the seats for the admission of students
                  to MBBS/BAMS/BSMS/BUMS Courses in Self-Financing
                  Medical/Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani Colleges in Kerala are
                  set apart for the allotment of candidates irrespective of
                  their Domicile as per the rank list prepared by the
                  Commissioner for the Entrance Examinations on the
                  basis of the rank obtained in NEET-UG 2021 conducted
                  by the National Testing Agency (NTA) New Delhi.
                  See clause 4.1.11(a) and 4.1.13(a) &(b)
                  4.12 Reservation for Nominees: These are the seats set
                  apart for the nominees of the Government of India, Union
                  Territories or other States for the various courses. [For
9
details, refer Clauses 4.1.11 (b), 4.1.12, 4.1.13, 4.1.14,
      4.1.15]
      4.1.3 Reservation for Persons with Disabilities: Leaving
      the seats set apart under Clauses 4.1.1, 4.1.2 above, all
      types of supernumerary seats sanctioned, five percent of
      the seats available for the state for allotment from the
      Entrance rank lists for all the courses in all the
      Government and Aided Colleges are reserved for the
      candidates with Benchmark disabilities [For details, refer
      Clause 5.3]
      4.1.4 Special Reservation: These are the seats reserved
      for certain specific categories, for different courses. [For
      details, refer Clause 5.2]
      4.1.5 Mandatory Reservation: Leaving the seats set apart
      for All India Quota, Government of India Nominees,
      Special reservations, Persons with Disabilities, all types
      of supernumerary seats sanctioned and Management
      Quota, the remaining Government seats for each course
      in Govt./Aided/KAU/KVASU/KUFOS Colleges will be
      distributed as per the mandatory reservation principle as
      contemplated in G.O (P) 208/66/Edn. Dated 2.5.1966,
      G.O (Ms) No. 95/08/SCSTDD Dated 06.10.2008, GO
      (Ms) No. 10/2014/BCDD Dated 23.05.2014 and as
      modified from time to time.
The percentage break up of seats as per mandatory
      reservation is as follows:
(A)   State Merit (SM)
-50%
(B)   Economically Weaker Sections in General Category
      (EWS)                                            -10%
(C)   Socially and Educationally backward Classes (SEBC)
-30%
(a)   Ezhavu(EZ)
-9%
(b)   Muslim (MU)
-8%
(c)   Other Backward Hindu (BH)
-3%
(d)   Latin Catholic and Anglo Indian (LA)
-3%
(e)   Dheevara and related communities (DV)
-2%
(f)   Viswakarma and related communities (VK)
-2%
(g)   Kusavan and related communities (KN)
-1%
(h)   Other Backward Christian (BX)
-1%
(i)   Kusumbi (KU)
-1%
10
(D) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
-10%
(a) Scheduled Castes (SC)
-8%
(b) Scheduled Tribes (ST)
-2%

                  […]
5.5.4 If any seat, in any special reservation quota including
               PwD quota, is left unavailed by the candidates to that
               particular category, it will go to the Mandatory reservation
               quota, unless otherwise stated.”

9          Clause 4.1.4 of the Prospectus defines ‘Special Reservation’ as seats

    reserved for ‘specific categories, for certain specific courses’. Clause 5.2 provides

    a list of special category reservations which include Ex-servicemen Quota,

    dependent of Defence personnel killed/missing/disabled in action, serving

    Defence Personnel, CAPF, and Jewish quota. Furthermore, quotas specific to

    courses are also termed ‘special reservations’. For instance, degree holders in

    MBBS and BHMS have a quota in BAMS course, degree holders in Ayurveda

    and Homeopathy have a quota in the MBBS course, children of Agriculturists

    have a quota in BSc. (Hons.) Agri. Degree, and the children of Fishermen in

    BFSc. course. Clause 4.1.5 which stipulates the breakup of reservation makes it

    evident that only vertical reservation as mandated by
Article 15
, that is for the

    socially and educationally backward classes 6 and economically weaker section 7

    of the unreserved category are brought within the phrase ‘mandatory reservation’.

    Clause 5.5.4 is broadly worded. Though the reservation for persons with

    disabilities 8 does not find a place in clause 5.2 of the proposal, clause 5.5.2

    states that unavailed      seats of special reservation ‘including PwD’ would be

    transferred to mandatory reservation quota.
6
“SEBC”
7
“EWS”
8
“PwD”
11
10              The Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court held that CEE

     can transfer the unavailed seats of the NRI quota to the State merit quota under

     Clause 5.5.4. The High Court held that Clause 5.5.4 was broadly worded to

     include the NRI quota within the meaning of ‘special reservation’. The prospectus

     does not mention the NRI quota in chapter 4 which is titled ‘reservation of seats

     for various courses’. The only reference to the NRIs’ in the prospectus is in

     clauses 2.2, 5.7 and 7.6(i). Clause 2.2 states that the categorization of seats in

     self-financing colleges run by institutions shall be notified separately. It also

     stipulates that the NRI seats in self-financing medical colleges shall be allotted by

     common counselling. Clauses 5.7 and 7.6(1) provide information on the

     documents required to be submitted under the NRI quota. The phrase ‘special

     reservation’ cannot be read to include the NRI quota when the prospectus does

     not stipulate the NRI quota as a category of reservation under Clause 4.

     Moreover, Clause 2.2 states that the categorization of seats in self-financing

     colleges shall be notified separately. Even if the argument that the NRI quota is a

     special reservation is accepted, the unoccupied seats can only be transferred to

     the mandatory quota (i.e SEBC and EWS reservation seats). However, in the

     present matter, the CEE has transferred the unoccupied NRI quota seats to State

     merit. Therefore, the reasoning of the High Court that the respondent could

     transfer the unoccupied NRI quota seats to state merit by virtue of clause 5.5.4 is

     erroneous.
11              The Medical Counselling Committee issued the Information Bulletin and

     Counselling Scheme 9 for admission to medical courses in 2021. Chapter 3 of the
9
“Bulletin”
12
bulletin provides the process of admission for the MBBS course in 100% deemed

     universities. The relevant portions of the bulletin are extracted below:
“ Chapter 3- 100% Deemed University
                 […]
                 Reservation Policy:
• Candidates who fall under the category of NRI as per the
                 directions/orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in
                 the case (W.P (C) No. 689/2017-Consortium of Deemed
                 Universities in
Karnataka (CODEUNIK) & Anr. v. Union of
                 India & Ors.
) dated 22-08-2017 are eligible for NRI
                 category. OCI/PIO/Foreign Nationals candidates will be
                 considered as NRI. OCI/PIO/Foreign Nationals
                 Candidates will only be eligible for NRI seats vide Ministry
                 of Home Affairs Gazette notification No. S.O.1050(E)
                 dated 04th March 2021.
[…]
                 JAIN          MINORITY/MUSLIM              MINORITY/NRI
                 CONVERSION:              JAIN          MINORITY/MUSLIM
MINORITY/NRI seats remaining vacant during the Mop-
                 Up rounds will be converted to Private Deemed
                 University seats after the exhaustion of all eligible Jain
                 Minority/Muslim Minority/NRI candidates to avoid
                 wastage of seats.
 The conversion of seats will be carried out during the
                 Mop Up Round of Deemed Universities. The said
                 conversion will be done only when the eligible
                 Candidates belonging to the said Conversion Category
                 have exhausted.
CONVERSION ALGORITHM
                 S. No.                   Conversion Category          Category
                                                                       Converted To
                 1                        NRI/Jain Minority/Muslim UR
                                          Minority
The information bulletin elaborates on the categorisation of seats for the NRI

     quota in deemed universities, the eligibility for the NRI quota and the conversion

     of unoccupied NRI quota seats to unreserved seats (that is, State merit seats).
12         In
Modern Dental College
(supra), petitions were filed challenging the

     constitutional validity of the Madhya Pradesh Niji Byavsayik Shikshan Sanstha

     (Pravesh Ka Viniyaman Avam Shulk Ka Nirsharan) Adhiniyam 2007 and the

     Rules framed thereunder.
This Court held that the provisions of the 2007 Act
13
providing that the entire selection process for admission to UG and PG medical

courses and fee fixation shall be done by the State Government is contrary to the

principles
laid down by
the eleven-Judge Bench in
TMA Pai Foundation v. State

of Karnataka10
and PA Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra 11. However, this Court

issued an interim order for admission to the medical seats in unaided colleges for

the academic term of 2009-10:
“We, therefore, direct that the admissions in the private
                unaided medical/dental colleges in the State of Madhya
                Pradesh will be done by first excluding 15% NRI seats
                (which can be filled up by the private institutions as per
                para 131 of Inamdar case [(2005) 6 SCC 537] ), and
                allotting half of the 85% seats for admission to the
                undergraduate and post-graduate courses to be filled in
                by an open competitive examination by the State
                Government, and the remaining half by the Association of
                the Private Medical and Dental Colleges. Both the State
                Government as well as the Association of Private Medical
                and Dental Colleges will hold their own separate entrance
                examination for this purpose. As regards “the NRI
                seats”, they will be filled as provided under the Act
                and the Rules, in the manner they were done earlier.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)


A dispute arose over the unfilled seats in the 15% seats that are set aside for

NRIs’.
In
RD Gardi Medical College v. State of MP
12, 10 NRI quota seats in the

petitioner-college were unfilled. The High Court held that the unfilled NRI seats

have to be shared between the State and the petitioner-college in equal

proportion.
This Court dismissed the appeal against the judgment of the High

Court observing that the order was in compliance with the judgment in
Modern

Dental College
(supra) where it was directed that the NRI seats be filled “as

provided under the Act and the Rules, in the manner they were done earlier.’
10
(2002) 8 SCC 481
11
(2005) 6 SCC 537
12
(2010) 10 SCC 225
14
Since Rule 8 of the Admission Rules 2008 stipulated that the vacant NRI seats

     shall be merged into the general pool, it was held that the vacant NRI seats were

     filled up in accordance with the judgment in
Modern Dental College
(supra):
“28. A plain reading of the above leaves no manner of
                       doubt that unfilled NRI seats had to be transferred to the
                       general pool to be filled up on the basis of the merit of the
                       candidates in the State-level common entrance test
                       conducted by the Madhya Pradesh Vyavsayik Pariksha
                       Mandal or by any other agency authorised by the State
                       Government for that purpose. The unfilled seats in the
                       NRI quota were, therefore, to be treated as a part of the
                       general pool and once that was done the share of the
                       College in terms of the order passed by this Court would
                       be 50% out of the said seats. The High Court has, in that
                       view, rightly held that while the management was justified
                       in filling up 5 unfilled seats in NRI quota, the remaining 5
                       could not have been filled up otherwise than on the basis
                       of the entrance test referred to in Rule 8.”
13             In view of the observations in
RD Gardi Medical College
(supra), IAs

     were filed for modication/clarification of the orders passed by the two-Judge

     Bench in
Modern Dental College
(supra) and
RD Gardi Medical College
(supra).
This Court noted that there is a conflict between the observations in para

     28 of the judgment in
RD Gardi Medical College
(supra) and para 27(
1) of TMA

     Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka13
.
In
TMA Pai
(supra), it was observed

     that the college shall admit students in the order of merit in the vacant NRI quota

     seats. Therefore, the matter was referred to a larger Bench. However, the larger

     Bench could not resolve the apparent conflict before the admissions for the

     academic year 2011-12 were to begin.
14             The same issue of transfer of vacant NRI seats arose in the academic year

     of 2012-13. A two-judge Bench by an order dated 9 December 2011 had directed

     that the matter be placed before a Constitution Bench. However, since the matter
13
(1995) 5 SCC 220
15
was not likely to be heard by a Constitution Bench shortly, a three-Judge Bench

     in
Modern Dental College and Research Centre v. State of Madhya

     Pradesh
, 14 heard the IA’s on the issue of transfer of unfilled NRI seats for the

     academic term of 2012-13.
Allowing the IA’s, it was observed that the finding in
RD Gardi Medical College
(supra) is contrary to the judgments of the

     Constitution Bench in
TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka
15, a three-

     Judge Bench in
TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka
16, and Inamdar

     (supra). The Court observed:
“18. We are of the considered view that the above
                     principles laid down by the larger Benches of this Court,
                     in the matter of filling up of NRI seats were not correctly
                     understood or applied by this Court in R.D. Gardi Medical
                     College [(2010) 10 SCC 225] while interpreting Rule 8 of
                     the M.P. Admission Rules, 2008. The finding recorded
                     in R.D. Gardi Medical College [(2010) 10 SCC 225] that
                     the unfilled seats in NRI quota in unaided professional
                     colleges should be treated as a part of the general pool
                     and be shared equally by the State and the unaided
                     professional colleges goes contrary to the principles laid
                     down       by    the      eleven-Judge    Bench      in Pai
                     Foundation [(2002) 8 SCC 481] , Inamdar [(2005) 6 SCC
                     537] as well as the judgments rendered by the three-
                     Judge Bench [Ed. : And the judgment rendered by the
                     five-Judge Bench in Pai Foundation, (1994) 4 SCC 728.]
                     in Pai Foundation [(1995) 5 SCC 220] , referred to earlier.
                     The wrong interpretation given in R.D. Gardi Medical
                     College [(2010) 10 SCC 225] is seen incorporated in Rule
                     5 of the Madhya Pradesh Private Medical and Dental
                     Undergraduate Course Entrance Examination Rules,
                     2011 as well, which in our view cannot be legally
                     sustained.”
15           The Constitution bench in
TMA Pai Foundation
(supra) had held that the

     unfilled NRI quota seats can only be filled by the management at its discretion:
“3. So far as the NRI quota is concerned, we fixed the
                     same as 15% last year. We fixed the NRI quota in
14
(2012) 4 SCC 707, “Modern Dental College and Research Centre”
15
(1994) 4 SCC 728
16
(1995) 5 SCC 220
16
respect of minorities' institutions as 5%. Although the NRI
                  quota should not, normally, be more than 5%, but
                  keeping in view the reduction in the fee structure, we fix
                  the same as 10% (of the total seats) for this year. We
                  further make it clear that in case any seat in the NRI
                  quota remains unfilled, the same can be filled by the
                  management at its discretion.”

The three judge Bench in
TMA Pai Foundation
(supra) reiterated the

observations of the Constitution Bench:
“(1) So far as NRI quota is concerned, it is fixed at fifteen
                  per cent for the current academic year. It shall be open to
                  the management to admit NRI students and foreign
                  students within this quota and in case they are not able to
                  get the NRI or foreign students up to the aforesaid
                  specified percentage, it shall be open to them to admit
                  students on their own, in the order of merit, within the
                  said quota. This direction shall be a general direction and
                  shall operate in the case of all the States where
                  admissions have not been finalised. It is, however, made
                  clear that by virtue of this direction, no student who has
                  already been admitted shall be disturbed or removed.”

A similar observation was also made by a two-Judge Bench of this Court in
AP(P) Engineering College Management Association v. Government of

AP
17.
This Court in
Modern Dental College and Research Centre
(supra) had

further referred to Inamdar (supra) where it was held that the imposition of the

reservation policy of the State on unaided private universities is an encroachment

of the right and autonomy of private professional educational institutions:
“125. […] such imposition of quota of State seats or
                  enforcing reservation policy of the State on available
                  seats in unaided professional institutions are acts
                  constituting serious encroachment on the right and
                  autonomy of private professional educational institutions.
                  […] Such appropriation of seats can also not be held to
                  be a regulatory measure in the interest of the minority
                  within the meaning of
Article 30(1)
or a reasonable
                  restriction within the meaning of
Article 19(6)
of the
                  Constitution.”
17
(2000) 10 SCC 565
17
16         In
Modern Dental College and Research Centre
(supra), an IA was filed

     challenging the transfer of unfilled NRI seats to the State. However, in the matter

     before us, only an extension of time for the submission of documents necessary

     for applying for the NRI quota seats was sought. The prayer in the writ petition is

     extracted below:
“i. Issue a Writ of Mandamus or such other writ, order or
                  direction directing the Respondents to grant time for fresh
                  registration in NRI Quota to the eligible before
                  commencement of the Mop-up counselling.
                  ii. Issue a Writ of Mandamus or such other writ, order or
                  direction directing, the 3rd Respondent to consider and
                  pass orders in Exhibit P3 representation within a time
                  limit to be fixed by this Hon’ble Court.
                  iii. Permit the members of the Petitioner association to
                  admit the NEET qualified eligible students who produce
                  the necessary documents in NRI Quota before the cut off
                  date stipulated by the Kerala University of Health
                  Sciences vide Exhibit P4, in the event the Respondents
                  does not invite fresh applications in the NRI Quota.
                  Issue such other writ, order, or direction as may be just
                  and necessary in the interest of justice.”
17          Moreover, the observations in
Modern Dental College and Research

     Centre
(supra) were made concerning admissions for the year 2011-2012. The

     principal issue of whether the unfilled NRI seats in unaided universities can be

     transferred to the State is pending before the Constitution Bench.
Further, the

     observations made in PA Inamdar (supra) and the Constitution Bench in
TMA

     Pai
(supra) will have to be read with
Article 15(5)
which was included by the
Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act
2005.
18         The names of only 7 of the 37 appellants find place in the NRI category list

     which was published by CEE on 31 January 2022. The respondent has submitted

     that of the 7 appellants whose names find place in the NRI category list, only 4 of

     them had registered options for NRI seats. However, candidates who had
18
received a higher rank than them were allotted those seats. Further, it was also

     submitted by the respondent that none of the 7 candidates registered their

     options for the 45 NRI seats that were later converted to unreserved seats. The

     respondent submits that only because none of the 7 candidates registered their

     options concerning NRI seats, were the seats converted to unreserved seats to

     prevent the seats from lying vacant.
19          Since the appellants have not challenged the provisions of the Information

     Bulletin which stipulate that the vacant NRI seats shall be converted to

     unreserved seats during the mop-up round, we cannot decide on the legality of

     such a conversion of seats. The 4 appellants who had registered their options for

  NRI seats had not exercised their options with respect to any of the vacant 45

  NRI seats. The respondents merely complied with the provisions of the

  Information Bulletin which is not in challenge before us in the present

  proceedings. The respondent association had only sought an extension of time

     for submission of documents by candidates seeking to apply for the NRI quota

     seats. The representation was rejected by CEE since sufficient time and

     extension had been given for the submission of the documents. The appellants

     have not contended that the rejection of the representation was malafide or

     arbitrary.
19
20        We accordingly dismiss the appeals for the reasons set out above.

21        Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                           [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                           …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                            [Bela M Trivedi]

     New Delhi;
May 18, 2022
20