[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rishiraj@ Tutul Mukharjee vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 20 May, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
NON-REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1301 OF 2019


                RISHIRAJ @ TUTUL MUKHARJEE & ANR.                              ..Appellants

                                                    VERSUS

                STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                    ..Respondent

                                                      WITH

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1302 OF 2019

                HANI @ KOUSTUBH SAMDARIYA                                      ..Appellant

                                                    VERSUS

                STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                          ..Respondent

                                                      AND

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1303 OF 2019

                VIJAY @ HALLO JAISWAL & ANR.                                   ..Appellants

                                                    VERSUS

                STATE OF CHHATTISGARH & ANR.                                   ..Respondents


                                                JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
1.       These appeals by special leave, at the instance of accused, named; (1)
Date: 2022.05.20
19:43:01 IST
Reason:
Rishiraj @ Tutul Mukharjee, (2) Samrat @ Laltu Mukharjee, (3) Vijay @
1
Hallo Jaiswal, (4) Ajay @ Chhotu @ Jijji Jaiswal and (5) Hani @ Koustubh

Samadriya, challenge the common judgment and order dated 10.08.2018

passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal

Nos.452, 492, 522 and 538 of 2012.
2.    The present proceedings arise out of the registration of crime pursuant to

First Information Report No.187 of 2010 dated 09.06.2010, lodged with Torwa

Police Station, District Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh, in respect of offences

punishable under
Sections 148
,
148
,
149
,
302
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

(“
IPC
”, for short) read with
Sections 25
and
27
of the Arms Act, 1959 (“
Arms

Act
”, for short).     The Report made by one Jugal Kishore @ Gappu

(subsequently examined as PW-12 in the trial) was to the following effect:
“I reside in the aforementioned address. I run Smoker Club in
          front of Geeta Hotel. On 08.06.2010, at night, I was in Surya
          Hotel and at that time at 12:06 in the night I got phone call from
          Gudda Sonkar, he said, “come immediately to Hotel Intercity.” I
          alongwith my friend Alok Singh reached Hotel Intercity in 5 -7
          minutes in a Scorpio car and saw that outside the hotel bar at car
          parking Jai Jaiswal along-with his friends Manoj Agrawal, Hallo
          Jaiswal, Jijji @ Chotu Jaiswal, Rishi Mukherjee, Samrat
          Mukherjee and Hani Samdariya and with 2-3 other, whom I do
          not know, were standing surrounding Gudda Sonkar and his Jija
          Nanka Ghore and all were having altercation with Gudda Sonkar
          and in the meantime, Vijay @ Hallo with their friends started
          pushing Gudda Sonkar and Nanka Ghore, at that time Manoj
          Agrawal, who was standing near, said to Jai @ Gudda Jaiswal
          that you people cannot kill him, give me pistol, I will kill this …
          (Expression used, is not reproduced), saying so he snatched
          pistol from the hand of Jai Jaiswal and caused a gun-shot injury
          on the face (cheek) of Gudda Sonkar, as a result, Gudda fell on
          the ground. Thereafter, Jai Jaiswal snatched that pistol from the
          hand of Manoj Agrawal and caused two gunshot injury on the
          chest of Nanka Ghore, who has come to intervene in the matter,
          as a result of which Nanka fell on the ground. People started
2
running here and there. Then, people standing near there started
          shouting, “ Gudda Sonkar is still alive, kill him”, on which, Jai
          Jaiswal after putting his leg on the chest of Gudda Sonkar caused
          a gunshot injury on his chest. In this way, with preplanned
          manner, Jai Jaiswal along-with his companions(friends) has
          killed Gudda and Nanka by firing 546 gunshot; and in this way,
          Vijay @ Hallo Jaiswal fled away driving his white Endeavour
          car bearing No.CG 10 F – 4499 and Jai Jaiswal fled away
          driving his white Ritz car bearing no. CG 10 FA 4499 with their
          friends. They all were armed with weapons. Jai @ Gudda Jaiswal
          has pistol, Vijay @ Hallo Jaiswal has 315 bore rifle, Ajay Jaiswal
          @ Jijji @ Chotu has .22 bore rifle, Rishi Mukherjee has 12 bore
          rifle and Hani Samdariya has 12 bore rifle. Alok Singh, Lallan,
          Mangal Singh, Bashir, Naim Memon, Praveen Keshri, Vinay
          Ghore and employees of Hotel Intercity have seen the incident.
          Gudda Sonkar was taken to CIMS Hospital in Scorpio and
          Nanka was taken to Apollo Hospital in police jeep, where both
          were declared dead by the doctor. I have seen the incident
          closely with my friend Alok Singh. I hid behind the car with my
          friends otherwise they would have also killed me.”
3.    In the consequential investigation undertaken, following items were

seized from the place of occurrence: -
“Blood-Stained Cement Brick.
5 Blank Cartridges of 7.65 MM Pistol, which bears the following
          KP 7.65 MM.
2 Mobile Phones of Nokia Company having SIM Cards.
          1 White Maruti Suzuki Ritz bearing No. CG10H-7
          1 Maroon Honda Activa bearing No. CG 10 EH 5326.”
4.    The post-mortem on the body of deceased Gudda Sonkar was conducted

by Dr. Chaturbhuj Mishra, (subsequently examined as PW-9 in the trial) who

in Post-Mortem Report Ex.P/24 noticed following ante mortem injuries:
“(i) an entry wound with inverted margins 0.8 cm x 1 cm
          elliptical in shape 7 cm away from left nipples directed
          downwards medially towards sternum.
3
(ii) two parallel abrasions marks over left side of chest about 4
         cm long and 3 cm long respectively, about 9 cm above nipple.
(iii) an entry wound over left cheek circular shape 0.8 cm x 0.8
         cm tattooing present around it size approx. 8 cm x 6 cm, margins
         are inverted.
(iv)   contusion mark below right eye on right cheek 0.5 x 0.6
         cm.
(v) another contusion over nostrils right side 0.2 x 0.2 cm,
         bleeding from nose present.
(vi) abrasion mark over back near 7-8 inter-vertebral space in
         inter scapular region over left side about 1.5 cm x 1 cm.”


      Dr. Chaturbhuj Mishra also noticed fracture of mandible bone and that a

bullet was stuck in the 6th cervical spine. In his opinion, the cause of death

was due to multiple gunshot injuries resulting in damage to internal vital

organs and hemorrhagic shock. However, the final opinion was deferred till

the receipt of biochemical analysis report and ballistic expert opinion. The

nature of death was opined to be homicidal.
5.    On the same day, Dr. Chaturbhuj Mishra conducted post-mortem on the

body of deceased Nanka Ghore and the Post Mortem report Ex.P/25 noticed

following ante-mortem injuries:
“(i)     an entry wound on left side of neck elliptical in shape
         0.9 x 1 cm margins inverted and tattooing of skin.
(ii)     an exit wound on right side of neck with inverted
         margins size 1.3 cm x 1 cm.
(iii)     one entry wound over sternum at level of lower end of
         areola.
4
(iv)      second entry wound over sternum level 7½ cm below
          1st injury.
(v)       3 ECG ports attached to chest, one on left side and two
          on right side.
(vi)     two exit wounds on back over right subscapular region
          one on 7th and one on 8th inter-vertebral level, each of 0.9 x 0.9
          cm size.
(vii)     bullet was present just below (beneath) 2nd exit wound
          at level of 8th inter-vertebral space, bullet has become flat and
          dorsal pointed flattened.”

      In the opinion of Dr. Chaturbhuj Mishra, the cause of death was due to

multiple gunshot injuries resulting in damage to internal vital organs i.e. liver,

right lung and great vessels of neck, and hemorrhage (massive internal).
However, the exact cause of death was to be ascertained after receipt of

histopathological, biochemical and ballistic expert reports. The nature of death

was opined to be homicidal.
6.    The recoveries of certain fire-arms as dealt with by the High Court in

paragraph 6 of its judgment were:
“06. Memorandum of accused No.1 Jai @ Gudda (Ex.P/12)
          recorded on 9.6.2010 led to seizure of one pistol of 7.66 MM in
          which UNIQUE MQD/51 CQL-7.065 MM has been written,
          bearing body No.5323404, one magazine containing five live
          cartridges of 7.65 MM pistol and one white coloured Maruti
          Suzuki Car (Ritz) bearing registration No.CG 10-FA 4499 vide
          Ex.P/13. On the memorandum of accused No.7 Hani (Ex.P/25,
          which appears to have been wrongly marked), one 12 bore pistol
          bearing body No.MPABR/I-159/52-ZI having two round live
          cartridges in its barrel and two other live cartridges were seized
          vide Ex.P/26.
It is relevant to note here that this weapon was registered in
5
the name of father of accused No.7, which is clear from Ex.P/5
         and admittedly, no fire was made from this weapon in the crime
         in question.
From accused No.2 one 315 bore rifle bearing body
         No.MPRGH11/107/6/1967 with magazine having five live
         cartridges, one empty cartridge in the barrel and one white
         coloured Ford Company Endeavour car bearing registration
         No.CG 10F-4499 were seized.
As per Ex.P/5, it is not in dispute that accused No.2 had the
         licence to hold the above weapon.
From the possession of accused No.3 Rishiraj, one 12 bore
         double barrel rifle of Royals Arms & Company, bearing
         No.9895A/2-Y2002, was seized vide Ex.P/15. As per Ex.P/5,
         this is also a licensed weapon in the name of accused No.3.
From accused No.6, Ajay @ Chhotu, one .22 rifle bearing body
         No.
         CAL22LONG/RIFLE/0147064JGANSCHITZGMBHWAFFEN
         ABRIK/UIM/D/GERMANY, having a magazine containing
         three live cartridges were seized vide Ex.P/14. As per Ex.P/5,
         the said weapon was licensed in the name of accused No.6.”
7.    Upon completion of investigation, seven persons, namely, Jai @ Gudda

Jaiswal s/o. Late Bajrant Pasad Jaiswal, Vijay @ Hallo Jaiswal s/o. Late

Bajrant Prasad Jaiswal, Rishiraj @ Tutlu Mukherji s/o. Ashok Mukherji,

Samrat @ Laltu Mukherji s/o. Ashok Mukherjee, Manoj Aggarwal s/o.

Shankar Lal Aggarwal, Ajay @ Chhoti @ Jijji Jaiswal, and, Honey @

Kaustubh Samdariya s/o. Dr. N.K. Samdariya, were sent up to face trial in

Sessions Trial No.169 of 2010 in the Court of Sessions Judge, Bilaspur,

Chhattisgarh for having committed the offences stated above.
8.    According to the prosecution, only one weapon, namely, pistol recovered
6
from accused No.1 Jai @ Gudda vide Ex.P/12 was used in the commission of

murders of Gudda Sonkar and Nanka Ghore. In order to prove its case, the

prosecution mainly relied upon the eye-witness account through PW1, PW2,

PW4 and PW12. As regards the incident and the role played by the concerned

accused, following statements made by the concerned witnesses are material:
“PW1 – Lallan Dhole son of Shri Niranjan Dhole.
2. Gudda Sonkar and Nanaka were also standing there. There
         had been abusive talk between accused persons, Gudda Sonkar
         and Nanaka. I and my friend were standing there and seeing
         them. I saw that Gudda Sonkar was talking on mobile phone.
After ten minutes of this continuing argument, Gappu Sonkar
         and Alok had also come there. The exchange of abusive language
         had increased when they came there. Thereafter accused Gudda
         and Jai had picked up pistol. During this time, exchange of
         abusive language between them continued. Thereafter accused
         Manoj also came there in between. Accused Manoj took away
         pistol from accused Jai and Gudda and had opened the fire.
         Accused Manoj opened fire on deceased Gudda Sonkar. Accused
         Jai taken pistol from accused Manoj and opened fire upon
         Nanaka. Gudda Sonkar and Nanaka had fallen on earth on being
         hit by the gun shot. Again accused Jai @ Gudda opened one
         bullet shot on the chest of deceased Gudda Sonkar. Both the
         deceased persons were shot with two gunshots each. After
         opening this gun shot on them, accused persons boarded their
         vehicle and had run away from the spot.”

         PW2 – Ram Narayan son of Late Shri Anand Kumar

         “1. I know accused persons. Both have died on 8.6.2010. In the
         fateful night of incident around 10.30 pm in the night, I along
         with Praveen Kesari, Prashant Gulahare and Ravish Narsingh
         had visited Hotel Intercity for having our dinner. When we came
         out of the hotel after we had our dinner, there was quarrel going
         on in the parking. This quarrel was going on between Gudda @
         Jai, Hallo @ Vijay, Hanny Samadariya, Rishi Mukherjee, Samrat
         Mukherjee, Manoj Aggarwal, Jijji @ Ajay and between deceased
         persons. Accused persons had encircled the deceased persons
         from all around and they were using abusive languages.
         Deceased Gudda Sonkar had also abused the accused persons.
         Accused Jai then took out his pistol from his pocket and put it on
7
Gudda Sonkar and started abusing him. In the same time accused
Manoj came from behind and snatched the gun from Jai and
opened fire on deceased Gudda. Again, accused Jai took the gun
from accused Manoj back and he opened two fires on deceased
Nanaka who was trying to interfere in between. In the meantime
other accused persons started saying loudly that Guddda is alive.
Accused Jai while putting his leg on the chest of deceased Gudda
and opened a fire on him again while abusing him ‘Sale Sonkar’.
Thereafter they flew away from the spot through their vehicles.
2. First fire was shot at his cheek on deceased Gudda. Accused
Manoj was having gun like weapon at the time of incident. Rishi
was in possession of revolver type weapon. Both the injured
persons were lying on the spot. They were dead. Police had
recorded my statement.”

PW4 – Praveen Kesari son of Shri Gaya Prasad Kesari

“1. I know deceased persons. Both these persons have died on
8.6.2010. Both these persons had died in the Hotel Intercity in
the night around 11.30 to 12.30 am in the night. I was there, for
my dinner in the Hotel Intercity along with Ram Narayan,
Prashant Gulahare and Ravish Narsingh were also there. When
we reached parking for taking our vehicles, quarrel between
accused Gudda Jaiswal, Manoj, Hanny, Hallo, Samrat, Vijay,
Ajay @ Jijji, Laltu and Gudda Sonakar and Nanaka. Both the
sides were abusing each other and argument in this way was
going on. We were seeing the argument while standing there.
During the course of argument, accused persons, ‘gherowed’
Gudda Sonkar and Nanka. Accused Jai while abusing him took
out his pistol and pointed it towards Gudda Sonkar. During
course of argument, accused Manoj snatched the pistol from
accused Jai and shot it upon the deceased Gudda Sonkar. This
gunshot was inflicted upon face of Gudda Sonkar. Thereafter
accused Jai took away the pistol from accused Manoj and in the
meantime Nanka brother-in-law of Gudda Sonkar came there for
interfering. On this accused Jai hit upon him two bullets shot.
Nanka suffered two gunshots at his chest and in the mid of
stomach. Both the injured persons had fallen on earth.
2. After both were fell down, accused persons cried with each
other that Gudda is alive. Kill him. Then accused Jai put his leg
upon the Gudda’s chest and had opened one fire on his chest and
which was inflicted upon his chest. After this incident, accused
persons ran away in three-four vehicles. There were weapons in
the hands of accused persons which were the guns. After this
incident police had interrogated me. Police had also recorded my
8
statement.”

          PW12 – Jugal Kishore @ Gappu son of Shri Kaushal Kishor

          “1. I identify the accused persons who is present in the court.
          Deceased Gudda Sonkar and Nanka were also known to me.
          Incident is of 8.6.2010. It was time of around 12 am in the night.
          Incident had taken place in the Intercity Hotel. I was there in
          Hotel Surya along with Alok Singh Thakur. When Gudda Sonkar
          had called me on my mobile and had informed me that there is
          quarrel going on with him. Therefore, I should go there. I and my
          friend went to the Hotel Intercity. When I reached Hotel
          Intercity, I saw that quarrel between accused persons and Gudda
          Sonkar was going on. This quarrel was going on outside bar. I
          saw that fighting is also with accused Jai and Manoj. They were
          saying ‘kill them, kill them’.
3. I had reported the incident in the police station Torwa. Report
          is Ex P-33 which bears my signature at point A to A. I had also
          given death information of both. My information was recorded
          which is Ex P-34 and 35. Which bears my signature at point A to
          A. police had recorded my statement.”
9.    After considering the material on record, the Trial Court by its judgment

and order dated 30.04.2012, convicted and sentenced accused Jai @ Gudda

and Manoj Aggarwal under
Sections 147
,
148
,
302
,
302
/
149
IPC and
Sections

25
&
27
of the Arms Act; accused Vijay @ Hallo, Ajay @ Chhotu, Hani,

Samrat and Rishiraj were convicted under
Sections 147
,
148
,
302
/
149
of IPC;

Vijay @ Hallo, Ajay @ Chhotu, Hani & Rishiraj were also convicted under
Section 25
of the Arms Act; while accused Samrat @ Laltu Mukherji was

acquitted of the charges under
Section 25
of the Arms Act. The substantive

sentence imposed for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and Section

302 read with 149 of the
IPC
was life imprisonment on both counts with other

term sentences for other offences, which need not be stated here in detail.
9
10.   All the convicted accused preferred Criminal Appeal Nos.452, 492, 522

and 538 of 2012 in the High Court, which were dealt with by the judgment

presently under challenge. After considering the entirety of the matter, the

High Court observed:
“41. In the case in hand, from the unrebutted evidence of the
         eyewitnesses (PWs-1, 2, 4 & 12) it is apparent that all the
         accused persons were standing surrounding the deceased persons
         and during the course of altercation between the two groups,
         accused/appellant Jai pointed pistol at deceased Gudda Sonkar,
         which was subsequently snatched by accused/appellant Manoj
         who caused gunshot injury to Gudda Sonkar and thereafter with
         the same weapon, accused/appellant Jai caused gunshot injury to
         Nanka who came to the rescue of Gudda Sonkar. All these
         witnesses have further stated that thereafter, the other accused
         persons exhorted that Gudda Sonkar is alive, shoot him. Thus,
         from their conduct during the course of incident it is evident that
         they were well aware of the act likely to be committed by the
         said assembly. Furthermore, there is no evidence that the other
         accused persons in any manner tried to pacify the dispute or
         prevent accused Jai and Manoj from firing. Thus, in light of the
         aforesaid principles of law as to the scope of
Section 149
of IPC,
         from the evidence of the eyewitnesses coupled with the conduct
         of these accused persons, it is clear that all the accused persons
         had a common object of committing murder of the deceased
         persons.”
11.   Thus, affirming the view taken by the Trial Court, the High Court

dismissed the appeals.
12.   All seven convicted accused preferred Special Leave Petitions in this

Court, which were dealt with by this Court in its order dated 27.08.2019. No

case was found to have been made out in respect of principal accused Manoj

Aggrawal and Jai @ Gudda Jaiswal [petitioners in SLP (Crl.) Diary No.11603
10
of 2019], and their Special Leave Petitions were rejected at the admission

stage, while Special Leave to Appeal was granted in favour of the other

accused, namely, Rishiraj @ Tutul Mukharjee and Samrat @ Laltu Mukharjee

[appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1301 of 2019]; Vijay @ Hallo Jaiswal and

Ajay @ Chhotu @ Jijji Jaiswal [Criminal Appeal No.1303 of 2019]; and, Hani

@ Koustubh Samdariya [Criminal Appeal No.1302 of 2019].
13.   In these appeals, we have heard Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned Senior

Advocate for the appellants and Mr. Saurabh Roy, learned Advocate for the

respondents.
14.   It is submitted by Mr. Luthra, learned Senior Advocate that:
(i)      Going by the narration of all the prosecution witnesses, the

principal role in the crime was attributed to Manoj Aggarwal and Jai @ Gudda

Jaiswal, whose challenge was rejected at the admission stage itself.
(ii)     In so far as the appellants before this Court are concerned, at best,

the role attributed to them was being part of the group which was having an

oral altercation.
(iii)    There was no commonality in action so as to hold the appellants

before this Court guilty with the aid of vicarious liability under
Section 149
of

the IPC.
On the other hand, it is submitted by Mr. Roy, learned Advocate that the

evidence indicates complete participation of the appellants in the crime and as
11
such they cannot escape the liability under Section 302 read with 149 of the
IPC
.
15.    The presence of the appellants stands established all through, which was

referred to in the First Information Report and in the evidence of all the

concerned eye-witnesses.
The question that now arises is about the participation of these

appellants in the crime.
As stated by the eye-witnesses, these appellants were taking part in the

initial scuffle and Gudda Sonkar and Nanka Ghore were being pushed by all

the accused. While this scuffle was going on, a firearm was taken out by

accused Jai @ Gudda Jaiswal. The evidence further discloses that this firearm

was snatched by Manoj Aggarwal, who fired at Gudda Sonkar. Thereafter, the

weapon was snatched back by accused Jai @ Gudda Jaiswal and he fired upon

Nanka Ghore. As a result of the gunshot injury received by him, Gudda

Sonkar had fallen down but was still alive. What is material is the exhortation

attributed to the appellants who were shouting that Gudda Sonkar was alive

and that he be killed. The second shot was then fired at Gudda Sonkar.
16.    The presence of the witnesses was established. The eye-witness account

shows participation of the appellants in the initial scuffle in which the

deceased were pushed as well as in the exhortation as stated above.        The

evidence unfolded through the eye-witness account about the exhortation by
12
the appellants was consistent and cogent. Nothing effective could be drawn

from the cross-examination of the witnesses. Thus, it can certainly be said that

the participation of the appellants was not just as bystanders or only in the oral

altercation or scuffle. There was not even a suggestion that after the first shot

was fired, any of the appellants backtracked or wanted to dissociate himself

from what was unfolding.
Their participation was full and effective and as such the appellants

cannot escape the vicarious liability. They were thus rightly convicted under

Section 302 read with 149 of the
IPC
.
17.   In the premises, we affirm the view taken by the Courts below and

dismiss these criminal appeals.
.....………………………………………….J.
                                             (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                  .....………………………………………….J.
                                              (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)


                                  …………………………………………….J.
                                  (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
New Delhi,
May 20, 2022.
13