[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. K.M. Sharma vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 20 May, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 1305
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3030 OF 2022

           Dr. K. M. Sharma & Ors.                               …Appellant(s)

                                            Versus

           The State of Chhattisgarh & Ors.                      …Respondent(s)


                                       JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

           and order passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Writ

           Appeal No. 538 of 2015 by which the High Court has dismissed the said

           appeal and has not interfered with the judgment and order passed by the

           learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition in which the appellants

           – original writ petitioners prayed for grant of equal pay-scale as

           admissible to teachers appointed in the Municipal services under the

           Municipal Employees (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules,

           1968 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules, 1968”), the original writ

           petitioners – Shiksha Karmis have preferred the present appeal.
2.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that respective petitioners

           were appointed as Shikha Karmis under the Chhattisgarh Municipalities
1
Shiksha Karmis (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1998

(hereinafter referred to the “Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998”). The Shiksha

Karmis Rules, 1998 were subsequently substituted by the Chhattisgarh

Shiksha (Nagriya Nikay) Samvarg (Bharti Tatha Sewa Ki Sharte) Niyam,

2013. That the original writ petitioners submitted representations praying

for grant of equal pay-scale as admissible to teachers appointed in

Municipal services, which came to be rejected.            The respective

appellants filed the writ petition before the High Court. The Learned

Single Judge dismissed the said writ petition. The appellants - original

writ petitioners preferred writ appeal before the Division Bench of the

High Court. By the impugned judgment and order, the Division Bench of

the High Court has dismissed the said appeal, hence the present appeal

has been filed by the appellants – original writ petitioners – Shiksha

Karmis.
3.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants – original

writ petitioners has submitted that the respective appellants are serving

as teachers. That they are the persons, who were appointed in the year

1998 under the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998 to teach in the schools

under the control of the respondent Municipality. It is submitted that they

are not the persons whose nature of appointment was ever in the form

and manner of contract employees.
2
3.1   It is submitted that as per Rule 7 of the Shiksha Karmis Rules,

1998, the probation period for a Shiksha Karmi would be for 3 to 5 years.

That after the probation period is over and the respective Shiksha

Karmis are confirmed as per Rule 7, they are entitled to “regular pay-

scale” as applicable to Municipality teachers from the date of

appointment. It is submitted that in the present case, the respective

Shiksha Karmis were appointed under Rule 5 and were confirmed in the

year 2001 after completion of their probation period. It is contended that

therefore, they are entitled to the “regular pay-scale”, which is being paid

to the Municipality Teachers, as per the mandate of Rule 7 of the

Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998.
3.2   It is urged by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellants that though the Shiksha Karmis and the teachers appointed

by the Municipality under the Rules, 1968 are performing the

same/similar duties, as per the 7th Pay Commission recommendation,

they are put in the pay-scale of Rs.9300-34800/- for Grade I Class 9 to

12, against which the Municipality teachers are given 3% increment

every year on the pay-scale of Rs.9300-34800/-.
It is submitted that the Municipality teachers are also getting

HRA/DA/SA/Medical/Old Pension Scheme/GPF/Ex-Gratia/Every 10 Year

Promotion. However, so far as the Shiksha Karmis are concerned, no
3
such benefits are given to them. It is submitted that when the Shiksha

Karmis are performing the same kind of work; teaching the similar class;

having   similar   educational    qualification;   similar   syllabus;   similar

Education Board and under the same controlling authority, not being

paid the same pay-scale as being paid to the teachers of the Municipality

is discriminatory and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.



3.3   Relying upon Rule 11 of the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998, it is

further submitted that as conditions of services of Shiksha Karmis are

the same as applicable to other employees of the Municipality therefore,

the Shiksha Karmis are also entitled to the same pay-scale which is

admissible to the other employees of the Municipality/Municipal

teachers.
3.4   Making the above submissions, it is prayed that the appellants are

entitled to the same pay-scale, which is made available to the teachers

of the Municipality.
4.    While opposing the present appeal, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondents have vehemently submitted that the appellants

are appointed as Shiksha Karmis under the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998

and therefore, they are being governed under the said Rules.               It is

submitted that so far as the teachers working in the Municipalities are
4
concerned, they are appointed under the Rules, 1968 and therefore they

are governed by the Rules, 1968. It is submitted that the appellants are

being paid the pay-scales as provided under Rule 4 of the Shiksha

Karmis Rules, 1998.
4.1   It is contended that submission on behalf of the appellants -

original writ petitioners that on completion of the probation period as

provided under Rule 7, they are entitled to the pay-scale as available to

the Municipality teachers is concerned, the same is on a mis-reading

and/or mis-interpretation of Rule 7. It is submitted that on completion of

the probation period, their services are confirmed as Shiksha Karmis

only and not as Municipal teachers.
4.2   It is urged that the pay-scales of Shiksha Karmis have been

prescribed under Rule 4 of the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998 and they are

being paid by the Municipality as per the pay-scales provided under

Schedule I of the said Rules.
4.3   It is submitted that so far as reliance being placed upon Rule 11 of

the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998 is concerned, Rule 11 is only with

respect to general conditions of services other than those mentioned in

the Rules. It is submitted that Rule 11 of the Shiksha Karmis Rules,

1998 clearly states that conditions of services other than those

mentioned in the said Rules will be the same as applicable to the other
5
employees of the Municipality. That other conditions of service as per

Rule 11 means that the Shiksha Karmis will have parity with regard to

leave, age, superannuation, provident fund, disciplinary enquiry, etc.,

which are otherwise not defined under the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998.



4.4   Now, so far as the contention on behalf of the appellants that they

are entitled to the pay-scales, which may be available to the Municipal

teachers on the principle of equal pay for equal work is concerned, it is

submitted that the Shiksha Karmis and the Municipal teachers are

appointed under different Rules and there are different methods of

selection and recruitment so far as the appointment of Shiksha Karmis

and Municipal Teachers are concerned.
4.5   Relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of
State of

Haryana and Ors. Vs. Charanjit Singh and Ors.
, (2006) 9 SCC 321, it

is submitted that as the Shiksha Karmis and the Municipal Teachers are

appointed under different Rules and there are different methods of

selection and recruitment, the appellants / Shiksha Karmis are not

entitled to the pay-scale as admissible to the Municipal teachers, as they

are appointed under different Rules.
4.6   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present

appeal.
6
5.    We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective

parties at length.
6.    The respective appellants, who are/were serving as Shiksha

Karmis are claiming parity in the pay-scale with that of the employees of

the Municipality/Municipal teachers.         However, it is to be noted that

Shiksha Karmis are appointed under different Rules namely, Shiksha

Karmis Rules, 1998 and the Municipal teachers are appointed under

different Rules namely, the Rules, 1968. Therefore, all Shiksha Karmis

appointed under the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998 shall be governed by

the provisions of the said Rules, 1998. Rules, 4, 7 and 11, which are

relevant for our purpose are extracted as under:-
“4. Classification and Pay Scale- Classification of
      Shiksha Karmis and their scales of pay shall be as given
      in the Schedule I. Number of posts shall not be increased
      except with the prior approval of the Government or an
      Officer duly authorised by the Government.
X     X        X      X
7. Probation - Every person directly recruited to the post
      of Shiksha Karmi shall be initially appointed on probation
      of three years, extendable up to five years for a particular
      school so that the Shiksha Karmis serves in that school
      for full probation period. The performance will be
      assessed by the appointing authority at the end of each
      year. After three years, the Shiksha Karmi may be
      appointed in the regular pay-scale of the Municipality on
      the basis of his work, conduct and performance. In case
      the performance is not found satisfactory, he may be
7
allowed to continue on the probation for another one to
     two years to improve after which his performance will be
     assessed again at the end of extended period and if not
     found satisfactory his services shall be terminated. But in
     no case the probationary period shall be extended
     beyond that maximum period of five years. Shiksha Karmi
     will be paid fixed pay equivalent to minimum of the pay
     scale with admissible dearness allowance during the
     probation period.
X     X     X     X
11. General conditions of Service- Conditions of
     service other than mentioned above, shall be the same as
     applicable to the other employees of the Municipality.”
7.   Heavy reliance is placed on Rule 7 and it is the case on behalf of

the appellants that after completion of the probation period as mentioned

in Rule 7, Shiksha Karmis will have to be paid the pay equivalent to the

pay-scale of the Municipal teachers. The aforesaid submission has no

substance. On a fair reading of Rule 7, it is clear that on completion of

the probation period, the Shiksha Karmis shall be confirmed as Shiksha

Karmis only and they shall be put in the regular pay-scale of the

Municipality as Shiksha Karmis and not as the Municipal teachers. As

observed hereinabove, Municipal teachers are appointed under the

Rules, 1968. As per Rule 4 of the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998, Shiksha

Karmis shall have to be paid the scales of pay as given in the Schedule I

to the aforesaid Rules. The respective Shiksha Karmis are paid the pay-

scales as per Schedule I of Rule 4. Therefore, when the Municipal
8
teachers and the Shiksha Karmis are appointed under different Rules

and there are different methods of selection and recruitment, a Shiksha

Karmi cannot claim parity in pay-scale with that of Municipal teachers on

the principle of equal pay for equal work. Therefore, it is observed and

held that Shiksha Karmis, who are governed by the Shiksha Karmis

Rules, 1998 under which they were appointed, are entitled to pay-scales

under the Shiksha Karmis Rules, 1998 only, which are being paid to

them.
8.      In view of the above, no error has been committed either by the

learned Single Judge or by the Division Bench in refusing to grant the

pay-scales of Municipal teachers to the appellants herein being Shiksha

Karmis. We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the High

Court.
9.      In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated above,

present appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed and is

accordingly dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the

case, there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                            [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………….J.
MAY 20, 2022.                              [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
9