[Cites
7
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
P. R. Adikesavan vs The Registrar General High Court Of ... on 23 May, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Bela M Trivedi
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Crl.A.847/2022
                                                          1


                                                                                         Reportable


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           Criminal Appeal No 847 of 2022


                      P R Adikesavan                                                Appellant


                                                     Versus


                      The Registrar General, High Court of                          Respondents
                      Madras and Another




                                                 JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



                 1        The appeal arises from the judgment dated 25 March 2022 of a Division

                          Bench of the Madras High Court convicting appellant under Section 2(c)(iii)

                          read with
Section 12(1)
of the Contempt of Courts Act 1971 and sentencing

                          him two weeks of simple imprisonment.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2022.05.26
17:23:01 IST
Reason:
Crl.A.847/2022
2
2       Insolvency proceedings were initiated against the appellant under the

            provisions of the
Presidency Towns Insolvency Act
1909. On 12 March 2021,

            a Single Judge of the Madras High Court issued a non-bailable warrant

            seeking the presence of the appellant on 26 March 2021. On 31 March 2021,

            when a team of the police tried to execute the warrant, the appellant and fifty

            other advocates gheraoed the police and prevented them from executing the

            order. The Deputy Commissioner of Police brought the incident to the notice

            of the Registrar General of the Madras High Court by a letter dated 13 April

            2021. On perusing the video clippings of the incident the Single Judge of the

            Madras High Court by an order dated 14 July 2021, initiated contempt

            proceedings against the appellant under
Section 15
of the Contempt of

            Courts Act 1926. The order of the Single judge is extracted below:
“ 4.   This Court has also seen the entire footage starting from the time the
                          Police informed the respondent about the orders of this Court and
                          thereafter, how the respondent and one of his Advocate friend had
                          started questioning the Police Personnel and the respondent has not
                          paid heed to the Inspector of Police’s statement that he is only
                          executing the orders of this Court. The Police report would also state
                          that the respondent’s counsel Mr. Balasubramaniam had arrived and
                          he also started abusing the Police. The video footage shows his
                          presence. Thereafter, the scene has totally turned ugly and in one
                          footage, I saw two Advocates trying to pull out a Police Officer using
                          abusive and unparliamentary words. The entire scene is enacted on
                          the public road just outside the Court premises in full public view. This
                          is nothing but obstructing the administration of Justice. The act
Crl.A.847/2022
3
becomes all the more contumacious as the respondent and the
                             others who are members of the noble profession have committed this
                             act. They are bound to respect not only the dignity of this Court but
                             also the orders of this Court.
5.     The respondent who was fully aware of the pendency of the
                             proceedings had deliberately not appeared before this Court
                             constraining the Court to issue the Non-Bailable Warrant. A prima
                             facie case of Contempt is made out against the respondent and Mr.
                             Balasubramanian, Advocate for obstructing the Police Officials from
                             executing the orders of this Court. This Court takes cognizance of the
                             act of Criminal Contempt committed by them.”
3        On 1 September 2021, a Division Bench of the Madras High Court on

             perusing the records found that a prima facie case has been made out

             against the appellant and issued notice. On 26 October 2021, the Court

             framed the following charge against the appellant:
“That, you, Mr. PR Adikesavan, Advocate and Mr. Balasubramanian,
                      Advocate, by your aforesaid conduct, in not permitting the execution of the
                      Non-Bailable Warrant issued by this Court on 31.03.2021, has interfered
                      with the administration of justice and has also obstructed the administration
                      of justice, thereby, you are charged under
Section 2(c)(iii)
of the Contempt of
                      Courts Act 1971, which is punishable under
Section 12
of the Act, ibid.”
4        The proceedings were adjourned by the Division Bench on five occasions at

             the behest of the appellant.1 The Bench finally adjourned the case and listed

             it on 28 February 2022. However, the appellant filed ‘sub-applications’ before

             the next date of hearing. The sub-applications were listed along with the


        1 The matter was adjourned on 23.11.2021, 30.11.2021, 21.12.2021, 24.1.2022, and 14.2.2022.
Crl.A.847/2022
4
contempt petition on 28 February 2022 before the Division Bench. The

            appellant submitted that he had filed sub-applications and made a

            representation to the Chief Justice of the Madras High Court seeking the

            recusal of one of the Judges of the Division Bench.
5       The appellant filed sub-applications seeking the issuance of summons to the

            Single Judge for examining her as a witness in this case and another

            application for one of the judges on the Division Bench to recuse from the

            hearing. The appellant took back the applications from the Registry and did

            not re-present them. By the impugned judgment dated 25 March 2022, the

            appellant was held guilty of contempt and was sentenced to undergo two

            weeks of simple imprisonment and was directed to pay a fine of Rs 2000. The

            appellant was also barred from practising as an Advocate in the Madras High

            Court for one year. The Court observed that on the video clipping shows that

            the police did not use physical force against the appellant and that it was the

            battery of lawyers who surrounded the police officials and abused them. The

            Division Bench observed that the appellant attempted to evade service of the

            non-bailable warrant though he :
“8…. Could have just accompanied the police along with his advocates to
                   the police station where after making necessary entry in the General Diary
                   in the nearby Flower Bazaar Police Station, he would have been produced
                   before PTAJ before whom he could have pleaded for release. Instead,
Crl.A.847/2022
5
Adikesavan has played fraud on Balasubramanian by not disclosing the
                    truth and had collected huge number of advocates to prevent the police
                    from performing their duty of executing the lawful order of the Court. To be
                    noted, whether PTAJ was correct in issuing the non-bailable warrant or not
                    is a question which could have been decided by the police officer, for, he is
                    simply required to execute all lawful orders issued by the Court.”
6       The appellant moved this Court in an appeal under
Section 19
of the

            Contempt of Courts Act 1971 read with Rule XX of the Supreme Court Rules

            2013. Mr K K Mani, learned senior counsel has urged that the appellant has

            submitted an apology and this should be accepted.
7       The behaviour and conduct of the appellant, who is a member of the Bar has

            been thoroughly contemptuous. There was a clear attempt to obstruct the

            process of justice when the non-bailable warrant was sought to be served on

            him by the competent police officials, which has been recorded in the video

            footage. The appellant is complicit in the obstruction of justice.


    8       That apart, wanton allegations have been levelled against the Single Judge of

            the Madras High Court who issued the non-bailable warrant. Further, a

            recusal was sought of one of the Judges hearing the proceedings thereafter

            on thoroughly improper grounds. Five adjournments were sought by the

            appellant before the Madras High Court, delaying the conclusion of the

            proceedings only to later file sub-applications imputing allegations against
Crl.A.847/2022
6
two Judges of the Madras High Court.
The appellant later also took back the

            sub-applications from the registry and did not re-present them. The appellant

            has no respect for the administration of justice. The finding of contempt, as

            well as the sentence cannot be regarded as disproportionate. Similarly, the

            debarment from practicing for a period of one year is in accordance with the

            judgment of this Court in
R.K. Anand vs Registrar, Delhi High Court2
.


      9     The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Pending applications, if any, stand

            disposed of.
….....…...….......………………........J.
                                                    [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [Bela M Trivedi]


      New Delhi;
May 23, 2022
      CKB




      2 (2009) 8 SCC 106