[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Kelkar And Kelkar vs M/S. Hotel Pride Executive Pvt. Ltd. on 4 May, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
[NON­REPORTABLE]

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.3479 OF 2022


          M/s. Kelkar & Kelkar                                         ..Appellant


                                                Versus


          M/s. Hotel Pride Executive Pvt. Ltd.                       ..Respondent




                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                           judgment and order dated 06.08.2015 passed by the High

                           Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No.4442

                           of 1999 by which the High Court, in exercise of
Articles

                           226
and
227
of the Constitution of India, has allowed the

                           said writ petition preferred by the respondent herein and

                           has quashed and set aside the award passed by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
learned Arbitrator and has remanded the matter for de
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.05.04
17:07:43 IST
Reason:
1
novo consideration, the original claimant has preferred

      the present appeal.
1.1   The dispute arose between the parties which was the

      subject   matter   of   arbitration   before   the   learned

      Arbitrator. On the learned Arbitrator declaring the award,

      on an application filed by the original claimant – original

      plaintiff vide order passed in Exhibit 10 in Regular Civil

      Suit No.1022/1996, passed a decree in terms of the

      award made by the learned Arbitrator. By the said award

      the original respondents were directed to pay to the

      original claimants Rs.12,46,663/­.
1.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the award made

      by the learned Arbitrator as well as the order passed by

      the learned trial Court passed as per Exhibit 10 in

      making the award a decree, instead of preferring appeals

      under the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(hereinafter referred to as

      ‘the Act’), preferred a writ petition before the High Court

      under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution of India

      mainly on the ground that, before the learned Arbitrator

      was appointed, there was non­compliance of Clause 56 of
2
the Articles of Agreement and the procedure as required

      under Clause 56 was not followed.             By the impugned

      judgment and order the High Court has set aside the

      award made by the learned Arbitrator on the ground that

      the procedure as required under Clause 56 had not been

      followed.    Consequently, the High Court has remanded

      the matter for de novo consideration.
1.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court, the

      original claimant has preferred the present appeal.
2.    Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective    parties     and   considering     the   impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court, we are of

      the opinion that against the award made by the learned

      Arbitrator made under the Act and against an order

      passed by the learned trial Court making the award a

      decree and without availing the alternative statutory

      remedy available by way of appeal under the provisions of

      the Act, the High Court ought not to have entertained the

      writ   petition   under
Articles   226
and
227
of   the
3
Constitution of India.       When the statute provides a

     further remedy by way of appeal against the award and

     even against the order passed by the learned trial Court

     making the award a decree of the court, the High Court

     ought not to have entertained the writ petition and ought

     not to have set aside the award, in a writ petition under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution of India. In that

     view of the matter the impugned judgment and order

     passed by the High Court is unsustainable and the same

     deserves to be quashed and set aside.
3.   At this stage, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respondent has prayed that in that view of the matter,

     liberty be reserved in favour of the respondent to take

     further recourse to law under the provisions of the Act

     which might have been available against the award made

     by the learned Arbitrator as well as the order passed by

     the learned trial Court as per Exhibit 10 making the

     award a decree. It is further prayed to make a suitable

     observation that whatever amount is already paid to the

     appellant – original claimant may be adjusted subject to
4
the ultimate outcome and the further order that may be

     passed in future.
4.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,

     present Appeal succeeds.          Impugned Judgment and

     Order passed by the High Court is set aside. However,

     liberty is reserved in favour of the respondent to take

     further recourse to law under the provisions of the
Arbitration Act, 1940
and in accordance with law against

     an award made by the learned Arbitrator and the order

     passed by the learned trial Court passed as per Exhibit

     10 making the award a decree of the court and if such

     proceedings are initiated within a period of four weeks

     from today, the same be considered in accordance with

     law and on its own merits without raising the issue with

     regard to limitation.       It goes without saying that the

     amount already paid to the appellant – original claimant

     shall   be   subject   to   the   ultimate   outcome   of   the

     proceeding that may be initiated by the respondent.
5
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,

       present appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent only.

       However, there shall be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)


                                     …………………………………J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
May 04, 2022.
6