[Cites
8
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
A.P.S.R.T.C vs P. Venkat Rao And Ors on 24 April, 2001
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2001 AP 17
Author:
N.V.Ramana
Bench:
N.V.Ramana
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE N.V.RAMANA        

CMA. No. 2617 of 1998 and Batch  

24.04.2001 

A.P.S.R.T.C. 

P. Venkat Rao and Ors. 

Counsels for Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: C.V. Ramulu, Adv.

Counsel for Respondents/Defendant: G. Pedda Babu and Vasireddy Prabhunath,    
Advs.

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:


(CMA. No. 2617 of 1998, 2692/1998, 1992/2000, 1997/2000, 1999/2000, 2000/2000,   
2125/2000) 
:ORDER:
All these appeals arise out of the same accident. The appellant in C.M.A. No.
2692/1998 is the claimant in O.P. 631/1993. He filed the appeal dissatisfied
with the quantum of compensation awarded by the Tribunal. The remaining appeals 
are filed by the A.P.S.R.T.C. aggrieved by the orders and decrees passed by the
Tribunal granting compensation to the claimants/respondents therein by the
Tribunal. As the facts and the question involved in all these cases are
identical, these appeals are heard together and are being disposed of by this
common order.
2. Before proceeding to consider the appeals, the brief facts that led to the
filing of these appeals may be noticed. On 8-3-1993, the Express R.T.C. bus AP
9Z 4236 proceeding from Hyderabad and bound to Chilakaluripet reached 
Narsaraopet at 4-00 a.m. Thereafter from Narsaraopet it started at 4-10 a.m. and
when the bus reached near the Vinukonda rail crossing gate at Narsaraopet, two
persons stopped the bus and boarded the bus. Then the bus started to go to
Chilakaluripet. When the bus reached Kavuru village, fire broke out due to the
use of petrol and it ultimately came out that the two persons who entered the
bus with petrol cans poured kerosene and lit a match stick. Due to the fire
accident in the bus some persons have lost their lives and some persons
sustained severe burn injuries and became disabled. Some of the injured and some
of the dependents of the deceased who died in the accident have filed O.Ps. in
the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal at Guntur. The present appeals are the
offshoot of some of the O.Ps. decided by the said Tribunal.
3. C.M.A. Nos. 1992/2000: 1997/2000: 1999/2000: 2000/2000 and 2125/2000:
These appeals are filed by the A.P.S.R.T.C. aggrieved by the orders and decrees
passed in O.P. Nos. 586/1996; 585/1996; 487/1994; 500/1994; 597/1998  
respectively.
4. The claimants in O.P. 586/1996 are the legal heirs of one Md. Rafiq Ahmed,
who was aged 22 years and studying B.Ed., course and died in the said incident.
They filed the O.P. for a compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/-. The Tribunal
determined the compensation payable as Rs. 1,00,000/- and after deducting Rs.
50,000/- paid as ex gratia, arrived at the compensation payable as Rs. 50,000/-.
Aggrieved by the same, the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No. 1992/2000.
5. The claimants in O.P. 585/1996 are the legal heirs of one Pendam Srinivas, a
boy who just passed his S.S.C., examination, who died in the very same fire
accident in the bus. They filed the O.P. for a compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/-.
The Tribunal determined the compensation as Rs. 1,00,000/- and after deducting
the ex gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/- paid to them, awarded a compensation of Rs.
50,000/-. Aggrieved by the same, the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No. 1997/2000.
6. The claimants in O.P. 487/1994 are the legal heirs of one Margani Apparao who
died in the same incident. They filed the O.P. for a compensation of Rs.
1,00,000/-and the Tribunal determined the compensation as Rs. 1,00,000/- and
after deducting the ex gratia of Rs. 50,000 paid to them, awarded the
compensation of Rs. 50,000/- and apportioned the compensation amongst  
petitioners 1 to 4 and respondent No. 2 in the O.P. who are the legal heirs of
the deceased. Aggrieved by the same, the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No. 1999/2000.
7. The claimants in O.P. 500/1994 are the legal heirs of one Yendrapati
Purushottam who died in the same incident. They filed the O.P. for a
compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/-. The Tribunal awarded a total compensation of Rs.
1,00,000/- and apportioned the same amongst petitioners 1 and 2 and respondents 
2 to 4 in the O.P., who are the legal heirs of the deceased. Aggrieved by the
same, the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No. 2000/2000.
8. The claimants in O.P. 597/1998 are the father and mother of the deceased who
died in the very same incident. They filed the O.P. for a compensation of Rs.
3,00,000/-. The Tribunal determined the compensation as Rs. 1,01,000/- and after
deducting the ex gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/- paid to the claimants, awarded a
compensation of Rs. 51,000/-. Aggrieved by the same, the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No.
2125/2000.
9. The main contention of the Appellant-A.P. State Road Transport Corporation is
that there is no negligence or rashness on the part of the driver or conductor
of the bus in question, and the incident took place due to the mischief
committed by the miscreants who poured petrol on the bus with an intention to
rob the inmates of the bus. It is contended that at the time of the
incident/accident the bus was stopped and so the incident/accident did not arise
out of use of the motor vehicle, and consequently, the Appellant-Corporation
cannot legitimately be fastened with any liability to pay compensation in
respect of the incident/accident. Hence the Corporation was not liable to pay
any compensation.
10. In the instant cases, the accident took place on 8-3-1993 at about 4.45 a.m.
near Kavuru village. The claimants laid claims for compensation before the Motor
Accidents Claims Tribunal stating that the injured/deceased, as the case may be,
boarded the bus run by the APSRTC to reach Chilakaluripeta. When the bus reached  
Kavuru village, while the injured/ deceased were in deep sleep, a fire broke out
resulting in the death of 15 persons and burn injuries to the others. According
to the claimants, the fire broke out due to the negligent act of conductor and
driver of APSRTC in permitting inflammable material to be carried inside the
bus.
11. On behalf of respondents/claimants, it is contended that the incident took
place due to the negligence of the employees of the A.P.S.R.T.C. bus and as the
incident/ accident took place out of the use of the motor vehicle, the
A.P.S.R.T.C. is vicariously liable for the negligent acts of its employees and
hence there are no grounds to interfere with the orders under appeal.
12. In view of the rival contentions advanced by the Counsel for the Appellant
and Respondents, the points that arise for determination are:
(1) Whether the Appellant-Corporation is liable to pay compensation to the
claimants?
(2) Whether the accident arose 'out of the use' of the motor vehicle?
13. Before the Tribunal the claimants and the A.P.S.R.T.C. adduced oral and
documentary evidence. The Tribunal after considering the evidence on record held
that the fire accident was caused in the bus due to the negligence of the
employees (Conductor and Driver) of the A.P.S.R.T.C. bus and the Appellant-
Corporation is vicariously liable to pay compensation to the claimants in the
respective O.Ps.,
14. In this context, it is just and necessary to look into the provisions of
Section 165
of the Motor Vehicles Act which read thus:
"165. Claims Tribunals:- (1) A State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals
(hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as Claims Tribunal) for such area as
may be specified in the notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims
for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily
injury to, persons arising out of the use of the motor vehicles, or damages to
any property of a third party so arising, or both.
Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
expression "claims for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death
of or bodily injury to, persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles"
includes claims' for compensation under Section 140 (and Section 163-A).
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the State
Government may think fit to appoint and where it consists of two or more
members, one of them shall be appointed as the Chairman thereof.
(3) xxxx
(4)xxxx"
15. It is clear from the provisions of
Section 165
of the Motor Vehicles Act
that the Claims Tribunals have been set up and conferred with the jurisdiction
to adjudicate upon the claims for compensation arising in respect of the
accidents resulting in death of, or bodily injury to, persons, arising out of
the use of motor vehicle.
16. In the present appeals, at the time of accident, the bus was being used for
the purpose of transporting the passengers. All the passengers including the
injured or the deceased, as the case may be, boarded the bus after paying the
requisite fare to the Conductor. Merely because the bus was stopped on the road
at the time of incident, it does not mean that the bus ceased to be a 'motor
vehicle' at the time of accident. The term 'arising out of use of motor vehicle'
has wider connotation. Simply because the bus was stopped at the time of
accident due to the threat given by some miscreants to the driver of the bus, it
does not mean that the bus ceased to be a motor vehicle or it cannot be said
that the bus was not in use when the fateful incident/accident occurred. The
evidence on record clearly indicates that the inmates of the bus sustained
injuries as a result of the fire that broke out in the bus. The victims of the
accident in no way contributed either to the incident/accident or to the fire.
In addition to that, when some persons were entering into the bus with
combustible material, explosive substances or some inflammable material, it is
the bounden duty of the employees of the Appellant-Corporation (i.e., the
Conductor and Driver of the bus, in this case) to prevent and object to their
entry into the bus, in the larger interests of passengers. The appellant-
Corporation is vicariously liable for payment of compensation, and the
relationship between the use of the motor vehicle and the accident resulting in
the death or permanent disablement, is not required to be direct or proximate.
17. In my considered view, the use of the motor vehicle was the main
contributory and relevant factor to determine whether the accident occurred out
of the use of the motor vehicle or not. The oral and documentary evidence on
record clearly establishes that the fire accident occurred in the bus due to the
negligence of the employees of the appellant-Corporation. The conductor and
driver of the bus failed to prevent the miscreants to bring the petrol tins into
the bus. As per the evidence on record, every passenger has to board or alight
the bus invariably in the presence of the conductor, because one has necessarily
to pass through the conductor seat, which will be at the entrance door of the
bus. It is the duty of the conductor to notice each and every passenger who is
either boarding or alighting. The evidence on record clearly discloses that the
Conductor failed to discharge his duty, and was negligent in permitting the
inflammable material to be brought into the bus by the miscreants. The evidence
on record clearly discloses that the conductor failed to check the miscreants
while they were entering into the bus with petrol cans.
18. Having carefully gone through the oral and documentary evidence on record, I
am of the view that the incident/accident occurred due to the negligence on the
part of the employees of the bus (conductor and driver) in not taking care and
allowing some inflammable material to be carried inside the bus. If accident of
any nature occurs out of the use of the motor vehicle, whether it is propelled
or standing, the Appellant is liable to pay compensation.
19. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shivaji Dayanu Patil v. Vastchala Uttam More,
MANU/SC/0402/1991 : [1991]3SCR26a , while considering the interpretation of the
expression 'arising out of the use of the motor vehicle', explained the ambit
and scope of the words 'arising out of, and 'caused by', in the following terms:
"The word 'use', in the context of motor vehicle, has been construed in a wider
sense to include the period when the vehicle is not moving and is stationary
being either parked on the road and when it is not in a position to move due to
some breakdown or mechanical defect.
In the context of motor accidents, the expressions 'caused by' and 'arising out
of are often used in statutes. Although both these expressions imply a casual
relationship between the accident resulting in injury and the use of the motor
vehicle but they differ in the degree of proximity of such relationship. This
distinction has been lucidly brought out in the decision of the High Court of
Australia in Government Insurance Office of N.S.W. v. R.J. Green case, wherein
Lord Barwick, C.J. has stated: (CLR p.433)
"Bearing in mind the General purpose of the Act, I think the expression 'arising
out of must be taken to require a less proximate relationship of the injury to
the relevant use of the vehicle than is required to satisfy the words 'caused
by'. It may be that an association of the injury with the use of the vehicle
while it cannot be said that use was casually related to the injury may yet be
enough to satisfy the expression 'arise out of as used in the Act and in the
policy".
20.
In similar circumstances, in
Samir Chandra v. Managing Director, Assam State
Road Transport Corporation, MANU/SC/0561/1998
: AIR1999SC136 , the Hon'ble    
Supreme Court while reversing the judgment rendered by the Gauhati High Court,
in
Managing Director, A.S.T.C. v. Samir Chandra MANU/GH/0079/1994
held, - when a  
bomb exploded inside the bus owned by the State Road Transport Corporation when  
it reached the last stop and when the passengers were alighting from the bus, --
that the accident arose 'out of the use of motor vehicle'. It was also held that
the driver and the conductor of the bus have to take the required care to
prevent such accidents. The Supreme Court held:
"After going through the judgment of the High Court, we are of the view that the
High Court was not right on facts that there was no negligence on the part of
the owner or the driver of the bus especially when the appellant has
specifically pleaded about the negligence which was accepted by the Tribunal in
the light of the pleadings and of the evidence produced before it. The explosion
took place inside the bus is an admitted fact and the usual police escort was
not there. The High Court, except observing that there was no negligence, has
not upset the finding of the Tribunal that the atmosphere during the period of
accident was so polluted requiring care on the part of the conductor and driver
of the bus. There cannot be any doubt that the accident arose out of the use of
the motor vehicle justifying the claim of the appellant."
21.
In another decision of the Supreme Court in
Rita Devi (Smt.) and Ors. v. New
India Assurance Co., Ltd. and Anr., MANU/SC/0312/2000
: (2000)ILLJ1656SC while  
dealing with the scope of the expression 'death due to accident arising out of
use of motor vehicle', it was held that the legal heirs of the deceased are
entitled to compensation from the owner and the insurer of the motor vehicle
when the accident arises out of the use of motor vehicle. In that context, the
Supreme Court held:
"As pointed out by the learned Counsel for the appellants, the
Motor Vehicles
Act
does not define the word 'accident'. However,
Section 163-A
of the Motor
Vehicles Act provides for payment of compensation for the death or injury
suffered in a motor vehicle accident on a structured formula basis in
Section
163-A
of the Act. Sub-section (1) of the said section says that:
"163-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law
for the time being in force or instrument having the force of law, the owner of
the motor vehicle or the authorised insurer shall be liable to pay in the case
of death or permanent disablement due to accident arising out of the use of
motor vehicle, compensation, as indicated in the Second Schedule, to the legal
heirs or the victim, as the case may be."
Sub-section (2) of the said section also provides:
"163.A. (2) In any claim for compensation under Sub-section (1), the claimant
shall not be required to plead or establish that the death or permanent
disablement in respect of which the claim has been made was due to any wrongful
act or neglect or default of the owner of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or
of any other person."
A conjoint reading of the above two Sub-sections of Section 163-A shows that a
victim or his heirs are entitled to claim from the owner/Insurance Company a
compensation for death or permanent disablement suffered due to accident arising
out of the use of the motor vehicle, without having to prove wrongful act or
neglect or default of anyone. Thus it is clear, if it is established by the
claimants that the death or disablement was caused due to an accident arising
out of the use of motor vehicle, then they will be entitled for payment of
compensation."
22. A Division Bench of this Court, while considering a similar question, in
A.P.S.R.T.C., Hyderabad v. Sanjaykumar Bhawsingkha, MANU/AP/0449/1996 :
1997(1)ALT293 (D.B.) confirmed the findings of the Tribunal holding that the
accident occurred due to the negligence on the part of the conductor and driver
in the bus in not taking care and allowing some inflammable and combustible
substances to be kept in the cabin of the driver instead of putting on the top
of the bus. In the above said judgment, while the Bus was at R.T.C. bus stand at
Tirupati, suddenly the bus was caught fire and took away the lives of 16
passengers. The Court below held that the accident occurred due to the
negligence of the driver and conductor. That finding of the trial Court was
confirmed by the Division Bench.
23. In similar circumstances, the Rajasthan High Court in Ramchandra v.
Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation 2 (1996) ACC 368 (Raj.) held:
"The expression 'arising out of the use of the motor vehicle' used in
Section
110
of the Motor Vehicles Act has a wide impact. While interpreting the
expression, the casual relationship between the 'use of the motor vehicle' and
the 'accident' resulting in the death or permanent disablement is not required
to be direct and proximate. Giving the restricted meaning to the expression to
confine it to some active movement of the vehicle only, i.e., when the motor
vehicle is mobile, would be against the object and intention with which the
provisions have been enacted."
24.
In similar circumstances, the Kerala High Court in
Padmanabhan Nair v.
Narayananikutty and Anr. MANU/PH/0543/1996 (Kerala
), held:
"Any accident occurring in the course of user for carriage of passengers, or
otherwise, is liable to be compensated through the forum provided under Section
110. This is in accord with the intent of the section, which is to afford
speedy, cheap and effective remedy in all cases involving motor vehicles. The
basic requirement of such claims is only that it should arise out of the use of
motor vehicle."
25. In view of the settled legal position noticed above, and for the reasons
mentioned supra, I hold that the incident/ accident is a 'motor vehicle
accident' that occurred while the motor vehicle was in use and caused because of
the negligence of the employees of the A.P.S.R.T. Corporation (Conductor and
Driver of the Bus) and the appellant-Corporation is vicariously liable to pay
compensation to the claimants in the O.Ps.
26. In the result, all these appeals (C.M.A. Nos. 1992/2000, 1997/2000,
1999/2000, 2000/2000 and 2125/2000) fail and they are accordingly dismissed. No
costs.
27. C.M.A. No. 2617/1998 and C.M.A. No. 2692/1998: These two appeals arise out  
of the order and decree in O.P. 631/1993. The claimant in O.P. 631/1993, Paleti
Venkatarao, aged 27 years, sustained severe burn injuries. He filed the O.P.
631/1993 for a compensation of Rs. 4,00,000/-, and the Tribunal granted him a
compensation of Rs. 1,74,000/-. Dissatisfied with the quantum of compensation
awarded, he filed C.M.A. No. 2692/1998, Aggrieved by the compensation awarded  
the R.T.C. filed C.M.A. No. 2617/1998, against the very same order in O.P.No.
631/1993.
28. The appeal, C.M.A. No. 2692/1998, is filed by the claimant for enhancement
of compensation. There is no need to narrate the facts, as the appellant herein
is one of the victims of the same accident/incident. I have already held in the
above C.M.A. Nos. 1992 of 2000 etc., that because of the negligence of the
employees of the A.P.S.R.T.C. only the incident took place. Therefore, it is
held that the appellant herein sustained injuries because of the negligence of
the employees of the A.P.S.R.T.C. since the appellant herein is also one of the
victims of the same accident. He suffered with severe burn injuries because of
the said incident. In this case, the Tribunal after elaborate consideration of
the medical evidence came to the conclusion that the permanent disability
suffered by the appellant is 80%. Taking the age of the appellant as 27 years,
his monthly salary as Rs. 1,378/-, the Tribunal arrived at the annual income of
the appellant as Rs. 16,539/-. Deducting one-third therefrom towards personal
expenses of the appellant (Rs. l6,539-Rs. 5,513), the Tribunal arrived at the
net annual income of the appellant as Rs. 11,024 and applying the multiplier of
17 arrived at the loss of earnings and compensation for permanent disability as
Rs. 1,84,486/-. Since the disability suffered by the appellant is only 80%, the
Tribunal calculated the compensation for 80% disability as Rs. 1,50,000/-.
29. Dissatisfied with the quantum of compensation the claimant in the O.P. filed
this appeal, as already stated supra.
30. Learned Counsel for the claimant/ appellant in C.M.A. 2692/1998 vehemently
contended that there is no reason to deduct 1/3rd from out of the annual income
of the claimant/appellant while arriving at the loss of earnings and
compensation for disability, in view of the evidence on record, especially the
medical evidence.
31. On behalf of the respondent-R.T.C./ appellant, it is contended that even
though the disability suffered by the claimant is stated to be 80% the burns are
only 50%. So, the claimant/appellant is entitled to only 50% of the
compensation.
32. I am unable to agree with the contention of the learned Counsel for the
R.T.C. Ex.A-3, medical certificate issued by the Medical Board, discloses that
the disability suffered by the claimant/ appellant is 80%. In the light of the
said finding, it is not proper for the Court to hold that the percentage of loss
of earnings is only 50%.
33. In this case, the claimant/appellant suffered with 80% disability besides
burn injuries and survived after the incident. He was aged 27 years as on the
date of the incident. There is no reason to deduct one third from the
compensation amount arrived at under the head of loss of earnings. In accident
cases, the better method of calculating the amount of compensation would be to
apply an appropriate multiplier, which is determined taking into consideration
the uncertainties of life and that the amount is being paid in a lumpsum by
computing future loss of earnings at present value. Once an appropriate
multiplier is applied, the amount of compensation is arrived, there is no
question of further deduction of such an amount.
34. In injury cases, when the Court/ Tribunal applies the multiplier method,
which is more logical and sound for calculating the compensation, no deduction
is permissible on account of lumpsum payment or personal expenses for the simple 
reason that the claimant himself is the victim and he is claiming compensation
for actionable negligence on the part of the respondents.
35.
In
R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Private Limited and Ors.,
MANU/SC/0146/1995
: [1995]1SCR75 while considering the case of an injured, the  
Hon'ble Supreme Court, after considering various factors, did not allow any
deduction from future loss of earnings towards personal expenses to be incurred
by the injured claimant. The Supreme Court (at para 9) held:
"Broadly speaking, while fixing an amount of compensation payable to a victim of
an accident, the damages have to be assessed separately as pecuniary damages and   
special damages. Pecuniary damages are those which the victim has actually 
incurred and which are capable of being calculated in terms of money; whereas
non-pecuniary damages are those which are incapable of being assessed by  
arithmetical calculations. In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary damages
may include expenses incurred by the claimant: (i) medical attendance; (ii) loss
of earning of profit up to the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. So far
as non-pecuniary damages are concerned, they may include (i) damages for mental 
and physical shock, pain and suffering already suffered or likely to be suffered
in future; (ii) damages to compensate for the loss of amenities of life which
may include a variety of matters, i.e., on account of injury the claimant may
not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for the loss of expectation of
life, i.e., on account of injury the normal longevity of the person concerned is
shortened; (iv) inconvenience, hardship, discomfort, disappointment, frustration
and mental stress in life."
36. The difference between injury and death cases is, on account of personal
expenses of injured himself, no amount can be deducted. A specific amount should
be added to the loss suffered by the claimant in case of disabled person who is
incapable of looking after himself for the rest of his life towards the cost of
service either gracious or otherwise. I am of the view that in case of personal
injury, no further amount need be deducted on account of expenses incurred by
the injured claimant towards his personal expenses when multiplier method is
applied for assessment of loss of earnings of the injured claimant.
37. Therefore, in this case, the compensation has to be calculated without
deducting one-third from the earnings of the claimant towards his personal
expenses. After multiplying the annual income of the appellant with the
multiplier of 17, the disability compensation/loss of earning has to be arrived
at as 80% thereof, thus, the loss of earnings -comes to Rs. 2,24,930/-(Rs.
16,539 x 17 x 80/100). Apart from that, the Tribunal has awarded only Rs. 15,000
towards pain and suffering. The accident has taken place immediately after the
marriage of the appellant. He suffered with severe burn injuries. Definitely the
appellant had suffered pain, to a great extent, because of the said injuries. So
I feel it proper and just to award another sum of Rs. 15,000/- under the head of
pain and suffering, making it Rs. 30,000/-. Apart from that for extra
nourishment the Tribunal has awarded only Rs. 2,000/-. In this case the
appellant was in hospital for a considerable period and spent considerable
amount towards extra nourishment. So another sum of Rs. 3,000/- is hereby
awarded, making it Rs. 5,000/- under extra nourishment. Insofar as the sum of
Rs. 2,000/- granted towards medical expenses and the sum of Rs. 5,000/- granted
as attendant charges, they do not require any enhancement and they are hereby
confirmed. Thus, the appellant is entitled to a total compensation of Rs.
2,66,930/-.
38. In the result, the appeal, C.M.A. No. 2692/1998 filed by the claimant/
appellant, is partly allowed as indicated above. The claimant/appellant is
entitled to a total compensation of Rs. 2,66,930/- with proportionate costs in
the O.P. and interest at 12% p.a., from the date of filing of O.P. till
realisation. The rest of the claim in this appeal is dismissed. There shall be
no order as to costs.
39. For the reasons stated supra the appeal, C.M.A. 2617/1998 filed by the
A.P.S.R.T.C. against the very same order and decree in O.P. 631/1993, is hereby
dismissed. No costs.
Sd/-T.R.Ratnakumar  
Asst. Registrar
/true copy/