[Cites
15
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
K. Pamulu vs Collector And Dist. Election Authority ... on 5 July, 2001
Equivalent citations: 2001(4)ALT389, AIR 2002 (NOC) 28 (AP), 2001 A I H C 4133 (2001) 4 ANDH LT 389, (2001) 4 ANDH LT 389
Author:
Satyabrata Sinha
Bench:
Satyabrata Sinha
JUDGMENT
 

Satyabrata Sinha, C.J.
1. Although an interesting question has been raised in this writ petition by Mr. Adinarayana Rao, learned Counsel for the petitioner questioning rejection of nomination of the writ petitioner on misinterpretation of
Section 19
of the A.P. Panchayat Raj Act, yet, having due regard to the provisions contained in
Article 243-O
of the Constitution of India, we cannot interfere with the matter in exercise of our jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
2. It is not in dispute that notification for election has been issued on 22-6-2001. The impugned order rejecting the claim of the petitioner has been passed on 1-7-2001. Although, a prima facie case has been made out, having regard to the limitation of this Court's power, we are of the opinion that no relief can be granted to the petitioner at this stage.
Article 243-O
of the Constitution reads thus:
"Bar to interference by Courts in electoral matters.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,..
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies, made or purporting to be made under
Article 243-K
, shall not be called in question in any Court;
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an Election Petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under law made by the Legislature of a State."
3. Apart from the fact that there existed a general provision to the effect that the Writ Court in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India would not ordinarily interfere with an election process, a constitutional mandate now has been issued by reason of the said provision. The question raised in this application is squarely covered by a decision of the Apex Court in
N.P. Ponnuswamy v. Returning Officer, Namakkal
,  wherein it has been held:
"As we have seen, the most important question for determination is the meaning to be given to the word "election" in
Article 329 (b).
That word has by long usage in connection with the process of selection of proper representatives in democratic institutions, acquired both a wide and a narrow meaning. In the narrow sense it is used to mean the final selection of a candidate which may embrace the result of the poll when there is polling or a particular candidate being returned unopposed when there is no poll. In the wide sense, the word is used to connote the entire process culminating in a candidate being declared elected."
4. The Court relied upon the judgment of Mahajan, J (as his Lordship then was) in Satnarain v. Hanuman Parshad, AIR 1946 Lah. 85; it was observed:
"It seems to me that the word 'election' has been used in Part XV of the Constitution is the wide sense, that is to say, to connote the entire procedure to be gone through to return a candidate to the Legislature. The use of the expression "conduct of elections" in
Article 324
specifically points to the wide meaning, and that meaning can also be read consistently into the other provisions which occur in Part XV including
Article 329 (b).
That the word "election" bears this wide meaning whenever we talk of elections in a democratic country, is borne out by the fact that in most of the books on the subject and in several cases dealing with the matter, one of the questions mooted is, when the election begins."
5. This aspect of the matter has also been considered recently by one of us (V.V.S. Rao, J) in
V. Narayana v. Election Officer, Alwal Municipality
, 2000 (3) ALT 61 wherein having regard to the provision contained in
Article 243-ZG
of the Constitution of India, which is in pari materia with
Article 243-O
of the Constitution of India, it was held:
"There cannot be any doubt that a challenge to an election means and includes a challenge to any intermediary stage in the election. These intermediary stages could be 'issue of election notification', filing of nominations, scrutiny of nominations, rejection of nomination, voting on the polling day, declaration of results, declaration of the elected candidates and reconstitution of the municipality by duly designated authorities and authorities specified under the
A.P. Municipalities Act, 1965
(the Act, for brevity) and various rules made under
Section 326
of the Act. Therefore, any challenge to any order or any act at the intermediary stage of the election can only be made before the duly constituted Special Tribunal constituted for the purpose. Clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of
Section 326
of the Act empowers the State Government to constitute an Election Tribunal."
6. Rejection of a nomination, which is being a part of the election process, we are afraid, no interference in the matter at this stage is called for.
7. A similar matter came up before this Court in
Ch. Ramachandra Rao v. State of A.P.
,  wherein the following question was raised inter alia:
"Whether the Writ Petitions are not maintainable for the reason that there is an embargo as per Clause (a) of
Article 243-ZG
of the Constitution of India on the exercise of power by this Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution?
8. The said question was answered in the following terms:
"72. In the light of the decided cases, the principles that emerge may be summarised.
(i) By reason of Clause (a) of
Article 243-ZG
, the Division of Municipality into territorial constituencies called wards or allotment of seats to such wards or the notification specifying the offices of Chairpersons of Municipalities reserved to persons belonging to STs., SCs., and/or B.Cs., cannot ordinarily be challenged under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
(ii) In view of embargo placed by Clause (a) of
Article 243-ZG
, a law providing for delimitation of constituencies and allotment of seats to such constituencies made by the State Legislature under Clause (6) of
Article 243-T
read with Clause (2) of
Article 243-ZA
and the Entry 5 of List II of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution cannot be called in question under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
(iii) The principles (i) and (ii) are subject to the condition that if the delimitation notification is arbitrary and in the sense that before delimitation no objections were invited and no hearing was given to a limited extent the same is amenable to judicial review by this Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution."
9. The aforementioned decision has recently been followed by a Full Bench of this Court in a judgment delivered on 27-6-2001 in W.P.No. 9857 of 2001 and batch.  (F.B.) - (
A.P. Sarpanchas Association v. Govt. of A.P
.)
10. For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the relief sought for by the petitioner cannot be granted by setting aside the impugned order dated 1-7-2001 at this stage.
11. The writ petition is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.