[Cites
5
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Shaik Zaheer vs The State Of A.P., Through Public ... on 12 December, 2001
Equivalent citations: 2002(1)ALT(CRI)177
Author:
B. Sudershan Reddy
Bench:
B. Sudershan Reddy
ORDER
 

B. Sudershan Reddy, J.
1. This is an application filed under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the judgment of both the Courts below passed in S.T.C No. 286 of 1999 on the file of the learned XIV Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad to the extent of confiscation of the seized amount and the judgment passed in Criminal Revision Petition No. 236 of 1999 on the file of the learned I Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad.  The petitioner accordingly prays for a consequential direction to the respondent to refund the amount of Rs. 3,000/- to secure the ends of justice.
2. Before adverting to the question as to whether the impugned orders suffer from any legal infirmity and as to whether the petitioner is entitled for the refund of the amount as prayed for, it may be necessary to briefly notice the relevant facts leading to filing of this petition.
3. The respondent-State filed a charge sheet against the petitioner-accused for the offence punishable under
Section 9
of the Andhra Pradesh Gaming Act, 1974 (for short 'the Act').  In the complaint, it is inter alia alleged that on 16.2.1999 at about       8.00 P.M, the petitioner-accused was found at New Road, Shamsheergunj playing satta betting money from the public on the public road.  He was accordingly taken into custody and an amount of Rs.3,000/- and the satta chits were seized from his possession under a panchanama. Thereafter, the prosecution was launched against the petitioner herein for the offence punishable under
Section 9
of the Act.
4. The prosecution in order to establish its case examined five witnesses and marked Exs.P-1 to P-3 and M.Os 1 and 2.
5. The learned Magistrate upon a perusal of the oral and documentary evidence available on record came to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to bring home the guilt of the petitioner-accused beyond all reasonable doubt and accordingly acquitted him under
Section 255 (1)
of Cr.P.C for the offence punishable under
Section 9
of the Act.  The learned Magistrate, however, ordered confiscation of a sum of Rs.3,000/- seized from the possession of the petitioner.  The petitioner aggrieved by the said order of confiscation preferred Criminal Revision Petition No. 236 of 2000 before the learned I Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Hyderabad.  The learned Judge dismissed the criminal revision petition by an order dated 4.12.2000 confirming the order passed by the learned Magistrate confiscating the seized amount from the possession of the petitioner.  Hence this petition.
6. Sri Mohd. Qasim, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order passed by the learned Magistrate and confirmed in the revision petition by the learned Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge suffers from incurable legal infirmities.  It is submitted that the order of confiscation of the amount seized from the possession of the petitioner is unsustainable in law.
7. It is required to notice that the judgment acquitting the petitioner of the charge punishable under
Section 9
of the Act has become final.  Therefore, the only question that arises for consideration is as to whether the order of confiscation of the amount seized from the possession of the petitioner is sustainable in law?
8.
Section 12
of the Act says that on conviction of any person under
Section 9
, the convicting magistrate may order that-
(i) all the instruments of gaming seized, shall forthwith be destroyed or forfeited;
(ii)....
9. It is thus clear that the learned Magistrate is empowered to order forfeiture or destruction of all the instruments of game seized on conviction of the individual under
Section 9
of the Act. Therefore, it is clear that the order of conviction alone would result in forfeiture of all the instruments of game or destruction thereof.  Conviction of the person under
Section 9
of the Act is a condition precedent for ordering the forfeiture or destruction of the instruments of game seized by the police and produced before the Magistrate.  Sub-Section (4) of
Section 2
of the Act defines instruments of gaming which includes cards, dice, gaming tables, or clothes, boards or any other article used or intended to be used as a subject or means of gaming, any document used or intended to be used as a register or record or evidence of any gaming, the proceedings of any gaming and any winnings or prizes in money or otherwise, distributed or intended to be distributed in respect of any gaming. Therefore, the money used as a subject or means of gaming is an instrument of gaming. Such instrument of gaming including the money is liable to be forfeited or destroyed as the case may be on conviction of the person under
Section 9
of the Act. The learned Magistrate convicting the person under
Section 9
of the Act is accordingly empowered to forfeit or destroy the instruments of gaming.
10. But in the instant case, the learned Magistrate having acquitted the petitioner herein of the charge for the offence punishable under
Section 9
of the Act ordered confiscation of the amount seized from the petitioner.  In the circumstances, there is absolutely no difficulty whatsoever to declare that the order of confiscation passed by the learned Magistrate and confirmed in the revision by the learned Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge is totally untenable and unsustainable in law.  The order is vitiated by an error apparent on the face of the record. The order has resulted in manifest injustice contrary to law.
11. In the circumstances, the order passed by the learned XIV Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad in S.T.C No. 286 of 1999 dated 28.8.2000 ordering confiscation of the amount seized as confirmed in Criminal Revision Petition No. 236 of 2000 dated 4.12.2000 is set aside.  Both the orders are accordingly quashed.  Consequently, there shall be a direction for refund of the amount of Rs. 3,000/- to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
12. The Criminal Petition is accordingly allowed.