[Cites
31
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Apsrtc, Musheerabad, Hyd. vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, ... on 15 March, 2001
Equivalent citations: II(2001)ACC760, II(2002)ACC337, 2001(3)ALD235, 2001(2)ALT532
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Satya Brata Sinha
,
B. Subhashan Reddy
ORDER
 

 S.B. Sinha, C.J.
1. All these writ petitions involving consideration of common questions of fact and law were heard together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2. Except WP No.2157 of 1995, all the writ petitions were filed by the A.P. State Road Transport Corporation (for short 'the Corporation') aggrieved by the orders of the A.P. Transport Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad allowing the appeals filed by the private bus operators against the orders of the respective Regional Transport Authorities rejecting their applications for grant of pucca stage carriage permits on town service route at various places in the State.
3. In WP Nos. 17953 of 1998 and 15538 of 1998, the Tribunal allowed the appeals following the decision of this Court in
A.P. State Road Transport Corporation v. Ch. Satyanarayana Raju
, 1988 (I) APLJ 119.
In WP No.1548 of 1995, the Tribunal allowed the appeal filed by the operator following the principles
laid down by
the Apex Court in regard to liberalisation policy of the Government in
Mithilesh Garg

v. Union of India
, .
In WP No. 17729 of 1990, the Tribunal
allowed the appeal on an interpretation of
the scheme approved by the Government in
G.O. Ms. No.782, Home (Transport-IV)
Department, dated 13-6-1972.
In the other
writ petitions the appeals filed by the
operators were allowed by the Tribunal
directing grant of permits relying upon
fhe decision of this Court in
Rajappa Kawati
v. G Hanumantha Rao
, .
In WP No.2157 of 1995, however, the
Tribunal dismissed the appeal filed by the
operator following the decision of a
learned single Judge of this Court in WP
No.5650 of 1987.
4. The common ground for rejecting the applications of the operators for grant of pucca stage carriage permits by the authorities on the routes requested by them was that the route applied for by them overlaps the notified mofussil route of the Corporation as per the schemes approved by the Government in the respective Government Orders.
5. In WA No.56 of 1992 a Division Bench of this Court by judgment dated 14-10-1992 while referring to the scheme framed under
Section 102(2)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') read with
Section 104
thereof held that mofussil service includes town service and that merely because town service route is not mentioned in the notified and published scheme, that is not a ground to grant a permit for town service route. On a different of view taken by another Division Bench, the matter was referred to a third Judge in
Satyanarayana Raju
case (supra) wherein after resolution it was held that the approved schemes do not enjoin prohibition against partial overlapping.
In
Rajappa Kawati v. G. Hanumantha Rao
(supra) another Division Bench of this Court held that a route which is exclusively for town service cannot, for the reason that a

mofussil service stage carriage shall traverse it for a longer distance, become a route falling under the nationalisation scheme for town service. It was held:
"..... We have carefully examined the scheme. We are of the opinion that routes for town service and routes for mofussil service should be separately dealt with. A route which is exclusively for town service cannot, for the reason that a mofussil service stage carriage shall traverse it for a longer distance, become a route falling under the nationalisation scheme for town service. In ever changing maps of the towns and cities in our country, one cannot live oblivious of the fact that routes are almost tearing a part of the cities and towns and the routes for town service are expanding and increasing. The cities and bigger municipal towns are developing ring roads to avoid transport vehicles including stage carriages moving through the thick of the city and town population and mofussil services are meant exclusively for mofussil and not for the cities and towns. Such interest of public should not be confused and a thing done for the benefit of the public at large should not be denied unless it is shown that the Corporation, that is undertaking under the law, has provided sufficient number of transport services for the commuters in the city on the route for which the permit has been granted."
6. Having regard to the divergence of opinion expressed by two Division Benches of this Court as regards the interpretation of a scheme framed under sub-section (2) of
Section 102
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, these matters have been referred to this Bench for rendering an authoritative pronouncement.
7. The fact of the matter revolving round the controversy shall be noticed from

WP No. 17729 of 1990. The 3rd respondent therein applied for the grant of a pucca stage carriage permit on new town service route DNR College (Bhimavaram) to Sringavruksham which was rejected by the Regional Transport Authority. The 3rd respondent preferred an appeal before the State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad in AP No.284 of 1990 whereby and whereunder interpreting the scheme notified by the State Government in G.O. Ms. No.782 (Transport-IV) Department, dated 13-6-1972 it was held that the scheme only restricted the mofussil service and not the town service and that the 3rd respondent is entitled to have the permit issued for grant of pucca stage carriage permit on town route service as applied for and accordingly set aside the order of the Regional Transport Authority by order dated 27-8-1990. Being aggrieved, the A.P. State Road Transport Corporation has filed the writ petition.
8. The facts in the other writ petitions are similar to the facts in WP No.17729 of 1990 except to the extent that different orders were issued by the Government approving the respective schemes prepared by the Corporation in the respective areas. The Tribunal allowed the appeals following the decisions of this Court as already referred to earlier.
9. The orders issued by the Government approving the schemes in all the writ petitions are in Form STU as prescribed by Rule 298 of the A.P. Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 (for short 'the Rules'). For the purpose of convenience, we may quote G.O. Ms. No.782, dated 13-6-1972 relating to WP No.17729 of 1990 of 1997 which approved the scheme prepared by the Corporation as under:
"Government of Andhra Pradesh     

ABSTRACT  

 

 Motor Vehicles Act, 1939-Administration of - Modified scheme of road transport services in respect of route Visakhapatnam to Machilipatnam via Tuni, Annavaram, Kakinada, Ramachandrapuram, Mandapeta, Marteru, Palacole, Bhimavaram, Kaikalur, Gudivada and Gudlavalleru - Prepared and published by the General Manager, Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation under Section 68-C read with
Section 68-E
of the Act- Approved -Publication in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette-Ordered.
xxxx  
 

Home (Transport-IV) Department   
 

 G.O. Ms. No.782    dated 13th June, 1972  
 

  Order:
Under Section 68-C read with
Section 68-E
of the Motor Vehicles, Act, 1939 (Central Act 4 of 1939), the General Manager, Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation published at PP 966-970 in Part II of the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, dated the 21st October, 1971, a scheme proposing modification of the scheme of road transport services approved by the Government under Section 68-D (3) of the said Act in G.O. Ms. No.1295, Home (Transport-IV) Department, dated 22nd September, 1969. Against the above modified scheme, M/s. Sri Ramadass Motor Transport (Private) Ltd., Kakinada filed an objection petition through their Counsel before the State Government within the statutory time limit of 30 days prescribed under Section 68-D(l) of the said Act. After considering the objections, the Government issued notices to the objector and the representatives of the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation in the matter by registered post acknowledgment due. A personal hearing as required by law, was given by the Government on the 28th April, 1972. The advocate of the objector had argued

the case on the same grounds as represented in the objection petition filed before the Government. The representatives of the Corporation had countered all the arguments of the advocate of the objector. The representative of the Corporation had further countered that the Corporation is competent to modify the approved scheme under
Section 68-E
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 after following the procedure
laid down in
Sections 68-C and 68-D of the said Act.
2. The Government have carefully considered the objection petition and also the arguments of the advocate of the objector and heard the representative of the Corporation. The Government are of the opinion that there is no force in any of the objections in the written representation filed before the Government and also arguments of the Advocate of the objector. Accordingly, under
Section 68-D(2)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, the Government approve the said scheme as published by the Corporation.
3. The following notification will be published in the next issue of the Andhra Pradesh Gazette:
NOTIFICATION  
 

 Whereas the Government, having considered the scheme prepared and published by the State Transport Undertaking, namely, the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, at pp.966-970 in Part II of the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, dated the 21st October, 1971 and the objections thereto made through written representations, have decided to approve the scheme as published by the said Corporation under sub-section (2) of
Section 68-D
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act 4 of 1939).
THE SCHEME
1.
Route (Starting point and
  terminus with important intermediate stations and route length).
---------
2.
   
   

Area (Name of routes with
  starting points and termini and intermediate stations and route length.
Visakhapatnam to Masulipatnam via Turn, Annavaram, Kakinada,
  Ramachandrapuram,Mandapeta, Marteru, Palacole, Bhimavarani, Kaikalur,
  Gudivada & Gudlavalleru (400 Kms.)
3.
   
   

Whether town services or
  mofussil services or both.
Motussil services (Stage Carriages).
4.
   
   

Maximum and minimum number
  of vehicles proposed to be operated on each route by the State Transport
  Undertaking to the exclusion, complete or partial or otherwise of other
  persons.
The following number of vehicles are proposed to be operated to
  the complete exclusion of other persons except holders of the existing stage
  carriage permits operating on the portions of the route in East Godavari and
  Visakha-patnam districts.
(a) Maximum number
6
(b) Minimum number
2
(c) Type
  
   
  Saloon
(d) Seating Capacity
49
5.
   
   

Maximum and minimum number
  of trips to be performed in each route by the State Transport Undertaking to
  the exclusion, complete or partial or otherwise of other persons.
The following number of trips
  are proposed to be performed to the complete exclusion of other persons
  except holders of the existing stage carriage permits operating on the
  portions of the route in East Godavari and Visakhapatnam districts.
(a) Maximum number
3
(b) Minimum number
1
6.
   
   

Number of vehicles intended
  to be kept in reserve to maintain the services and to provide for special
  occasions.
12 1/2% of the total number of
  vehicles required for the operation of scheduled services will be kept in
  service.
7.
   
   

The arrangements proposed
  for housing maintenance and repair of the vehicles.
The existing depot at
  Visakhapatnam, Bhima-varam and Masulipatnam will provide for 'housing,
  maintenance and repair of the vehicles.
8.
   
   

The arrangements proposed for
  the comfort and convenience of passengers.
Bus stations at important
  traffic points and wayside shelters are proposed to be constructed.
9.
   
   

The arrangements proposed
  for the stands and halts on the route at which copies oftime-tables
  of the services are proposed to be exhibited.
At important traffic points
  where bus stations are proposed to be constructed. Time-table boards will be
  exhibited.
10.
   
   

Whether it is proposed to
  permit the carriage of goods in addition to passengers.
Newspaper parcels,
  unaccompanied parcels and postal mail bags will be permitted in additionto
  passengers and their personal luggage.
11.
   
   

Any other information the
  State Transport Undertaking desires to submit.
----------
(By Order and in the name of
  the Governor of Andhra Pradesh)
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
   
  Dilsukh
  Ram
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
   
  Joint
  Secretary to Government.
G.O Ms. No.179, dated 28-6-1990 which is also relevant for the purpose of this case reads thus:
"Approved scheme of Road Transport Services published by the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation relating to the routes in West Godavari district.
G.O. Ms. No. 179, Transport, Roads and Buildings (Tr.IV), 28th June, 1990.
Whereas the Government having considered the scheme prepared and published by the state Transport Undertaking at pages 29-59 of Part II, Extraordinary issue of the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, dated 12-5-1989 and objections made through petitions and personally have decided to approve the scheme with certain modifications under
Section 102(2)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
Rs.
(i)
   
  Colouring the entire
  building (inside and outside)
  
   
  1,00,000
(ii)
   
  Revising the compound wall
  and fixing M. S. Grill over the same
  
   
  30,100
(iii)
   
  Providing acrylic sheet
  shed
  
   
  27,810
(iv)
   
  Polishing the doors and
  windows
  
   
  60,000
(v)
   
  Powder coated curtain rods
  
   
  8,000
(vi)
   
  Grass and horticulture
  works
  
   
  30,000
(vii)
   
  Geysers
  
   
  14,000 
  
 
  
   
   
  Total
  
   
  2,69,910
7.
The arrangements proposed
  for the housing, maintenance and repairs of the vehicles.
The existing and proposed
  depots of APSRTC will provide for housing, maintenance and repairs of the
  vehicles.
8.
    


  The arrangements proposed
  for the comfort and convenience of the passengers.
Bus stations at important
  traffic points and wayside shelters are proposed to be constructed. In
  addition, drinking water facilities will be provided at important places
  during summer.
9.
    


  The arrangements proposed
  for the stands and halts on the route at which copies of the time-tables of
  the services are proposed to be exhibited.
At important traffic points
  where bus stations are proposed to be constructed, time-table boards will be
  exhibited.
10.
    


  Whether it is proposed to
  permit the carriage of goods in addition to the passengers.
Newspaper parcels unaccompanied
  luggage and postal mail bags will be permitted in addition to the passengers
  and their personal luggage.
Note :--This scheme shall not affect-
1. The State Transport Undertakings.
2. The existing town services operating on the notified routes.
3. The holders of stage carriage permits for a distance not exceeding 5 KMs., on the notified route.
4.  The existing services operating on the inter-State routes incorporated in the concluded Inter-state agreement under Section 63-(3-B) of M.V. Act, 1939; and
5.  The services operated by Devasthanams.
Lal Rosem          
 

Joint Secretary to Government".
10.
The Act
was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to motor vehicles.
Section 2
provides for definition of various clauses.
Section 2(31)
defines 'permit' as under:
" 'Permit' means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorising the use of a motor vehicles as a transport vehicle".
11. Chapter VI of the said Act provides for special provisions relating to State Transport Undertakings. Sub-section (1) of
Section 99
stipulates preparation and publication of proposals regarding State Road Transport Undertakings. Sub-section (2) of
Section 99
prohibits grant of any permit during the pendency of the proposals except a temporary permit during the pendency of the proposal and such temporary permit is to remain valid only for a period of one year from the date of its issue.
12.
Section 100
(
Section 68-D
of Act, 1939) provides for objection to the proposal made under
Section 99
.
Section 102
(Corresponding to
Section 68-E
of the Old Act) which provides for cancellation or modification of scheme reads thus:
"(1) The State Government may, at anytime, if it considers necessary, in the public interest so to do, modify any approved scheme after giving-
(i) the State Transport Undertaking; and
(ii) any other person who, in the opinion of the State Government is likely to be affected by the proposed modification, an opportunity of being heard in respect of the proposed modification.
(2) The State Government shall publish any modification proposed under subsection (1) in the Official Gazette and in one of the newspapers in the regional language circulating in the area in which it is proposed to be covered by such modification, together with the date, not being less than thirty days from such publication in the Official Gazette, and the time and place at which any representation received in this behalf will be heard by the State Government".
13.
Section 104
which corresponds to
Section 68-FF
of the Old Act provides for restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route in the following terms:
"104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route :--Where a scheme has been published under sub-section (3) of
Section 100
in respect of any notified route, the State Transport Authority or the Regional Authority, as the case may be, shall not grant any permit except in accordance with the provisions of the scheme :
Provided that where no application for a permit has been made by the State Transport Undertaking in respect of any notified area or notified route in pursuance of an approved scheme, the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, may grant temporary permit to any person in respect of such notified area or notified route subject to the condition that such permit shall cease to be effective on the issue of a permit to the State Transport Undertaking in respect of the area or route."
14. There is no dispute that such a scheme as approved by State under the Act is a law and no permit can be granted to any person in contravention thereof. The

question which arises for consideration in these applications is as to whether the prohibition having been imposed in the scheme approved by the Government to the exclusion, complete or partial or otherwise of other persons, with regard to stage carriage mofussil service, the same has any application to the town service.
15. Rule 258 of A.P. Motor Vehicles, Rules, 1989 which provides for fixation of stages for carriages reads as under:
"258. Fixation of stages for carriages:--(I) In the case of stage carriages, the Regional Transport Authority shall, after consultation with such other authority as it may deem desirable, fix stages on all bus routes except town service. The maximum distance of each stage shall not ordinarily exceed 6.4 kilometers. When stages are so fixed, fares shall be collected according to stage.
Explanation :--When a passenger gets into or gets down from a stage carriage at a place lying in between two stages, he shall pay the fare from the stage proceeding the place where he gets into the bus to the stage succeeding the place where he gets down.
(1) The Regional Transport Authority shall, subject to the following restrictions, determine which are town service routes:
(i) at least one terminus of every town service shall lie within the limits of a municipality or any build up place notified in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette as 'town' for this purpose by the Regional Transport Authority concerned, with the prior concurrence of the State Transport Authority.
(ii) No route of town service shall extend more than 8 kilometers beyond the limits of the

municipality or town from which it starts, provided that this restriction shall not apply to any town service route, which were in existence on the date of coming of these rules into force or in respect of those routes for which specific permission of the Transport Commissioner is obtained.
(iii) No route shall be determined as both town and mofussil service routes.
16. Rule 298 of the Rules provides that every scheme for road transport service formulated by the State Government under
Section 99
shall be published by the State Government in Form STU. Rule 299 provides that any scheme for road transport service as approved or modified by the State Government shall be notified in the manner specified in Form STU-AS. It may be noted here that the schemes approved and notified by the State Government were in the said forms.
17. As already noticed above,
Section 99(1)
provides for preparation and publication of proposals regarding road transport service of a State Transport Undertaking where in the opinion of the State Government it is necessary in the public interest that road transport service in general or any particular class of such service in relation to any area or route or portion thereof should be run and operated exclusively by the State Road Transport Undertaking. The exclusion of other persons to run vehicles in relation to such notified area or route or portion thereof contained in the scheme may either be complete or partial.
18. The schedule appended to the aforementioned G.O. Ms. No.782/G.O. Ms. No. 179 is part of the scheme. In the said schedule the route area, the nature of

service, number of vehicles proposed to be operated on the route, number of trips to be performed and other connected matters are mentioned.
19. It is not in dispute that in terms of the rules framed by the State of Andhra Pradesh two different services, namely, 'Town Service' and 'Mofussil Service' have been specified. The said two services are absolutely different and distinct.
20. There is a great deal of difference between a town service and a mofussil service. A mofussil service in its very scheme is a long distance one which nitty have number of stages on the route; it may also have different fare structures and the stages prescribed therefor are also different, whereas town service normally operates in a particular limited route. Not only that the fare structures of the two services are different, the buses that are plied on the two services are differently built so as to satisfy the need of the different types of commuters in the respective areas. We may also note that whereas in a town service, the number of stoppages would be more and the fare structure would be higher and the types of buses would also be different, in long distance buses covering the mofussil service stoppages would be less and the buses will be used for different purposes.
21. Clause (3) of the schedule in G.O.Ms. No. 179 is a part of Form STU issued in terms of Rule 298 of the Rules and thus is statutory in nature. The STU form has been defined under Rule 2(d) of the Rules to mean a Form prescribed under the Act or Central Rules or appended to the State Rules.
22. As noticed hereinbefore, against Clause No.3 of the scheme published in G.O. Ms. No. 179/G.O. Ms. No.782 viz., "Whether town service or mofussil service or both" it was clearly notified that it was only for "mofussil service". Had the intention of the State Government been to bring within the purview of the said notification both for mofussil service and town service in regard to the service operated by the Corporation in the area or route notified under the scheme, it could have stated so in unmistakable terms. At this stage, we may also note that Clause (iii) of Explanation under Rule 258 clearly put a bar that no route shall be determined as both town and mofussil service routes. The prohibition imposed in Clause No.4 of the scheme notified cannot be read in isolation but must be read conjointly with Clause No.3 therefor read with Explanation No.(iii) under Rule 258(1).
23. The submission of Mr. Haranath learned Standing Counsel for the Corporation to the effect that the exclusion contained in Clause No.4 of the scheme is only to the extent specified in the note appended thereunder which includes the existing town service operating on the notified routes and thus all others would be necessarily prohibited cannot be accepted.
24. There cannot be any dispute whatsoever that having regard to the various decisions of the Apex Court in
T. V. Nataraj v. State of Karnataka
, ,
Pandiyen Road Ways Corporation Ltd. v. Thiru N.A. Egappan
, ,
C. Kasturi v. Secretary
,
Regional Transport Authority, , APSRTC v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal
, , as also the decisions of this Court in
APSRTC v. Secretary to Government
,
, in 1999 (2) ALD 622 and 1999(6) ALT 509 the authorisation to ply a vehicle must be express and implied authorisation is not countenanced. But the question which arises for consideration would be as to whether in a situation of this nature where a ban has been imposed only expressly in relation to mofussil service, whether the exclusion clause contained

in Clause No.4 of the schedule in G.O. Ms. No. 179 read with Note (2) thereunder can be put in service so as to bring within its fold also town service. The answer to the same must necessarily be in the negative.
25. Having regard to the purport and object of the Act, 1988, permits are to be liberally granted.
Chapter VI of the Act
contains a special provision. There cannot also be any doubt whatsoever in regard to the principles adumbrated by the Apex Court in
Mithilesh Garg v. Union of India
case (supra), in the matter of grant of permits in view of the liberlisation policy of the Government which was intended to encourage healthy competition and eliminate corruption. Although
the said decision
has no application in relation to a scheme prepared under
Chapter VI of the Act
which provides for special provision relating to State Transport Undertaking but it is also beyond any cavil of doubt that such exclusionary clause must be strictly interpreted.
26. It is true that the definition of 'permit' as contained in
Section 2(31)
of the Act is a wide one. We are also not oblivious of the specific bar imposed by
Section 104
of the Act prohibiting grant of any permit on the notified route which is part of the scheme.
27. The words 'any permit' cannot embrace within its fold both mofussil permit and town permit unless the same is specifically provided for.
28. A scheme, although has to be read in the context of
Section 104
of the Act, but the same cannot be given a wider application than intended to by the maker thereof.
In
Achyut v. Regional Transport Officer
, , the Apex Court held that despite publication of a scheme under
Section 68-C
of the 1939 Act proposing to nationalise contract carriage service would

not be an impediment for grant of permits under
Section 63(6)
thereof in respect of the routes covered by the scheme.
The Apex Court in this connection approved the decision of the Karnataka High Court in K.N. Sreekanthaiah v. Dy. Transport Commr., Bangalore, (1979) 2 Kant.LJ 292 = AIR 1979 NOC 134, as also the decision of this Court in
Mohd. Basha v. Secretary, Regional Transport Authority
, . Having regard to the different kinds of permits contemplated under the Act and a special permit under
Section 63(6)
can be granted we find no reason as to why town permits cannot be granted when the scheme of nationalisation covers only mofussil routes.
29. The note appended to a scheme framed under the statute must be construed having regard to the fact that it is a purposive enactment. It is a well settled principle of law that where the law is not clear, recourse must be taken to purposive interpretation.
In
Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless Co.
, , it was held:
"Interpretation must depend on the text and the context. They are the bases of interpretation. One may well say if the text is the texture, context is what gives the colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are important. That interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation match the contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we know why it was enacted. With this knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and then section by section, clause by clause, phrase by phrase and word by word. If a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute-maker, provided by such context, its scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour and appear different than when the statute is looked at without the glasses provided by the context. With these glasses we must

look at the Act as a whole and discover what each section, each clause, each phrase and each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no word of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have to be construed so that every word has a place and everything is in its place.
30. In Anantha Kumar v. State of West Bengal, 1999 (4) SLR 661, a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court has noticed the authorities as regards purposive construction. In Francis Bennion Statutory Interpretation, Second Edition, as regards the rule of 'purposive construction', it has been stated at Section 304 as under:
"A purposive construction of an enactment is one which gives effect to the legislative purpose by-
(a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where that meaning is in accordance with the legislative purpose (in the Code called a purposive-and-literal construction);
(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal meaning is not in accordance with the legislative purpose (in the Code called a purposive-and-strained construction)".
31. The meaning of "note" as per P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Law Lexicon, 1997 Edition is a 'brief statement of particulars of some fact', a passage or explanation. 'Explanation' has various functions.
In
S. Sundaram v. R. Pattabhiraman
,  it has been held:
"Thus, from a conspectus of the authorities referred to above, it is manifest that the object of an Explanation to a statutory provision is-
(a) to explain the meaning and intendment of the Act itself;
(b) where there is any obscurity or vagueness in the main enactment, to clarify the same so as to make it consistent with the dominant object which it seems to subserve;
(c) to provide an additional support to the dominant object of the Act in order to make it meaningful and purposeful;
(d) an Explanation cannot in any way interfere with or change the enactment or any part thereof but where some gap is left which is relevant for the purpose of the Explanation, in order to suppress the mischief and advance the object of the Act it can help or assist the Court in interpreting the true purport and intendment of the enactment; and
(e) it cannot, however, take away a statutory right with which any person under a statute has been clothed or set at naught the working of an Act by becoming an hindrance in the interpretation of the same".
32. It is, therefore, evident that the note (2) appended to G.O. Ms. No. 179, dated 28-6-1990 that the scheme shall not affect the existing town services operating on the notified routes is merely clarificatory in nature which was appended so as to obviate the difficulties that may be faced by the existing town services operating on the notified routes but the same cannot by itself take away the statutory right with which any person under a statute has been clothed nor it can interfere with or change the enactment or any part of the statute. So read and having regard to the object and purport of the issuance of the notification, we are of the opinion that the view taken by the Division Bench of this Court in
Rajappa Kawati v. G. Hanumantha Rao and others
, lays down the correct proposition of law and the view taken by the Division Bench in

WA No.56 of 1992 dated 14-10-1992 does not reflect the correct interpretation of the provisions.
33. For the reasons aforementioned, the
writ petitions filed by the A.P. State Road
Transport Corporation are dismissed and
WPNo.2157 of 1995 is allowed. No order
as to costs.