[Cites
27
, Cited by
8
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Jaleel Khan vs M. Kamalamma on 13 July, 2001
Equivalent citations: 2001(5)ALD610, 2001(5)ALT595
Author:
Bilal Nazki
Bench:
Bilal Nazki
ORDER
 

 T. Ch.  Surya  Rao,  J.
1. This
reference has been made for adjudication by a Division Bench on a vital point as to whether a revision petition filed under Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code be converted into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution.
2. The factual matrix germane for brevity and better understanding of the matter and for effective adjudication of the same may be set forth hereunder thus:
The landlord-petitioner filed RC No. 209 of 1998 seeking eviction of the tenant from the demised premises on the premise that the tenant committed wilful default in paying the rents. That was resisted by the tenant denying the title of the landlord and setting up the title in himself. While the landlord-petitioner claimed that she purchased the demised premises along with another property under a registered sale deed from her vendor, who in turn said to have purchased the same in her name; the plea of the respondent-tenant was that the demised premises was gifted to him by the husband of the vendor of the landlord-petitioner. During the course of enquiry in the eviction petition, the vendor of the landlord-petitioner was examined as PW1, in proof of title of the landlord-petitioner over the demised premises. The chief-examination was done on 23-4-1999 and the matter was adjourned to 28-4-1999 for cross-
examination on the side of the tenant-respondent. Thereafter, the matter underwent four adjournments including a couple of adjournments on payment of costs of Rs. 25/-. When the matter stood adjourned to 9-6-1999 for payment of costs of Rs. 25/- for the second time and for proceeding with the cross-examination of PW1, neither the tenant nor his Counsel was present. The learned Rent Controller, therefore, passed an order forfeiting the right of the tenant to cross-examine the witness.
3. On 21-6-1999, the tenant filed IA No. 267 of 1999 seeking to set aside the order dated 9-6-1999 forfeiting the right of cross-examination. In that petition, inter alia, the tenant sought to explain the reason for his default on 9-6-1999 on the premise that the date of adjournment was recorded as 19-6-1999 by his Counsel instead of 9-6-1999. The explanation was not found favoured with and in sequal thereto, the learned Rent Controller dismissed, as aforesaid IA No. 276 of 1999.
4. Having been aggrieved by the same, the tenant sought to file the Civil Revision Petition No. 3680 of 1999 under
Section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure ('the Code' for brevity). On an objection take by the learned Counsel appearing for the landlord about the maintainability of the said civil revision petition under
Section 115
of the Code realising that in view of the specific provision envisaged by the
A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960
('the Act' for brevity) conferring the revisional jurisdiction on the High Court, Section 115 of the Code has no application and as the impugned order, which is an interlocutory order, has not been covered by
Section 22
of the Act; the tenant sought to convert the Civil Revision Petition No. 3680 of 1991 as a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
5. Again that application was resisted by the landlord on the ground that such an application was not permissible placing reliance upon three judgments of this Court rendered by three learned single Judges and a judgment of the Apex Court in
Vishesh Kumar v. Shanti Prasad
, .
6. Having regard to the fact situation in this case and after having perused the judgment of the Apex Court referred to supra, while respectfully differing with the views expressed by the three learned single Judges of this Court, one of us (TCSR, J) referred the matter to a Bench to have a fresh look at the legal position. That is how, as aforesaid, the matter has come up before us for adjudication.
7. It is obvious that the order passed by the learned Rent Controller in an interlocutory application filed by the tenant in IA No. 267 of 1999 refusing to set aside the earlier order passed by her forfeiting the right of cross-examination, falls within the realm of an interlocutory order. The tenant who is aggrieved by the said order seeks to assail the same.
The Act
is a self-contained Code and has conferred a right of appeal on the aggrieved parities and has also clearly envisaged the revisional jurisdiction.
Sections 20
and
22
of the Act are the two provisions, which are germane for consideration in this regard.
Section 20
of the Act insofar as is relevant for the present purpose reads as under:
"Appeal:--(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Controller may, within thirty days, from the date of such order, prefer an appeal in writing to the Chief Judge, Small Causes Court in the cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad and elsewhere to the Subordinate Judge or if there are more than one Subordinate Judge, to the Principal Subordinate Judge having original jurisdiction over

the area aforesaid. In computing the said period of thirty days the time taken to obtain a certified copy of the order appealed against shall be excluded.
(2) x x x x  
 

 (3) x x x x  
 

 (4) x x x x"
8. A mere perusal of the said provision shows that an appeal lies against an order passed by the Rent Controller to the appellate forum. There has been no ostensible indication in the said section restricting the right of appeal to a particular kind of order. However, the Apex Court in
Central Bank of India Limited v. Gokal Chand
, , dealing with the provisions of the
Delhi Rent Control Act
held thus:
"In the context of Section 38(1) the words 'every order of the Controller made under this Act', though very wide, do not include interlocutory orders, which are merely procedural and do not affect the rights or liabilities of the parties and in a pending proceeding, the Controller may pass many interlocutory orders under Sections 36 and 37, such as orders regarding the summoning of witnesses, discovery, production and inspection of documents, issue of a commission for examination of witnesses, inspection of premises, a date of hearing and the admissibility of a document or the relevancy of a question. All these interlocutory orders are steps taken towards the final adjudication and for assisting the parties in the prosecution of their case in the pending proceeding; they regulate the procedure only and do not affect any right or liability of the parties. The Legislature could not have intended that the parties would be harassed with endless expenses and delay by appeals from such procedural orders."
9. Following
the said judgment
, a Bench of this Court in Chaganlal (died) Sardarilal v. N. Pershad, 1972 (1) APLJ 343, while interpreting
Section 20
of the Act held that no appeal could be maintained against an interlocutory order passed by the learned Rent Controller.
Thus, in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court in
Central Bank of India Limited
's case (supra) and in view of a Bench judgment of this Court rendered directly under the provisions of the Act, following the judgment of the Apex Court, the legal position is obvious that no appeal could be maintained under
Section 20
of the Act assailing an interlocutory order passed by the Rent Controller, which order is merely regulates the procedure and docs not affect the rights or liabilities of the parties.
10.
Section 22
of the Act confers revisional jurisdiction upon the High Court.
Section 22
of the Act insofar as is relevant for the present purpose reads as under:
"Revision :--(1) The High Court may, at any time, on the application of an aggrieved party, call for an examine the  records relating to any order passed or proceeding taken under this Act by the Controller in execution under
Section 15
or by the appellate authority on appeal under
Section 20
, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality, regularity or of propriety of such order or proceeding and may pass such order in reference thereto as it thinks fit.
(2) x x x x"
11. It is manifest that the revisional jurisdiction conferred upon the High Court is restricted to an order passed by the appellate Court and an order passed by the Rent Controller in execution proceedings. Therefore, no revision lies against an interlocutory order passed by the Rent Controller pending the main proceedings in view of the clear legal position, as discussed

by us supra. The aggrieved party can neither maintain an appeal, nor can he assail the said order by preferring any revision against the same.
12. Inasmuch as the Act is a self-contained Code and has clearly envisaged the revisional jurisdiction, obviously the provisions under Section 115 of the Code cannot be invoked. In view of the peculiar situation obtaining in this case, the party aggrieved cannot be said to have no remedy at all. Although the Act excludes the applicability of the provisions of Section 115 of the Code, it cannot take away the right ofan individual to approach the High Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India.
13. It is now beyond controversy that the High Court can exercise revisional jurisdiction over the Tribunals and Courts. Even otherwise, in view of the authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court in
Shama Prashanl Raje v. Ganpatrao and others
, , and in
Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited v. Grapco Industries Limited and others
, , the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be doubted over the Tribunals and the Courts. Hence, the aggrieved party can clearly approach the High Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India assailing the order passed by the learned Rent Controller in an interlocutory application when he has no remedy either under
Section 20
or under
Section 22
of the Act. Had the tenant approached this Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India initially assailing the order dated 5-7-1999 passed in IA No. 267 of 1999, there would not have been any controversy at all. Because he sought to approach this-Court under Section 115 of the Code in the first instance and in the wake of a tenable objection raised by the adversary, he had to seek conversion of his application;
so as to avoid  unnecessary delay and expenditure.
14. Whether a petition filed under Section 115 of the Code can be converted into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India in ordinary course is the next question for determination?
15.
In
Dulhin Sona Kuer v. Jamil Ahmed, Vol
. 48 Indian Cases 779, a Full Bench of the Patna High Court held as under:
"The High Court has jurisdiction, in the exercise of its inherent powers under Section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code, to condone in special cases the misapplication of the provisions of the Code, if the provisions of the law as regards limitation and Court-fee are complied with. The High Court has authority to convert an application for revision into a memorandum of  appeal."
16.
In
Swat Krishna Bose v. Bisweswar Mitra
, AIR 1927 Cal. 534, a Bench of the Calcutta High Court held as follows:
"When an application under Order 9, Rule 9, for restoration of the suit is dismissed for default under Rule 4 of that order, no application lies under Order 9, Rule 9, for setting aside that order of dismissal and for restoration and re-hearing for the former application under Order 9, Rule 9, but the second application may be treated as an application to restore the suit itself and not to restore the first application, and if it is within time, there can be no bar to its being dealt with an application under Order 9, Rule 9 Civil PC."
17.
In
Shivaprasad Singh v. Prayagkumari Debee, ILR LXL Cal
. (1934) 711 at page 785, a Bench of the Calcutta High Court held thus:
"There is, of course, the inherent power, which the Code has reserved to every Court, under Section 151 to make such orders as should be made ex debit justitiae, and every Court should have in view the shortening of litigation preventing duplication of proceedings and saving the parties from harassment and expense. And delay by itself, is not sufficient to deprive a party of his remedies, if such delay does not amount to waiver, acquiescence of abandonment of his claim or has not created a corresponding right in his opponent on extinguishments of his own."
The Supreme Court in
V.C. Shukla v. State
, , held as follows:
"Apart from the revisional power, the High Court under the Code of 1908 possessed an inherent power to pass orders ex debito justitiae in order to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. This was a special power which was to be exercised by the High Court to meet a particular contingency in not expressly provided for in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
Code."
18. Although
the above decision
came to be rendered under the provisions of
Criminal Procedure Code
, nonetheless, the principle is the same, where either the Civil Procedure Code or the
Criminal Procedure Code
saves certain inherent powers of the Court. An inherent power of the Court is not a power conferred on the High Court by either of these Codes. It inheres in the Court to meet certain contingencies. The Code only saves those powers.
19. The Apex Court in
Nandarani Mazumdar v. Indian Airlines
, , held that a suit can be treated as an execution application as a measure of ex debito justitiae.
20. Thus, we see conversion in appropriate cases is permissible so as to

avoid unnecessary delay, inconvenience and expenditure, and in certain cases to save the limitation, as has been done in
Nandarani Mazumdar
's case (supra).
21. Apropos the legal bar for such conversion, much reliance has been placed by the learned Counsel for the petitioner upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
Vishesh Kumar
's case (supra). It is expedient here therefore to understand
the said judgment
of the Apex Court. That was a case where there had been a bifurcation of revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code in view of Section 3 of the Code (U.P. Amendment Act, 1978). In view of the State amendment to Section 115 of the Code, the trial Court alone had jurisdiction under Section 115 in cases arising out of Original Suits or other proceedings of the value of Rs. 20,000/- and above; and the District Court alone has jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code in any other case. The High Court has jurisdiction under Section 115 in respect of cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of any valuation decided by the District Court. The matter therein arose out of the provisions of the
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1920
. Under
Section 25
of the said Act, as amended, the District Judge became the repository of revisional power instead of High Court against any order passed by the Court exercising original jurisdiction under the
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act
and as against the matters decided by the District Judge or the Additional District Judge exercising the jurisdiction of a Judge of Small Cause Court, the power of revision would vest in the High Court.
22. Two questions arose for consideration before the Apex Court in the context - (1) Whether the High Court vests revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code in respect of an order of the District Court under Section 115 of the Code

disposing of a revision petition? and (2) whether the High Court possesses the revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code against an order of the District Court under
Section 25
of the Provincial Small Cause Courts, Act, 1920, disposing of a revision petition?
23. After having reviewed the legal position with reference to the U.P. Amendment Acts, both to
the Code of Civil Procedure
as well as the
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1920
, the Apex Court held in paras 15 and 19 as under:
"15. We are of the opinion on the first question that the High Court is not vested with revisional jurisdiction under
Section 115
, Code of Civil Procedure, over a revisional order made by the District Court under that section."
"19. Accordingly, we hold that an order passed under
Section 25
, Provincial Small Cause Courts Act by a District Court is not amenable to the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 115
, Code of Civil Procedure."
24. When the Apex Court decided both the points in the negative, it had been urged before it that the case should be remitted to the High Court for consideration as a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. In the context, it was held in para 22 as under:
'We are unable to accept that prayer. A revision petition under Section 115 is a separate and distinct proceeding from a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution, and one cannot be identified with the other."
Inasmuch as a concurrent revisional jurisdiction has been conferred upon the District Court and the High Court by the U.P. State Amendment Act to
the Code of

Civil Procedure
as against the order passed by the District Court exercising revisional jurisdiction, the High Court cannot entertain a revision and when the High Court cannot entertain its revisional jurisdiction under the Code, it cannot exercise its supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India for the self-same reason. Under the circumstances, that was not a clear case where an application filed under Section 115 of the Code was sought to be converted into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India so as to see whether such a conversion is permissible. As the revisional jurisdiction has already been exercised by one Court having concurrent jurisdiction along with the High Court, the Apex Court did not accede the request for such conversion.
25. The above decision, therefore, cannot be understood to mean that a revision petition under Section 115 of the Code cannot be permitted to be converted into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. The observations made by the Apex Court while parting with the matter cannot be read in isolation and it is expedient to understand the rationale behind it by taking a holistic view of the entire case.
26. There can be no second revision over an order passed exercising revisional jurisdiction, notwithstanding the fact that the former order passed by the Court exercising revisional jurisdiction is a Court inferior to the High Court. A fortiori when that inferior Court had concurrent revisional jurisdiction along with the High Court. It was not a simple case where the High Court lacks revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code. But it was a case where a second revision would be maintained or not in view of the concurrent jurisdiction to the High Court and the District Court. Furthermore there has been

no ratio involved
in that case
and in deed has not been decided by the Apex Court.
Therefore it cannot be a precedent as held by the Apex Court in
Arnit Das v. State of Bihar
, , thus:
"A decision not expressed, not accompanied by reasons and not proceeded on a conscious consideration of an issue cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have binding effect as is contemplated by
Article 141.
That which escaped in the judgment is not the ratio decidendi. This is the rule of sub silentio, in the technical sense when a particular point was not consciously determined."
27. In our considered view, therefore, there is no legal bar and the contention of the learned Counsel appearing for the landlord that the conversion of the revision petition filed under Section 115 of the Code into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India is not permissible, merits no consideration.
28. Placing reliance upon
Vishesh Kumar
's case (supra), a learned single Judge of this Court in
Nallamilli Satyanarayana Reddy v. Tadi Venkata Reddy
, 1997 (4) ALD 684, has come to a conclusion that a petition filed under Section 115 of the Code cannot be converted into one under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India. That was a case where as against the judgment of the appellate forum under Andhra Tenancy Act a revision was sought to be filed under Section 115 of the Code. Later in was sought to be converted into a petition under
Article 227
, of the Constitution.
Following
the said judgment
and the judgment of the Apex Court again in
Md. Kutubuddin v. Bhaikar Raja Mitraji Anand Kumar, , another
learned single Judge has taken the same view. This decision was rendered under the provisions of the Act. When a revision petition filed against the orders of the

appellate forum in rent control proceedings sought to be converted it was held not permissible.
Again in
Oriental Insurance Company Limited v. Sunnapu Govindamma
, , a learned single Judge of this Court has taken a similar view. That judgment has been rendered under the provisions of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
.
The basis for all these decisions was
Visesh Kumar
's case (supra).
29. In view of the clear legal position the judgments rendered by this Court referred to supra are no more good law.
30. It is further made clear that we are only dealing with the matter regarding conversion of a petition originally filed under Section 115 of the Code into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India and for reasons given above we hold that it is permissible. But, whether in the facts of this case a petition under
Article 227
would be maintainable or not is a question, which will have to be decided by the Court after conversion. Any observations made should not be taken as an expression of opinion that every order passed at the interim stage by the Rent Controller is challengeable under
Article 227.
31. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the considered view that in appropriate cases where the fact situation warrants a petition filed under Section 115 of the Code can be converted into a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India on the principle of ex debito justitiae. The reference is answered accordingly.