[Cites
41
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sms Schloemann Siemag, A.G. vs Dy. Cit & Anr. on 26 April, 2001
Equivalent citations: [2001]250ITR97(AP)
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
JUDGMENT
 

S.B. Sinha, C.J.
Reference to this Bench has been made by a Division Bench of this court having regard to the importance of theuestion as regards the interpretation of
section 220(2)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as "the said Act" for brevity). Although all the writ petitions involve a similaruestion of law, the factual matrix of the matter shall be considered from Writ Petition No. 6112 of 1996.
2. The writ petition relates to the assessment year 1984-85 and the original demand of assessment was made on 27-3-1987. The entire amount of tax was paid. But the order of assessment wasuestioned in an appeal. The said appeal of the assessee was allowed by the Commissioner (Appeals) by an order dated 31-3-1989. The assessee made a demand of refund of the amount with interest, pursuant whereto the amount was refunded along with interest in terms of
section 244
of the said Act on or about 28-7-1989. The department preferred an appeal there against before the Appellate Tribunal, which was allowed on 6-9-1995. A conse uential demand was made on 6-9-1995, wherein interest was charged under
section 220(2)
of the said Act from the date of the original demand.
3. Mr. V. Ramachandran, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner-assessee, inter alia, submitted that having regard to the provision in
section 156
read with the scheme as contained in Chapter XVII of the said Act, it is manifest that interest can be charged only when there exists a demand. According to learned counsel, as the assessee had already paid the entire amount pursuant to the notice of demand issued under
section 156
of the said Act, the entire demand having been wiped out, theuestion of charging of interest from the date of the original demand would not arise only because the appeal of the department before the Appellate Tribunal succeeded and in the meantime pursuant to the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), the amount was refunded together with interest in terms of
section 244
of the said Act. According to learned counsel, the demand made upon the petitioner is a fresh one. It was pointed out that having regard to the procedure for the deposit of the amount, a challan has to be issued and a prescribed procedure has to be followed. Learned counsel would contend that it is not necessary, having regard to
section 244(1)
of the said Act that an order of refund would be made automatically. In this connection, our attention has been drawn to the provisions contained in
sections 237
,
240
and
241
of the said Act.
4. Learned counsel would further urge that even the
Taxation Laws (Continuation and Validation of Recovery Proceedings) Act, 1964
(hereinafter referred to as "the Validation Act"), would not change the situation. It was urged that interest is leviable only if there exists an express provision.
5. Mr. S.R. Ashok, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, would submit that section 3 of the Validation Act raises a legal fiction. It was contended that in a case of this nature, the doctrine of merger would come into play. Mr. Ashok would urge that, having regard to the fact that by reason of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) the appeal was allowed, the demand would remain in eclipse during the pendency of the appeal by the department before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
In support of the said contention reliance has been placed on
Pitambardas Dulichand v. Union of India
(1999) 239 ITR 69 (MP);
ITO v. Ghanshyamdas Jatia
(1976) 105 ITR 693 (Cal);
Bharat Commerce and Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
(1991) 188 ITR 277 (Del) ;
Roopali Dyeing and Printing Works v. Asstt. CIT
(
1995) 212 ITR 573 (Guj), Vikrant Tyres Ltd. v. First ITO
(1993) 202 ITR 454 (Karn) ;
Union of India v. Jardine Henderson Ltd.
(
1979) 118 ITR 112 (SC) and M.N. Jadhav v. Fourth ITO
(1986) 161 ITR 275 (Karn). According to learned counsel, there does not exist any ambiguity after the amendment.
6.
Section 156
of the said Act provides that when any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum is payable in conse uence of an order passed under the said Act, the assessing officer shall serve upon the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable. Reference by learned counsel to the provisions of
sections 219
and
234A
of the said Act, in our opinion, is not relevant for the purpose of disposal of the present case.
Section 220
prescribes the period within which the payment has to be made. Sub-section (2) of
section 220
reads thus :
7. If the amount specified in any notice of demand under
section 156
is not paid within the period limited under sub-section (1), the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at one and one-half per cent. for every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing from the day immediately following the end of the period mentioned in sub-section (1) and ending with the day on which the amount is paid."
8.
Section 221
of the said Act provides for penalty payable when the assessee is in default in payment of tax.
Section 223
lays down the power of the Tax Recovery Officer to take action under
section 222
.
Section 224
of the said Act provides that it shall not be open to the assessee to dispute the correctness of the certificate drawn up by the Tax Recovery Officer on any ground whatsoever, but the Tax Recovery Officer may cancel the certificate if, for any reason, he thinks it necessary so to do. He has also the power to correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake therein.
Section 225
empowers the Tax Recovery Officer to grant time to the assessee for payment of tax and for the said purpose he may stay the proceedings for recovery of tax until the expiry of the time so granted. Sub-section (2) of
section 225
deals with a situation where a demand has been reduced in a proceeding, but the order is the subject-matter of further proceeding under the Act. Sub-section (3) of
section 225
provides that if by reason of an order passed in appeal or other proceedings, the amount of outstanding demand is reduced the certifying officer may amend the certificate or cancel it.
Section 226
provides for other modes of recovery.
9.
Section 244
of the said Act deals with interest on refund where no claim is needed.
10. Theuestion came up before the Apex Court in
ITO v. Seghu Buchiah Setty
(1964) 52 ITR 538 (SC), and, while interpreting the provisions of
sections 29
and
45
of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, it was held that in a case where the demand. levied by the Income Tax Officer was varied by the appellate or revising authority, the original order of the Income Tax Officer merges into the order of such authority and, conse uently, in all cases of an order varying the assessment, the original order goes and all steps already taken for recovery of the demand become null and void and that in such cases it is the duty of the Income Tax Officer to issue a fresh notice of demand in the prescribed form and serve it upon the assessee.
11. Parliament has enacted the Validation Act, 1964, and the Statement of Objects and Reasons reads thus (1964) 52 ITR (St.) 65 :
"Recently in the case of
ITO v. Seghu Buchiah Setty
(supra), the Supreme Court had occasion to consider the scope of
sections 29
and
45
of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, and it has been held
in that case
that when a demand levied by the Income Tax Officer as a result of an assessment is varied by an appellate or revising authority, the original order of the Income Tax Officer merges into the order of such authority and conse uently in all cases of an order varying the assessment, the original order goes and all steps already taken for the recovery of the demand become null and void and that in such cases it is the duty of the Income Tax Officer to issue a fresh notice of demand in the prescribed form and serve it upon the assessee. Though the judgment is with reference to the
Indian Income Tax Act, 1922
, which has been repealed but kept alive only for some limited purposes, the same interpretation may hold good with respect to the corresponding provisions in the
Income Tax Act, 1961
, and in the other Acts relating to the imposition of direct taxes.
2. The above decision of the Supreme Court will create difficulties in the collection of income-tax and other direct taxes. The number of assessments involved in the arrear demands of the direct taxes is nearly six lakhs and recovery certificates have been issued to Collectors or Tax Recovery Officers in approximately 2,25,000 cases and the revenue involved comes to Rs. 157 crores.
In view of
the above decision
of the Supreme Court, in most of these cases, fresh notices of demand may have to be served upon the assessees and the assessees will have to be allowed a further period for paying the tax. It will be only after the expiry of the said period that fresh proceedings for recovery can be started. The result would be that recalcitrant assessees would get sufficient time to withdraw their funds or alienate their properties with a view to defeating the claims of the revenue.
3. In order to overcome these difficulties, it is proposed to provide that in such cases, it shall not be necessary to take proceedings afresh or to serve fresh notices of demand except that in the case of an enhancement of assessment, another notice of demand shall be served upon the assessee with respect to the amount by which the assessment has been enhanced. Opportunity has also been taken to provide for certain matters which are ancillary to the above proposal."
12. The said Validation Act received the assent of the President on 12-5-1964, and was published in the Gazette of India on the same date. The assessee, the taxing authority and the Tax Recovery Officer have been defined in sections 2(a), 2(d) and 2(e) of the Validation Act, respectively, in the following terms :
"2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise re uires,
(a) assessee, in relation to
(i) the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940), or the
Business Profits Tax Act, 1947
(21 of 1947), means a person by whom the tax or any other sum is payable under that Act ;
(ii) the
Estate Duty Act, 1953
(34 of 1953) means a person accountable or an accountable person as defined in that Act ;
(iii) any other Scheduled Act, means an assessee as defined in that Act ; . . .
(d) taxing authority in relation to any Scheduled Act, means an officer (by whatever name called) empowered to serve upon an assessee a notice of demand in respect of any government dues under that Act ;
(e) Tax Recovery Officer, in relation to any Scheduled Act, means a Tax Recovery Officer as defined in that Act and where there is no such definition, means an officer (by whatever name called) to whom a certificate for the recovery of arrears of government dues may be issued under that Act."
Section 3 of the Validation Act reads thus :
"3. Continuation and validation of certain proceedings.  (1) Where any notice of demand in respect of any government dues is served upon an assessee by a taxing authority under any Scheduled Act, and any appeal or other proceeding is filed or taken in respect of such government dues. then,
(a) where such government dues are enhanced in such appeal or proceeding, the taxing authority shall serve upon the assessee another notice of demand only in respect of the amount by which such government dues are enhanced and any proceedings in relation to such government dues as are covered by the notice or notices of demand served upon him before the disposal of such appeal or proceeding may, without the service of any fresh notice of demand, be continued from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal ;
(b) where such government dues are reduced in such appeal or proceeding,
(i) it shall not be necessary for the taxing authority to serve upon the assessee a fresh notice of demand ;
(ii) the taxing authority shall give intimation of the fact of such reduction to the assessee, and where a certificate has been issued to the Tax Recovery Officer for the recovery of such amount, also to that officer :
(iii) any proceedings initiated on the basis of the notice or notices of demand served upon the assessee before the disposal of such appeal or proceeding may be continued in relation to the amount so reduced from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal ;
(c) no proceedings in relation to such government dues (including the imposition of penalty or charging of interest) shall be invalid by reason only that no fresh notice of demand was served upon the assessee after the disposal of such appeal or proceeding or that such government dues have been enhanced or reduced in such appeal or proceeding :
Provided that if as a result of any final order such government dues (other than annuity deposit) have been reduced and the penalty imposed on the assessee for default in payment thereof exceeds the amount so reduced, the excess shall not be recovered and if it has already been recovered, it shall be refunded to the assessee on an application made by him to the taxing authority within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act :
Provided further that if the amount of penalty imposed on the assessee for failure to make any annuity deposit exceeds one half of the amount of the annuity deposit re uired to be made as a result of such order, the excess shall not be recovered, and if it has already been recovered, shall be refunded to the assessee on an application made by him to the taxing authority within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act :
Provided further that where any government dues are reduced in such appeal or proceeding and the assessee is entitled to any refund thereof, such refund shall be made in accordance with the provisions of that Act.
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no fresh notice of demand shall be necessary in any case where the amount of government dues is not varied as a result of any order passed in any appeal or other proceeding under any scheduled Act.
(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, Tribunal or other authority."
13. We may, however, note that in this regard the Central Board of Direct Taxes has also issued a circular, being No. 334, dated 3-4-1982.
14. A taxing statute, in a case where two interpretations are possible, must be construed in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
15.
In
Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. v. ITO
(1993) 203 ITR 84 (Guj), a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court, having regard to the provisions of section 220 of the said Act, held :
"From the aforesaid provisions, it is apparent that interest can be recovered only if the assessee fails to comply with the notice of demand issued under
section 156
of the Income Tax Act. It is also apparent, as stated above, that the petitioner had complied with the notice of demand issued under
section 156
of the Income Tax Act and, therefore, there is nouestion of applying the provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 220
of the Income Tax Act.
As the provisions are absolutely unambiguous and clear, in our view, it is not necessary to refer to the decision of the Kerala High Court in the case of
ITO v. A.V. Thomas and Co.
(1986) 160 ITR 818 (Ker), and the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
Bharat Commerce and Industries Ltd. v. Union of India
(1991) 188 ITR 277 (Del)."
16.
In
A.V Thomas and Co. Ltd. v. ITO
(1982) 138 ITR 275 (Ker), the Kerala High Court held that where the assessee had paid the amount at the right time and received the refund as per the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, he had no liability to pay any amount to the department, unless notice of demand was served on him conse uent upon the reversal of the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner by the Tribunal.
17. The said decision was affirmed in appeal in
ITO v. A.V. Thomas and Co.
(1986) 160 ITR 818 (Ker).
18.
In
CIT v. Chittoor Electric Supply Corporation
(1995) 212 ITR 404 (SC), the Apex Court, in a different fact situation, overruled the decision of the Kerala High Court reported in
New Woodlands Hotel v. CIT
(1991) 188 ITR 137 (Ker) holding :
"
Section 240
says that where, as a result of any appellate or other order passed under the Act, any amount becomes due to the assessee, the assessing officer shall have to refund it even without the assessee making a claim therefor.
Section 244(1)
, which carries forward the idea contained in
section 240
, says that where a refund is due to the assessee pursuant to an order referred to in
section 240
and the assessing officer does not grant the refund within a period of three months from the end of the month in which said order is passed, the Central Government shall pay to the assessee interest on the amount of refund from the date immediately following the expiry of the period of three months till the date on which refund is granted at the prescribed rate.
Section 237
, which is a general provision relating to refunds, says that if any person satisfies the assessing officer that the tax paid by him for any assessment year exceeds the amount properly chargeable under the Act, he shall be entitled to a refund of the excess. What is significant is that
section 240
speaks of an amount becoming due as a result of any order passed in appeal or other proceeding under the Act.
Section 244(1)
is also to the same effect. It says, where a refund is due to the assessee pursuant to an order referred to in
section 240
. Theuestion to be answered is whether any amount became due to the assessee in this case when the Appellate Assistant Commissioner passed his order. Obviously not. According to
section 237
, a refund becomes due when the amount paid by the assessee is in excess of the amount with which he is properly chargeable under this Act for that year. Unless a fresh assessment is made, it would not be possible to say what amount is properly chargeable and until that is determined, theuestion of refund may not arise. In this case, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner merely directed a fresh assessment on a different basis. In cases where the assessment is set aside and a fresh assessment is directed to be made, the tax determined on such assessment may be either more or less than the tax determined in the original (set aside) assessment. Therefore, no one can say on the date of such appellate order that any amount has become due to the assessee-or for that matter, to the revenue."
19. The Apex Court, thus held that the refund becomes due only after fresh assessment is made pursuant to appeal and not from the date of the appellate order. In the fact situation of that case, it was observed that according to
section 220(2)
, interest is payable by the assessee on the amount due only after the service of the notice of demand pursuant to such fresh assessment. However, the Apex Court has clarified that the ratio laid down therein is confined to a case where an appellate or other authority under the Act sets aside or cancels the assessment and directs a fresh assessment to be made, i.e., a situation contemplated by the subse uently inserted proviso (clause (a)).
20.
In
Bharat Commerce and Industries Ltd. v. CIT
(1994) 210 ITR 13 (Del), it was held that interest cannot be levied in an order of rectification passed under
section 154
of the Act.
21.
In
K.P. Abdul Kareem Hajee v. ITO
(1983) 141 ITR 120 (Ker), the doctrine of eclipse was taken recourse to stating :
"The order of a judicial oruasi-judicial authority is not final for the purpose of res judicata during the time allowed for filing an appeal or the pendency of an appeal. In the absence of any statutory provision to the contrary, or an interim stay granted by a competent authority, the order, although not final, is provisionally executable, subject to restoration. The finality of exhibit P-2A wasualified by and subject to appeal, which was taken before the appellate authority. The order of the appellate authority itself was likewise provisional during the period allowed for filing an appeal or during the pendency of the appeal. When the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner concerning the petitioner was finally set aside by the Tribunal, thereby affirming exhibit P-2A order of the Income Tax Officer, the cloud hanging over exhibit P-2A was removed and its finality was affirmed. Conse uently, for the relevant period, exhibit P-2A is deemed to have operated in full vigour to make the petitioner liable in law by reason of the Tribunals affirmative order. If this is the position in law, which I think it is,
section 220(2)
of the Income Tax Act was attracted in respect of the amount due from the petitioner as per exhibit P-2A dated 1-12-1973. It is that interest which is now demanded by the Income Tax Officer, vide exhibit P-6, and affirmed by the Commissioner by exhibit P-7."
22.
In
Bharat Commerce and Industries Ltd.
case (supra), the Delhi High Court in a case where the tax was reduced by the Commissioner (Appeals) and increased by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. directed that the levy of interest was valid as tax demanded under
section 156
of the said Act pursuant to the original assessment has not been paid.
23.
In
Vikrant Tyres Ltd.s
case (supra), the Karnataka High Court had held that the interest is valid from the date of refund till the date of final payment.
The said decision was rendered prior to the judgment of the Apex Court in
Chittoor Electric Supply Corporations
case (supra).
24. The Karnataka High Court
in that case
, considered the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Circular No. 334, dated 3-4-1982 (1982) 135 ITR (St.) 10), and held that as refund had been obtained by the petitioner because the appellate authority reversed the order of the assessing authority, it cannot be said that the assessee had not paid the tax specified in the notice of demand under
section 156
of the said Act. Referring to the Central Board of Direct Taxes Circular and the Validation Act, 1964, the Division Bench held :
" Payment of interest, essentially, is compensatory in nature. Logically, the compensation should cover the entire period during which the person to whom the money belongs lawfully was made to part with it to another. To reduce the period for which compensation is payable, when, in fact, the person was deprived of his money for a longer period, is to truncate the very concept of compensation.
That liability to pay income-tax is a debt due on the last date of the accounting period is a principle now established by the decision of the Supreme Court in Kesoram Industries and Cotton Mills Ltd. v. CWT (1966) 59 ITR 767 (SC). At page 784, the Supreme Court observed :
A liability to pay income-tax is a present liability though it becomes payable after it isuantified in accordance with ascertainable data. There is a perfected debt at any rate on the last day of the accounting year and not a contingent liability.
Therefore, jurisprudentially, the revenue is a creditor and the taxpayer is a debtor and there is nothing strange if the law contemplates that the debtor should compensate the creditor by paying interest on the amount due. The fact that the law has postponed the discharge of tax liability to the date of issuance of a demand notice and the period of 30 days from the date of the demand, would not alter the nature of the said liability."
25. As regards the decision of the Kerala High Court in
A.V. Thomas and Co. Ltd.s
case (supra), it was observed :
"With utmost respect, we cannot agree with the observations of the Kerala High Court referred to earlier. The nature of the interest payable under the Act has not been considered in
the said decision
."
26. We may, however, notice that the decision of the Karnataka High Court in
Vikram Tyres Ltd.s
case (supra), has been reversed by the Apex Court recently in
Vikrant Tyres Ltd. v. First ITO
(2001) 20 DTC 390 (SC) : (2001) 247 ITR 821 (SC) wherein it was held :
"A bare reading of this section clearly indicates that if the assessee does not pay the amount demanded under a notice issued under
section 156
of the Act within the time stipulated under sub-section (1), the said assessee is liable to pay simple interest at one and one-half per cent. for every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing from the date immediately following the end of the period mentioned in sub-section (1) and ending with the day on which the amount is paid, and, therefore, the condition precedent under this section is that there should be a demand notice and there should be a default to pay the amount so demanded within the time stipulated in the said notice. Applying this section to the facts of the case, it is seen that immediately after the assessment was made for the relevant years, demand notices were issued under
section 156(1)
of the Act and admittedly the appellant satisfied the said demands and nothing was due pursuant to the said demand notices. However, after the judgment of the appellate authority which went in favour of the assessee, the revenue refunded the amount due as per the said order of the authority. Thereafter, when the matter was taken up ultimately in reference to the High Court and the assessee lost the case, fresh demand notices were issued and it is also an admitted fact that in satisfaction of the said demand notices the appellant had paid the amount as demanded within the time stipulated therein. Theuestion, therefore, is : whether the revenue is entitled to demand interest in regard to the amount which was refunded to the assessee by virtue of the judgment of the appellate authority and which was repaid to the revenue after decision in the reference by the High Court on fresh demand notices being issued to the assessee ? Admittedly, on a literal meaning of the provisions of
section 220(2)
of the Act, such a demand for interest cannot be made. The High Court by a liberal interpretation of the said section and relying upon section 3 of the Validation Act has held that the revenue is entitled to invoke
section 220(2)
of the Act for the purpose of demanding interest on such retention of money.
We are not in agreement with the High Court on the interpretation placed by it on
section 220(2)
of the Act in regard to the right of the revenue to demand interest in a situation where the assessee has promptly satisfied the demand made by the revenue in regard to the tax originally assessed.
It is settled principle in law that the courts while construing revenue Acts have to give a fair and reasonable construction to the language of a statute without leaning to one side or the other, meaning thereby that no tax or levy can be imposed on a subject by an Act of Parliament without the words of the statute clearly showing an intention to lay the burden on the subject. In this process, the courts must adhere to the words of the statute and the so-called e uitable construction of those words of the statute is not permissible. The task of the court is to construe the provisions of the taxing enactments according to the ordinary and natural meaning of the language used and then to apply that meaning to the facts of the case and in that process if the taxpayer is brought within the net he is caught, otherwise he has to go free. This principle in law is settled by this court in
India Carbon Ltd. v. State of Assam
(1997) 6 SCC 479 wherein this court held (page 464): Interest can be levied and charged on delayed payment of tax only if the statute that levies and charges the tax makes a substantive provision in this behalf.' A Constitution Bench of this court, speaking through one of us (S.P. Bharucha J.)
in the case of
V.V.S. Sugars v. Government of A.P.
(1999) 4 SCC 192 reiterated the proposition
laid down in
India Carbon Ltd.s
case (supra) in the following words (headnote of (1999) 4 SCC) :
The Act
inuestion is a taxing statute and, therefore, must be interpreted as it reads, with no additions and no subtractions, on the ground of legislative intendment or otherwise. If we apply this principle in interpreting
section 220
of the Act, we find that the condition precedent for invoking the said section is only if there is a default in payment of the amount demanded under notice by the revenue within the time stipulated therein and if such a demand is not satisfied then
section 220(2)
can be invoked.
The High Court also fell in error in relying on section 3 of the Validation Act to construe
section 220(2)
in the manner in which it has done in the impugned judgment. Section 3 of the Validation Act, in our opinion, cannot be relied upon to construe the authority of the revenue to demand interest under
section 220
of the Act. The said section was enacted to cope up with a different fact-situation. That section only revives the old demand notice which had never been satisfied by the assessee and which notice gotuashed during some stage of the challenge and finally the saiduashed notice gets restored by an order of a higher forum. In such a situation, section 3 of the Validation Act restores the original demand notice which was never satisfied by the assessee and the said section does away with the need to issue a fresh notice. Beyond that, that section cannot be resorted to for reviving a demand notice which is already fully satisfied."
27. The Supreme Court approved the views of the Kerala High Court in
A.V. Thomas and Co.s
case (supra).
In view of the aforementioned recent authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court, the decisions of different High Courts in
Pitambardas Dulichands
case (supra);
K.P. Abdul Kareem Hajees
case (supra);
Bharat Commerce and Industries Ltd.s
case (supra);
Shri Ambica Mills Ltd.s
case (supra);
Roopali Dyeing and Printing Works
case (
supra) and Ghanshyamdas Jatias
case (supra), cannot be said to be good law.
28. Interest is payable if a sum is due. Where the assessee is in default in making payment of the assessed amount demanded from him he is liable to pay interest. Although interest is payable to the revenue by an assessee in terms of
section 220
of the Income Tax Act by way of compensation, the same would not mean that, although there does not exist any demand, interest would become payable.
29. For the reasons aforementioned these writ petitions must be allowed but, in the facts and circumstances of these cases, there shall be no order as to costs.