[Cites
8
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Parthasarathy vs State Of Karnataka & Ors on 24 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 748, 2011 (12) SCC 183, 2012 (2) AIR KAR R 68, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 526, (2013) 2 KANT LJ 226, (2011) 9 SCALE 373, (2012) 4 KCCR 3149, 2011 (107) AIC (SOC) 3 (SC)
Bench:
Mukundakam Sharma
,
Anil R. Dave
REPORTABLE


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




            Special Leave Petition (Civil) No(s).19510/2011





P. PARTHASARATHY                                                  Petitioner(s)




                                    VERSUS




STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.                              Respondent(s)





                                   O R D E R
1. This special leave petition is directed against the judgment and 



   order   dated   15.6.2011   passed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the 



   Karnataka High Court affirming the judgment and order passed 



   by the learned Single Judge of the same High Court.
2. By   the   aforesaid   order,   the   High   Court   where   the   legality   and 



   validity of the final notification dated 6.2.09 issued under sub-
section   (4)   of
Section   28
of   the   Karnataka   Industrial   Areas 



   Development   Act,   1966   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   'Act')
Page 1 of 15
was challenged upheld the validity and legality of the aforesaid 



      notification   issued   by   the   respondent/State   exercising   the 



      powers   vested   in   it   under   sub-section   (4)   of
Section   28
of   the 



      Act.
3. The   petitioner   herein   is   the   owner   of   survey   no.   154/10 



      measuring   about   2   acres   at   Kengeri   village,   Kengeri   Hobli, 



      Bangalore   South   taluk.     The   land   of   the   petitioner   was   the 



      subject   matter   of   the   notification   issued   by   the   State   of 



      Karnataka.   The  notification was issued  under
Section  28(1)
of 



      the   Act.     The   petitioner,   however,   did   not   file   any   objection 



      whereupon   a   final   notification   under
Section   28(4)
of   the   Act 



      was issued, which, however, was challenged before the learned 



      Single   Judge   of   the   Karnataka   High   Court   by   filing   a   writ 



      petition, which was registered and numbered as W.P. No. 24867 



      of 2005.
4.    The   learned   Single   Judge   by   judgment   and   order   dated 


      13.01.2009 allowed the said writ petition filed by the petitioner 



      herein   and   quashed   the   final   notification   issued   and   also   the 



      consequential corrigendum.  The learned Single Judge also gave 



      a   liberty   to   the   respondents   to   identify   the   land   which   they
Page 2 of 15
propose   to   acquire.     It   was   also   held   therein   by   the   learned 



Single   Judge   that   the   petitioner   as   also   the   respondent   no.   4 



would take the proceeding before the High Court as the notice in 



the matter of identification of the land in question and file their 



objections within a period of four weeks.  Subsequent thereto, a 



notice was issued to the petitioner by the Board on 6.2.2009.  In 



the said notice, the Board informed the petitioner that the land 



described   in   the   notice   is   required   for   the   development   of   the 



Karnataka   Industrial   Development   Board   and   that   the 



Government of Karnataka had issued a notification under sub-
section   (1)   of
Section   28
of   the   Act   by   notification   dated 



19.12.1998.     The   petitioner   was   further   informed   that   he   may 



show cause as to why the land should not be acquired and that 



such   a   notice   is   being   given   to   the   petitioner   pursuant   to   the 



order passed by the High Court in the aforesaid writ petition.  A 



description   of   the   land   was   also   given   in   the   said   notice.     The 



petitioner   as   against   the   same   submitted   a   reply   contending, 



inter   alia,   that   the   land   of   the   petitioner   could   not   and   would 



not   come   within   the   aforesaid   acquisition   and,   therefore,   his 



name shown in the preliminary notification dated 19.12.1998 be
Page 3 of 15
deleted.   He further  stated   in the  said  reply filed  that the plan 



  prepared   for   road   including   the   peripherial   road   junction, 



  approved by the competent          authority clearly indicate that 



  the   land   in   question   is   not   at   all   required   or   proposed   to   be 



  acquired   and   that   being   the   state   of   affairs,   acquisition   of   any 



  portion   of   the   said   land   bearing   survey   no.   154   cannot   be 



  sustained either in facts or in law and the same is liable to be 



  dropped from acquisition.
5. After the receipt of the aforesaid objection filed by the petitioner, 



  an   enquiry   was   conducted   by   the   Special   Land   Acquisition 



  Officer.   A report was also prepared, which is placed on record.
It appears the petitioner was represented by his counsel in the 



  said enquiry proceedings.   The concerned officer considered the 



  records and then ordered that notices be issued to all concerned 



  persons   including   the   petitioner   notifying   them   that   a   survey 



  would be conducted to measure the land and that the petitioner 



  should   be   present   in   the   aforesaid   survey   to   be   made   to   show 



  their respective lands.
6. It is also disclosed from the record that as per the date fixed i.e. 



  on   18.4.2009,   the   concerned   officers   visited   the   spot   and   on
Page 4 of 15
that   day,   the   concerned   persons   including   the   petitioner   and 



  others   were   present.     In   the   said   survey,   the   previous   phoded 



  numbers were cancelled and thereafter the mahazar was drawn 



  in   the   presence   of   the   parties  and   they   were   also   given   sketch 



  copies   with   available   records   in   terms   of   their   requests.       The 



  officer,   thereafter,   heard   the   arguments   and   after   referring   to 



  the order of the Karnataka High Court dated 13.01.2009 it was 



  held   that   the   land   measuring   2.33   acres   is   required   for   the 



  project.   Thereafter the said Land Acquisition Officer passed an 



  order that the land bearing survey no. 154/10 of Kengeri village, 



  Kengeri   Hobli,   Bangalore   South   taluk   is   required   for   the 



  proposed   reasons   of   acquisition   and   that   the   same   is   suitable 



  and   required   as   per   the   joint   measurement   and   schedule   and, 



  therefore, the said land measuring 2.33 acres was ordered to be 



  acquired.     Consequent   thereupon   a   notification   under
Section 



  28(4)
was   issued   whereby   the   land   of   the   petitioner   was 



  acquired by  putting the name of the petitioner in the  schedule 



  annexed to the said notification.
7. The validity of the aforesaid notification was challenged by filing 



  a writ petition in the Karnataka High Court.  The learned Single
Page 5 of 15
Judge   who   heard   the   writ   petition,   after   hearing   the   counsel 



  appearing   for   the   parties,   dismissed   the   writ   petition   by   his 



  order   dated   11.9.2009   holding   that   the   order   of   the   learned 



  Single   Judge   in   the   earlier   writ   petition   no.   24867/2005 



  directing the Land Acquisition Officer to provide opportunity to 



  the   petitioner   and   also   to   identify   the   land   and   thereafter   to 



  proceed   with   the   matter   having   become   final   and   binding   and 



  since   subsequent   to   the   said   order,   the   land   having   been 



  identified   and   his   objections   having   been   considered   and   the 



  actual   portion   of   the   land   required   for   formation   of   the   road 



  having been notified, there could be no further grievance of the 



  petitioner.  Consequently, the writ petition filed by the petitioner 



  was dismissed.
8. Being aggrieved by the said order, a writ appeal was filed before 



  the High Court, which is the impugned judgment and order.  By 



  the   said   judgment,   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court 



  dismissed the appeal holding that any defect in the preliminary 



  notification would not prove fatal to the acquisition proceedings.
It was also held that though survey number was not challenged, 



  a fresh inquiry was held to identify the land whereupon the land
Page 6 of 15
was identified and thereafter order was passed followed by final 



   declaration   that   the   land   of   the   petitioner   is   required   for   the 



   project.     Consequently,   the   appeal  was  also   dismissed   and  the 



   present   petition   was   filed   on   which   we   have   heard   the   learned 



   counsel appearing for the parties.
9. Mr. P.P. Rao, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner 



   has submitted that the land was not identifiable as although the 



   extent   of   land   was   mentioned   in   the   notification   but   the 



   boundaries   that   were   given   were   incorrect   and   erroneous   and, 



   therefore, the notification issued by the respondent State under 



   sub-section (4) of
Section 28
of the Act is liable to be quashed.
10. In support of the aforesaid contention,  the learned counsel has 



   relied upon the decisions of this Court titled Narendrajit Singh 


   &
        Anr.
Vs.  The
                                 State   of   U.P.   and   Anr.    reported   in   (
1970)   1 


   SCC  125,  Madhya
                                   Pradesh Housing Board  Vs.
                                                                            Mohd.
                                                                                      Shafi  


   and   Others
reported   in  (1992)   2     SCC   168   and  Om   Prakash  


   Sharma
                   and Others Vs.
                                           M.P
                                                 . Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam  


   and Others reported in (2005) 10 SCC 306.
11.Mr.   Dushyant   Dave,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the
Page 7 of 15
respondent   no.   5   and   Ms.   Shenoy,   learned   counsel   appearing 



   for   the   State   have   refuted   the   aforesaid   submissions   of   the 



   counsel appearing for the petitioner and submitted that the land 



   which   was   sought   to   be   acquired   by   the   respondent   was 



   identifiable all along. It is also submitted that the petitioner was 



   given opportunity to file his objections, which were considered, 



   and even the land was re-surveyed in order to identify the exact 



   location and area of the land in terms of the order passed by the 



   learned   Single   Judge   and   thereafter   upon   proper   identification 



   and   verification   of   the   land,   the   notification   under   sub-section 



   (4)   of
Section   28
of   the   Act   having   been   validly   issued,   there 



   could be no interference in the present case.
12.In   the   light   of   the   aforesaid   submissions   of   the   counsel 



   appearing   for   the   respondents,   we   propose   to   dispose   of   this 



   special leave petition by giving our reasons thereof.
13. The   project   that   we   are   concerned   with   was   also   the   subject 



   matter   of   appeal   filed   in   this   Court   in   the   case   of
State   of  


   Karnataka
                     and   Anr.    Vs.         All
                                                          India   Manufacturers  


   Association   and   Anr.
reported   in   (2006)   4   SCC   683.     In 


   paragraph   77   of
the   said   judgment
,   it   was   held   by   this   Court
Page 8 of 15
that   the   concerned   project   is   an   integrated   infrastructure 



  development project and is not merely a highway project.  It was 



  also   held   that   the   project   which   is   styled,   conceived   and 



  implemented   is   the   Bangalore-Mysore   Infrastructure   Corridor 



  Project   which   conceived   of   the   development   of   roads   between 



  Bangalore   and   Mysore.   There   are   several   interchanges   in   and 



  around the periphery of the city of the Bangalore together with 



  numerous developmental infrastructure activities along with the 



  highway at several points.   It is, therefore, needless to reiterate 



  that the project is a very important project and the land which 



  is   sought   to   be   acquired   is   proposed   to   be   a   part   of   the 



  peripheral   road   being   a   part   of   the   aforesaid   developmental 



  infrastructure.
14.The issue that arises for our consideration is whether there was 



  any inaccuracy with regard to the description of the boundaries 



  of the land which is sought to be acquired by the respondents.
In fact, in the earlier round of litigation wherein validity of sub-
section (1) of
Section 28
was not challenged, what was done was 



  to quash the notification issued under sub-section (4) of
Section 



  28
,   which   was   in   fact   under   challenge.   Even   thereafter   and
Page 9 of 15
pursuant   to   the   orders   of   the   High   Court   which   had   become 



   final and binding, a re-survey was done after going through the 



   objection filed by the petitioner. In the said re-survey where the 



   petitioner was also personally present, the land proposed to be 



   taken   and   acquired   was   identified,   sketch   map   was   prepared 



   and thereafter only the final notification under sub-section (4) of
Section 28
was issued.
15.That   the   petitioner   could   file   his   objection   and   he   was   fully 



   heard   and   was   also   given   an   opportunity   regarding 



   identification of the land indicates that the petitioner had ample 



   opportunity   to   place   his   case,   which   was   considered   but 



   decided against him.  In our considered opinion full opportunity 



   having   been   given   to   the   petitioner   to   place   his   case   and   to 



   oppose   the   acquisition   process,   there   could   be   no   further 



   grievance of the petitioner in that regard.
16.We   are   also   of   the   opinion   that   no   prejudice   is   caused   to   the 



   petitioner   in   any   manner   for   the   land   was   re-surveyed   and 



   thereafter the land sought to be acquired was identified, which 



   included the land of the petitioner and, therefore, the entire pre-
conditions and formalities as laid down under
Section 28
of the
Page 10 of 15
Act were duly complied with and were adhered to and followed 



   and,   therefore,   there   cannot   be   any   further   cause   of   grievance 



   for the petitioner.
17.
In   this   connection,   we   may   appropriately   refer   to   a   decision   of 



   the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Babu Barkya Thakur 



   Vs.    State   of   Bombay   and   Others
,  reported   in   AIR   1960   SC 



   1203.     In   paragraph   12   of
the   said   judgment
,   the   Supreme 



   Court   has   held   that   the   purpose   of   the   notification   under
Section 4
is to carry on a preliminary investigation with a view 



   to finding out after necessary survey and taking of levels and if 



   necessary   digging   or  boring   into   the   sub-soil   whether   the   land 



   was   adapted   for   the   purpose   for   which   it   was   sought   to   be 



   acquired.     It   was   further   held   in   that   decision   that   it   is   only 



   under
Section  6
that a firm declaration has to be made by the 



   Government that the   land with proper description and area so 



   as   to   identifiable   is   needed   for   a   public   purpose   or   for   a 



   company.     The   aforesaid   observation   was   made   after   holding 



   that   what   was   a   mere   proposal   under
Section   4
becomes   a 



   subject   matter   of   a   definite   proceeding   for   acquisition   on 



   issuance of notification under
Section 6
of the Act.
Page 11 of 15
18.We   feel   that   the   law
laid   down   in
the   said   decision
applies   in 



   full   force  to  this  case  also.  In the  present  case  also  there  were 



   some errors and mistakes in the notification issued under sub-
section (1) of
Section 28
of the Act but the same did not, in any 



   manner,   prevent   the   petitioner   from   submitting   an   effective 



   objection   and   also   from   getting   an   opportunity   of   effective 



   hearing   for   him.   A   re-survey   was   done   in   his   presence   and, 



   therefore,   the   purpose   for   which     the   provision   of   sub-section 



   (1), (2) and (3) have been enacted, have been fully carried out in 



   the present case.
19.We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that although there 



   was   some   discrepancy   in   the   description   of   the   property 



   proposed   to   be   acquired   and   the   description   given   although 



   might not have been exactly accurate, but the same did not in 



   any manner misled the petitioner regarding the identity   of the 



   land   which   is   corroborated   by   the   fact   of   the   detailed   enquiry 



   which   was   conducted   in   his   presence.   The   petitioner   was   also 



   able   to   file   a   detailed   and   effective   reply   to   the   show   cause 



   notice issued to him.
20. The   decisions   which   are   relied   upon   by   the   learned   counsel
Page 12 of 15
appearing for the petitioner are clearly distinguishable on facts.
So   far   the   decision   in   case   of  Narendrajit
                                                                 Singh   &   Anr.
Vs. 


   The
            State   of   U.P.   and   Anr.    reported   in  (1970)   1
SCC
125 


   (supra)   is   concerned,   in   the   said   case   we   find   that   this   Court 



   interfered with the declaration because there was no particulars 



   given in the notification.  In the said case, there was no mention 



   of   any   locality   at   all   and   in   that   context,   this   Court   interfered 



   with the proposed acquisition.
21. So far the next case, namely,
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board 



   Vs.
           Mohd
.
Shafi   and   Others  reported   in  (1992)   2
SCC
168 


   (supra) is concerned
,
in that case
also details and particulars of 



   the   land   were   not   given   and   a   wrong   public   purpose   was 



   mentioned and in that view of the matter, this Court interfered 



   with the acquisition proceeding.
22. As   regards   the   case   of  Om
                                           Prakash  Sharma   and  Others   Vs. 


   M.P. Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam and Others  reported in 


   (2005)   10
SCC
306   (supra)   which   was   relied   upon   by   the 



   counsel for the petitioner is concerned
,
in that case
neither any 



   survey   number   was   given   nor   any   khasra   number   was   given.
Even the name of the  persons  were not mentioned and in  that
Page 13 of 15
context   the   declaration   was   quashed   with   a   liberty   by   way   of 



   giving   a   fresh   opportunity   for   initiation   of   a   fresh   acquisition 



   proceeding.
23.The   aforesaid   cases   are   clearly   distinguishable   on   facts   and, 



   therefore,   they   have   no   application   in   the   facts   and 



   circumstances of the present case.
24.Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case, we 



   are  of  the  considered  opinion  that  the   learned  Single  Judge  as 



   also   the   learned   Division   Bench   of   the   Karnataka   High   Court 



   did   not   commit   any   mistake   or   error   in   dismissing   the   writ 



   petition.
25.We   find   no   infirmity   in   the   impugned   judgment   and   order 



   passed by the Division Bench.  The petition has no merit and is 



   dismissed, but leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
26.Since we have dismissed this petition, any interim order passed 



   by the High Court shall also stand vacated by this order.
.............................................
J

                                              (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
Page 14 of 15
............................................J

                                  (ANIL R. DAVE)



NEW DELHI,

AUGUST 24, 2011.
Page 15 of 15