[Cites
4
, Cited by
113
]
Supreme Court of India
Man Singh vs Maruti Suzuki India Ltd.& Anr on 26 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 2488, 2011 (14) SCC 662, 2012 LAB IC 2080, (2011) 3 CURLR 390, (2011) 6 SERVLR 741, (2012) 3 ALL WC 3134, (2011) 3 SERVLJ 294, (2011) 10 ADJ 51 (SC), (2011) 9 SCALE 390, (2011) 4 ESC 677, (2011) 5 LAB LN 33, (2011) 131 FACLR 1
Bench:
R.M. Lodha
,
Aftab Alam
NON-REPORTABLE


                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7389 OF 2011 

            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.9211 OF 2010]





Man Singh                                                            ... Appellant


                                          Versus





Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. & Another                                   ... Respondents





                                       O R D E R
1.     Leave granted.
2.     The  relationship of employer and workman between  the appellant 


and the respondent - company was brought to end in terms of a voluntary 


retirement scheme (in short "VRS") introduced by the management of the 


company   in   September,   2011.     The   appellant,   however,   alleged   that   he 


was   made   to   take   voluntary   retirement   under   duress   and,   in   reality,   his 


removal from service was illegal and unjustified.  On those allegations he
2
raised   an   industrial   dispute.     The   appropriate   Government   referred   the 


dispute   for   adjudication   before   the   Labour   Court,   Gurgaon,  vide  order 


dated December 4, 2006.  The reference is in the following terms:
"Whether the termination of service of Shri Man Singh 

       on   the   basis   of   VRS   Scheme   by   the   Management   was 

       justified and correct, if not, to what relief is he entitled?"
3.     The respondent - company challenged the competence and validity 


of   the   reference   in   a   Writ   Petition   (CWP   No.3358/2009)   before   the 


Punjab and Haryana High Court.  On behalf of the respondent - company, 


it was contended that having accepted the full monetary benefits under the 


VRS, it was no longer open to the appellant to question or challenge his 


termination of service and, in any case, any adjudication  on the dispute 


raised by the appellant should not be allowed to proceed while he retained 


all the monetary benefits collected by him under the scheme.
4.     A learned single Judge of the High Court upheld the respondent's 


contention   and     while   disposing   of   the   Writ   Petition   by   judgment   and 


order dated November 23, 2009 made the  following directions:-
"To make  the  scales  even,  the  Labour  Court  will  undertake 

       the   adjudication   on   the   reference,   if   only   the   workman 

       deposits   the   amount   which   he   has   received   into   Court   with 

       interest   from   the   date   when   he   has   received   to   the   date   of 

       deposit calculated  at 7.5% per annum.   If the  deposit  is not 

       made within 60 days from the date when reference was issued
3
to   him,   the   reference   made   by   the   Government   shall   stand 

       annulled.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms."
5.     The appellant challenged the order passed by the single Judge in an 


intra-court appeal but a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed his 


appeal [(L.P.A. No.82 of 2010)(O & M)] by a brief order, dated January 


21, 2010.
6.     The appellant has now brought this matter to this Court.  On behalf 


of the appellant, it is submitted that the High Court in exercise of its writ 


jurisdiction could not interfere with the reference made by the appropriate 


Government and the direction to deposit in court the amount received by 


him under the VRS along with interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum as 


the   condition   for   the   reference   to   proceed,   was   quite   unreasonable, 


inequitable and illegal.
7.     The submission made on behalf   of the appellant is fully answered 


by an earlier decision of this Court in
Ramesh Chandra Sankla and others  


versus  Vikram   Cement   and   others
(2008)   14   SCC   58.     In  Ramesh  


Chandra Sankla a number of workmen of Vikram Cement Company who 


had ceased to be the employees of Company after accepting full benefits 


under the scheme of voluntary retirement moved the Labour Court under
4
section 31
of the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960 making 


the same allegations against the Company as the appellant in this case.  In 


that case, the Labour Court declined to decide certain issues framed at the 


instance   of   the   management   as   preliminary   issues.   The   management's 


appeal against the decision of the Labour Court not to decide those issues 


as   preliminary   issues   was   rejected   by   the   Industrial   Court.     The   writ 


petition filed by the management was dismissed by a learned single Judge 


on the ground that the orders passed by the Labour Court and affirmed by 


the Industrial Court were interlocutory in nature.   The management took 


the   matter   before   the   Division   Bench   which   held   that   the  writ   petitions 


filed by the Company were under
Article 227
of the Constitution and the 


single   Judge   was   exercising   supervisory   jurisdiction;   hence,   intra-court 


appeals were not maintainable and the appeals filed by the Company were 


liable to be dismissed on that score alone.   Even while holding that the 


management's   appeals   were   liable   to   be   dismissed   as   not   maintainable, 


the   Division   Bench   went   on   to   hold   that   since   the   workmen   had 


approached the Labour Court after having received the benefits under the 


scheme, it would be equitable to direct the concerned employees to return 


the benefits so received to the employer subject to the undertaking by the
5
Company   that   in   the   event   the   Labour   Court   allowed   the   claim   and 


granted benefits to the workmen, the same would be restored to them by 


the Company with interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
8.     The   workmen   challenged   the   order   of   the   Division   Bench   before 


this Court inter alia on the ground that having held that the management's 


appeals were not maintainable, the Division Bench had no jurisdiction to 


make the impugned direction. This   Court   repelled   the   workmen's 


contention   and   in   paragraphs   100   and   101   of   the   decision   held   and 


observed as follows:-
"100. Even otherwise, according to the workmen, they were 

       compelled   to   accept   the   amount   and   they   received   such 

       amount   under   coercion   and   duress.     In   our   considered 

       opinion,   they   cannot   retain   the   benefit   if   they   want   to 

       prosecute claim petitions instituted by them with the Labour 

       Court. Hence, the order passed by the Division Bench of the 

       High Court as to refund of amount cannot be termed unjust, 

       inequitable   or   improper.     Hence,   even   if   it   is   held   that   a 

       "technical"   contention   raised   by   the   workmen   has   some 

       force,   this   Court   which   again   exercises   discretionary   and 

       equitable   jurisdiction   under
Article   136
of   the   Constitution, 

       will not interfere with a direction which is in consonance with 

       the doctrine of equity.   It has been rightly said that a person 

       "who seeks equity must do equity". Here the workmen claim 

       benefits as workmen of the Company, but they do not want to 

       part   with   the   benefit   they   have   received   towards   retirement 

       and severance of relationship of master and servant. It simply 

       cannot   be   permitted.     In   our   judgment,   therefore,   the   final 

       direction issued by the Division Bench needs no interference,
6
particularly   when   the   Company   has   also   approached   this 

       Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
101.   For   the   foregoing   reasons,   in   our   opinion,   the   order 

       passed by the Division Bench of the High Court deserves to 

       be confirmed and is hereby confirmed.   The payment which 

       is required to be made as per the said order should be made 

       by   the   applicants   intending   to   prosecute  their   claims   before 

       the   Labour   Court,   Mandsour.   In   view   of   the   fact,   however, 

       that the said period is by now over, ends of justice would be 

       served if we extend the time so as to enable the applicants to 

       refund the amount.  We, therefore, extend the time up to 31-

       12-2008 to make such payment.   We may, however,  clarify 

       that  the claim  petitions  will  not be proceeded  with till  such 

       payment   is   made.     If   the   payment   is   not   made   within   the 

       period   stipulated   above,   the   claim   petitions   of   those 

       applicants   will   automatically   stand   dismissed.     The   Labour 

       Court will take up the claim petitions after 31-12-2008."
The   present   case   is   squarely   covered   by   the   decision   of   this   Court   in
Ramesh   Chandra   Sankla
(supra).     We,   thus,   find   no   merit   in   the 


submission made on behalf  of the appellant that the High Court had no 


jurisdiction to make a direction for refund of the entire amount received 


by the appellant as a condition precedent for the reference to proceed.
9.     We, however, feel that the imposition of interest at the rate of 7.5% 


per annum was a little harsh and unwarranted.  Having regard to the fact 


that the appellant is no longer in service, we feel that the ends of justice 


would   meet  if  the   direction   for   refund   is  confined   only   to   the   principal 


amount received by the appellant under VRS.   We, accordingly, modify
7
the order of the High Court to this limited extent and direct the appellant 


to refund the amount received by him under VRS, without any interest. In 


case the amount, as directed, is deposited by the appellant by November 


30, 2011, the reference shall proceed in accordance with law, otherwise it 


would stand quashed.
10.    The appeal stands disposed of subject to the above observations and 


directions.
.................................J.

                                           (Aftab Alam)





                                           .................................J.

                                           (R.M. Lodha)

New Delhi;
August 26, 2011.