[Cites
4
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Kandarpa Sarma vs Rajeswar Das & Ors on 25 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 6655, 2011 (14) SCC 752, 2012 LAB. I. C. 350, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 733, (2012) 1 SERVLJ 220, (2011) 6 SERVLR 702, (2011) 1 SCT 96, (2011) 5 MAD LW 784
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7401 OF 2011
                         (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 21013 of 2006)

       KANDARPA SARMA                                    Appellant(s)

                        VERSUS



       RAJESWAR DAS & ORS.                               Respondent(s)

                                           O R D E R
1.       Leave granted.
2.       This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   and   order 

       passed   by   the   Gauhati   High   Court   on   17.11.2006   allowing   the 

       appeal   filed   by   the   respondent   no.   1   whereby   the   learned 

       Division   Bench   set   aside   the   judgment   and   order   passed   by   the 

       learned   Single   Judge   allowing   the   writ   petition   filed   by   the 

       appellant herein.
3.       The respondent State issued an advertisement for filling 

       up the post of Gaonburah of Tikka Garia Gaon, Mouza: Sariha in 

       the District of Barpeta.  The appellant as also respondent no. 1 

       along   with   others   submitted   their   candidature   as   against   the 

       aforesaid   advertisement   which   was   issued   on   11.11.1998   by   the 

       Sub-Divisional Office, Balaji Sub Division.  After submission of 

       the   applications   by   the   various   candidates,   the   circle   officer
1
submitted   a   report   along   with   other   records   regarding 

suitability   of   the   candidates   which   was   considered   by   the 

Selection   Committee   consisting   of   the   Sub-Divisional   Officer 

Balaji   Sub   Division,,   the   Circle   Officer   and   the   Election 

Officer.     The   said   selection   committee   considered   the   records 

and   found   the   appellant   as   the   most   suitable   candidate   and 

appointed him as the Gaonburah.
4.      Being aggrieved by the said order of appointment issued 

by the Sub-Divisional Officer, respondent no. 1 filed an appeal 

in terms of paragraph 162(B) of the Executive Instructions which 

was   entertained.     The   aforesaid   appeal   was   heard   by   the 

Additional   Deputy   Commissioner   and   upon   consideration   he   set 

aside the order of appointment of the appellant and also issued 

a   direction   to   appoint   respondent   no.   1   as   the   Gaonburah   in 

place   of   the   appellant.     The   said   decision   of   the   First 

Appellate   Authority   was   challenged   by   the   appellant   herein   in 

Second   Appeal   as   provided   for   under   paragraph   162(C)   of   the 

Executive Instructions.
5.      The aforesaid Second Appeal was dismissed consequent upon 

which the appellant herein filed a Writ Petition before the High 

Court which was registered as Writ Petition (C ) No. 8019/2001. 

The learned Single Judge by a judgment and order dated 11.5.2004 

allowed   the   writ   petition   and   directed   that   the   appellant   be
2
allowed   to   continue   as   Gaonburah   of     Tikka   Garia   Gaon,   Mouza:
Sariha in the District of Barpeta.
6.       Being   aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   judgment   and   order 

passed   by   the   learned   Single   Judge,   respondent   no.   1   filed   an 

appeal before the Division Bench of the Gauhati High Court which 

was   registered   as   Writ   Appeal   No.   228   of   2004.     The   Division 

Bench,   after   hearing   the   counsel   appearing   for   the   parties   on 

15.11.2006   allowed   the   appeal   by   its   judgment   and   order   dated 

17.11.2006   whereby   the   Division   Bench   not   only   set   aside   the 

judgment   and   order   of   the   learned   Single   Judge   but   it   also 

restored   the   order   passed   by   the   Second   Appellate   Authority 

directing   appointment   of   respondent   no.   1   as   Gaonburah.     By 

virtue of the aforesaid order, respondent no. 1 assumed charge 

of the office and he, as of today, continues to hold the post of 

Gaonburah.
7.       Being   aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   order   passed   by   the 

Division Bench, the appellant herein filed the present appeal on 

which   we   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 

parties.
8.       Mr.   P.K.   Goswami,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for 

the   appellant   has   submitted   before   us   that   the   Division   Bench 

committed manifest error in holding that the expression 'family'
3
used   in   the   Executive   Instructions   should   receive   an   extended 

meaning   so   as   to   include   'nephew'   within   the   expression 

'family'.     He   has   also   submitted   before   us   that   the   selection 

committee after taking into consideration all the factors found 

the   appellant   as   the   best   candidate   for   the   post   and   the   said 

decision being based on records should not have been interfered 

with by the Appellate Authority as also by the Division Bench of 

the High Court on extraneous consideration and also by wrongly 

reading the documents particularly when the learned Single Judge 

has upheld the aforesaid order of the selection committee.
In 

support of his contention, he has relied upon the decisions of 

Constitution Bench of this Court in  State of Assam and another 

Vs.  Nahar Chutia and another  reported in 1974 Assam Law Reports 

163 as also in
State of Assam and Others Vs. Kanak Chandra Dutta
reported in AIR 1967 SC 884.  He has also drawn our attention to 

the   Executive   Instructions   which   are   part   of   the   Assam   Land 

Revenue   Regulation   by   referring   to   paragraph   162   of   the   said 

instructions as also paragraph 163.
9.       It  was also  brought to  our notice  that in  terms of  the 

ratio of the decisions of the aforesaid two cases decided by the 

Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court,   the   status   of   Gaonburah   in 

Assam is that he holds a Civil post under the State of Assam and 

he is entitled to the protection as provided for under
Article 

311
of the Constitution of India.   Consequently, the State has
4
the   power   and   also   the   jurisdiction   to   select   and   appoint   a 

Gaonburah and also to dismiss him.   He has also pointed out to 

us   the   settled   position   that   Gaonburah   works   under   the 

supervision of Moujadar who is also a State government servant 

as   held   in   the   aforesaid   Constitution   Bench   decision   of   this 

Court.
10.       Mr. Pravir Choudhary appearing for the respondent no. 1, 

however, has submitted that the judgment and order passed by the 

High   Court   is   justified   as   in   the   context   of   the   expression 

'family' used in the Executive Instructions.   According to him, 

the   said   expression   should   receive   a   wider   and   extensive 

interpretation so as to include a nephew.  He has also submitted 

that respondent no. 1 was working with and helping and assisting 

the   earlier   Gaonburah   for   a   very   long   time   and,   therefore,   he 

has   sound   experience   in   the   working   and   functioning   of   the 

Gaonburah and, so he was the best candidate and the High Court 

was justified in directing for his appointment to the aforesaid 

post.
11.       The   State   is   also   represented   by   the   counsel   who   has 

submitted that the impugned judgment and order should not have 

been   interfered   with   for   the   reasons   that   the   decision   of   the 

selection committee should have been preferred as the selection 

committee had the privilege of looking into all the records and
5
also had the privilege of interviewing the candidates.
12.      Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 

parties   and   having   gone   through   the   connected   records,   we 

propose to dispose of this appeal by giving our reasons thereof.
13.      The post of Gaonburah is an executive post in the sense 

that he works under the supervision of the Moujadar.  He holds a 

civil   post   and,   therefore,   is   entitled   to   the   protection   as 

provided for under
Article 311
of the Constitution of India.  In 

that view of the matter, there has to be some service conditions 

governing   his   service.     A   Government   Servant   who   is   usually 

appointed   to   a   civil   post   has   to   have   minimum   age   requirement 

for appointment and there is always a maximum age on completion 

of which he stands retired from the government service.   He has 

other   service   conditions   also   prescribed   for   his   service   and 

status.     However,   on   going   through   the   Executive   Instructions, 

we   do   not   find   any   such   terms   and   conditions   of   service 

envisaged   and   laid   down   which   would   govern   his   service 

condition.   A government servant cannot be appointed unless he 

fulfills a minimum age criteria.   He should not also be allowed 

to continue to work as Gaonburah in perpetuity.  There has to be 

some   age   limit   or   duration   of   period   for   his   service   on 

completion of which he should stand relieved.  The other service 

conditions   like   the   reasons   for   removal   of   the   Gaonburah   are
6
also   required   to   be   clearly   stated   by   the   State   Government 

either in the executive instruction or by framing a separate set 

of rules.   Since all these fall within the domain of the State 

Government, we request and leave it to the State Government to 

frame such service conditions of the Gaonburahs as expeditiously 

as   possible   preferably   within   a   period   of   three   months   from 

today   keeping   in   view   the   observation   made   hereinbefore.     We 

also   feel   that   the   contents   of   the   Executive   instructions 

relating   to   appointment   of   Gaonburah   requires   updating   and 

further   amendments   to   be   in   tune   with   the   present   day 

requirement,   which   shall   be   done   simultaneously   with   the 

aforesaid exercise.
14.     The   next   question   that   arises   for   our   consideration   is 

whether   the   respondent   no.   1   herein   is   entitled   to   get   a 

preferential   treatment   for   appointment   as   a   Gaonburah   on   the 

ground   that   he   was   the   nephew   of   an   earlier   Gaonburah.     The 

executive instruction in para 162 provides that in the matter of 

appointment of Gaonburah, certain factors are to be taken into 

consideration which are (1)claim of the family of the Gaonburah 

(2) the views of the Maujadar (3) the suitability of the person 

for the post.
15.     On going through the records, we find that the selection 

committee   considered   the   suitability   of   the   candidates   by
7
allotting   80   marks   in   all.     For   the   factors   stated   above,   the 

selection committee had allotted 10 marks for the claims of the 

family of Gaonburah and for the views of the Moujadar, another 

10 marks were allotted by the selection committee and it appears 

that   the   rest   60   marks   were   allotted   for   consideration   of   the 

suitability of the person for the post.
16.      For the scheme of compassionate appointment in government 

service, the expression 'family' in the natural course, includes 

the family of the deceased, namely, his son, daughter and widow. 

The surviving dependents in the family are considered for such 

appointment   on   compassionate   grounds.   The   said   expression 

'family'   in   those   cases   is   always   restricted   to   the   aforesaid 

members, namely, son, daughter or widow.   This expression also 

has   come   to   be   used   in   various   ceiling
Acts   in   the   Assam 

Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956
.   The expression 

'family' has been defined to mean a family consisting of any one 

or   more   or   all   of   the   following   namely   (1)   husband,   (2)   wife, 

(3)   minor   children,   and   also   includes   a   joint   family.   In   the 

explanation   thereto,   joint   family   has   been   defined   to   mean   a 

family   of   which   the   members   are   descendents   from   a   common 

ancestor   and   have   a   common   mess,   and   shall   include   wife   or 

husband,   as   the   case   may   be,   but   shall   exclude   married 

daughters, married sons and their children.
8
17.      A   joint   family   could   be   considered   to   be   a   family   only 

when   they   are   sharing   a   common   residence   and   common   mess.     To 

give   an   extended   meaning   to   mean   any   'nephew'   would   also   be 

inappropriate for the word nephew is a very vague expression for 

it   could   include   not   only   nephew   being   the   son   from   the   own 

brother but it could also be nephew being the son not only from 

the   sister   but   being   son   of   even   from   the   cousin   brothers   or 

sisters.     It   is   difficult   to   give   such   a   wide   meaning   to   the 

expression   'family'.     It   is,   therefore,   appropriate   that   the 

State Government also while laying down the criteria identifies 

the   members   of   the   family   who   could   be   entitled   to   some 

preferential consideration in the matter of such appointment to 

the   post   of   Gaonburah.     The   State   Government   should   also 

therefore frame proper guidelines laying down the conditions as 

stated hereinbefore.
18.      Now,   coming   to   the   facts   of   the   present   case,   we   find 

that the Circle Officer submitted a report on consideration of 

all   the   materials   on   record   that   the   appellant   should   be 

considered   for   appointment   to   the   post   of   Gaonburah   as   he 

satisfies   all   the   requirements   and   because   he   is   the   best 

candidate.     The   selection   committee   considered   the   records   and 

thereafter selected the appellant herein despite being aware of 

the fact that the recommendation of the Moujadar is for another 

candidate neither being the appellant nor being respondent no. 1
9
and   also   being   aware   of   the   fact   that   respondent   no.   1   was 

related to the earlier Gaonburah.   The said selection was made 

keeping   in   view   the   mandate   of   executive   instructions.     The 

executive instructions which lay down the criteria for selection 

have   force   in   law   as   they   were   made   part   of   the   Assam   Land 

Revenue Regulation.   They also have a binding force having been 

issued   in   exercise   of   constitutional   powers   conferred   under
Article 162
of the constitution of India.
19.      Pursuant to the aforesaid selection made by the selection 

committee   which   had   considered   all   the   factors   and   also   the 

criteria laid down for the purpose, the appellant was appointed 

to   the   said   post   which   came   to   be   set   aside   by   the   Appellate 

Authority   which   order   was   confirmed   by   the   Second   Appellate 

Authority.     Having   gone   through   the   records,   we   find   that   the 

First Appellate Authority has set aside the appointment of the 

selection   committee   and   the   order   passed   by   the   Sub-Divisional 

Officer   on   the   ground   that   respondent   no.   1   is   entitled   to   a 

preferential   treatment,   he   being   the   nephew   of   the   earlier 

Gaonburah.   We have found that the aforesaid view taken by the 

Deputy Commissioner was incorrect and without jurisdiction and, 

therefore, the aforesaid findings which are also rendered by the 

Division   Bench   and   also   by   the   First   Appellate   Authority   and 

Second Appellate Authority have to be set aside which we hereby 

do.
10
20.      In   our   considered   opinion,   the   entire   matter   of 

appointment to the post of Gaonburah in the present case has to 

be considered afresh in accordance with law  de novo  taking into 

consideration the relevant factors only and in the light of the 

observations made hereinbefore.   Therefore, while setting aside 

the orders of the Division bench of the High Court and also of 

the   learned   Single   Judge,   we   remit   back   the   matter   to   the 

selection   committee   who   shall   consider   the   records   and   take   a 

final   decision   regarding   the   appointment   of   Gaonburah   as 

expeditiously   as   possible   preferably   within   a   period   of   four 

months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.   The 

State Government shall make the entire records available to the 

concerned   selection   committee   so   as   to   enable   them   to   take   a 

conscious and informed decision.   It would be also appropriate 

that the State Government would also take a decision regarding 

updating the administrative instructions in this regard and also 

laying down the service conditions of the Gaonburah in terms of 

this   order.     It   would   be   appropriate   that   these   decisions   are 

also taken within three months so that the selection committee 

may   be   in   a   position   to   consider   the   said   criterion   which   are
laid down by
the State afresh in terms of this order.
21.      Since   the   selection   committee   has   been   directed   to 

complete   the   entire   process   of   fresh   selection   and   appointment
11
within four months from the date of receipt of the copy of this 

order, respondent no. 1 would continue to hold the post till the 

order of appointment is issued by the sub-Divisional Officer in 

accordance   with   law   within   a   period   of   four   months.     The   said 

continuation would be only as a stop gap arrangement so that the 

working of Gaonburah is not affected in any manner.  He shall in 

no case be allowed to continue beyond a period of four months. 

We make it clear that respondent no. 1 will not claim any equity 

also   to   hold   the   post   beyond   four   months   and   also   beyond   the 

terms as mentioned herein.
22.      The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent leaving the 

parties to bear their own costs.
23.      I.A. is also disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.
.........................J.
                                              (DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)




                                              .........................J.
                                              (ANIL R. DAVE)

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 25, 2011
12