[Cites
11
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
Md.Murtaza & Ors vs State Of Assam & Ors on 29 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 189, 2012 (2) AIR JHAR R 694, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 258, (2011) 8 MAD LJ 66, (2011) 5 MAD LW 332, 2011 (12) SCC 413, (2011) 9 SCALE 526, (2011) 2 CLR 677 (SC), (2011) 6 ALL WC 6329
Bench:
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
,
Markandey Katju
1



                                                              REPORTABLE


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CIVIL APPELLAE JURISDICTION


                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.7517__2011

               [Arising out of SLP(Civil) Nos. 15141 of 2009]




Md. Murtaza and others                        ..                             Appellants 


       -vs-


State of  Assam and others                    ..                             Respondents


                                          WITH


                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7518_2011

                 [Arising out of SLP(Civil) Nos. 27497 of 2009]


Shaukat Ali and others                        ..                             Appellants 


       -vs-


State of  Assam and others                    ..                             Respondents





                                      O R D E R
1.     Leave granted.
2.     These   appeals   have   been   filed   against   the   impugned   judgment   and 


order   dated   28.4.2008   passed   by   the   Gauhati   High   Court   in   Writ   Petition 


(Civil) No. 8081 of 2005.
2
3.       The   appellants   are   wholesale   vegetable   and   fruit   vendors   and   were 


engaged in selling vegetables and fruits at Machkhowa market, Gauhati in 


the State of Assam since 1995.  However, they had to vacate their respective 


possession of the premises in pursuance to the orders of the Gauhati High 


Court.     Machkhowa   market   is   situated   close   to   the   railway   station   and   is 


inside the city and the land thereon has been allotted to the Department of 


Handloom   and   Textiles,   Government   of   Assam   for   the   purpose   of 


construction of an administrative building.  For this purpose it was proposed 


to remove the appellants and other wholesale vendors from the Machkhowa 


market,  and  instead   a  new  market  has   been  constructed  at   Ganeshguri.    It 


was submitted by the appellants and others that there is not enough space in 


the Ganeshguri municipal market for the appellants and others.  We are not 


referring to the various orders issued by the Gauhati High Court from time to 


time.
4.       In one of the counter affidavits filed before us it has been stated that 


all parts of the city of Gauhati, including Machkhowa is very congested and 


hence   the   appellants   and   other   wholesellers   should   not   be   allowed   to   do 


business of  wholesale  fruits and vegetables inside the city limits as a large 


number of heavy and medium goods vehicles have to enter the city to go to
3
that   wholesale   market   and   consequently   the   area   becomes   very   congested 


causing serious traffic problems and also hazard of health and hygiene and 


pollution.     It is stated that the government of Assam has initiated steps to 


develop   the   fruits   and   vegetables   wholesale   market   at   the   outskirts   of 


Gauhati at Garchuk near the bypass on an area of 8 bighas of land and the 


foundation   stone   of   the   project   market   was   laid   by   the   Chief   Minister   on 


25.2.2011.   It  has  been  further  submitted that  development   work  is  taking 


place at a high speed at Garchuk.
5.      We   are   of   the   opinion   that   the   wholesale   market   of   fruits   and 


vegetables for supplying of these goods to Gauhati and elsewhere should be 


at   the   outskirts   or   outside   the   city   limits   of   Gauhati   to   avoid   problems   of 


traffic congestion, health and hygiene, pollution etc.
6.      Citizens   ordinarily   do   not   go   to   wholesale   markets,   but   they   go   to 


retail markets.  Hence if the wholesale market is not situated within the city 


limits it will not cause any inconvenience to the public in general.   On the 


other hand, if  such wholesale market is situated within the city limits, there 


will   be   everyday   hazards   of   traffic   congestion   because   of   hundreds   of 


vehicles entering the city carrying goods for the wholesale markets resulting 


in traffic  congestion, air and noise pollution etc., apart from posing health
4
and hygiene problems.   A large number of these goods will be dumped on 


the roads causing huge collection of waste and garbage.   The rotting goods 


may spread diseases.  They may also attract stray animals.
7.      Ordinarily everywhere in the world wholesale markets are situated at 


the outskirts or outside the city limits.  No doubt, the shifting of the shops of 


the wholesellers will cause some hardships to some individuals, but it is well 


settled   that   public   interest   prevails   over   the   private   interests.     Thus,   in
Friends Colony Development Committee vs. State of Orissa
AIR 2005 SC 1 


(vide para 22) this Court observed :
"The   private   interest   stands   subordinated   to   the   public 

                good".
8.      Similarly,  in
Sales  Tax  Officer  vs.  Shree   Durga  Oil  Mills
,  (1998)  1 


SCC 572 (vide para 21) this Court observed:
"Public   interest   must   override   any   consideration   of 

                private loss or gain".
9.      It is true that right to do business is a fundamental  right guaranteed 


under
Article   19(1)(g)
of   the   Constitution,   but   this   right   is   subject   to 


reasonable restrictions under
Article 19(6).
5
10.     It may be mentioned that to test the reasonability of a restriction we 


have   to   see   the   subject   matter,   extent   of   restriction,   the   mischief   which   it 


seeks   to   check,   etc.   The   reasonableness   of   the   restriction   has   to   be 


determined in an objective manner and has to be seen from the point of view 


of the interest of the general public and not merely from the point of view of 


the   persons   upon   whom   the   restrictions   are   imposed   vide  Hanif   Quareshi   v.
State   of   Bihar,   AIR  1958   SC   731.   Moreover,   the   impugned   action   of   the 



authorities cannot be said to be unreasonable merely because in a given case, 


they may operate harshly, vide
State of Gujarat v. Shantilal
, AIR  1969 SC 634 


(vide Para 52).
As observed by the Supreme Court in  Laxmi Khandsari  v.
State of UP., AIR 1981 SC 873;  Divert  v.  State of Gujarat, AIR 1986 SC 


1323;
State of Madras v. Row
, 1952 SCR 597;
Peerless v. Reserve Bank
, AIR 


1992 SC 1033; and
Harakchand v. Union of India
, AIR 1970 SC 1453 etc., 


the nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose 


of the restriction imposed and the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be 


remedied  thereby,  disproportion of the imposition,  prevailing conditions at 


the   time   etc.,   are   the   relevant   considerations   for   determining   whether   the 


restriction is reasonable.
11.     Further, as held in
Jyoti Pershad v. Union Territory of Delhi
, AIR  1961 SC 


1602, the standard of reasonableness must also vary from age to age and be
6
related   to   the   adjustments   necessary   to   solve   the   problems   which 


communities   face   from   time   to   time.
In   adjudging   the   validity   of   the 


restriction the Court has necessarily to approach the question from the point 


of view of the social interest which the State action intends to promote, vide 


Puthumma  v.  State of Kerala, AIR 1978 SC 771;
P.P. Enterprises v. Union of 


India
,   AIR  1982   SC   1016   and  Jyoti   Pershad  v.  Union   Territory   of   Delhi 



(supra), etc.
12.       Judged   by   these   standards   the   impugned   action   of   the   authorities 


cannot be faulted on the ground of lack of reasonableness. As stated in the 


counter-affidavits filed in these cases, the existing wholesale markets have 


become   the   cause   of   immense   traffic   congestion   in   the   city,   apart   from 


causing diseases, pollution etc. Hence, shifting the wholesale markets to the 


outskirts of the City or beyond is clearly reasonable.
13.     It   must   be   remembered   that  certain   matters   are   by   their   very   nature 


such as had better be left to the administrative authorities instead of Courts 


themselves seeking to substitute their own views and perceptions as to what 


is the best solution to the problem.  The present is clearly an instance where 


this   Court   should   not   interfere   with   the   steps   taken   by   the   respondents   to 


resolve a pressing problem. In matters of policy the Courts have a limited
7
role and it should only interfere with the same when it is clearly illegal. That 


clearly   is   not   the   case   here.   The   impugned   action   is   a   salutary   step   for 


undoing a mischief, which was crying out for redress for a long time, and it 


is not illegal.
14.     As   observed   by   the   Supreme   Court   in
Mohd.   Hanif   Qureshi   v.   State   of 


Bihar
,   AIR  1958   SC   731,   the   Court   must   presume,   that   the   legislature 



understands   and   correctly   appreciates   the   need   of   its   own   people.   The 


legislature   is   free   to   recognize   degrees   of   harm,   and   may   confine   its 


restrictions   to   those   where   the   need   is   deemed   to   be   the   clearest.     In   our 


opinion,   the   same   principle   would   apply   to   executive   action   also,   unless 


there is clear violation of a statute or a constitutional provision.
15.     In   our   opinion,   the   State   should   not   be   hampered   by   the   Court   in 


dealing   with   evils   at   their   point   of   pressure.   All   legislation,   including 


delegated   legislation   (such   as   the   kind   we   are   examining)   and   executive 


action is essentially ad hoc. Since, social problems nowadays are extremely 


complicated,   this   inevitably   entails   special   treatment   for   distinct   social 


phenomena. If legislation or executive action is to deal with realities it must 


address itself to variations in society. The State must, therefore, be left with 


wide latitude in devising ways and means of social control and Regulation,
8
and the Court should not, unless compelled  by the law, encroach into this 


field.
16.       As   Justice   Frankfurter   of   the   U.S.   Supreme   Court   observed   in 


American   Federation   of   Labour  v.  American   Sash   and   Door   Co.,   335   US 


538 (1949) :-
"Even   where   the   social   undesirability   of   a   law   may   be 

                 convincingly   urged,   invalidation   of   the   law   by   a   Court 

                 debilitates   popular   Democratic   Government.   Most   laws 

                 dealing with social and economic problems are matters of 

                 trial   and   error.   That   which   before   trial   appears   to   be 

                 demonstrably   bad   may   belie   prophecy   in   actual 

                 operation. But, even if a law is found wanting on trial, it 

                 is   better   that   its   defects   should   be   demonstrated   and 

                 removed   by   the   legislature   than   that   the   law   should   be 

                 aborted   by   judicial   fiat.   Such,   an   assertion   of   judicial 

                 power   defeats   responsibility   from   those   on   whom   in   a 

                 democratic society it ultimately rests. Hence, rather than 

                 exercise   judicial   review   Courts   should   ordinarily   allow 

                 legislatures   to   correct   their   own   mistakes   wherever 

                 possible."
In our opinion the same principle would apply to executive action too.
17.       Similarly,   in   his   dissenting   judgment   in  New   State   Ice   Co.   v.
Liebemann, 285 U.S. 262 (1932), Mr. Justice Brandeis, the celebrated Judge 


of the U.S. Supreme Court observed that the government must be left free to 


engage   in   social   experiments.   Progress   in   the   Social   Sciences,   as   in   the
9
Physical Sciences, depends on "a process of trial and error" and Courts must 


not interfere with necessary experiments.
18.     Justice Brandeis also observed :-
"To stay  experimentation in things social and economic 

              is   a   grave   responsibility.   Denial   of   the   right   to 

              experiment may be fraught with serious consequences to 

              the Nation."
19.     On the facts of the case, we are of the opinion that the appellants and 


other wholesale traders should shift to the wholesale markets at the outskirts 


or outside the city limits of Gauhati.
20.     If the markets are not constructed yet, they will be constructed by the 


government, the municipalities and other authorities in consultation with the 


representatives   of   the   wholesale   traders   of   Gauhati   and   allotments   made 


within a period of one year from today.  For this purpose a Committee shall 


be set up under the Chairmanship of the concerned Secretary of Government 


of   Assam   and   having   members   from   the   representatives   of   the   Gauhati 


municipality   and   other   authorities,   and   also   representatives   of   the 


associations of wholesellers of fruits and vegetables and grains etc., as well 


as   representatives   from   the   electricity   department,   water   department, 


telephone department, police etc.  This Committee shall form a rational plan
10
for allotment of the existing wholesale markets inside the Gauhati city to the 


new  wholesale  market   (which  will  be  constructed,  if  has  not already   been 


constructed).
21.       All   wholesellers   inside   Gauhati   city   shall   be   allowed   to   apply   for 


allotment for adequate land for the wholesale market at the outskirts of or 


beyond Gauhati city.  If such applications are made the same will be decided 


in a fair and non-arbitrary manner without any pick and choose.  The entire 


exercise   including   allotments   must   be   completed   within   one   year   from 


today.
22.       With the observations made above, the appeals stand disposed of.  No 


costs.
....................................J.

                                                         (Markandey Katju)





                                                         ....................................J.

                                                         (Chandramauli Kr. Prasad)


New Delhi;
August, 29, 2011