[Cites
8
, Cited by
26
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Prakash Jha Productions & Anr vs Union Of India & Ors on 19 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2011 SC 568
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
REPORTABLE


                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION




                   WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO(s). 345 OF 2011





M/S PRAKASH JHA PRODUCTIONS & ANR                 Petitioner(s)




                                            Versus




UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                          Respondent(s)





                                       O R D E R
1.        This  writ   petition   is   filed  by   the   petitioners   praying   for   the 


reliefs specifically set out in the prayer portion of the writ petition.
One of the reliefs that is sought for in this writ petition is to strike 


down the provision of
Section 6 (1)
of the U.P. Cinemas (Regulation) 


Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") being allegedly ultra vires to 


the   Constitution   of   India.     The   other   relief   that   is   sought   for   is   to 


quash   and   set   aside   the   decisions   taken   by   the   respondents, 


namely State of Punjab, State of Andhra Pradesh and State of Uttar 


Pradesh   suspending   the   screening   of   the   film   'Aarakshan'   in   their 


respective States for a specified period.
Page 1 of 14
2.          Notice   was   issued   on   this   writ   petition   making   the   same 


returnable   today   so   as   to   enable   the   three   State   Governments   to 


submit   their   reply/counter   affidavit.     However,   at   the   stage   of 


issuing notice itself, we were informed by the counsel appearing for 


the State of Punjab and Andhra Pradesh that so far as their States 


are   concerned,   they   had   withdrawn   the   order   of   suspension   of 


screening of the film 'Aarakshan'.
3.          The counsel appearing for the State of Punjab and the State 


of Andhra Pradesh are present in the Court.  Today also they stand 


by   the   same   statement   which   they   had   made   on   the   last   date, 


meaning   thereby,   that   they   had   lifted   the   orders   of   suspension   of 


screening   of   the   film   in   their   respective   States.     Therefore,   to   our 


understanding, the aforesaid film is being screened in the aforesaid 


two States also as on this date.   This petition, therefore, has been 


rendered   infructuous   so   far   as   the   States   of   Andhra   Pradesh   and 


Punjab are concerned.
4.          The   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   has   filed   the   counter   affidavit 


opposing   the   prayer   in   the   writ   petition   which   is   on   record.     We 


have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties extensively 


today.
Page 2 of 14
5.       Mr.   Harish   Salve,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 


petitioners   has   not   pressed   the   prayer   so   far   as   constitutional 


validity   of
Section   6
of   the   Act   is   concerned.     However,   on   his 


submission, we are keeping the said issue open to be agitated in an 


appropriate   case   in   future,   if   necessary.     He,   however,   has 


challenged   the   legality   of   the   decision   of   the   Uttar   Pradesh 


Government suspending the screening of the film 'Aarakshan' in the 


entire   State   of   Uttar   Pradesh.     According   to   him,   the   aforesaid 


exercise   of   power   of   suspension   of   the   screening   of   the   film 


amounts   to   exercising   the   power   of   pre-censorship   which   is   being 


exercised by the Government, although no such power vested on it.
According   to   him,   the   said   power   of   censorship   is   vested   in   the 


Central Board of Film  Certification,  (hereinafter  referred  to as "the 


Board")   and   in   the   Central   Government   as   provided   for   in   the 


provisions   made   in
The   Cinematograph   Act,   1952
.     He   has   also 


submitted   that   the   power   that   is   sought   to   be   exercised   in   the 


present   case   under
Section   6(1)
of   the   Act   is   also   without 


jurisdiction   as   such   power   could   be   exercised   only   when   a   film   is 


being   screened   and   shown   in   the   public   hall   and   also   when   a 


contingency of the nature as mentioned in the said Section arises.
He submits that on satisfying the preconditions and only in such a
Page 3 of 14
situation a power is vested in the State Government to suspend the 


screening   of   the   film   for   a   specified   period.     He   also   submits   that 


the aforesaid decision of the State Government is in violation of the 


provisions   of
Article   19(1)
of   the   Constitution   of   India   and, 


therefore, the same is required to be struck down and quashed.
6.        We   have   also   heard   Mr.   Chandiok,   learned   Additional 


Solicitor   General,   who   submits   that   after   a   certificate   has   been 


issued to a particular film by the Censor Board, the said film could 


be screened in the entire country and the order which is passed by 


the   State   Government   is   not   envisaged   as   it   practically   prohibits 


screening of the film in the entire State of Uttar Pradesh.
7.        Mr.   U.U.   Lalit,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 


State of Uttar Pradesh has, however, taken us through the contents 


of the counter-affidavit in support of his contention that the prayer 


in writ petition cannot be granted by this Court.  He has submitted 


that a very   high-level Committee has seen the film and thereafter 


has given an opinion, according to which if and when the concerned 


film is shown there is likelihood of breach of peace and also breach 


of law and order situation and, therefore, the aforesaid decision of 


suspending the screening of the film "Aarakshan" in Uttar Pradesh,
Page 4 of 14
which has been taken in order to preserve and upkeep the law and 


order situation in the State should be upheld.
8.       In   order   to   appreciate   the   aforesaid   contentions   of   the 


counsel   appearing   for   the   parties,   we   have   gone   through   the 


pleadings   of   the   parties   alongwith   the   documents   relied   upon   as 


also the decisions which are referred to and relied upon.
9.       We have also perused the provisions of
Section 6
of the Act 


which   is   practically   the   foundation   and   basis   of   the   present   case.
Section   6(1)
of   the   Uttar   Pradesh   Cinemas   (Regulation)   Act,   1955 


reads as follows:
"6.       Power to the State Government or District  

        Magistrate   to   suspend   exhibition   of   films   in  

        certain   cases   -   (1)   The   State   Government,   in  

        respect of the whole of the State of Uttar Pradesh  

        or   any   part   thereof,   and   the   District   Magistrate  

        in   respect   of   the   district   within   his   jurisdiction  

        may, if it or he, as the case may be, is of opinion  

        that any film which is being publicly exhibited, is  

        likely   to   cause   a   breach   of   the   peace,   by   order,  

        suspend the exhibition of the films and thereupon  

        the   films   shall   not   during   such   suspension   be  

        exhibited   in   the   State,   part   or   the   district  

        concerned,   notwithstanding                the      certificate  

        granted under the
Cintmatograph Act, 1952
."
10.      Upon   going   through   the   records,   we   find   that   the   film 


'Aarakashan'   was   submitted   to   the   Central   Board   of   Film
Page 5 of 14
Certification   on   12.07.2011   for   certification.                 Upon   such 


submission   of   the   film,   the   Chairperson   of   the   Board,   in   terms   of 


the provisions of the Act and the Rules, invited the legal expert and 


another expert who is related to dalit movement to watch the film at 


the time when the Examining Committee was previewing the film.
11.      The Chairperson also saw to it that all the four members of 


the   Examining   Committee   are   members   belonging   to   scheduled 


casts/scheduled tribes and OBC category.  The said members of the 


Examining Committee along with the legal expert as also the expert 


related   to   dalit   movement   were   present   during   the   preview   of   the 


film.     The   experts   as   also   the   Examining   Committee   gave   their 


approval   for   grant   of   censorship   certificate   and   screening   of   the 


film.   The   Examining   Committee   decided   to   give   U/A   certificate   to 


the film  under  the theme category "social".    However, while taking 


the aforesaid decision, a view was expressed by the members of the 


Examining   Committee   for   deletion   of   the   word   'dalit'   from     the 


trailor in reel no. 1, which was deleted by the producer of the film, 


and   the   same   was   treated   as   voluntary   cut.     Thereafter,   the 


certification was granted and a certificate was issued for screening 


of the film.  The said certificate is annexed with the petition.
Page 6 of 14
12.      Pursuant   to   grant   of   the   aforesaid   certificate,   the   film   is 


being screened all over India except  for the State of Uttar Pradesh 


where it is not being exhibited because of the aforesaid decision of 


the State Government.  The State of Uttar Pradesh has given certain 


reasons in their counter affidavit for the action taken leading to the 


issuance   of   the   order   suspending   the   screening   of   the   film.     They 


have also stated in their counter affidavit that the exhibition of the 


film 'Aarakshan' if allowed would definitely cause an adverse effect 


on the law and order situation in the State.
13.      Our attention is also drawn by the counsel appearing for the 


State   of   U.P.   to   paragraph   3   of   the   said   affidavit   wherein   the 


relevant   portion   of   the   report   given   by   the   High   Level   committee 


constituted by the State Government is extracted.  A bare perusal of 


the   same   would   indicate   that   in   the   report   the   High   Level 


Committee   has   suggested   deletion   of   some   portion   from   the   film 


without   which,   according   to   them,   the   film   cannot   be   screened   as 


that may cause an adverse effect on the law and order situation in 


the State.
14.      Before   dealing   with   the   said   contentions,   we   would   like   to 


deal   with   the   provision   of   the   Act   on   the   basis   of   which   the
Page 7 of 14
aforesaid decision is taken.  There is no dispute that the impugned 


decision is taken in the purported exercise of power under
Section 6
of the Act.  A bare perusal of the aforesaid  provision in
Section 6
of 


the   Act   would   make   it   crystal-clear   that   the   power   vested   therein 


could   be   exercised   by   the   State   under   the   said   provision   when   a 


film which is being publicly exhibited could likely cause a breach of 


peace.     Only   in   such   circumstance   and   event,   an   order   could   be 


passed suspending the exhibition of the film.
15.       The   expression  'being   publicly   exhibited'  and   the   word 


'suspension'  are   relevant   for   our   purpose   and,   therefore,   we   are 


giving emphasis on the aforesaid expression and the word.     When 


it   is   said   that   a   film   is   being   publicly   exhibited,   it   definitely   pre-
supposes a meaning that the film is being exhibited for public and 


in doing so if it is found to likely to cause breach of peace then in 


that   event   such   a   power   could   be   exercised   by   the   State 


Government.     Such   an   extra-ordinary   power   cannot   be   exercised 


with   regard   to   a   film   which   is   yet   to   be   exhibited   openly   and 


publicly in a particular State.  This view that we have taken is also 


fortified   from   the   use   of   the   word   'suspension'  in   the   said   section.
The word `suspension' envisages something functional or something 


which   is   being   shown   or   is   running.   Suspension   is   always   a
Page 8 of 14
temporary phase, which gets obliterated as and when the previous 


position is restored.  Therefore, the power as vested under
Section 6
of   the   Act   could   not   have   been   exercised   by   the   State   of   Uttar 


Pradesh   in   view   of   the   fact   that   the   said   film   was   not   being 


exhibited publicly in the theatre halls in U.P.  Consequently, at this 


stage, when the film is not screened or exhibited in the theatre halls 


publicly and for public viewing, neither an opinion could be formed 


nor any decision could be taken that there is a likelihood of breach 


of peace by exercising power purported under
Section 6
of the Act.
16.       The counsel appearing for the State has also submitted that 


in   fact   the   film   already   is   being   exhibited   in   the   State   of   Uttar 


Pradesh  as a  High  Level  committee  has seen  the  film.     We  cannot 


accept the aforesaid position as the expression specifically uses the 


word  'publicly exhibited'  meaning thereby that it is  being  exhibited 


all over and publicly for public viewing in the State.
17.       Besides, the contention of the State of U.P. that some of the 


scenes of the film could create a breach of peace or could have an 


adverse effect on the law and order situation cannot be accepted as 


this film is being screened in all other States of India peacefully and 


smoothly   and   in   fact   some   of   the   States,   where   this   film   is   being
Page 9 of 14
screened, are also similarly sensitive States  as that of the State of 


U.P.   In   such   States   the   film   is   being   screened   without   any 


obstruction   or   difficulty   and   without   any   disturbance   of   law   and 


order situation.
18.       So far the contention of the counsel appearing for the State 


of Uttar Pradesh that the issue of reservation is a delicate issue and 


is   to   be   handled   carefully   is   concerned,   we   are   of   the   considered 


opinion   that   reservation   is   also   one   of   the   social   issues   and   in   a 


vibrant   democracy   like   ours,   public   discussions   and   debate   on 


social issues are required and are necessary for smooth functioning 


of a healthy democracy.  Such discussions on social issues bring in 


awareness which is required for effective working of the democracy.
In fact, when there is public discussion and there is some dissent 


on   these   issues,   an   informed   and   better   decision   could   be   taken 


which becomes a positive view and helps the society to grow.
19.       We may, at this stage, appropriately refer to the decisions of 



this Court in the case of
S.
                                     Rangaranjan   Vs.   P.
                                                                  Jagjivan Ram &  


Ors.
reported   in   (1989)   2   SCC   574.     In   paragraph   36   of
the   said 


judgment
, this Court has stated thus:-
"36.       The democracy is a government by the
Page 10 of 14
people   via   open   discussion.     The   democratic  

                form of government itself demands its citizens  

                an   active   and   intelligent   participation   in   the  

                affairs   of   the   community.               The   public  

                discussion   with   people's   participation   is   a  

                basic   feature   and   a   rational   process   of  

                democracy   which   distinguishes   it   from   all  

                other   forms   of   government.     The   democracy  

                can neither work nor prosper unless people go  

                out   to   share   their   views.     The   truth   is   that  

                public   discussion   on   issues   relating   to  

                administration   has   positive   value.     What  

                Walter   Lippman   said   in   another   context   is  

                relevant here:
When men act on the principle of  

                       intelligence,   they   go   out   to   find   the  

                       facts....   When   they   ignore   it,   they   go  

                       inside   themselves   and   find   out   what   is  

                       there.     They   elaborate   their   prejudice  

                       instead of increasing their knowledge".
20.          In   paragraph   35,   this   Court   has   also   stated   that  in   a  


democracy   it   is   not   necessary   that   everyone   should   sing   the   same  


song.  Freedom of expression is the rule and it is generally taken for  


granted.
21.          Reference could also  be made to  the  decision  of  this Court 



in
Union
                  of   India   Vs.  K.M.   Shankarappa
reported   in   (2001)   1 


SCC   582.     In   the   said   case   constitutional   validity   of
Sections   3
,
4
and   other
Sections   of   the   Cinematograph   Act,   1958
were 


challenged.     In   paragraph   8   of
the   said   judgment
,   this   Court   has
Page 11 of 14
stated   that  once   an   expert   body   has   considered  the   impact   of   the 


film  on  the   public  and has  cleared   the  film,   it  is  no  excuse  to  say 


that   there   may   be   a   law   and   order   situation   and   that   it   is   for   the 


State Government concerned to see that the law and order situation 


is maintained and that in any democratic society there are bound to 


be divergent views.
22.       In the present case, the Examining Committee of the Board 


had   seen   the   film   along   with   the   experts   and   only   after   all   the 


members   of   the   Committee   as   also   the   two   experts   gave   positive 


views on the screening of the film, thereafter only the certificate was 


granted. Therefore, since the expert body has already found that the 


aforesaid   film   could   be   screened   all   over   the   country,   we   find   the 


opinion   of   the   High   Level   committee   for   deletion   of   some   of   the 


scenes/words   from   the   film   amounted   to   exercising   power   of   pre-
censorship,   which   power   is   not   available   either   to   any   high-level 


expert   committee   of   the   State   or   to   the   State   Government.   It 


appears   that   the   State   Government   through   the   High   Level 


Committee sought to sit over and override the decision of the Board 


by   proposing   deletion   of   some   portion   of   the   film,   which   power   is 


not vested at all with the State.
Page 12 of 14
23.        It is for the State to maintain law and order situation in the 


State   and,   therefore,   the   State   shall   maintain   it   effectively   and 


potentially.  Once the Board has cleared the film for public viewing, 


screening   of   the   same   cannot   be   prohibited   in   the   manner   as 



sought to be done by the State in the present case.  As held in
K.M 


Sankarapaa
(Supra) it is the responsibility of the State Government 


to maintain law and order.
24.        Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case, 


we   are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   the   present   writ   petition   is 


required   to   be   partly   allowed   in   terms   of   the   observations   made 


herein.
25.        We, therefore, set aside and quash the decision of the State 


Government suspending the screening of the film 'Aarakshan' in the 


State of Uttar Pradesh in the light of the observations made and we 


partly allow the petition to the aforesaid extent.
.........................................................J.

                                                    (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
Page 13 of 14
........................................................J.

                                                 (ANIL R. DAVE)


New Delhi

August 19, 2011.
Page 14 of 14