[Cites
24
, Cited by
55
]
Supreme Court of India
Alka Ojha vs Rajasthan Public Ser.Commn.& Anr on 25 August, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 3547, 2011 AIR SCW 4947, 2011 LAB. I. C. 4204, 2012 (1) AIR JHAR R 380, (2012) 1 MAD LJ 158, (2011) 1 SCT 102, (2011) 131 FACLR 593, 2011 (9) SCC 438, (2011) 9 SCALE 411, (2012) 1 SERVLJ 230
Bench:
H.L. Dattu
,
G.S. Singhvi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


        SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.24020      OF 2011

                    (Arising out of  CC No.13191 of 2011)




Alka Ojha                                                          ... Petitioner(s)


                                        Versus




Rajasthan Public Service Commission and another                    ... Respondents


                                         With


 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.24021-24023              OF 2011

                 (Arising out of CC Nos.13504-13506 of 2011)


         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.  21462 OF 2011


         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.  22044 OF 2011


         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.  23039 OF 2011




                                     O R D E R
1.    The delay in filing SLP(C)  CC Nos.13191 and 13504-13506 of 2011 


is condoned.
2.    The   questions   which   arise   for   consideration   in   these   petitions   are 


whether the qualifications prescribed in the Rajasthan Transport Subordinate 


Service Rules, 1963 (for short, "the Rules") for the post of Motor Vehicle 


Sub-Inspector   are   mandatory   and   whether   the   petitioners,   who   were
2
appointed  as  Motor  Vehicle  Sub-Inspectors  in compliance  of the  direction 


given by the learned Single Judge of the High Court are entitled to continue 


in   service   despite   reversal   of   the   order   of  the   learned   Single   judge   by   the 


Division Bench.
3.      In response to advertisement dated 1.10.2001 issued by the Rajasthan 


Public   Service   Commission   (for   short,   "the   Commission"),   the   petitioners 


applied   for   appointment   as   Motor   Vehicle   Sub-Inspectors.     The   last   date 


fixed for submission of the application was 19.11.2001.                    Although   as   on 


that date, none of the petitioners possessed driving licence authorising them 


to drive motor cycle, heavy goods vehicles and heavy passenger vehicles, all 


of them were provisionally allowed to take part in the written examination 


and the interview and their names were included in the select list prepared 


by   the   Commission.     However,   after   final   scrutiny   of   the   papers   the 


Commission   cancelled   the   tentative   selection   of   the   petitioners   on   the 


ground that as on the last date fixed for submission of the application, they 


did not possess the required driving licence.
4.      The writ petitions filed by the petitioners questioning the cancellation 


of their selection were allowed by the learned Single Judge, who referred to 


the   qualifications   specified   in   paragraph   13   of  the   advertisement   and   held
3
that when the requirement of the educational qualifications could be relaxed, 


there   was   no   justification   to   deny   appointment   to   the   petitioners   on   the 


ground that they did not have the required driving licence on the last date 


fixed for submission of the application.
5.     The   special   appeals   filed   by   the   Commission   were   admitted   by   the 


Division Bench of the High Court but its prayer for interim stay was rejected 


with   an   observation   that   if   any   appointment   is   made,   the   same   will   be 


subject to the decision of the appeal.   For the sake of reference, the relevant 


portions   of   order   dated   26.10.2004   passed   in   D.B.   Civil   Special   Appeal 


(Writ) No.494 of 2004 are extracted below:
"Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Admit.
Heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   on   the   stay   application 

       also.
Considering the submissions, no case is made out for stay.


       Consequently, the stay application stands rejected.  However, it 

       is also made clear that if any appointment on the post of Motor 

       Vehicle   Sub   Inspector   is   made,   that   will   be   subject   to   the 

       decision of this appeal.
List   the   appeal   itself   for   hearing   in   the   month   of   December, 

       2004, as prayed for."
4
6.     When   the   special   appeals   were   taken   up   for   hearing,   the   Division 


Bench   noticed   that   in   R.P.S.C.   v.   Shri   Manish   Thakur   another   Division 


Bench had adversely commented upon the order of the learned Single Judge 


and   referred   the   matter   to   the   larger   Bench   for   deciding   the   following 


question:
"Whether   as   per   the   educational   qualifications   mentioned   in 

       clause   13   of   the   advertisement,   the   driving   licence   and 

       experience   should   be   possessed   by   the   candidate   on   the   last 

       date   of   filing   the   application   or   on   or   before   the   date   of 

       interview?"
7.     The Full Bench of the High Court referred to the relevant provisions 


of   the   Rules,   the   judgments   of   this   Court   in
U.P.   Public   Service 


Commission, U.P. v. Alpana
(
1994) 2 SCC 723, Ashok Kumar Sharma v. 


Chander Shekhar
(1997) 4 SCC 18 and held:
".....................In   reference   to   aforesaid   legal   position,   if 

       rules and advertisement are looked into, then it becomes clear 

       that   so   far   as   required   educational   eligibility   is   concerned,   a 

       candidate   appearing   in   last   year   examination   or   has   already 

       appeared,   can   apply   for   selection,   subject   to   possessing 

       educational   certificates   on   or   before   the   date   of   interview. 

       Thus, in view of the facts and legal position, the eligibility date 

       for educational qualification being provided not only under the 

       rules but also in advertisement,  accordingly  it has to be taken 

       the date of interview.  So far as experience and driving licence 

       are   concerned,   it   is   provided   under   the   heading   of 

       "Qualification for Direct Recruitment", if schedule appended to 

       the   Rules   is   looked   into,   however,   contrary   to   statutory   rules 

       heading   given   under   Para   13   of   advertisement   is   `educational 

       qualification'.     In   view   of   aforesaid,   firstly   it   is   only   the 

       statutory rules and not the condition in the advertisement, will 

       govern the subject because anything contrary to statutory rules
5
cannot be accepted or given effect to which ultimately violates 

       the statutory rules.  This is only to clarify the confusion kept in 

       mind by candidates from heading of clause 13 of advertisement. 

       Since   schedule   provides   heading   "Qualification   for   Direct 

       Recruitment",   which   includes   driving   licence,   experience   and 

       educational   qualification,   thus   there   are   3   different 

       requirements   for   candidates   to   become   eligible   and   out   of 

       which for educational qualification, a separate cut off date has 

       been   given   under   the   rules   as   well   as   in   the   advertisement 

       whereas rules as well as advertisement are silent regarding cut 

       off date to possess experience and driving licence.  As per legal 

       proposition
referred   above
,   it   can   be   only   the   last   date   of 

       submission of application.
Thus, in our view, Division Bench 

       of this Court in case of Rajasthan Public Service Commission 

       and another v. Shri Manish Thakur has rightly settled the issue. 

       It   is,   however,   made   clear   that   there   can   be   different   cut   off 

       dates   for   eligibility   criteria,   which   exist   even   if   interpretation 

       given   by   learned   counsel   for   parties   are   accepted.     Under   the 

       Rules   of   1963,   eligibility   in   regard   to   age   is   the   first   day   of 

       January following the last date fixed for application.  As against 

       cut off date of age, a different cut off date has been given for 

       other eligibility, thus it is not necessary that one and same cut 

       off date has to be provided for all eligibility.
In   view   of   aforesaid,   our   answer   to   reference   is   that   as 

       per clause 13 of advertisement, driving licence and experience 

       are required to be possessed by the candidates on the last date 

       of submission of the application forms and not on or before the 

       date of interview."
(emphasis supplied)
8.     After the judgment of the Full Bench, the special appeals were placed 


before the Division Bench for final disposal.  The Division Bench referred to 


the   definitions   of   the   terms   `driving   licence'   and   `learner's   licence' 


contained in
Section 2(10)
and
2(19)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for 


short, "the Act"), order dated 20.5.2004 passed in D.B. Civil Special Appeal
6
No.252 of 2003 and held that the respondents (petitioners herein), who did 


not possess one of the prescribed qualifications i.e., the driving licence as on 


the last date fixed for submission of the application, were not eligible to be 


considered for selection.  However, the Division Bench accepted the prayer 


made on behalf of the petitioners that they be allowed to participate in the 


process   of   fresh   selection   by   providing   relaxation   in   age   and   directed   the 


Commission to complete the process of fresh selection within three months. 


The   Division   Bench   also   directed   that   for   a   period   of  three   months   status 


quo shall be maintained with regard to those who are in service.
9.      S/Shri   P.P.   Rao,   S.P.   Sharma,   Colin   Gonsalves   and   Rakesh   K. 


Khanna, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners argued that the 


High   Court's   interpretation   of   the   qualifications   specified   in   the   Schedule 


appended to the Rules is erroneous and the petitioners were wrongly treated 


ineligible   because   on   the   date   of   interview   they   were   having   all   the 


qualifications including the driving licence.  Shri S.P. Sharma further argued 


that   the   requirement   of   having   the   driving   licence   cannot   be   treated   as 


mandatory because the same is not imperative for discharging the duties of 


Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector and the candidates who had obtained learner's 


licence   before   the   last   date   fixed   for   submission   of   the   application   are 


entitled to be appointed because such licence authorised them to drive motor
7
cycle   etc.     Shri   Rakesh   K.   Khanna   supported   the   argument   of   Shri   S.P. 


Sharma   and   pointed   out   as   per   the   definition   of   `learner's   licence',   the 


licensee   is   authorised   to   drive   a   motor   vehicle   of   the   specified   class   or 


description.     Shri   Rakesh   K.   Khanna   also   produced   xerox  of  the   learner's 


licence   of   Sanjay   Kumar   (petitioner   in   SLP(C)   No.   22044/2011)   to   show 


that by virtue of that licence, he was entitled to drive heavy goods vehicles. 


Shri P.P. Rao and other learned senior counsel then argued that even if this 


Court is inclined to approve the impugned judgment, the petitioners should 


be   allowed   to   continue   in   service   because   the   provisions   contained   in   the 


Schedule appended to the Rules were vague and only after the judgment of 


the Full Bench, it became clear that for being treated eligible, the candidate 


must   possess   driving   licence   on   the   last   date   fixed   for   submission   of   the 


application.   Learned counsel submitted  that it will be extremely harsh for 


the   petitioners   to   be   thrown   out   of   service   after   they   have   served   for   five 


years and have crossed the upper age limit prescribed for other posts.  In the 


end,   learned   counsel   submitted   that   the   order   of   status   quo   passed   by   the 


Division Bench may be extended because the Commission has not been able 


to make fresh selection for the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector.
10.     On   19.8.2011,   the   Court   had,   while   reserving   order   in   SLP(C) 


Nos.21462, 22044 and 23039 of 2011 permitted the learned counsel for the
8
petitioners to furnish to the Court Master copies of the licence which their 


clients possessed on the date of application.  Taking advantage of the liberty 


given by the Court, Ms. Jyoti Mendiratta, learned counsel appearing for the 


petitioner in SLP(C) No. 21462/2011 made available photostat copies of the 


learner's licences (Annexures A-1 to A-3) issued to her client.  Shri Nikilesh 


Ramachandran,   learned   counsel   representing   the   petitioner   in   SLP(C)   No. 


22044/2011 filed affidavit of his client along with xerox copy of learner's 


licence issued in his favour.
11.     For   deciding   the   questions   framed   in   the   opening   paragraph   of   this 


order,   it   will   be   useful   to   notice   Rule   11   and   the   relevant   extracts   of   the 


Schedule appended to the Rules.  The same are as under:
"11.   Academic   and   Technical   qualifications.   -   A   candidate 

        for direct recruitment to the post specified in the Schedule shall 

        possess (1) the qualification given in column 4 of the Schedule, 

        and   (2)   "Working   knowledge   of   Hindi   written   in   Devnagri 

        script and knowledge of Rajasthani culture."
SCHEDULE


        Name   of           Source   of      Qualification            Post   from  Minimum 

        Post                Recruitment      for          Direct      which            experience 

                            with             recruitment              appointment      and   qualifi-
percentage                                by               cations 

                                                                      promotion is  required   for 

                                                                      to be made       promotion

        2.   Motor          25%   by         1.   Must   have 

        Vehicle             promot-          passed   Secondary 

        Sub-                ion 75%          Examination   of   a 

        Inspector           by               recognized   Board; 

                            direct           and 

                            recruit-
9
ment    3.   A   Diploma   in 

        Automobile 

        Engineering                        (3 

        years'   course)     or 

        a   diploma   in 

        Mechanical 

        Engineering 

        awarded   by   the 

        State   Board   of 

        Technical 

        Examination                        (3 

        years' course)


        OR


        Any   qualification 

        in   either   of   the 

        above   disciplines 

        declared 

        equivalent   by   the 

        Central 

        Government                         of 

        State Government; 

        and


        3.                    Working 

        experience   of   at 

        lest   one   year   in   a 

        reputed 

        Automobile 

        Workshop   which 

        undertakes   repairs 

        of   both   light 

        motor                 vehicle, 

        heavy                       goods 

        vehicles                          and 

        heavy   passenger 

        motor                 vehicles 

        fitted   with   petrol 

        and                         diesel 

        engines; and


        4.    Must   hold   a 

        driving                licence 

        authorising  him  to 

        drive Motor cycle, 

        heavy                       goods 

        vehicles                          and 

        heavy   passenger
10
vehicles.   Nothing 

                                   contained   in   this 

                                   Notification   shall 

                                   apply   to   persons 

                                   whose names were 

                                   under 

                                   consideration   for 

                                   appointment to the 

                                   post   of   Inspector 

                                   of Motor  Vehicles 

                                   or           Assistant 

                                   Inspector of Motor 

                                   Vehicles            (by 

                                   whatever   names 

                                   called by the State 

                                   Government   prior 

                                   to first day of July, 

                                   1989   or   to   an 

                                   officer   appointed 

                                   to such post before 

                                   the   first   day   of 

                                   July, 1989 or to an 

                                   officer   appointed 

                                   to           discharge 

                                   functions of a non-

                                   technical nature."


                                                               (emphasis supplied)
12.    Paragraph 13 of the advertisement issued by the Commission, which 


is also relevant for deciding the issue raised by the petitioners reads thus:
"13. Educational Qualification:-
(A)(1)   Passed   Secondary   Examination   from   any   recognized 

               Board.
(2)     Awarded by the State Technical Education Board -
Diploma in Automobile Engineering (3 years' course)

                           Or

               Diploma in Mechanical Engineering (3 years' course)

                           Or
11
Any   qualification   in   either   of   the   above   disciplines 

                declared equivalent by the Central Government or State 

                Government; and 




         (3)    Working   experience   of   at   least   one   year   in   a   reputed 

                Automobile Workshop which undertakes repairs of both 

                light   motor   vehicles,   heavy   goods   vehicles   and   heavy 

                passenger motor fitted with petrol and diesel engines; and


         (4)    Must
                          hold   a   driving   licence   authorizing   him   to   drive 

                Motor Cycle, heavy goods vehicles and heavy passenger 

                vehicles.
But, such candidate who appeared in the final year of the 

                course   for   such   educational   qualification   sought   for   as 

                per the Rules or is going to appear in such examination, 

                will be eligible to submit application but he has to submit 

                the   certificate   passing   the   specified   qualification   before 

                the interview.
(5)    Working knowledge of Hindi written in Devnagri script 

                and the knowledge of the culture of Rajasthan."
(emphasis supplied)
13.      The   use   of   word   "shall"   in   Rule   11   makes   it   clear   that   the 


qualifications   specified   in   the   Schedule   are   mandatory   and   a   candidate 


aspiring   for   appointment   as   Motor   Vehicle   Sub-Inspector   by   direct 


recruitment   must   possess   those   qualifications   and   must   have   working 


knowledge of Hindi written in Devnagri script and knowledge of Rajasthani 


culture.  A conjoint reading of Rule 11, the relevant entries of the Schedule 


and   paragraph   13   of  the   advertisement   shows   that   a   person   who   does   not 


possess   the   prescribed   educational   and   technical   qualifications,   working
12
experience and a driving licence authorizing him to drive motor cycle, heavy 


goods vehicles and heavy passenger vehicles cannot compete for the post of 


Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector.
14.     The   question   whether   the   candidate   must   have   the   prescribed 


educational and other qualifications as on the particular date specified in the 


Rule or the advertisement is no longer res integra.
In
Bhupinderpal Singh 


v.   State   of   Punjab
(2000)   5   SCC   262,   this   Court   referred   to   the   earlier 


judgments   in
A.P.   Public   Service   Commission   v.   B.   Sarat   Chandra
(
1990)   2   SCC   669,  District   Collector   and   Chairman,   Vizianagaram 


Social  Welfare Residential  School Society v. M. Tripura Sundari  Devi
(
1990) 3 SCC 655,  M.V. Nair (Dr.) v. Union of India
(
1993) 2 SCC 429, 


Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan
1993 Supp.
(
3) SCC 168, 


U.P. Public Service Commission, U.P., Allahabad v. Alpana
(
supra) and 


Ashok   Kumar   Sharma   v.   Chander   Shekhar
(supra)   and   approved   the 


following proposition
laid down by
the Punjab and Haryana High Court:
"..... that the cut off date by reference to which the eligibility 

        requirement must be satisfied by the candidate seeking a public 

        employment is the date appointed by the relevant service rules 

        and if there be no cut off date appointed by the rules then such 

        date as may be appointed for the purpose in the advertisement 

        calling   for   applications   and   that   if   there   be   no   such   date 

        appointed   then   the   eligibility   criteria   shall   be   applied   by 

        reference   to  the  last  date   appointed  by   which  the  applications 

        have to be received by the competent authority."
13
The   same   view   was   reiterated   in
M.A.   Murthy   v.   State   of 


Karnataka
(
2003)   7   SCC   517   and  Ashok   Kumar   Sonkar   v.   Union   of 


India
(2007) 4 SCC 54.  Therefore, the Full Bench of the High Court rightly 


held that a candidate who does not possess driving licence on the last date 


fixed for submission  of the application  is not eligible to be considered for 


selection.
15.    Unfortunately,   the   learned   Single   Judge   decided   the   writ   petitions 


without even adverting to Rule 11, the relevant entries of the Schedule and 


paragraph 13 of the advertisement and issued direction which amounted to 


amendment of the Rules framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution.  This 


was clearly impermissible.  Therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court 


rightly   set   aside   the   direction   given   by   the   learned   Single   Judge,   which 


facilitated appointment of the petitioners despite the fact that they were not 


eligible to be considered for selection.
16.    We   may   now   deal   with   the   argument   of  Shri   S.P.   Sharma   and   Shri 


Rakesh K. Khanna that the learner's licence possessed by the petitioners was 


sufficient   to   make   them   eligible   for   appointment   as   Motor   Vehicle   Sub-


Inspector.     The   definitions   of   `driving   licence'   and   `learner's   licence',   as 


contained in
Section 2(10)
and
2(19)
of the Act, read as under:
14
"2(10)   "driving   licence"   means   the   licence   issued   by   a 

       competent   authority   under   Chapter   II   authorising   the   person 

       specified therein to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor 

       vehicle or a motor vehicle of any specified class or description


       2(19)     "learner's   licence"   means   the   licence   issued   by   a 

       competent   authority   under   Chapter   II   authorising   the   person 

       specified   therein   to   drive   as   a   learner,   a   motor   vehicle   or   a 

       motor vehicle of any specified class or description"
17.
Sections 3
,
8(1)
, (5) and (6), 9(1), (4), (5), (6) and (7) and 10 of the 


Act,   which   too   have   bearing   on   the   decision   of   the   question   whether 


learner's licence is at par with driving licence and a person having learner's 


licence is eligible for appointment as Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector under the 


Rules read as under:
"3. Necessity for driving licence. - (1) No person shall drive a 

       motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds an effective 

       driving   licence   issued   to   him   authorising   him   to   drive   the 

       vehicle;  and no person shall so drive a transport vehicle other 

       than a motor cab or motor cycle hired for his own use or rented 

       under   any   scheme   made   under   sub-section   (2)   of
section   75
unless his driving licence specifically entitles him so to do.


       (2)     The conditions subject to which sub-section (1) shall not 

       apply   to   a   person   receiving   instructions   in   driving   a   motor 

       vehicle   shall   be   such   as   may   be   prescribed   by   the   Central 

       Government.
8.   Grant   of   learner's   licence  -   (1)   Any   person   who   is   not 

       disqualified   under
section   4
for   driving   a   motor   vehicle   and 

       who   is   not   for   the   time   being   disqualified   for   holding   or 

       obtaining   a   driving   licence   may,   subject   to   the   provisions   of
section 7
, apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in 

       the area-
15
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, 

        or
(ii)   in   which   the   school   or   establishment   referred   to   in
section 12
from where he intends to receive instruction in 

        driving a motor vehicle is situate,


for the issue to him of a learner's licence.
(5)     No   learner's   licence   shall   be   issued   to   any   applicant 

unless   he   passes   to   the   satisfaction   of   the   licensing   authority 

such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government.


(6)     When   an   application   has   been   duly   made   to   the 

appropriate   licensing   authority   and   the   applicant   has   satisfied 

such authority of his physical fitness under sub-section (3) and 

has passed to the satisfaction of the licensing authority the test 

referred   to   in   sub-section   (5),   the   licensing   authority   shall, 

subject   to   the   provisions   of
section   7
,   issue   the   applicant   a 

learner's   licence   unless   the   applicant   is   disqualified   under
section   4
for   driving   a  motor   vehicle   or  is   for   the  time   being 

disqualified for holding or obtaining a licence to drive a motor 

vehicle:
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a learner's licence 

to drive a motor cycle or a light motor vehicle notwithstanding 

that   it   is   not   the   appropriate   licensing   authority,   if   such 

authority is satisfied that there is good reason for the applicant's 

inability to apply to the appropriate licensing authority.
9. Grant of driving licence.  - (1) Any person who is not for 

the   time   being   disqualified   for   holding   or   obtaining   a   driving 

licence may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction 

in the area -
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, 

        or
(ii)   in   which   the   school   or   establishment   referred   to   in
section   12
from   where   he   is   receiving   or   has   received 

        instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situated.


for the issue to him of a driving licence.
16
(4)     Where the application is for a licence to drive a transport 

vehicle, no such authorisation shall be granted to any applicant 

unless he possesses such minimum educational qualification as 

may   be   prescribed   by   the   Central   Government   and   a   driving 

certificate   issued   by   a   school   or   establishment   referred   to   in
section 12
.
(5)     Where   the   applicant   does   not   pass   the   test,   he   may   be 

permitted to reappear for the test after a period of seven days:
Provided   that   where   the   applicant   does   not   pass   the   test   even 

after   three   appearances,   he   shall   not   be   qualified   to   re-appear 

for such test before the expiry of a period of sixty days from the 

date of last such test.
(6)     The test of competence to drive shall be carried out in a 

vehicle of the type to which the application refers:
Provided   that   a   person   who   passed   a   test   in   driving   a   motor 

cycle  with  gear shall  be  deemed   also  to have  passed  a test  in 

driving a motor cycle without gear.
(7)     When   any   application   has   been   duly   made   to   the 

appropriate   licensing   authority   and   the   applicant   has   satisfied 

such   authority   of   his   competence   to   drive,   the   licensing 

authority  shall issue the applicant  a driving  licence  unless the 

applicant   is   for   the   time   being   disqualified   for   holding   or 

obtaining a driving licence:
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a driving licence 

to drive a motor cycle or a light motor vehicle notwithstanding 

that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if the licensing 

authority is satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for 

the   applicant's   inability   to   apply   to   the   appropriate   licensing 

authority:
Provided   further   that   the   licensing   authority   shall   not   issue   a 

new driving licence to the applicant, if he had previously held a 

driving   licence,   unless   it   is   satisfied   that   there   is   good   and 

sufficient reason for his inability to obtain a duplicate copy of 

his former licence.
17
10.   Form   and   contents   of   licences   to   drive.   -   (1)   Every 

        learner's   licence   and   driving   licence,   except   a   driving   licence 

        issued under
section 18
, shall be in such form and shall contain 

        such   information   as   may   be   prescribed   by   the   Central 

        Government.
(2)     A learner's licence or, as the case may be, driving licence 

        shall also be expressed as entitling the holder to drive a motor 

        vehicle of one or more of the following classes, namely:-
(a) motor cycle without gear;
(b) motor cycle with gear;
(c) invalid carriage;
(d) light motor vehicle;
(e) transport vehicle;
(i) road-roller;
(j) motor vehicle of a specified description."
18.     A reading of the two definitions brings out stark difference between 


the   two   types   of   licences.     `Driving   licence'   issued   by   the   competent 


authority under Chapter II authorises a person to drive a motor vehicle or a 


motor   vehicle   of   any   specified   class   or   description   otherwise   than   as   a 


learner and `learner's licence' authorises a person specified therein  to drive 


as   a   learner  a   motor   vehicle   or   a   motor   vehicle   of   any   specified   class   or 


description.  It is thus evident that a person who is granted `learner's licence' 


is entitled to drive a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of any specified class 


or description only as a learner and he cannot be treated as a person to whom 


`driving   licence'   defined   under
Section   2(10)
has   been   issued.     Though, 


there   is   some   similarity   in   the   language   of
Section   8
which   regulates   the
18
grant   of   `learner's   licence'   and
Section   9
which   regulates   the   grant   of 


`driving  licence',  the very fact  that the legislature  has  thought it proper  to 


make   separate   provisions   for   grant   of   two   types   of   licences   leads   to   an 


irresistible   conclusion   that   a   person   holding   `learner's   licence'   cannot   be 


treated   at   par   with   a   person   having   `driving   licence'   authorised   to   drive 


motor cycle, heavy goods vehicles and heavy passengers vehicles.
Section 3
of   the   Act,   which   is   mandatory   in   character   also   lays   down   that   a   person 


shall   not   drive   a   motor   vehicle   in   any   public   place   unless   he   holds   an 


effective driving licence.  Surely, learner's licence cannot entitle a person to 


claim that he holds an effective driving licence.     Therefore, the mere fact 


that the petitioners possessed learner's licence on the date of application was 


not sufficient to make them eligible to compete for selection.
19.     The   judgment   in
National   Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   v.   Swaran   Singh
(2004) 3 SCC 297 (paras 93 and 94) on which reliance was placed by Shri 


Rakesh K. Khanna has no bearing on the interpretation of Rule 11 read with 


the entries contained in the Schedule and it is not possible for this Court to 


rewrite   the   rule   so   as   to   enable   the   persons   holding   learner's   licence   to 


compete for appointment as Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector.
19
20.    We   shall   now   consider   the   question   whether   despite   reversal   of   the 


order passed by the learned Single Judge by the Division Bench of the High 


Court, the petitioners can continue in service.  The submission of the learned 


counsel   that   this   Court   should   invoke
Article   142
of   the   Constitution   and 


direct the competent authority to allow the petitioners to continue in service 


because   they   have   already   completed   more   than   5   years'   service   sounds 


attractive but lacks merit.   In our view, the power under
Article 142
cannot 


be exercised for conferring legitimacy to the appointment of the petitioners, 


who, as held hereinabove, were not eligible to be considered for selection. 


The Commission had provisionally allowed the petitioners to take part in the 


written   test   and   the   interview,   but   their   tentative   selection   was   cancelled 


because at the stage of final scrutiny, it was found that they did not possess 


one of the prescribed qualifications i.e. driving licence authorising them to 


drive   motor   cycle,   heavy   goods   vehicles   and   heavy   passenger   vehicles. 


Notwithstanding this, the competent authority was compelled to appoint the 


petitioners   because   while   entertaining   the   special   appeals,   the   Division 


Bench of the High Court declined to stay the direction given by the learned 


Single   Judge.     If   the   course   suggested   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 


petitioners is adopted, then every illegal appointment will get regularized by 


judicial   fiat   and   those   who   are   eligible   and   more   meritorious   will   be 


deprived of their constitutional right to be fairly considered for selection and
20
appointment  against   the   advertised   posts.     The   judgments  of   this   Court   in
Dr. M.S. Mudhol v. S.D. Halegkar
(
1993) 3 SCC 591, Rekha Chaturvedi 


v.   University   of   Rajasthan
(supra),  Bhupinderpal   Singh   v.   State   of 


Punjab  (supra) and other similar judgments cannot be pressed into service 


for issuing a direction for the petitioners' continuance in service because in 


those cases, the selection and/or appointments were made otherwise than by 


judicial intervention and this Court held that the candidate should not suffer 


due to the fault of the public authorities.
21.    A half-hearted attempt was made by Shri Rakesh K. Khanna, learned 


counsel   appearing  for  the petitioner  in  SLP(C)  No.22044  of  2011 to  draw 


solace  from the last line contained in order dated 29.6.2011 passed by the 


Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   in   D.B.   Civil   Special   Appeal   (Writ) 


No.494 of 2004 wherein it was observed that the question of regularisation 


has to be considered by the RPSC/State Government.   In this context, it is 


sufficient to observe that there is no provision in the Rules under which the 


Commission   or   the   State   Government   can   regularise   the  appointment  of  a 


person, who was not eligible to compete for selection.
22.    In   the   result,   the   special   leave   petitions   are   dismissed.     However, 


keeping in view the statement of the learned senior counsel appearing for the
21
petitioners that the Commission has not completed the process of selection 


for   fresh   recruitment   of   Motor   Vehicle   Sub-Inspectors,   we   direct   the 


Commission to do the needful within a period of next 4 months.   Till then, 


the petitioners shall be allowed to continue in service.  The Secretary of the 


Commission shall send a report to the High Court about compliance of the 


directions   given   by   the   Division   Bench   and   this   Court   for   completing   the 


process of selection.
23.    It is needless to say that the order of status quo passed by the High 


Court and the direction given by this Court for the petitioners' continuance 


in service will not enure to their advantage and the Commission shall make 


selection without being influenced by those orders.
24.    Copies of this order be sent to the Secretary, Rajasthan Public Service 


Commission, Ajmer and Transport Commissioner, Rajasthan, Jaipur by fax.
........ ........................J

                                                      (G.S. Singhvi)





                                                      ........ ........................J

                                                      (H.L. Dattu)

New Delhi

August 25, 2011.