[Cites
7
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Jupudi Bhushanam vs Joint Collector And Ors. on 11 December, 1996
Equivalent citations: 1997(1)ALT627
Author:
K.B. Siddappa
Bench:
K.B. Siddappa
ORDER
 

K.B. Siddappa, J.
1. This Revision is filed against the order passed by the Joint Collector, Khammam in Case No. C4 (M)2/90. The Revision Petitioner filed a petition before the Mandal Revenue Officer, Sattupalli, for restoration of his possession in respect of the land in Survey Nos. 732, 733 to 738, 832 to 835, situated at Baithupalli Village of Khammam District Under
Section 32(1)
of the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act. The Mandal Revenue Officer considered the same on merits and held that the father of the petitioner and after him the petitioner himself are the protected tenants. They were to be in possession of the lands in question. Subsequently, it seems that the petitioner was displaced from the land and he filed a petition for restoration of possession. Such a remedy is not available to him. According to the Mandal Revenue Officer, once
Section 38-E
Certificate is issued, the protected tenant becomes the owner. Subsequently possession does not entitle the owner seeking remedy under the
Tenancy Act
. He has to go to the Civil Court.
2. This finding of Mandal Revenue Officer was accepted by the Joint Collector. He held that the ownership was transferred during 1955-56 to the Appellant. Thereafter the Appellant was is continuous possession for several years. Therefore, the benefit of the
Amended Act
of 1979 does not apply to the case. Aggrieved by the said order, the present Revision is filed.
3. The learned counsel appearing for the Revision Petitioner submitted that the Appellant/Petitioner is a protected tenant. He was in possession of the land and subsequenlty he was dispossessed by the village elders and the respondent here in was given the possession in lieu of his archakatvam services to the temple. According to him the subsequent dispossession also comes under the purview of
Section 32
and
Section 38-E(2)
of the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act.
4.
In support of his contention, he relied upon a Full Bench Judgment of this Court reported in
Sada v. The Tahsildar, Utnoor, Adilabad District
, 1987 (2) ALT 749 = 1987 (2) APLJ 749 (F.B.). He submitted that this Act is a State Legislation. Therefore, the protected tenant whenever dispossessed can resort to these provisions.
5. I am unable to agree to the submission. Once
Section 38-E
Certificate is issued, the protected tenant becomes the owner. For any subsequent dispossession he has to resort to the Civil Court, He cannot rely upon the provisions of the
Tenancy Act
. The facts of the Full Bench Judgment are quite different and this case is distinguishable on facts. The lower Tribunals held concurrently against the petitioner on this aspect. I do not want to interfere with the order of the Collector.
6. The Revision is dismissed. No costs.