[Cites
41
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Tej Prakash S. Dangi And Ors. vs Coramandal Pharmaceuticals Ltd. And ... on 10 October, 1996
Equivalent citations: [2002]108COMPCAS516(AP)
JUDGMENT
 

  Lingaraja Rath, J.
1. The appellants, having failed to persuade  the learned
Company Judge to hold the application filed by them to obtain a declaration that forfeiture
of their shares in respondent No. 1 company is illegal, as maintainable, have
preferred this appeal. The appellants had obtained shares in respondent No. 1 company,
but since they failed to pay the call money in respect of the balance due on the
shares, the shares were forfeited. The appellants filed the company petition before
the learned Company Judge seeking redressal raising the question that since they
had been allotted the shares which were endorsed as 'fully paid-up', these could not
be forfeited even though money was due to be paid to the company in respect of the
shares. The learned Judge held that the application was not maintainable since there
was no statutory provision under which an action in respect of forfeiture of shares
lay before the court. Admittedly, the provision regarding forfeiture of shares is provided only in the articles of association of the company.
Article 29
of the articles provides
that when a member fails to pay any call money on the appointed day, the
Board may serve a notice requiring the payment and if the notice is not complied
with, a resolution may be passed by the Board to forfeit the shares. The Board has
also the authority to cancel the forfeiture of shares on such terms as it thinks fit. Admittedly,
there is no provision of in the
Companies Act
for a court to entertain a petition
regarding forfeiture of shares made under the articles of association.
2. Mr. M.S.K. Sastry, learned counsel for the appellants, has raised the same submissions
which were urged before the learned Company Judge and were negatived.
Placing reliance on the definition of 'court' in
Section 2(11)
and
Section 10
which deals
with the jurisdiction of court it is the argument that in all matters relating to companies,
the High Court has the general jurisdiction unless such jurisdiction is specifically
conferred on the District Courts. The learned Company Judge took the view
that
Section 10(1)
does not say anything more than only specifying that in such of the
matters where the court has been conferred the jurisdiction under the
Companies
Act
, 'court' would mean the High Court, unless the matter has been notified to be
within the cognizance of the District Court. There is no provision in the
Companies
Act
vesting general authority in the High Court to deal with all matters relating to a
company.
Section 2(11)(a)
defines 'the Court', with respect to any matter relating to a
company (other than any offence against the Act), as the court having jurisdiction
under the Act with respect to that matter relating to the company, as provided in
Section 10
.
Section 10
so far as relevant is as follows:
"10. Jurisdiction of Courts. -- (1) The court having jurisdiction under this act
shall be-
(a) the High Court having jurisdiction in relating to the place at which the registered
office of the company concerned is situate, except to the extent to
which jurisdiction has been conferred on any District Court or District
Courts subordinate to that High Court in pursuance of Sub-section (2); and
(b) where jurisdiction has been so conferred, the District Court in regard to
matters falling within the scope of the jurisdiction conferred, in respect of
companies having their registered officers in the district.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette and
subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as it thinks fit, empower
any District Court to exercise all or any of the jurisdiction conferred by this Act
upon the court, not being the jurisdiction conferred-
(a) in respect of companies generally, by
Sections 237
,
391
,
394
,
395
and
397
to
407
, both inclusive ;
(b) in respect of companies with a paid up share capital of not less than one
lakh of rupees, by Part VII (
Sections 425
to
560
) and the other provisions of
this Act relating to the winding up of companies. ..."
3. Both the provisions of
Section 10
read with
Section 2(11)
show that where in
respect of a matter relating to a company, the court has jurisdiction, the court having
that jurisdiction would be the High Court unless the District Court has been notified
as the court to deal with that matter.
Section 10
is not designed to be a sweeping provision,
blanket in nature, to assume suzerainty over all questions that may arise in
connection with a company. The courts are not the only functionaries under the
Companies Act
to decide matters. Power has been vested within the scheme of the
Act also with the other authorities like the Company Law Board or the Central Government.
4. There are provisions in the Act conferring, specifically, powers on the court in
relation to matters provided therein. Some such sections are
Sections 101
,
102
391
to
394
,
433
, etc. Similarly, powers have been conferred on the Company Law Board under
Section 17
,
79
and other provisions. Powers have also been conferred on the
Central Government like those in
Section 235
. There is no provision in the Act to enable
the High Court to entertain an application relating to forfeiture of shares. It has
rightly been pointed out by the learned Company Judge that
Section 155
which
vested power in the court to rectify the register of members if the name of any person
had been omitted without sufficient cause from the register of members of the company,
has since been deleted from 31 May, 1991, by the Amendment Act of 1988 and
that besides, by the Depositories Ordinance, 1996,
Section 111
of the Act has been
confined to private companies, and a new
Section 111A
has been added which empowers
the Company Law Board to direct any company to rectify the register or the
records where a transfer if shares has been made in contravention of the provisions
of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act
or regulations made thereunder or
in violation of the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
. Evidently,
the law has not made a provision, like those noticed earlier, vesting jurisdiction
in the court to deal with a matter of forfeiture of shares made under the articles
of association. The powers vested in the High Court or the District Court, as the case
may be, under the
Companies Act
are in respect of only rights and obligations arising
under the Act. The High Court or the District Court is not designed to function as
common law courts in respect of every grievance arising in relation to a company.
Except in matters where specific right is conferred on the High Court or the District
Court under the Act, the jurisdiction of the common law court is not ousted in respect
of causes of action which may arise besides those contemplated under the Act.
The learned Company Judge rightly referredc to the observations of Justice Willies in
a decision in Wolverhampton Newwater Works Co. v. Hawkesford (1884) 7 WR 464 which
read as under :
"There are three classes of cases in which a liability may be established
founded upon a statute. One is, where there was a liability existing at common
law, and that liability is affirmed by a statute which gives a special and peculiar
form of remedy different from the remedy which existed at common law ; there,
unless the statute contains words which expressly or by necessary implication exclude
the common law remedy, the party,  suing has his election to pursue either
that or the statutory remedy. The second class of case is, where the statute gives
the right to sue merely, but provides no particular form of remedy; there, the
party can only proceed by action at common law. But there is a third class, viz.,
where  a liability not existing at common law is created by a statute which at the
same time gives a special and particular remedy for and it is not competent to the
party to puruse the course applicable to cases of the second class. The form given
by the statute must be adopted and adhered to."
5. The grievance of the appellants does not come under the first or the third category
of cases. If the appellants have any rights to sue in the matter complained of by
them, that can only be by an action under the common law.
6. The law relating to the subject has also been exposed in the similar manner by
earlier decisions of this court as also by other High Courts.
In
Mylavarapu Ramakrishna
Rao v. Mothey Krishna Rao
(1947) 17 Comp Cas 63 (Mad), a learned  Single Judge
of the Madras High Court held, negativing an application by the newly elected secretary
and treasurer of the company for direction to his predecessor to hand over the
records and accounts of the company and for an injunction restraining him from proceeding
with his suit challenging the validity of the election, that the application was
not maintainable as there is no provision in the
Indian Companies Act
which gives
the Company Court exclusive jurisdiction in all company matters.
In deciding the
case, the learned Judge differed from the decision in
British Indian Corporation Ltd. v.
Robert Menzies
(1936) 6 Comp Cas 250 (All) and held that there is no provision in the
Indian Companies Act
which gives the Company Court (i.e., the court having jurisdiction
under the Act) exclusive jurisdiction in all company matters.
The question
was examined at length by a Single Judge of this court in
Avanthi Explosives (P) Ltd. v.
Principal Subordinate Judge
(1997) 5 Comp LJ 345 (AP) : (1987) 62 Comp Cas 301 (AP),
where the learned Judge took the view as under (paras 14 and 15 at page 350 of
Comp LJ):
"It may be seen that there are various provisions in the Act which refer to 'the
court', such as
Sections 107
,
155
,
163(6)
,
237
,
391
,
394
,
395
, and
397
to
407
,
425
, etc.
The Central Government is empowered, however, to confer jurisdiction on the
District Court powers only in respect of some of these sections, but not all. In my
view,
Section 10
of the Act only proceeds to enumerate or specify 'the court having
jurisdiction under this Act', wherever such jurisdiction is conferred on 'the
court' by the other provisions of the Act. Powers are conferred by the Act not only
on courts, but also on other authorities like the Central Government, the Company
Law Board and the Registrar ; and where a power is vested in a court, that
court has to be specified. Beyond so specifying the court competent to deal with a
matter arising under the Act,
Section 10
does not purport to invest the company
court with jurisdiction over every matter arising under the Act. It may be that, in
view of the elaborate provisions contained in the 1956 Act in regard to the management
and the conduct of a company's affairs including important internal
matters of administration, the court's interference by civil court has become more
limited, but the power has not at all been taken away. Every suit for redress of individual
wrongs cannot be considered as merely concerned with matter of internal
management. (M.P. Menon J. in
R. Prakasam v. Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalana
Yogam
(1980) 50 Comp 611 (Ker)."
6.1 In deciding the case, learned Judge also referred to a decision in Bhagawan Das
Garg v. Canara Bank Ltd. (1978) 51 Comp Cas 31 (AP) : (1978) 1 An WR 504 which held
that
Section 10
confers jurisdiction on High Court only in respect of certain matters.
7. More recently, Justice Sivaraman Nair reiterated the same view in
K.K. Maheshwari
v. Rockhard Building Materials Ltd.
, in a matter relating to removal
of directors contrary to the provisions of
Section 284
of the Companies Act,
and held that where there is no exclusion of jurisdiction of the civil court either by
express provision or by necessary implication, the civil court shall have jurisdiction
under
Section 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure and that
Section 2(11)
or
Section 10(1)
cannot be understood to exclude the jurisdiction of the civil court in any manner. The
learned Judge held the petition as liable for dismissal for the only reason that the petitioners
were not able to point  out any provision of law conferring exclusive power
to decide the disputes relating to the removal of directors.
8. Pressing for the opposite view, Mr. Sastry has placed reliance on a decision of a
Single Judge of this court in
Nizamabad Corn Products (P) Ltd. v. Vasudev Walia
. The court
in that case
was considering the maintainability of a suit in the
civil court to declare a resolution passed in the annual general meeting and the
meeting of the Board of directors removing a director of a company  as illegal and
void and for permanent injunction. The learned Judge held that the view that the
civil court's jurisdiction has not been taken away merely because
Section 10
confers
jurisdiction on the High Court, cannot be correct in view of the specific direction
contained in
Section 10(1)(a)
, viz., 'except to the extent to which jurisdiction has been
conferred on any District Court, in pursuance of Sub-section (3)'. The learned Judge
proceeded on the footing that he civil court has jurisdiction only in matters in respect
of which specific jurisdiction has been conferred upon it and that otherwise, the
High Court has the exclusive jurisdiction in all matters.
Since the learned Judge was
deciding contrary to the view taken in the earlier decision of the court in
Avanthi Explosives
P. Ltd. v. Principal Subordinate Judge
(1997) 5 Comp LJ 345 (AP) -- it was necessary
to have referred the case to a larger Bench. A judgment of a co-ordinate Bench is
binding unless it is overruled by a larger Bench. Besides, the view was also not legally
correct. The civil court would have jurisdiction in all matters unless its jurisdiction
is either expressly or by implication ousted. We hence overrule the decision.
9. Mr. Sastry has also sought to place reliance on the decision in
Public Passenger
Service Ltd. V. M.A. Khadar
(, where applications under
Section 155
were maintained in the High Court in
the matter of forfeiture of shares. The application had been filed seeking setting aside
of the forfeiture of the shares and for necessary rectification in the register of the
company. The decision in no way runs counter to the view taken by us as the application
was made under
Section 155
of the Companies Act, which no longer exists in
the Act. The
case has no application
to the case on hand.
10. Another decision in
Maharaj Kumar Mahendra Singh v. Lake Palace Hotels and
Motels (P) Ltd.
(1985) 58 Comp Cas 805 (Raj), a decision of the Rajasthan High Court
no doubt has taken the view that since power is conferred under
Section 209(4)
of the
Act on a director a statutory right of inspection of the books of account, other books
and papers of a company, the right is enforceable by way of an application in the
High Court as the court having jurisdiction. The learned Judge observed as under:
"The general maxim is ubi jus ibi remedium (Where there is a right, there is a
remedy). Here Sub-section (4) of
Section 209
of the Act confers a statutory right of
inspection, and the court which has jurisdiction under the Act, in my opinion,
possesses powers to enforce that statutory right. It has been urged that the Companies
(Court) Rules, 1959, do not envisage any such petition and what petitions
lie are specified. Petitions provided under the rules are exhaustive. I am unable to
agree with this submission as well. As already stated, when Sub-section (4) of
Section
209
of the Act envisages conferment of right of inspection on the director,
then the director can seek a remedy by moving a petition to this court. Thus, I
hold that the petition is maintainable under
Section 209(4)
of the Act and the
company is under an obligation to allow inspection to the petitioner of all the
books of account and other books and papers."
11. We are unable to concur with the view taken as a whole. There may be other
remedies available to enforce the right, but the remedy is not available in the High
Court, since the
Companies Act
does not stipulate as such.
12. In the result, the appeal has no merit and is dismissed with costs. The order of
stay granted in this appeal on 9 September, 1996, is vacated.