[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Naeem Bano Alias Gaindo vs Mohammad Rahees on 22 November, 2024
REPORTABLE
2024 INSC 1000
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2024
                              (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 16460 OF 2023)


        NAEEM BANO ALIAS GAINDO                                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                          VERSUS


            MOHAMMAD RAHEES & ANR.                                                ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                         O R D E R
Leave granted.
2.                  Being aggrieved by the Order dated 18.11.2022 passed in

        Matters                     under
Article      227
No.8207        of    2017,        the

        appellant/landlord                     is   before         this    Court.    By   the   impugned

        order, the High Court stated that since there is a matter

        under
Article 227
No.5718 of 2019, which has to be answered by

        a larger Bench of the High Court by way of a reference and

        which                 has    a   bearing    on   the       case,    the     interim     order    is

        continued until further orders. A direction was issued that

        the matter may be considered after the answer is given by the

        larger Bench, referred to above. Being aggrieved by the said

        order, the appellant, who is the landlord, has preferred this
Signature Not Verified
appeal.
Digitally signed by
NEETU SACHDEVA
Date: 2024.12.18
16:39:45 IST
Reason:
1
3.     We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties

and perused the material on record.
4.     Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that it is

not    known     as    to    when     the       larger      Bench     would       answer     the

questions       referred      to     it    on       a   reference.     However,         having

regard     to
Article       254
of        the     Constitution          of    India,

particularly the proviso to Sub-clause 2 of
Article 254
, the

amendment made by the Parliament by Section 2 of Act 3 of

2003, whereby
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act,

1882 (for short, “the
T.P. Act
”) has been substituted with

effect from 31.12.2002, would apply and the provision of the

Uttar Pradesh Amendment would no longer be applicable to the

present case.         It was submitted that the notice for ejectment

was issued on 24.07.2015 under
Section 106
of the T.P. Act.

The said notice was issued having regard to the Parliamentary

amendment referred to above and hence the earlier amendment

made to
Section 106
by the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature

vide     30.11.1954          would      pale        into     insignificance            on    the

principle       of    implied        repeal.        Therefore,        on    the    aforesaid

premise,      the     High    Court       may    be       requested    to     consider       the

present case without reference to the aspect regarding the

validity of the notice. In the alternative, it was submitted

that    the     proviso      to
Article          254
may   be    applied         and   the

validity of the notice issued under
Section 106
of the T.P.
2
Act may be sustained.
5.    Per   contra,    learned    counsel      for    the   respondent(s)

submitted that as a reference was pending before the High

Court, the impugned order was correctly passed and the case

has to be heard subsequent to the answer given by the larger

Bench on the reference order.           In the circumstance, there is

no merit in this appeal
6.    We have perused the impugned order, which reads as under:
“It is agreed between the parties that the matter
     involved in this case qua period of notice under
     Section 106 of Transfer of Properties Act is pending
     decision by Larger Bench under the reference order of
     a concurrent Bench of this Court dated 9.9.2019 passed
     in Matter under
Article 227
No. 5718 of 2019 and so
     this matter may either be connected with the said
     matter or be listed after judgment of the larger
     Bench.
In the circumstances I direct the office to list
     this matter after the reference made in Matter under
Article 227
No.5718 of 2019 stands answered by the
     larger Bench.
Interim order, if any, shall continue to operate
     in the meanwhile until further orders.”


     The aforesaid order has been passed in a revision petition

filed under
Article 227
of the Constitution by the respondent-
tenant against an order of ejectment.
7.
Section   106
of   the   T.P.   Act,   as    it   stood   prior   to

31.12.2002, read as under:
3
“106. Duration of certain leases in absence of
   written contract or local usage.— In the absence of a
   contract or local law or usage to the contrary, a
   lease of immovable property for agricultural or
   manufacturing purposes shall be deemed to be a lease
   from year to year, terminable, on the part of either
   lessor or lessee, by six months' notice expiring with
   the end of year of the tenancy; and a        lease of
   immovable property for any other purpose shall be
   deemed to be a lease from month to month, terminable,
   on the part of either lessor or lessee, by fifteen
   days' notice expiring with the end of a month of the
   tenancy.
Every notice under this section must be in
   writing, signed by or on behalf of the person giving
   it, and either be sent by post to the party who is
   intended to be bound by it or be tendered or
   delivered personally to such party, or to one of his
   family or servants at his residence, or (if such
   tender or delivery is not practicable) affixed to a
   conspicuous part of the property.”


7.1 As far as the State of U.P. is concerned, by amendment

dated 30.11.1954,
Section 106
was amended as under -
“(i) omit the word “expiring with the end of a
   year of the tenancy” and “expiring with the end of a
   month of the tenancy”;
(ii) for the words “fifteen days’          notice”
   substitute the words “thirty days’ notice”


7.2 However, the Parliament, by Act 3 of 2003, substituted
Section 106
with effect from 31.12.2002. As a result, the

substituted
Section 106
reads as under:
“106. Duration of certain leases in absence of
    written contract or local usage.— (1) In the absence
    of a contract or local law or usage to the contrary,
    a lease of immovable property for agricultural or
    manufacturing purposes shall be deemed to be a lease
    from year to year, terminable, on the part of either
4
lessor or lessee, by six months' notice; and a lease
      of immovable property for any other purpose shall be
      deemed to be a lease from month to month,
      terminable, on the part of either lessor or lessee,
      by fifteen days' notice.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
      law for the time being in force, the period
      mentioned in sub-section (1) shall commence from the
      date of receipt of notice.
(3) A notice under sub-section (1) shall not be
      deemed to be invalid merely because the period
      mentioned   therein  falls   short of  the  period
      specified under that sub-section, where a suit or
      proceeding is filed after the expiry of the period
      mentioned in that sub-section.
(4) Every notice under sub-section (1) must be in
       writing, signed by or on behalf of the person
       giving it, and either be sent by post to the party
       who is intended to be bound by it or be tendered or
       delivered personally to such party, or to one of
       his family or servants at his residence, or (if
       such tender or delivery is not practicable) affixed
       to a conspicuous part of the property.”
8.    Entry   6,    List   III    -   Concurrent     List   of    the    Seventh

Schedule of the Constitution of India reads as under -
“Transfer of property other than agricultural land;
      registration of deeds and documents.”



      Entry 6, List III being in the Concurrent List both the

Parliament as well as the State Legislature have concurrent

legislative    competence        to   enact   laws   on   the    said   subject.

However, there could be an inconsistency in the laws made by

the    Parliament    and   the    State     Legislature.    How    would   such

inconsistency be resolved?
5
8.1      When there is an inconsistency between a law made by

the Parliament and a law made by the Legislature of a State,
Article 254
of the Constitution would apply, which reads as

under:
“254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament
       and laws made by the Legislatures of States. – (1)
       If any provision of a law made by the Legislature
       of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law
       made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to
       enact, or to any provision of an existing law with
       respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
       Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of
       clause (2), the law made by Parliament, whether
       passed before or after the law made by the
       Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be,
       the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by
       the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent
       of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State
       with respect to one of the matters enumerated in
       the   Concurrent    List contains   any   provision
       repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made
       by Parliament or an existing law with respect to
       that matter, then, the law so made by the
       Legislature of such State shall, if it has been
       reserved for the consideration of the President and
       has received his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent
       Parliament from enacting at any time any law
       with respect to the same matter including a law
       adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law
       so made by the Legislature of the State.”


8.2
Article   254
of     the    Constitution          makes   provision

firstly, as to what would happen in case of a conflict between

a Central and a State law with regard to subjects enumerated

in    the   Concurrent   List,    and       secondly,   for    resolving   such

conflict. Clause (1) to
Article 254
lays down the general
6
rule. As discussed in
T.Barai vs. Henry Ah Hoe
, [1983] 1 SCR

905, clause (1) lays down that if a State law relating to a

Concurrent subject is 'repugnant' to a Union law relating to

that subject, then, whether the Union law is prior or later in

time, the Union law will prevail and the State law shall, to

the extent of such repugnancy, be void.
8.3     Clause (2) is an exception to clause (1). As held in
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. vs. State of Bihar
, [1983] 3 SCR

130, clause (2) provides that if the President assents to a

State law which has been reserved for her consideration, it

will prevail notwithstanding its repugnancy to an earlier law

of the Union, both laws dealing with a concurrent subject. In

such a case, the Central Act will give way to the State Act

only to the extent of inconsistency between the two.


8.4     The     Proviso      to   clause       (2)   qualifies     the   exception

provided      in    Clause    (2)    to
Article     254.
It    empowers   the

Parliament to repeal or amend a repugnant State law, either

directly, or by itself enacting a law repugnant to the State

law with respect to the ‘same matter’.
9.
In
Zaverbhai Amaidas vs. State of Bombay
, [1955] SCR 799,

this    Court      noted   that
Article     254(2)
is   in    substance,   a

reproduction of
section 107(2)
of the Government of India Act,

1935 and that the proviso in
Article 254(2)
was incorporated
7
as    a    further   addition.   This   Court   further   noted   that,   by

incorporating the proviso, the Constitution has enlarged the

powers of Parliament. That a State law will be void if it

conflicts with a later “law with respect to the same matter”

that may be enacted by Parliament even if it did not expressly

repeal the State law.
9.1 Further, in
Gauri Shankar Gaur vs. State of UP
, [1993]

Supp.1 SCR 667, this Court held as follows:
“An exception has been engrafted to this rule by
          Cl.2 thereof, namely, if the state law has been
          reserved for consideration and the President gives
          assent   to   a  State   Law,   it  will   prevail,
          notwithstanding it repugnance to a earlier law made
          by the Union, though both laws are dealing with
          concurrent subject occupying the same field but
          operate in a collision course. The assent obtained
          from the President of the State Act which is
          inconsistent with the Union Law prevails in that
          State and overrides the provisions of the Union Law
          in its application to that State only. However, if
          the Parliament, in exercising its power under
          proviso to
Art. 254(2)
makes a law adding, amending
          or repealing the union law, predominance secured by
          the State law by the assent of the President is
          taken away and the repugnant State law though it
          became valid by virtue of President's assent, would
          be void either directly of by its repugnance with
          respect to the same matter.”


                                                [emphasis supplied]


9.2        The judgment of this Court in
Innoventive Industries

Ltd. vs. ICICI Bank
, [2017] 8 SCR 33 examined the case law on
8
Article 254
and summarised the position of law. As regards the

case at hand, the following points are relevant:
50. The case law
referred to above
, therefore, yields
    the following propositions:
XXX
vi) Repugnancy may be direct in the sense that there
    is inconsistency in the actual terms of the competing
    statutes and there is, therefore, a direct conflict
    between two or more provisions of the competing
    statutes. In this sense, the inconsistency must be
    clear and direct and be of such a nature as to bring
    the two Acts or parts thereof into direct collision
    with each other, reaching a situation where it is
    impossible to obey the one without disobeying the
    other. This happens when two enactments produce
    different legal results when applied to the same
    facts.
XXX
viii) A conflict may arise when Parliamentary law and
    State law seek to exercise their powers over the same
    subject matter. This need not be in the form of a
    direct conflict, where one says "do" and the other
    says "don't". Laws under this head are repugnant even
    if the rule of conduct prescribed by both laws is
    identical. The test that has been applied in such
    cases is based on the principle on which the rule of
    implied repeal rests, namely, that if the subject
    matter of the State legislation or part thereof is
    identical with that of the Parliamentary legislation,
    so that they cannot both stand together, then the
    State legislation will be said to be repugnant to the
    Parliamentary legislation. However, if the State
    legislation or part thereof deals not with the
    matters   which   formed   the  subject   matter   of
    Parliamentary legislation but with other and distinct
    matters though of a cognate and allied nature, there
    is no repugnancy.
ix) Repugnant legislation by the State is void only
    to the extent of the repugnancy. In other words, only
    that portion of the State's statute which is found to
    be repugnant is to be declared void.
9
x) The only exception to the above is when it is
       found that a State legislation is repugnant to
       Parliamentary legislation or an existing law if the
       case falls within
Article 254(2)
, and Presidential
       assent is received for State legislation, in which
       case State legislation prevails over Parliamentary
       legislation or an existing law within that State.
Here again, the State law must give way to any
       subsequent Parliamentary law which adds to, amends,
       varies or repeals the law made by the legislature of
       the State, by virtue of the operation of
Article
       254(2)
proviso.”
                                                 (underlining by us)



9.3      It is noted that the
T.P. Act, 1882
, which is a pre-

Independence statute, has been adopted vide Adaptation of Laws

Order, 1950. Consequently, the said Act has to be read within

the scope and ambit of Entry 6 List III which is in the

Concurrent List. When any subject is within the scope and

ambit of the concurrent list, both the Parliament as well as

the State Legislature have the legislative competence to make

laws on the said subject. In the instant case, by virtue of

the    said    legislative   competence     to   make   laws   on   the   said

subject, the U.P. Legislature amended
Section 106
with effect

from 30.11.1954, which had been in operation. However, with

effect    from    31.12.2002,    the    Parliamentary      amendment      would

apply. This is because of the proviso to Clause 2 of
Article

254
which would apply to the facts of the present case.


9.4      Consequently, the U.P. amendment to
Section 106
would

pale    into    insignificance    owing     to   implied   repugnancy       and
10
inconsistency         between      the     U.P.        State        amendment      and     the

Parliamentary amendment to
Section 106
of the T.P. Act in the

year 2003 even if the earlier U.P. amendment had been reserved

for   consideration          of   the     President           and    had    received       the

Presidential         assent.      Thus,       on     the    Parliament       amending        a

provision subsequent to a State legislature’s amendment of a

provision       of     law     found      in         the    Concurrent        List,        the

Parliamentary         amendment         would        apply.
Article      254
is     an

instance of Parliamentary supremacy.
9.5     Thus,    the     subject        “transfer          of   property      other       than

agricultural land” is one which falls within the scope and

ambit   of   Entry      6,     List     III     as    noted     above      and   both      the

Parliament      and     the       State       Legislatures           have    legislative

competence to make laws on the said subject including enacting

an amendment to any provision of the
T.P. Act
. If an amendment

is made to a provision of
T.P. Act
such as
Section 106
in the

instant case, by a State Legislature and the mandate of sub-

clause (2) of
Article 254
is complied with by the State, then

any inconsistency between the State law and the Parliamentary

law would result in State law prevailing in the State.


9.6 In the instant case, it is noted that the Legislature of

State   of      U.P.     amended
Section        106
by     amendment         dated

30.11.1954      by     which      the    words        “fifteen       days’    notice”       in
11
Section 106
of the T.P. Act were substituted by “thirty days’

notice” and the substituted clause prevailed in the State of

U.P. However, in view of the amendment made to
Section 106
by

the Parliament by Act 3 of 2003 with effect from 31.12.2002,

the substitution in
Section 106
made by the Legislature of the

State of U.P. is impliedly repealed and
Section 106
as amended

with effect from 31.12.2002 by the Parliament, would apply.

This   is    on   the   strength   of   the    proviso    to   clause   (2)   of
Article 254
of the Constitution. This position could be better

understood by referring to
Article 254
of the Constitution and

the relevant judicial dicta on the said Article as discussed

above.      The   proviso   to   clause      (2)   of
Article   254
of    the

Constitution squarely applies in the instant case.


9.7 In the circumstance, we are of the opinion that the issue

with regard to the validity of the notice dated 24.07.2015 in

light of the inconsistency between the amendment made by the

State Legislature of U.P. and the subsequent Parliamentary

amendment to
Section 106
of the T.P. Act can no longer be a

point of controversy.        Therefore, the High Court ought to have

considered the case i.e. the tenant’s revision petition, on

its own merits and disposed of the same rather than awaiting

the opinion of the larger Bench on a reference made. It is

noted that the respondent(s)/tenant having been unsuccessful

before two Courts has filed the petition under
Article 227
of
12
the Constitution of India.
9.8    In the circumstance, the impugned order is set aside.

The High Court is requested to dispose of the petition filed

by    the   respondent(s)/tenants   bearing     the   observations   made

above and on merits as expeditiously as possible.
The appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
……………………………………………………………………J.
                                                     [B.V. NAGARATHNA]



                                          ……………………………………………………………………J.
                                         [NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]

NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 22, 2024.
13