[Cites
30
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Parivar Seva Sanstha vs Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. on 24 November, 2022
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2773 OF 2012

           PARIVAR SEVA SANSTHA                                                         .....           APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS

           AHMEDABAD MUNICIPAL CORPORATION                                              .....       RESPONDENT

                                                               WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10694 OF 2016




                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Section 1271
of the Gujarat Provincial Municipal Corporations

                     Act, 1949
(Bombay Act
No. LIX of 1949)2, as applicable to the State

                     of Gujarat, post the
Gujarat Act
No. 2 of 20073, empowers a

                     Municipal Corporation4 to impose property tax either under Section

                     1295 based on the rateable value of buildings and lands, or under


            1 “127. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Corporation shall impose the following taxes, namely :—
(a)Property taxes either under
section 129
or under
section 141
AA;
                       [* * * * * ]”
                       2 For short, ‘
GPMC Act
’.
Originally, the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949
.
Signature Not Verified
3 The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations (Gujarat Amendment and Validation) Act, 2007
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah            4 Hereinafter referred as the’Corporation’.
Date: 2022.11.24
16:39:03 IST           5 “129. For the purposes of sub-section (1) of
section 127
property taxes shall comprise the following
Reason:
taxes which shall, subject to the exceptions, limitations and conditions hereinafter provided, be levied
                       on buildings and lands in the City:—
                                  [* * * * * ]
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                                                Page 1 of 24
Section 141AA6 based on the carpet area of the buildings and

        lands. The common question of law which arises in the

        aforementioned appeals is whether the appellants, namely, Parivar

        Seva Sanstha7 and Bai Gulab Hargovandas Jagjivandasni Dikarina

        Dikarina Will Trust8, are entitled to exemption from levy of general

        tax in terms of clause (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 132
in cases

        where the Corporation has exercised the option to levy property tax

        on carpet area method under
Section 141AA
of the GPMC Act. An

        additional issue which arises for consideration in the appeal

        preferred by Appellant No. 2 Trust relates to the challenge to Rule

        8B(4)(i) of the Taxation (Amendment) Rules 20019, as applicable to

        the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, on the ground that it is

        unconstitutional, illegal and arbitrary as it violates the principle of

        equality enshrined under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
2.      The first issue should not hold us for long as when we assort and

        pigeonhole sub-sections under Chapter XI of the GPMC Act, it is
(c) a general tax of not less than twelve per cent. 2 but not more than thirty per cent of their
             rateable value, which may be levied, if the Corporation so determines on a graduated
             scale;
[* * * * * ]”
6 “141AA. For the purposes of sub-section (1) of
section127
, property taxes shall comprise the

following taxes which shall, subject to exceptions, limitations and conditions hereinafter provided, be
levied on buildings and lands in the City:
[* * * * * ]
(c) a general tax which may be levied in accordance with the provisions of
section 141B
, if
             the Corporation so determines on a graduated scale;
[* * * * * ]”
7 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Appellant No.1 Trust’.
8 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Appellant No. 2 Trust’.
9
Schedule-A, Chapter VIII of the GPMC Act
. For short, ‘Taxation Rules’.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                                      Page 2 of 24
crystal clear that
Sections 129
to
141A
of the GPMC Act are

       grouped together and are applicable when property tax is payable

       on annual letting value/annual rateable value, whereas provisions

       from
Sections 141AA
to
141F
of the GPMC Act apply when property

       tax is payable on the basis of carpet area method. We do not find

       any good ground and reason to hold that clause (b) to sub-section

       (1) of
Section 132
of the GPMC Act, which grants exemption to

       buildings and lands or portions thereof solely occupied and used for

       public worship or for public charitable purposes, would apply when

       property tax is calculated and is payable on the basis of the carpet

       area method, which is to be computed and calculated in

       accordance with the provisions of
Section 141AA
to
Section 141F
of the GPMC Act. This aspect has been examined threadbare in

       the two impugned judgments passed by the Gujarat High Court,

       with which we agree. However, for the sake of clarity and

       convenience, we would briefly record our reasons.
3.     As noticed above,
Chapter XI of the GPMC Act
deals with municipal

       taxation and sub-section (1) to
Section 127
states and gives an

       option to the Corporation to impose property tax either under
Section 129
, or under
Section 141AA
of the GPMC Act.
Section 129
states that the property tax shall comprise of the taxes, which shall,

       subject to the exceptions, limitations and conditions thereinafter
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                               Page 3 of 24
provided, be levied on buildings and lands in the city.
Section 13210
of the GPMC Act states that general tax shall be levied in respect

        of all buildings and lands in the city, the rateable value of which

        exceeds Rs.600/-, save when a case is covered by exceptions

        enumerated and listed in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1)

        to
Section 132
of the GPMC Act. Clause (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 132
states that buildings and lands, or portions thereof,

        solely occupied and used for public worship or for public charitable

        purposes are exempt from payment of general tax leviable under
Section 132
of the GPMC Act. In other words, exemption under

        clause (b) only applies when general tax is payable under sub-

        section (1) to
Section 132
read with
Section 129
of the GPMC Act.

        Clause (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 132
per se and ex facie




10 “132. (1) The general tax shall be levied in respect of all buildings and lands in the City, the rateable

value of which exceeds six hundred rupees except:
(a) buildings and lands solely used for purposes connected with the disposal of the dead;
(b) buildings and lands or portions thereof solely occupied and used for public worship or for a
         public charitable purposes;
(c) buildings and lands vesting in the Government used solely for public purposes and not used
         or intended to be used for purposes of trade or profit or vesting in the Corporation, in respect
         of which the said tax, if levied, would under the provisions hereinafter contained by primarily
         leviable from the Government or the Corporation, respectively.
(2) The following buildings and lands or portions thereof shall not be deemed to be solely occupied
and used for public worship or for a public charitable purpose within the meaning of clause (b) of sub-
section (1), namely:–
(a) buildings or lands or portions thereof in which any trade or business is carried on; and
(b) buildings or lands or portions thereof in respect of which rent is derived whether such rent is
         or is not applied solely to religious or charitable purposes.
(3) Where any portion of any building or land is exempt from the general tax by reason of its being
solely occupied and used for public worship or for a public charitable purpose, such portion shall be
deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.”
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                                         Page 4 of 24
does not apply to taxes payable in terms of
Section 141AA
on the

       basis of the carpet area method.
4.
Section 141AA
, which is an alternative mode of taxation and an

       option available to the Corporation to impose tax on the basis of the

       carpet area method, states that the property taxes shall comprise

       of the taxes which shall, subject to exceptions, limitations and

       conditions thereinafter provided, be levied on buildings and lands in

       the city. Clause (c) to
Section 141AA
states that a general tax may

       be levied in accordance with the provisions of
Section 141B
, if the

       Corporation so determines, on a graduated scale. Sub-section (1)

       to
Section 141B
states that for the purpose of clause (c) to
Section

       141AA
of the GPMC Act, general tax, subject to such exceptions,

       limitations     and      conditions   thereinafter   provided   (and    not

       thereinbefore provided), shall be levied annually on the buildings

       and lands in the city at such rate per square meter of the carpet

       areas of the buildings and of the areas of land, which thereinafter

       in the enactment has been referred to as ‘the rate of tax’, as the

       Corporation may determine. Sub-section (2) to
Section 141B
states

       that for the purpose of levy of tax on buildings in the city under sub-

       section (1) to
Section 141B
, the buildings may be classified into

       ‘residential’ and ‘buildings other than residential’ and the

       Corporation may determine one rate of tax for residential buildings
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                   Page 5 of 24
and the other rate of tax for buildings other than residential. The

       proviso states that it shall be lawful for the Corporation to determine

       for residential buildings, the carpet area of which does not exceed

       40 square meters, such rate of tax as is lower than the rate of tax

       determined for residential buildings. Sub-section (3) to
Section

       141B
states that the rate of tax determined under sub-section (1)

       read with sub-section (2) to
Section 141B
shall not, in respect of the

       residential buildings, be less than Rs.10/- per square meter of

       carpet area and more than Rs.40/- per square meter of carpet area.

       In respect of buildings other than residential, it shall not be less than

       Rs.20/- per square meter of carpet area and not more than Rs.80/-

       per square meter of carpet area. Sub-section (4) to
Section 141B
states that the Corporation, subject to the Taxation Rules, may

       increase or decrease or neither increase nor decrease the rate of

       tax determined under sub-section (1) read with sub-section (2) and

       sub-section (3) to
Section 141B
in the case of residential buildings

       having regard to factors, like, market value of the land where the

       building is situated, the year of construction of the building, type of

       the building, the duration of existence of the building, the type of

       building, and whether the building is self-occupied or tenanted.

       Similarly, in the case of buildings other than residential, the

       following factors, namely, market value of the land in the area in
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                 Page 6 of 24
which the building is situated, the duration of existence of the

       building, the purpose for which the building is used, and whether

       the building is self-occupied or tenanted are to be taken into

       consideration.
5.     Keeping in view the aforesaid legislative scheme, there is hardly

       any scope to urge and argue that clause (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 132
of the GPMC Act, which relates to and grants

       exemption from payment of general tax when rateable value is

       computable under
Section 129
read with
Section 132
of the GPMC

       Act, would apply in cases where property tax is payable by the

       carpet area method. General tax in terms of clause (c) to
Section

       141AA
has to be computed subject to such exceptions, limitations

       and conditions provided in
Sections 141B
or thereinafter. It would

       be, therefore, correct to hold that provisions from
Section 141AA
to
Section 141F
form a complete code when tax has to be computed

       and paid on the carpet area method, and for such computation,

       reference cannot be made to the provisions of
Sections 129
to
133
which relate to property tax payable on annual rateable value. This

       position is also made clear by
Section 141F
, which states that

       provisions of
Section 140
and
141A
shall apply in relation to

       property taxes levied under
Section 141AA
, subject to modifications

       specified in Appendix I-A. Therefore, only provisions of
Section 140
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                             Page 7 of 24
and
Section 141A
have been made applicable when property tax is

       levied and is payable in terms of
Section 141AA
of the GPMC Act.

       Clause (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 132
of the GPMC Act is not

       attracted and cannot be relied upon when property tax is payable

       under
Section 141AA
of the GPMC Act.
6.     The second aspect has to be also answered against the Appellant

       No. 2 Trust. Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules, which relates to the

       increase and decrease of rate of property tax determined for

       ‘buildings other than residential’, refers to several factors which

       result in an increase or decrease, or neither increase nor decrease,

       in the rate of tax applicable to the carpet area. Sub-rule (1) to Rule

       8B states that for the purpose of determining the rate of tax for

       buildings other than residential, the increase and decrease, or

       neither increase nor decrease, shall be in terms of sub-rules (2),

       (3), (4) and (5) to Rule 8B. Sub-rule (2) to Rule 8B relates to the

       ‘location factor’, sub-rule (3) to Rule 8B relates to the ‘age factor’,

       sub-rule (4) to Rule 8B deals with the ‘use factor’, and sub-rule (5)

       to Rule 8B deals with the ‘occupancy factor’. The said sub-rules (2)

       to (5) to Rule 8B specify the rate by the multipliers specified therein.

       In some cases, as in clause (b) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B relating

       to the ‘use factor’, it is stated that the designated rate shall be

       neither increased nor decreased, in respect of buildings used as
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                Page 8 of 24
specified therein, and in clause (c) to sub-rule (4) to Rule 8B, it is

       stipulated that the designated rate shall be decreased by a

       multiplier of 0.0 in respect of buildings used as specified therein.

       There are illustrations in sub-rule (7) to Rule 8B of the Taxation

       Rules, which elucidate the manner in which the computation is to

       be made under Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules. Sub-rule (2) to Rule

       8D states that for the purpose of sub-rule (2) to Rule 8B, the

       Commissioner shall classify the area of the city in which the

       buildings other than residential buildings are situated into four

       classes, namely, I, II, III, and IV, having regard to the market value

       of the lands in the area. The classification so made shall be revised

       once every four years. Sub-rule (5) to Rule 8D states that for the

       purpose of sub-rule (4) to Rule 8B, the Commissioner shall have

       the power to decide which property would fall in the category

       mentioned in sub-rule (4)(a)(i)(ii)(iii) and (iv) and sub-rule (4)(b) and
(c) of Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules. Rule 8C of the Taxation Rules

       deals with property tax for commercial and industrial units and

       states that the property tax shall be levied at the rates stipulated

       therein.
7.     Clause (a)(i) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B, which relates to commercial

       properties, reads as under:
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                 Page 9 of 24
“(a) The designated rate shall be increased by
                 multiplying it –
(i) by 7.0 in respect of the buildings used as under:
Bank, Dispensary, Hospital, Clinic, Maternity home,
                 Laboratory, Central Government office, Post office,
                 Commercial and / or industrial office, Oil companies
                 office, Offices of Corporations, Tuition classes, Typing
                 institutes, godowns and warehouses of the properties
                 falling in the above categories and those buildings
                 which do not fall within any other sub-clause of this
                 clause.
xx               xx                xx"
8.     It may be also relevant to refer to clause (a)(iv) to sub-rule (4) of

       Rule 8B, which specifically relates to educational and specified

       social institutions, and reads as under:
“ (a)

                           xx               xx                xx
(iv) By 2.0 in respect of the buildings used as under:
Private Nursery (Bal-Mandir), Private and Govt.
                 Schools, Private and Govt. Colleges, University
                 Campus, Museum, Community halls, Social institutes
                 run by public charitable trust (for the welfare of women,
                 old people, deaf, dumb and blind, physically
                 handicapped, mentally retarded people) and non
                 grantable schools.
xx               xx                xx"
9.     It is an undisputed position that Appellant No. 2 Trust was using

       portions of the property/building as a hospital or a clinic. In view of

       the aforesaid position, sub-clause (i) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of

       Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules would be applicable and thereby, the
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                     Page 10 of 24
designated rate has to be increased by applying the multiplier of

       7.0.
10.    The contention of Appellant No. 2 Trust is that their clinic/hospital

       is being used for charitable purposes as the fee demanded from the

       patients and users is not the actual market fee. Reference in this

       regard is made to sub-clause (iv) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of

       Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules, whereby a multiplier of 2.0 is to be

       applied in respect of social institutes run by a public charitable trust

       for the welfare of women, old people, deaf, dumb and blind,

       physically handicapped and mentally retarded people. Our

       attention has also been drawn to clause (b) to sub-rule 4 of Rule 8B

       of the Taxation Rules, which states that the designated rate shall

       neither be increased nor decreased when the building is used as

       grantable schools run by public charitable trusts, boarding-lodging-
hostels run by public charitable trusts, and religious institutions,

       dharma-shala, ashram, and library.
11.    As far as clause (b) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules

       is concerned, the same is clearly distinguishable, and the ‘use

       factor’ enlisted thereunder is a separate category; the category

       being grantable schools run by public charitable trusts, boarding-

       lodging-hostels run by public charitable trusts, and religious
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                               Page 11 of 24
institutions, dharma-shala, ashram, and library. Appellant No.2

       Trust cannot claim any parity with the aforesaid ‘use factors’, even

       though the hospital/clinic run by them are run by public charitable

       trusts. Sub-clause (i) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B of the

       Taxation Rules enlists all buildings used as hospitals, dispensaries,

       clinics, maternity homes, etc. They have all been classified under

       one head. No distinction is made whether they are run by public

       charitable trusts or not. The legislature is entitled to club and treat

       the buildings as per the ‘use factor’ alike without falling foul of the

       right to equality, as enshrined under
Article 14
of the Constitution of

       India.
12.    Recently, this Court in
Manish Kumar v. Union of India and

       Others11
, has exhaustively referred to the case law on the subject

       of reasonable classification under
Article 14
of the Constitution of

       India vide paragraphs 210 to 230 to observe that
Article 14
frowns

       upon what constitutes hostile discrimination but does not bar

       classification which is reasonable. To answer whether a

       classification is reasonable, one must look beyond the classification

       to the purpose of law. A reasonable classification is one which

       includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to the



11 (2021) 5 SCC 1.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 12 of 24
purpose of law. The purpose of law may be either elimination of

       public mischief or achievement of some positive public good.

       Reference in this regard was made to the decision in
State of

       Gujarat and Another v. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad and

       Another12
, which elucidates and explains the distinction between

       under-inclusive and over-inclusive classification. A classification is

       under-inclusive when the State benefits or burdens persons in a

       manner that furthers a legitimate purpose but does not confer the

       same benefit or place the same burden on others who are similarly

       situated. An over-inclusive classification is one, where it imposes a

       burden on a wider range of individuals who are included in that

       class of those attended with mischief at which the law aims.

       Piecemeal approach to the general problem is permitted in under-

       inclusive classification on the ground that legislative dealing with

       problems of classification is usually an experimental matter. It is

       impossible to tell how successful a particular approach may be,

       what dislocations might occur, what evasions might develop, and

       what new evils might be generated in the attempt. Administrative

       expedients must be forged and tested. This decision also

       propounds that laws regulating economic activity should be viewed

       differently from the laws which touch or concern freedom of speech


12 (1974) 4 SCC 656.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 13 of 24
or religion, voting, procreation, rights with respect to criminal

       procedure, etc. Judicial deference should be given to legislature in

       the field of economic regulation viz. the constitutional requirement

       and need to vigorously enforce equal protection clause to strike

       down legislative action in the area of fundamental human rights.

       Equally, this Court in
State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Shri Triloki

       Nath Kosa and Others13
, has held that there is always a

       presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and

       the burden is upon the person who attacks it to show that there has

       been a clear transgression of constitutional principles. A provision

       cannot be struck down as discriminatory on any a priori reasoning.

       The question of classification is primarily for legislative judgment.

       Power to classify being extremely broad and based upon

       consideration of executive pragmatism, the judicature cannot rush

       in where the legislature varily treads. Generally, the two-fold test

       applied by the courts is (i) the classification must be founded on an

       intelligible differentia, and (ii) the differentia must have a rational

       relation with the object sought to be achieved by the legislature in

       question. If the object itself is not discriminatory, it should be held

       that there is a reasonable classification because it has a rational

       relation to the object sought to be achieved.
13 (1974) 1 SCC 19.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 14 of 24
13.    This Court in the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Children Book Trust14, had the occasion to examine the

       provisions of
Section 115(4)
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,

       1957, a provision which had granted exemption to land and

       buildings or portions thereof used for charitable purpose from

       payment of municipal general tax by charitable institutions. In the

       context of the legislation, a distinction was drawn between

       charitable purpose under
Section 115(4)
, and as then defined under

       the
Income Tax Act, 1961
, to observe that the test under the

       municipal act is both qualitative and quantitative. In other words,

       voluntary contributions or support as a mean of sustenance or

       maintenance should be satisfied before the assessee was granted

       exemption on the ground that the building was being used for

       charitable purposes. In other words, where an assessee is making

       systematic profits, even though that profit is utilised for charitable

       purposes, the assessee cannot claim exemption. Thus, where the

       assessee could survive without receiving voluntary contributions, it

       would be liable to pay general property tax. The term ‘contribution’,

       for the purpose of the statute, was interpreted as something that

       cannot amount to compulsive donation. The underlying reasoning



14 (1992) 3 SCC 390.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 15 of 24
behind
the said judgment
is to ensure that such institutions take the

       burden and provide for municipal revenue, which is necessary and

       required for local needs. In a democratic set-up, a municipality

       requires the proceeds from the taxes for their own administration

       and therefore, there is a need to leave to these municipalities the

       power to impose and collect taxes.
14.    The Statement of Objects and Reasons for Amendment Act No. 3

       of 1999, while enacting the option to levy property tax by applying

       the carpet area method, records that the levy of property tax did not

       provide sufficient revenue to the Corporation to meet the escalating

       cost concerns, particularly in view of rapid urbanisation in the cities.

       It is in this background it was necessary to provide alternative tax

       on buildings and lands based upon the carpet area method.

       However, at the same time, the legislation has provided the

       minimum and maximum rate of tax. The power is given to the

       Corporation to increase or decrease the tax for residential and non-

       residential properties according to factors like location, age and

       type of buildings.
15.    Another aspect which we cannot ignore is the need to have clarity

       and uniformity in the rate of tax. Discretion or variation of the rate
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                               Page 16 of 24
of tax based upon ascertainment of details etc., always leads to

       litigation.
16.    This Court in
State of Bihar and Others v. Sachchidanand

       Kishore Prasad Sinha and Others15
, had set aside the judgment

       of the Patna High Court striking down the assessment rules as

       being violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India by relying

       upon the earlier decision in
Twyford Tea Co. Ltd. and Another v.

       The State of Kerala and Another16
, wherein the Constitutional

       Bench by majority had held that the legislature must have a wide

       range of selection and freedom in appraisal not only in the objects

       of taxation, and the manner of taxation, but also in the

       determination of the rate or rates applicable. A person, to succeed

       on the ground of discrimination, must show hostile unequal

       treatment. This is more so when uniform taxes are levied. In this

       connection it was stressed:
“15….This indicates a wide range of selection and
                  freedom in appraisal not only in the objects of
                  taxation and the manner of taxation but also in the
                  determination of the rate or rates applicable.
16.…The burden of proving discrimination is
                  always heavy and heavier still when a taxing
                  statute is under attack. … The burden is on a
                  person complaining of discrimination. The burden
                  is proving not possible ‘inequality’ but hostile


15 (1995) 3 SCC 86.
16 (1970) 1 SCC 189.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                Page 17 of 24
‘unequal’ treatment. This is more so when uniform
                  taxes are levied.”

               This judgment in
Sachchidanand Kishore Prasad Sinha
(supra) also refers to the earlier decision in
R.K. Garg v. Union of

       India and Others17
, that the laws relating to economic activities

       should be viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil

       rights. The economic mechanism is highly sensitive and complex,

       laws are not abstract propositions, do not relate to abstract units,

       are not to be measured by abstract symmetry and exact wisdom

       and nice adaption of remedy are not always possible. Every

       legislation, especially in economic matters, is essentially empiric,

       and it is based on experimentation or what one may call the trial

       and error method. It may not provide for all possible situations or

       anticipate all possible abuses. There can be crudities or inequities

       in complicated experimental economic legislation but on that

       account alone it cannot be struck down as invalid. In the context of

       the impugned legislation, it was observed that the simplistic

       approach of classification adopted in the said case cannot be

       rejected on the ground that it is possible to evolve a classification

       to cater to several distinctions. More importantly, and for the

       present context, it was observed in Sachchidanand Kishore



17 (1981) 4 SCC 675.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 18 of 24
Prasad Sinha
(supra) that even if it is so evolved, not only would it

       be too complex and elaborate, it would leave too much discretion

       to the assessing authorities and thereby eliminate one of the main

       objectives of the rules therein. One of the objects of the rules was

       to withdraw discretion which can result in harassment and constant

       threats of revision. These observations are of relevance because,

       in the present case, all hospitals, dispensaries, clinics, maternity

       homes etc., have been classified under one head, and thereby the

       levy of taxation in such cases simplifies and is uniform. Discretion

       is eliminated. Examination of facts, etc. is not required. We do not,

       therefore, think that the classification made vide sub-clause (i) to

       clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B of the Taxation Rules is

       discriminatory and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.

       The object and purpose of this classification is to avoid litigation and

       complexities which may arise in case there is a distinct and

       separate taxation of hospitals, clinics, maternity homes, etc., stated

       and claimed to be run for charitable purpose.
17.    Sub-clause (iv) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B of the

       Taxation Rules applies to educational and social institutions run by

       public charitable trusts for the welfare of women, old people, deaf,

       dumb, blind, physically handicapped or mentally retarded people.

       These are separate categories and cannot be confused and treated
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                               Page 19 of 24
similarly and at par with hospitals, clinics, maternity homes, etc, as

       elucidated in sub-clause (i) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of Rule 8B

       of the Taxation Rules.
18.    At this stage, we may refer to the case law relied upon by the

       counsel for the appellant and distinguish the same.
In
State of

       Kerala v. Haji K. Haji K. Kutty Naha and Others
Etc.18, a uniform

       rate of general/property tax was sought to be imposed based

       entirely on the total floor area regardless of the age, the location

       and the use of the building. Different tax slabs were provided where

       the total floor area would be 1000-2000 sq. ft., 2000-4000 sq. ft.

       and so on. It is in this background that the classification was struck

       down as being arbitrary as it had imposed a uniform tax slab

       regardless of the class to which the building belongs, the nature of

       construction, the purpose for which it is used, capacity for profitable

       use, and relevant circumstances which have a bearing on the

       matters of taxation.
The decision in
Deputy Commissioner of

       Income Tax and Another v. Pepsi Foods Limited19
, had upheld

       the striking down of the third proviso to
Section 254
(2-
A) of the

       Income Tax Act, 1961
on the ground that it was arbitrary and

       offended
Article 14
of the Constitution of India as assessees who


18 1969 1 SCR 645.
19 (2021) 7 SCC 413.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 20 of 24
were not even responsible for the delay in the decision before the

       tribunal were clubbed with those assessees responsible for

       delaying the proceedings. In this context, it was observed that
Article 14
of the Constitution of India applies to tax legislation, albeit

       greater freedom in the joints must be allowed by the courts in

       adjudging the constitutional validity of the same. However, where

       tax is imposed deliberately with the object of differentiating between

       persons similarly situated, such tax is liable to be struck down.

       Similarly, in
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others v. Deepak

       Fertilizers & Petrochemical Corporation Ltd.20
, a retrospective

       notification withdrawing exemption in respect of NPK 23:23:0

       fertilizer, while granting it to other NPK fertilizers, was struck down

       as without there being any rational basis. The judgment specifically

       records that the State was not able to satisfy that there was a good

       reason for introducing a fresh set of notifications for one period and

       another set of notifications for another period, either by amending

       the notification or introducing a new notification to withdraw the

       benefit given earlier.
In
Union of India and Others v. N.S.

       Rathnam and Sons21
, noticing that the exemption was denied to

       those who had paid customs duty under an alternative provision,



20 (2007) 10 SCC 342.
21 (2015) 10 SCC 681.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                 Page 21 of 24
albeit at a lower rate, this Court, to ensure parity, had directed that

       the assessees would be entitled to the benefit of the exemption

       subject to the condition that they shall pay the differential amount

       of their duty.
19.    We may, in the end, refer to another decision of a Constitutional

       Bench of this Court which supports our reasoning.
In the case of
Ganga Sugar Corporation Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and

       Others22
, the levy, which was uniform on all sugarcane purchases,

       was attacked as ultra vires on the ground that the sucrose content

       of various consignments could vary from place to place, the

       variation being of the order of 8% to 10%, and yet a uniform levy by

       weight was sanctioned by the impugned Act therein. Rejecting the

       contention, it was observed by this Court that practical

       considerations of the administration, traditional practices in the

       trade, other economic pros and cons enter the verdict, but after a

       judicial generosity is extended to the legislative wisdom, if there is

       writ on the statute perversity, ‘madness’ in the method or gross

       disparity, judicial credulity may snap, and the measure may meet

       with its funeral. Otherwise, the benefit of uniformity in the

       classification of taxation should not be struck down on the



22 (1980) 1 SCC 223.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                              Page 22 of 24
application of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. It must be

        viewed liberally and not meticulously. Thus, in the said case, the

        contention that the price of the sugarcane should be the permissible

        criteria for purchase tax was rejected. It was observed that marginal

        difference of the sucrose content being too inconsequential would

        not build a case for discrimination. We have referred to this decision

        in the context that we have also taken into account the total

        quantum of tax being paid in terms of the method of calculation as

        prescribed by sub-clause (iv) to clause (a) to sub-rule (4) of Rule

        8B of the Taxation Rules. The bills raised are not substantial so as

        to warrant any interference.23
20.     However, we are also conscious that in some cases it is possible

        that small organisations performing purely charitable work, which

        meets both qualitative and quantitative criteria, may have to curtail

        the charitable work in case the municipal taxes increase or are

        enhanced. We would, in this context, like to reproduce the

        observations of this Court in the case of
Sachchidanand Kishore

        Prasad Sinha
(supra), which are as under:
23 Assessment Bill for 2001-2002 dated 05.01.2002 of Rs. 5.92/- per sq. ft.
Assessment Bill for 2002-2003 dated 27.08.2002 of Rs. 5.94/- per sq. ft.
Assessment Bill for 2003-2004 dated 27.04.2003 of Rs. 6.37/- per sq. ft.
Assessment Bill for 2004-2005 dated 21.05.2004 of Rs. 6.46/- per sq. ft.
Assessment Bill for 2005-2006 dated 27.05.2005 of Rs. 6.44/- per sq. ft.
Assessment Bill for 2006-2007 dated 14.06.2006 of Rs. 6.60/- per sq. ft.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                          Page 23 of 24
“14. It is one thing to suggest that the rule-making
                 authority may consider making a further distinction on
                 the lines suggested and an altogether different thing to
                 strike down the rule itself on the ground of inadequate
                 classification...”

               The aforesaid observation has been reproduced of abundant

       caution and, we clarify, does not have any application in the factual

       background of the present case.
21.    Recording the aforesaid, we do not find any merit in the present

       appeals and the same are dismissed. However, in light of the facts

       of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                              (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                     ......................................J.
                                                           (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 24, 2022.
Civil Appeal No. 2773 of 2012 & Anr.                                        Page 24 of 24