[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahindra And Mahindra Financial ... vs Nizamuddin on 4 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8043 OF 2022


          Mahindra and Mahindra Financial Services Ltd.                 …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

          Nizamuddin                                               …Respondent(s)


                                           JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 23.03.2022 passed by the

                         National     Consumer   Disputes   Redressal    Commission

                         (hereinafter referred to as the National Commission) at New

                         Delhi in Revision Petition No. 222 of 2022, by which, the

                         National Commission has dismissed the said revision

                         petition preferred by the appellant and ultimately has not
Signature Not Verified
interfered with the order passed by the District Forum
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.11.04
16:23:57 IST
Reason:
confirmed by the State Commission ordering return/refund

                         of Rs. 3,45,000/­ being insurance amount of the vehicle
1
sold   which   was       hypothecated     after    deducting   10%

     depreciation and directing that the appellant to pay the

     complainant Rs. 300/­ per day towards compensation/loss

     suffered because of not plying of the vehicle from the date

     of picking up of the vehicle hypothecated and sold from

     19.12.2004 till the date of payment of the actual amount,

     the original opponent – financial company has preferred

     the present appeal.
2.   Vide order dated 14.07.2022 a limited notice has been

     issued    by      this     Court     on      the     amount     of

     compensation/damages awarded by the District Forum at

     Rs. 300/­ per day. Therefore, the short question which is

     posed for consideration of this Court is whether the District

     Forum       was          justified      in        awarding     the

     compensation/damages at Rs. 300/­ per day?
3.   Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties and having gone through the order

     passed by the District Forum confirmed up to the National

     Commission it appears that no cogent reason has been

     given by the District Forum determining/awarding the

     compensation/damages at Rs. 300/­ per day. While
2
awarding the compensation/damages at Rs. 300/­ per day,

it is observed by the District Forum as under: ­

       “As far as the question of granting compensation to the
       complainant is concerned the said vehicle of the
       complainant was insured from the Oriental Insurance
       Company for a sum of Rs. 3,45,000/­. Therefore, upon
       deducting the depreciation amount from this amount
       he is entitled to get the value of his vehicle. Apart from
       this the complainant has submitted that from the said
       vehicle he was earning Rs. 500/­ per month (sic).
       Therefore, the compensation be granted to the
       complainant at the rate of Rs. 500/­ per day from the
       date of its picking up i.e. 19.12.04. In our opinion his
       income from the said jeep can be assumed as Rs.
       300/­ and it is justifiable to grant him the said
       amount from the opposite party. Accordingly the
       complaint deserves to be allowed.”



       Nothing is on record that any evidence was led on the

loss       suffered     because     of   not    plying     the      vehicle

hypothecated and sold. Therefore, in absence of any cogent

evidence led, the District Forum was not justified in

determining and awarding the compensation/damages at

Rs. 300/­ per day. At the same time, it cannot be disputed

that the original complainant was able to pay the monthly

instalment and he was also the owner cum driver. It also

cannot be disputed that as the hypothecated vehicle was

detained/seized and thereafter, sold which was found to be

illegal,     the      complainant     shall    be    entitled       to   the
3
compensation/loss suffered because of not plying of the

     vehicle seized and sold illegally.
4.   Instead of remanding the matter to the District Forum for

     determining the loss/damages we deem it proper to award

     reasonable loss/damages. It is reported that a sum of Rs.

     3,45,000/­ has been deposited by the appellant which has

     been withdrawn by the complainant in the year 2017. The

     complainant cannot be paid the loss/damages per day till

     the date of actual payment because of the prolonged

     litigation. If the same is accepted in that case the

     damages/compensation shall be much more than the

     value of the vehicle.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     present appeal is allowed in part. The order passed by the

     District Forum confirmed up to the National Commission

     ordering/awarding       the   compensation/damages   at   Rs.

     300/­ per day from 19.12.2004 till the date of payment of

     the actual amount is hereby modified and it is directed

     that the appellant herein shall pay to the original

     complainant the compensation/damages towards loss

     suffered because of not plying of the vehicle at Rs. 5000/­
4
per month from the date of the picking up of the vehicle

     i.e., 19.12.2004 till 31.12.2007. The appellant is directed

     to pay the said amount with interest @ 7.5% from

     December, 2004 till the actual payment within a period of

     six weeks from today. The present appeal is allowed to the

     aforesaid extent. In the facts and circumstances of the

     case there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                    [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                          ………………………………….J.
NOVEMBER 04, 2022                   [M.M. SUNDRESH]
5