[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mukesh Kumar vs The State Of Bihar on 29 November, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M. R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.     OF 2022
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 8799 OF 2020)


          Mukesh Kumar                                                 .Appellant(S)


                                                Versus

          The State of Bihar & Ors.                                 ..Respondent(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 09.12.2019 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Patna in Civil Writ Jurisdiction

                         Case No. 8384/2018, by which, the Division Bench of the

                         High Court has disposed of the said writ petition by way of

                         public interest litigation, the original writ petitioner has
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
preferred the present appeal.
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2022.11.29
17:18:13 IST
Reason:
1
3.   That the appellant herein filed the writ petition by way of

     public interest litigation before the High Court for the

     following reliefs: -
“(i) For issuance of necessary direction upon the
         respondent authorities to not to allow any person
         other than a registered Pharmacist to compound,
         prepare, mix or dispense any medicine on the
         prescription of any medical practitioner because in
         various Govt. Hospitals, the persons, who are not a
         registered Pharmacist have been allowed to discharge
         the function of a Pharmacist inasmuch as at some
         places, even the Clerks, ANMs, Staff Nurse etc. have
         been assigned with the duty to be performed only by a
         registered Pharmacist.
(ii) For holding that by allowing a non-
pharmacist to discharge the duty and responsibility of
         Pharmacist, the respondent authorities are not only
         violating the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act, 1948
as
         well as Pharmacy Practices Regulation, 2015 but they
         are also playing with the health of the concerned
         patients.
(iii) For issuance of necessary direction upon the
         respondent authorities to implement the Pharmacy
         Practice Regulation, 2015 framed by the Pharmacy
         Council of India in exercise of powers conferred under
Section-10
&
18
of the Pharmacy Act, 1948, inasmuch
         as the said Regulation provides for creation of various
         types of posts with diverse types of responsibilities for
         regulating the profession of Pharmacy so that the
         quality of health care may improve, the Pharmacist
         may maintain high standard in their duty, the cost of
         health care may reduce and the criminal abuse of
         medicines may be stopped.
(iv) For holding that the Govt. of Bihar has not
         created an post except for the post of Pharmacist
         under the Pharmacy Practice Regulation, 2015 and as
         such, the respondents may be directed to create such
         posts and appoint eligible persons on such posts so
         that the objectives of the Pharmacy Practice
         Regulation, 2015 may be achieved.
2
(v) For necessary direction upon the respondent
         authorities to constitute an Enquiry Committee in
         terms of
Section-45(5)
of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 to
         enquire into the functioning of the Bihar State
         Pharmacy Council because the Bihar State Pharmacy
         Council is not functioning in accordance with the
         provisions of the
Pharmacy Act, 1948
and Pharmacy
         Practice Regulation, 2015 inasmuch as the Bihar State
         Pharmacy Council is involved in grant of fake and
         illegal registration to the fake Pharmacists.
(vi) For any other direction, which your
         Lordships may deem fit and proper in the facts and
         circumstances of the case.”



         Without going into details of the grievances voiced

     before the High Court, the High Court has disposed of the

     writ petition in a most casual manner by taking note of the

     fact that the Bihar State Pharmacy Council has submitted

     that the fact-finding committee was constituted and they

     forwarded its report to the State Government. The High

     Court has disposed of the said public interest litigation –

     writ petition by observing that the appellant, after verifying

     each case individually may invite the attention to such

     illegality either to the Bihar State Pharmacy Council or the

     State of Bihar.
4.   Serious allegations were made against the Bihar State

     Pharmacy Council and the State of Bihar for not taking
3
any action with respect to fake pharmacist and/or running

      the Government’s hospitals and/or other hospitals without

      registered pharmacist and the in-action on the part of the

      Bihar State Pharmacy Council/State Government has

      resulted into the affected health of the citizen, the High

      Court ought to have called upon the Bihar State Pharmacy

      Council to file the status report on the allegations of fake

      pharmacist      and/or    on      how   many   Governments’

      hospitals/hospitals in the State are running without

      registered pharmacist. Running the hospitals/dispensaries

      in absence of any registered pharmacist and/or running

      such hospitals by fake pharmacist and even running the

      medical stores by fake pharmacist and without even any

      pharmacist will ultimately affect the health of the citizen.

      The State Government and the Bihar State Pharmacy

      Council cannot be permitted to play with the health and

      life of the citizen.
4.1   Under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act, 1948
as well as

      the Pharmacy Practice Regulations, 2015, it is the duty

      cast   upon     the    Pharmacy    Council   and   the   State
4
Government to see that the hospitals/medical stores, etc.,

     are not run by the fake pharmacist and are run by the

     registered pharmacist only. The manner in which the High

     Court has disposed of the public interest litigation – writ

     petition ventilating the very serious grievances touching

     the health and life of the citizen is disapproved. The High

     Court has failed to exercise the powers vested in it under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court disposing of

     the writ petition is unsustainable.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     present appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court disposing of the writ

     petition is hereby quashed and set aside. The matter is

     remanded to the High Court to consider the writ petition

     afresh after calling the detailed report/counter from the

     State of Bihar and Bihar State Pharmacy Council on: -
(i)   how many Governments’ hospitals/hospitals/medical


           stores/private hospitals are being run either by fake

           pharmacist or without registered pharmacist;
5
(ii)     whether any action is taken by the State Government

          on the fact-finding committee report submitted by the

          Bihar State Pharmacy Council which was reported to

          be forwarded to the State Government;
(iii)    whether there are any fake pharmacists as alleged in

          the writ petition;
(iv)     any action is taken by the State Government or by

          the Bihar State Pharmacy Council against such fake

          pharmacist;
(v)      whether the Pharmacy Practice Regulations, 2015 are

          being followed in the entire State of Bihar or not.
While considering the writ petition the High Court

should bear in mind the public interest and the health of

the citizen. The High Court to take up the writ petition for

hearing on remand within a period of four weeks from

today. The Registry is directed to send the copy of this order

to the High Court forthwith. With this, the present appeal is

allowed accordingly. In the facts and circumstances of the

case there shall be no order as to costs.
6
…………………………………J.
                         (M. R. SHAH)




                         …………………………………J.
                         (M.M. SUNDRESH)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 29, 2022.
7