[Cites
60
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Municipal Corporation Of Greater ... vs Property Owners Association on 7 November, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                          REPORTABLE



                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 17009 of 2019)

          MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
          GREATER MUMBAI & ORS.                                  ...APPELLANT(S)

                                             VERSUS

          PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATION & ORS. …RESPONDENT(S)

                                               with

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 25689 of 2019)

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 22138 of 2019)

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 24126 of 2019)

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 25686 of 2019)

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO………….. OF 2022
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 25687 of 2019)

                                                and

Signature Not Verified      CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 38 OF 2021
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2022.11.07
                                             in
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 17009 OF 2019
21:44:17 IST
Reason:
                                                                 2




                          JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, CJI
1.     Leave granted in all Special Leave Petitions.
2.     These appeals are challenging the common judgment and

order dated 24.4.2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High

Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 2592/2013

and connected matters. Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 38/2021

has been filed against the alleged contemnor for disobedience of

orders dated 29.7.2019, 21.10.2019 and 22.11.2019 passed by

this Court in the appeal arising out of said SLP(C) No. 17009 of

2019.      For the present purposes, said Contempt Petition is

segregated with a direction to list the same before an appropriate

Court after six weeks.
3.
The Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 18881
has been

enacted by the State Government to consolidate and amend


1 “
MMC Act
”, for short
3
various Municipal Acts which were in force relating to the

Municipal administration of the city of Mumbai. The Municipal

Corporation of Greater Mumbai (“the Corporation” for short) has

been established and discharging its duties under the
MMC Act
.
4.
The MMC Act
authorizes the Corporation to impose

property tax on lands and buildings. Importantly, property tax

is one of the main sources of revenue for the Corporation,

specifically after abolition of Octroi.
The   MMC     Act
earlier

provided for levy of property tax on the basis of certain

percentage of rateable value of the buildings or lands. The basis

of determination of rateable value as provided in the
MMC Act
was the annual rent for which such buildings or lands might

reasonably be expected to be let from year to year.
5.      The Corporation appointed Tata Institute of Social Sciences

(for short “TISS”) and University of Mumbai to study the system

of levy of property tax and to suggest alternative system for such

levy.     TISS submitted a detailed report recommending that

capital value­based system of assessment be adopted in place of

annual rental system.       After detailed discussions with stake

holders and based on the recommendations of TISS, the MMC
4
Act was amended by the
Maharashtra Act
No. XI of 2009. The

amendment      incorporated      an   option     and    empowered       the

Corporation to levy property tax on the basis of capital value as

an alternative to the earlier method of levying property tax on

the basis of rateable value.
6.   The Statement of Objects forming part of the Bill which led

to the passing of the
Maharashtra Act
No. XI of 2009 was as

under: ­

               “STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 139
of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
        Act (Bom.III of 1888) provides for imposition of taxes by the
        Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai. The taxes to be
        so imposed provide inter alia property taxes on buildings or
        lands. The property taxes include water tax, water benefit
        tax, sewerage tax, sewerage benefit tax, general tax,
        education cess and street tax, which are leviable on the
        basis of certain percentage of rateable value of the
        buildings or lands.
2.
Section 154
of the Act provides the method of
        fixing rateable value of any buildings or lands assessable to
        property tax. The basis to determine the rateable value is
        the annual rent for which such buildings or lands might
        reasonably be expected to let from year to year, less 10 per
        centum of the said annual rent and the said deduction is in
        lieu of all allowances for repairs or on any other account
        whatever.
3.    The determination or fixation of the rateable value
        under different Municipal Acts or Municipal Corporation
        Acts throughout India for the purpose of levy of property
        taxes under these Acts has resulted in ceaseless dispute.
        There has been a catena of decisions rendered by various
        High Courts and the Supreme Court in respect of the
        matter of fixation of rateable value particularly because of
        the provisions of Rent Control Legislation in various States
        including the State of Maharashtra. On account of these
5
decisions the annual rent to be taken into account for
fixation of rateable value of any buildings or lands has been
pegged down to the standard rent of any buildings or lands
according to the provisions of the Rent Control Acts. In so
far as the area of the Municipal Corporation of Brihan
Mumbai is concerned, the
Rent Control Act
, which provided
for standard rent for the first time, was the Bombay Rent
Restriction Act. 1939 (Bom. XVI of 1939).
This Act
was
repealed by the
Bombay Rents, Hotel Rates and Lodging
House Rates (Control) Act, 1944
(Bom.VII of 1944), which
had been replaced by the
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging
House Rates Control Act, 1947
(Bom. LVII of 1947), which
has also been now repealed by the
Maharashtra Rent
Control Act, 1999
(Mah. XVIII of 2000) which came into
force on the 31st day of March 2000 and is at present in
operation.     Thus the Rent Control Act has been in
operation in the Mumbai Municipal Corporation area for
over 65 years. In effect, therefore, the property tax has to
be determined on the basis of rateable value fixed
considering the annual rent, being the fair rent (standard
rent) alone, regardless of the actual rent received. Fair rent
very often means the rent prevailing prior for the year 1940
with some marginal modifications and additions. Because
of the limitations or restrictions brought into play by the
provisions of the
Maharashtra Rent Control Act, 1999
and
the various judgements of the Court in respect of fixation of
rateable value for the purpose of levy of property taxes a lot
of subjectivity has crept into the system by which the rent
of buildings or lands is determined. Apart from this, it has
also resulted in lack of transparency, equity and rationality
in the system of assessment of property taxes. Property tax
is one of the main sources of revenue to the Corporation.
Due to such restrictions or limitations the income of the
Corporation from property tax has remained static. To
continue to compel the Corporation to levy and collect the
property tax on the basis of fair rent or standard rent
alone, while at the same time under
Section 61
in Chapter
III and other provisions of the
Mumbai Municipal
Corporation Act
making it incumbent on the Corporation to
make adequate provisions to perform all its obligatory and
discretionary functions laid down by the Act may be to ask
for the impossible. The cost of maintaining and laying
roads, drains, water supply lines and providing other
essential civic services and amenities, the salaries of staff
and wages of employee and all other types of expenditure
have gone up steeply over the last more than 65 years.
4. With a view to exploring the possibility of reforming the
property tax system, so as to augment the revenue of the
6
Corporation, the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS),
Mumbai were entrusted by the Corporation with the job to
study the present system of levy of property taxes and to
suggest any alternative system for such levy.         After
studying various systems available for assessment of
property taxes within and without India, they have
recommended that Capital Value Based System of
Assessment in place of the Annual Rental System may be
adopted, as according to them the trend in property tax
practices in developing countries is to move away from the
Annual Rental Value base to Capital Value base. The
capital value based system of assessment has the following
merits:­
   (1) Formula     based    assessment     is   possible    with
simplicity,
   (2) Self­assessment is possible,
   (3) Greater flexibility in tax administration which
provides control over revenue,
   (4) Subjectivity is eliminated to the extent possible,
   (5) There is transparency and easy to understand,
    (6) Tax revenue can keep pace with inflation and cost of
living.
5. The highlights of the system recommended by the Tata
Institute of Social Sciences is the shift from Annual Rental
Value to Capital Value as the base for the purpose of levy of
property taxes at a certain rate which may be determined
by the Corporation and such value is proposed to be
adopted as the value of any buildings or lands as is
indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time
being in force as prepared under the Bombay Stamp
(Determination of True Market Value of Property) Rules,
1995 and the capital value of the property could then be
computed by applying thereto factors such as location,
carpet area, type of construction, age of property and user
thereof. In this system properties which are old or of semi­
permanent structures including chawls, will be given due
consideration and concession.        Care is also taken to
provide for an appropriate cap on the increase on property
tax on account of switching over to the capital value base of
levy.
6. It is a modest attempt to enable the Corporation to
augment its revenue so as to meet the ever­rising
expenditure in providing appropriate an adequate
infrastructure for rendering civic services in the City like
7
Mumbai and its suburbs. Having regard to the status
          thereof as a financial capital of India, the Mumbai City
          requires a special attention.
7. The amendments to the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation
          Act
(Bom. III of 1888) proposed in this Bill are intended to
          achieve the above­mentioned objectives.”
7.
The MMC Act
was, thereafter, amended by successive

amendments as a result of which newly introduced
Section

154(1A)
and    (1B)    MMC      Act   now     authorizes     Municipal

Commissioner to fix the Capital Value of land and building with

the approval of the Standing Committee.                  Accordingly, the

Commissioner formulated Factors and Categories of Users of

Buildings or Lands (Assignment of Weightages by Multiplication)

Fixation of Capital Value Rules, 2010 (‘the Capital Value Rules of

2010’, for short) which came into force on and with effect from

20.03.2012, and Factors and Categories of Users of Buildings or

Lands (Assignment of Weightage by Multiplication) Fixation of

Capital Value Rules, 2015 (‘the Capital Values Rules of 2015’, for

short), which came into force on 01.04.2015.
8.   It must be stated here that on 20.01.2010 a resolution was

passed appointing an expert committee comprising of Dr. D.M.

Sukthankar, Dr. D.N. Choudhary and Dr. Roshan Namavati to

make recommendations on the Capital Value System. The draft
8
rules prepared by the Committee were published in various

newspapers on 18.10.2010 inviting objections. The last date for

submissions and objections after due extension expired on

30.11.2010, whereafter final report was submitted.                After

obtaining the sanction of the Standing Committee, the Capital

Value   Rules,   of   2010    were    published     on   20.03.2012.
Subsequently, the Capital Value Rules of 2015 were also framed.
9.   The relevant provisions of the
MMC Act
dealing with the

matters in issue are extracted here for ready reference:
“120. Constitution of Fines Fund. Fines collected under
section 83
shall be credited to a separate fund to be
        called “the Fines Fund” the proceeds of which shall be
        expended in promoting the well­being of municipal
        officers and servants other than those appointed under
        the provisions of Chapter XVIA of this Act, and for the
        payment of compassionate allowances to the widows of
        such officers and servants who die while in municipal
        service and to such other relation of the officers and
        servants as the corporation may from time to time
        determine.
xxx                xxx            xxx
123. Accounts to be kept in forms prescribed by
        Standing Committee. Subject to the provisions of
        Chapter XVI­A of this Act accounts of the receipts and
        expenditure of the corporation shall be kept in such
        manner and in such forms as the Standing Committee
        shall from time to time prescribe:
Provided that, the accounts of the Water and Sewage
        Fund and the Consolidated Water Supply and Sewage
        Disposal Loan Fund shall be maintained on the accrual
        basis, unless otherwise prescribed by the Standing
        Committee.
xxx              xxx               xxx
9
125. Estimates of expenditure and income to be
prepared annually by Commissioner.
The Commissioner shall on or before each fifth day of
February, have prepared and lay before the Standing
Committee, in such form as the said Committee shall
from time to time approve, —
  (1) (a) an estimate of the expenditure which must
  or should, in his opinion be incurred by the
  corporation in the next ensuing Official Year,
  other than—
        *****
(ii) expenditure to be incurred by reason of
        the obligations imposed on the corporation
        arising out of the transfer to the
        corporation of the powers, duties, assets
        and liabilities of the Board of Trustees for
        the improvement of the City of Bombay
        constituted under the City of Bombay
        Improvement Trust Transfer Act, 1925 13
        or for any of the purposes of Chapter XII­
        A; and
(iii) expenditure to be incurred on account
        of the Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
        Transport Undertaking;
(iv) expenditure to be incurred for the
        purposes of clause (q) of
section 61
;
(v) expenditure to be incurred for the
        purposes of Chapters IX and X;
(b) an estimate of the balances, if any (other than
  balances) shown in the accounts maintained under
sections 123A
and
123C
which will be available for
  re­appropriation     or   expenditure      at    the
  commencement of the next ensuing official year;
(c) an estimate of the corporation’s receipts and
  income for the next ensuing official year other than
  from taxation and from the Brihan Mumbai
  Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking and
  other than that referred to in clause (c) of sub­
  section (2) and in clause (d) of
section 126C
and in
section 126E
;
(cc) an estimate of the amount due to be
  transferred during the next ensuing official year to
  the municipal fund under the provisions of
sections 460KK
and
460LL
;
10
(d) a statement of proposals as to the taxation
which it will, in his opinion, be necessary or
expedient to impose under the provisions of this
Act in the next ensuing official year;
(2) (a) an estimate of the expenditure which must
or should, in his opinion, be incurred by the
corporation in the next ensuing official year by
reason of the obligations imposed upon the
corporation arising out of the transfer to the
corporation of the powers, duties, assets and
liabilities of the Board of Trustees for the
Improvement of the City of Bombay constituted
under the City of Bombay Improvement Trust
Transfer Act, 1925 or for any of the purposes of
Chapter XII­A;
(b) an estimate of all balances, if any in the
account maintained under section 122A, which
will  be    available  for re­appropriation or
expenditure at the commencement of the next
ensuing official year;
(c) an estimate of the corporation’s receipts and
income for the next ensuing official year—
(i)  arising from sales, leases and other
    dispositions of immovable property vesting
    in the corporation by reason of the
    enactment of the City of Bombay Municipal
    (Amendment) Act, 1933 or acquired by the
    Corporation for any of the purposes of
    Chapter XII­A; and
(ii) being payments of interest on and
    repayments in whole or part of the capital of
    loans granted by the corporation and
    secured on the aforesaid immovable
    property;
(d) an estimate of three times the amount of the
net estimated realisations of the corporation in
the then current financial year under the head of
general tax (including arrears and payments in
advance) divided by the rate fixed for general tax
for the then current financial year;
xxx                xxx              xxx

     Provided further that, with effect from the
financial year 1974­75, this subclause shall have
11
effect as if for the words “three­times” the word
   “twice” were substituted;
(e) an estimate of the Corporation’s receipts and
   income, other than receipts and income referred
   to in other clauses of this sub­section arising from
   or relating to, transaction connected with the
   obligations imposed upon the Corporation by the
   transfer to the Corporation of the powers, duties,
   assets and liabilities of the said Board of Trustees
   or with the exercise of the powers and duties
   conferred or imposed upon the Corporation by
   Chapter XII­A including grants from the State
   Government.
xxx                xxx                xxx
128. Fixing rates, of municipal taxes and of fares and
charges of “Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
Transport Undertaking”
    (1) The Corporation shall, on or before the
    twentieth day of March after considering the
    Standing Committee’s proposals in this behalf, —
(a) determine, subject to the limitations and
        conditions prescribed in Chapter VIII, the
        rates at which municipal taxes shall be
        levied, and the articles on which octroi shall
        be levied, in the next ensuing official year:
Provided that, the Corporation may
        determine different rates of property taxes
        for different categories of users of a building
        or land or part thereof; and
(b) approve, subject to the limitations and
        conditions which may have been prescribed
        by or under any of the enactments or any
        licence referred to in clause (i­a) of sub­
        section (2) of
section 126B
, the rates at
        which the fares and charges in respect of
        the Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
        Transport Undertaking shall be levied.
    (2) Except under
sections 134
,
196
,
460H
and
460I
,
    the rates so fixed and the articles so appointed
    shall not be subsequently altered for the year for
    which they have been fixed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­
    sections (1) and (2), the Corporation may, at any
12
time during the official years 2010­2011, 2011­
    2012 and 2012­2013 determine, separately for
    each of the said three years, the rates of property
    taxes for different categories of users of a building
    or land or part thereof. The rates of property taxes
    so determined shall be effective and shall be
    deemed to have been effective from the 1st of April
    of those three years and the taxes for the said
    three years shall be leviable and payable at the
    rates so determined.
xxx                xxx                xxx
139. Taxes to be imposed under this Act. For the
purpose of this Act, taxations shall be imposed as follows,
namely:­
        (1) property taxes;
(2) a tax on dogs: and
        (3) a theatre tax;
139A. Property taxes what to consist.
(1) Property taxes leviable on buildings and lands in
Brihan Mumbai under this Act shall include water tax,
water benefit tax, sewerage tax, sewerage benefit tax,
general tax, education cess, street tax and betterment
charges.
(2) For the purposes of levy of property taxes, the
expression “Building” includes ­a flat, a gala, a unit or
any portion of the building.
(3) All or any of the property taxes may be imposed on a
graduated scale.
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be
lawful ­ for the Corporation to levy all property taxes on
the rateable value of buildings and lands until the
Corporation adopts levy of any or all the property taxes
on such buildings and lands on the capital value thereof
under
section 140A
.
140. Property taxes leviable on rateable value, or
capital value as the case may be, and at what rate. (1)
The following property taxes shall be levied on building
and lands in Brihan Mumbai, namely: ­
(a) (i) the water tax of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
providing water supply;
13
(ii) an additional water tax which shall be called ‘the
water benefit tax’ of so many per centum of their rateable
value, or their capital value, as the case may be, as the
Standing Committee may consider necessary for meeting
the whole or part of the expenditure incurred or to be
incurred on capital works for making and improving the
facilities of water­supply and for maintaining and
operating such works;
Provided that all or any of the property taxes may be
imposed on a graduated scale.
(b) (i) the sewerage tax of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
collection, removal and disposal of human waste and
other wastes;
(ii) an additional sewerage tax which shall be called the
“sewerage benefit tax” of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
meeting the whole or a part of the expenditure incurred
or likely to be incurred on capital work ­ for making and
improving facilities for the collection, removal and
disposal of human waste and other wastes and for
maintaining and operating such works;
General tax
(c) a general tax of not less than eight and not more than
fifty per centum of their rateable value, or of not less than
0.1 and not more than 1 per centum of their capital
value, as the case may be, together with not less than
one­eight and not more than five per centum of their
rateable value or not less than 0.01 and not more than
0.2 per centum of their capital value, as the case may be,
added thereto in order to provide for the expense
necessary for fulfilling the duties of the corporation
arising under clause (k) of
section 61
and Chapter XIV;
Education cess
(ca) the education cess leviable under
section 195E
;
(cb) the street tax leviable under
section 195G
;
(d) betterment charges leviable under Chapter XII­A.
14
(2) Any reference in this Act or in any instrument to a
water tax or a halalkhor tax shall after the
commencement of the Bombay Municipal Corporation
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1973, be construed as a
reference to the water tax or the water benefit tax or both
or the sewerage tax or the sewerage benefit tax, or both
as the context may require;
140A. Property taxes to be levied on capital value and
the rate thereof. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in
section 140
or any other provision of this Act, the
Corporation may pass a resolution to adopt levy of
property tax on buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai
on the basis of capital value of the buildings and lands on
and from such date, and at such rates, as the
Corporation may determine in accordance with the
provisions of
section 128
:
Provided that, for the period of five years from the
date on and from which such property tax is levied on
capital value, the tax shall not:
(a)exceed, ­
(i) in respect of building used for residential
        purposes, two times, and
(ii) in respect of building or land used for non­
         residential purposes, three times, and
(b)where the tax so levied on any building or land,
      whether used for residential or for non­residential
      purposes, gets reduced, be less than half of the
      amount of the property tax leviable in respect
      thereof in the year immediately preceding such
      date:
shall not exceed, ­
(i)  in respect of building used for residential
        purposes, two times, and
(ii)  in respect of building or land used for non­
        residential purposes, three times,

the amount of the property tax leviable in respect thereof
in the year immediately preceding such date:
Provided further that, where the property taxes
levied in respect of any residential or non­residential
building or portion thereof were on the basis of annual
letting value arrived at considering the leave and licence
15
charges, by whatever name called, then for the purposes
of the first proviso it shall be lawful for the Commissioner
to ascertain such tax leviable during such immediately
preceding year, as if such building or portion thereof were
self­occupied and had been so entered in the assessment
book:
Provided also that, the property tax levied on the
basis of capital value of any building or land on revision
made under sub section (1C) of
section 154
shall not in
any case exceed 40 per centum of the amount of the
property tax payable in the year immediately preceding
the year of such revision:
Provided also that, for the period of five years
commencing from the year of adoption of capital value as
the base, for levy of property tax under
section 140A
, the
amount of property tax leviable in respect of a residential
building or residential tenement, having carpet area of
46.45 sq. meter (500 sq. feet) or less, shall not exceed the
amount of property tax levied and payable in the year
immediately preceding the year of such adoption of
capital value as the basis.
Provided also that, for a period of five years
commencing on the 1st April 2015, the amount of
property tax leviable in respect of a residential building or
residential tenement, having carpet area of 46.45 sq.
meter (500 sq. feet) or less, shall not exceed the amount
of property tax which is being levied and payable in
respect of such residential building or tenement as on the
31st March 2015.
Provided also that, for the financial year 2019­20,
the provisions of the preceding proviso shall apply as if
the general tax leviable under clause (c) of sub­section (1)
of
section 140
do not form part of the property tax
leviable under that section.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section (4)
of
section 139A
or any other provisions of this Act or
Resolution, if any, passed by the Corporation for adopting
the levy of property tax on the basis of capital value but
subject to the provisions of
section 154A
, buildings and
lands in respect of which the process of fixing capital
value is in progress on the 26th August 2010, being the
date of coming into force of section 3 of the Maharashtra
Municipal Corporations and Municipal Councils (Third
Amendment) Act, 2010, until it is so fixed, the tax
16
leviable and payable in respect of such buildings and
lands shall provisionally be equal to the amount of tax
leviable and payable in the preceding year, that is to say,
for the year commencing on the first day of April 2009
and ending on the thirty­first day of March 2010 and
such provisional tax shall be leviable and payable for
each of the years 2010­2011, 2011­2012 and 2012­2013,
according to the provisional bills which may be issued
separately for each such year; so, however, that on
fixation of capital value of the respective buildings and
lands,               final              bill              of
assessment of property taxes on the basis of capital value
may then be issued for each such year as aforesaid. After
such final assessment, if it is found that the assessee has
paid excess amount, such excess shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in
section 179
, be refunded within
three months from the date of issuing the final bill, along
with interest from such date as provided in the first
proviso to sub­section (5) of
section 217
, or after
obtaining the consent of the assessee, shall be adjusted
towards payment of property tax due, if any, for the
subsequent years; and if the amount of taxes on final
assessment is more than the amount of tax already paid
by the assessee, the difference shall be recovered from
the assessee.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section
(1) or (2) or any other provisions of this Act, the tax on
buildings and lands, which are liable to be assessed for
the first time on or after the 1st April 2010, shall
provisionally be equal to the amount of tax, as if such
buildings and lands are liable to be assessed in the year
2009­2010; and on ascertainment of the capital value of
such ‘buildings and lands, the corporation may issue a
final bill in respect of the years for which they are liable
to be assessed, on the basis of capital value thereof and
accordingly it shall be the duty of the owner and occupier
of such buildings and lands to pay such tax within the
period specified in the final bill issued as aforesaid.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 163
or
217 or any other provisions of this Act and having regard
to the fact that the property tax bill has been issued in
accordance with the provisions of sub­section (2), not
being a final bill, such bill shall not be questioned before
any forum; and no complaint or appeal shall lie against
such bill merely on the ground that capital value in
respect of the property which is subject matter of the bill
is not yet fixed, or that the amount of tax leviable and
17
payable at the rate of property tax determined by the
        Corporation is not yet finally ascertained, or on any other
        ground whatever.
Explanation.­ For the purposes of this section, after the
        Corporation adopts the Capital Value as the basis of levy
        of property tax, the property tax in respect of any taxable
        building shall be revised after every five years and on
        each such revision, such amount of property tax, shall
        not in any case exceed the forty per cent of the amount of
        the property tax levied and payable in the year
        immediately preceding the year of the revision.
xxx          xxx         xxx
154. Rateable value or capital value how to be
        determined. (1) In order to fix the rateable value of any
        building or land assessable to a property­tax, there shall
        be deducted from the amount of the annual rent for which
        such land or building might reasonably be expected to let
        from year to year as unequal to ten per centum of the said
        annual rent and the said deduction shall be in lieu of all
        allowances for repairs or on any other account whatever.
(1A) In order to fix the capital value of any building or
        land assessable to a property tax the Commissioner shall
        have regard to the value of any building or land as
        indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time
        being in force as prepared under the Bombay Stamp
        (Determination of True Market Value of Property) Rules,
        1995, framed under the provisions of the
Bombay Stamp
        Act, 1958
, as a base value2 or where the Stamp Duty
        Ready Reckoner does not indicate Value of any properties
        in any particular area wherein a building or land in
        respect of which capital value is required to be determined
        is situate, or in case such Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner
        does not exist, then the Commissioner may fix the capital
        value of any building or land taking into consideration the
        market value of such building or land, as a base value.
        The Commissioner while fixing the capital value as




2 and
18
aforesaid, shall have regard3 to the following factors,
            namely: ­
(a) the nature and type of the land and structure
                   of the building, ­
(b) area of land or carpet area of building,
(c) user category, that is to say, (i) residential, (ii)
                  commercial (shops or the like), (iii) offices, (iv)
                  hotels (upto 4 stars), (v) hotels (more than 4
                  stars), (vi) banks, (vii) industries and factories,
(viii) school and college building or building used
                  for educational purposes, (ix) malls and (x) any
                  other building or land not covered by any of the
                  above categories,
(d) age of the building, or
(e) such other factors as may be specified by rules
                  made under subsection (1B).
(1B) The Commissioner shall with the approval of the
            Standing Committee, frame such rules as respects the
            details of categories of building or land and the weightage
            by multiplication to be assigned to various such factors and
            categories for the purpose of fixing the capital value under
            sub­section (1A).
(1C) The capital value of any building or land fixed under
            sub­section (1A) shall be revised every five years:
Provided that, the Commissioner may, for reasons to
            be recorded in writing, revise the capital value of any
3
The expressions were added / substituted by 2010 Amendment.             The erstwhile sub­
    section (1A) introduced by
Maharashtra Act
No. XI of 2009 was : ­
        ““(1A) In order to fix the capital value of any building or land assessable to a
       property tax the Commissioner shall have regard to the value of any building or
       land as indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time being in force as
       prepared under the Bombay Stamp (Determination of True Market Value of
       Property) Rules, 1995, framed under the provisions of the
Bombay Stamp Act,
       1958
, or where the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner does not indicate value of any
       properties in any particular area wherein a building or land in respect of which
       capital value is required to be determined is situate, or in case such Stamp Duty
       Ready Reckoner does not exist, then the Commissioner may fix the capital value of
       any building or land taking into consideration the market value of such building or
       land, as a base value; and also have regard to the following factors, namely: ­
(a) the nature and type of the land and structure of the building,
(b) area of land or carpet area of building,
(c) user category, that is to say, (i) residential, (ii) commercial (shops or
                    the like), (iii) offices, (iv) hotels (upto 4 stars), (v) hotels (more than 4
                    stars) (vi) banks, (vii) industries and factories, (viii) school and college
                    building or building used for educational purposes, (ix) malls and (x)
                    any other building or land not covered by any of the above categories,
(d) age of the building, or
       such other factors as may be specified by rules made under subsection (1B).””
19
building or land any time during the said period of five
years and shall accordingly amend the assessment book in
relation to such building or land under
section 167
.
(1D) (a) Notwithstanding     anything    contained    in   sub­
section (1C),­
(i) due to the spread of COVID­19 pandemic, the
      capital value of any building or land fixed under
      sub­section (1A) shall not be revised in the year
      2020­21 and the year 2021­22;
(ii)for the year 2020­21 and the year 2021­22, the
      property tax bill for any building or land shall be
      the same as is for the year 2019­20;
(iii) the capital value of any building or land fixed
      under sub­section (1A) shall be revised in the
      year 2022­23, as if the clause (i) is not applicable
      for the year 2020­21 and the year 2021­22.
(b)Subject to the proviso to sub­section (1C), the
      next revision shall be in the year 2025­26, and,
      thereafter, the revision of capital value of any
      building or land, shall be in accordance with the
      provisions of sub­section (1C).
(2) The value of any machinery contained or situate in or
upon any building or land shall not be included in the
rateable value or the capital value, as the case may be, of
such building or land.
154A. Provisional fixation of capital value in certain
cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 154
,
the rateable value of any building or land or part thereof,
for the official year 2009­2010, shall be the provisional
capital value of such building and lands in respect of the
official years 2010­2011, 2011­2012 and 2012­2013, and
such provisional capital value shall be deemed to be the
capital value validly and legally fixed under the provisions
of this Act, pending fixing the capital value thereof, and it
shall be lawful for the Commissioner to treat it as such for
the purposes of assessment book kept under the provisions
of this Act, and the bill for property taxes issued under
sub­section (2) of
section 140A
shall be deemed to have
been validly and legally issued under the provisions of this
Act.
Provided that, in respect of the buildings and lands which
are liable to be assessed for the first time on or after the 1st
April 2010, the capital value of such buildings and lands
20
shall, until the final capital value is determined under this
section, be provisionally equal to the amount of rateable
value worked out on the basis of the prescribed letting
rates by the corporation in respect of the official year 2009­
2010.
155. Commissioner may call for information or returns
from owner or occupier or enter and inspect assessable
premises. (1) To enable him to determine the rateable
value or the capital value, as the case may be, of any
building or land and the person primarily liable for the
payment of any property tax leviable in respect thereof the
Commissioner may require the owner or occupier of such
building or land, or of any portion thereof, to furnish him,
within such reasonable period as the Commissioner
prescribes in this behalf, with information or with a written
return signed by such owner or occupier­
(a) as to the name and place of abode of the owner
    or occupier, or of both owner and occupier of such
    building or land; and
(b) as to the details in respect of any or all the
    items as enumerated in clauses (a) to (e) of sub­
    section (1A) of
section 154
in relation to such
    building or land or any portion thereof.
(2) Every owner or occupier on whom any such requisition
is made shall be bound to comply with the same and to give
true information or to make a true return to the best of his
knowledge or belief.
(3) The Commissioner may also for the purpose aforesaid
make an inspection of any such building or land.
156. Assessment book what to contain.
The Commissioner shall keep a book, in such form and
manner as he may, with the approval of the Standing
Committee, determine, and such book shall be called “the
assessment book” in which shall be entered every official
year­
(a) a list of all buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai
  distinguishing each either by name or number, as he
  shall think fit;
(b) the rateable value or the capital value, as the case
  may be, of each such building and land determined
  in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this
  Act;
21
(c) the name of the person primarily liable for the
           payment of the property taxes, if any, leviable on
           each such building or land;
(d) if any such building or land is not liable to be
           assessed to the general tax or is exempt from
           payment of property tax either in whole or in part, as
           the case may be, the reason of such non­liability or
           exemption, as the case may be;
(e) when the rates of the property taxes to be levied
           for the year have been duly fixed by the corporation
           and the period fixed by public notice, as hereinafter
           provided, for the receipt of complaints against the
           amount of rateable value or the capital value, as the
           case may be, entered in any portion of the
           assessment book, has expired, and in the case of any
           such entry which is complained against, when such
           complaint has been disposed of in accordance with
           the provisions hereinafter contained, the amount at
           which each building or land entered in such portion
           of the assessment book is assessed to each of the
           property taxes, if any, leviable thereon;
(f) if under
section 169
, a charge is made for water
           supplied to any buildings or land by measurement or
           the water taxes or charges for water by measurement
           are compounded for, or if, under
section 170
, the
           sewerage taxes or sewerage charges for any building
           or land are fixed at a special rate, the particulars and
           amount of such charges composition or rates;
(g) such other details, if any, as the Commissioner
           from time to time thinks fit to direct.”
10. The relevant portion of the Capital Value Rules, 2010 is as

under: ­

            “No. AC/NTC/1310/2011­22 dated 20.03.2012. In
            exercise of the powers conferred by clause (e)s of sub­
            section (1A) and sub­section (1B) of
section 154
of the
            Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act (Act No. Bom.III of
            1888), and of all other powers enabling him in this
            behalf, the Commissioner, after having obtained the
            approval of the Standing Committee, as required
            under the said sub­section (1B), hereby makes the
            following rules to provide for the factors and
            categories of users of buildings or lands and the
22
weightage by multiplication to be assigned to various
such factors and categories for the purpose of fixing
the capital value of buildings and lands in Brihan
Mumbai, namely:­
1. Short title and commencement: ­ (i) These rules
   may be called for the Factors and Categories of
   Users of Buildings or Lands (Assignment of
   Weightages by Multiplication) Fixation of Capital
   Value Rules, 2010.
(ii) They shall come into force forthwith.
xxx          xxx          xxx
3.   Capital of open land :­ Save otherwise provided
in these rules, where, within the precincts of a
building there is vacant land other than the land
appurtenant to the building, such land shall be
treated as open land and the capital value thereof
shall be fixed accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
4.    User categories of open land and weightages by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User categories
of open land shall be as specified in column (2) of Part
1 of schedule ‘A’ and the weightages by multiplication
to base value, to be respectively assigned thereto the
purpose of fixing capital value, shall be as shown in
column (3) of the said Part I of schedule ‘A’.
5.   User categories of buildings or part thereof and
weightages by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­
User categories of buildings part thereof shall be as
specified column (2) of each of Parts II, III and IV of
schedule 'A' and the weightages by multiplication to
the relative base value, to be respectively assigned
thereto for the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be
as in column (3) of each of the said Parts II, III and IV
of schedule 'A'.
6.    The nature and type of building and the
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­
The nature and type of a building shall be as specified
in column (2) of schedule ‘B’ and the weightages my
multiplication to be assigned thereto for the purpose
of fixing capital value, shall be shown in column (3) of
the said schedule ‘B’.
7.   The weightage by multiplication to be assigned
to a building on account of the age thereof: ­ The
weightage by multiplication to be assigned to a
23
building on account of age factor, for the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be according to the age of
the building as shown in column (2) of schedule ‘C’
and the weightage by multiplication be assigned
thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of the said
schedule ‘C’.
8.    The weightage by multiplication on account of
floor factor to be assigned to RCC building with lift: ­
Weightage by multiplication on account of floor factor
to be assigned to a RCC building with lift, for the
purpose of fixing capital value, shall be according to
the number of floors as shown in column (2) of
schedule 'D' and the weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of
the said schedule 'D'.
9.    Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose of
fixing capital value: ­Area of hoarding or tower for the
purpose of fixing capital value thereof shall mean, ­
(a) in the case of a hoarding, the area of the square
of the extremities of the poles on which the hoarding
is erected plus the area of the hoarding; and
(b) in the case of a tower, the area covered by the
extremities of the foundation of the tower.
10. Built­up area of a flat or a building: (1) The total
carpet area of a flat shall be reckoned by including
the area of the following items, namely: (i) terrace in
exclusive possession, (ii) mezzanine floor, (iii) loft
(excluding loft in residential flat) or attic, (iv) dry
balcony and (v) niches; and
(2) The total built­up area of a building shall be
reckoned by including the areas of the following
items, namely: ­ (i) total area of the flats in the
building computed in accordance with sub rule (1), (ii)
basement, (iii) stilt, (iv)porch, (v) podium, (vi) service
floor, (vii) refuge area, (viii) entrance lobby, (ix) lounge,
(x) air­ conditioning plant room, (xi) air handling
room, (xii) the structure for an effluent treatment
plant and (xiii) watchman cabin
(3) The built­up area of any of the following items
shall not be reckoned while computing the carpet
area of a building or part thereof, namely: ­
(i) lift room above topmost storey, (ii) lift well,
(iii) stair­case and passage thereto including
     staircase room, (iv) chimney and elevated
     tank, (v) meter room, (vi) pump room, (vii)
24
underground and overhead water tank, (viii)
     septic tank, (ix)flower­bed and (x) loft in
     residential flat
(4) Where only the carpet area of a flat or building is
available on the record of the Corporation and the
total built­up area thereof, computed in the manner
as aforesaid in sub­rule (1), or, as the case may be,
sub­rule (2), is not available on such record, then the
total built­up area of the flat or, as the case may be,
of a building shall be arrived at in the following
manner, namely :­
     Built­up area = 1.2 x carpet area as available on
                     the record of the Corporation +
                     the built­up area of the items
                     specified in sub­rule(1),or, as
                     the case may be, sub­rule (2),
                     unless already reckoned in such
                     carpet area.
11. Fixation of capital value of a flat or building or
part thereof.­     (1) While fixing the capital value of
a flat, the capital value of any one or more of the
relevant items specified in sub­rule (1) of rule 10, as
fixed in accordance with the provisions of rules 14,15,
or sub­rule(1) of rule 16, as the case may be, shall be
added to the capital value of the flat.
(2) While fixing the capital value of a building or part
thereof, the capital value of any of the one or more of
the relevant items specified in sub­rule (2) of rule 10
as fixed in accordance with the provisions of sub­rule
(2) or, as the case may be, (3) of rule 16, shall be
added to the capital value of the building or part
thereof.
12. Fixation of capital value of a building where
there are tenants: ­ The capital value of a building or
part thereof which is occupied by a tenant shall be
fixed at 75% of the capital value of such building or
part thereof; fixed in accordance with the provisions
of sub­rule (1), or, as the case may be, sub­rule (2) of
rule 11.
Explanation. ­ For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the provisions of this rule shall not
apply to a building or part thereof if, ­
     (1) it is occupied by a licensee to whom it is
given on leave and licence;
25
s(2) it is occupied by an office bearer or officer or
an employee of the landlord.
13. Fixation of capital value of religious buildings :­
The capital value of a religious building which is a
temple, math, gurudwara, mosque, takth, church,
durgah, synagogue, or agiary or the like, and is used
or intended to be used for the purpose of religious
worship or offering prayers or performance of any
religious rites or rituals by a person of, or belonging
to, the relevant religion, creed, or sect, shall be fixed
at the rate of base value applicable to a residential
building as indicated in the Ready Reckoner; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
14. Fixation of capital value of open terrace: ­ If an
open terrace in exclusive possession is attached to a
flat, the capital value of such terrace of a non­
residential flat shall be fixed at 40% of the relative
rate of base value of such flat, and of residential flat
at 10% of the relative rate of base value of such flat;
and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
15. Fixation of capital value of mezzanine floor, loft
and attic floor: ­
(a) the capital value of mezzanine floor shall be
fixed at 70% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat beneath the mezzanine floor; and by applying the
relevant weightages by multiplication provided for in
these rules;
(b) the capital value of loft or attic floor shall be
fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat beneath the loft, or as the case may be, the attic;
and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules;
Provided that, where the rate of base value
applicable to the mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor
having regard to its user is higher or, as the case may
be, lower than the rate of base value applicable to the
flat beneath such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor,
the capital value of such mezzanine floor, loft or attic
floor shall be fixed at 70% or 50%, as the case may
be, of such higher or lower rate of base value; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
26
16. Fixation of capital value of certain other items
which are part of a flat or a building or part thereto,­
(1) The capital value of dry balcony and niches shall
be fixed at 25% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat, if any one of these items are part of the flat; and
by applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
(2) The capital value of any one or more of the
following items, namely:­ (i)porch, (ii) air­conditioning
plant room, (iii) air­handling room, (iv) structure for
an effluent plant, (v) watchman cabin and (vi) refuge
area, shall be fixed at 25% of the relative rate of base
value of the building or part thereof, if any one or
more of these items are part of the building or part
thereof; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
(3) The capital value of any one or more of the
following items, namely:­ (i) service floor, (ii) entrance
lobby and (iii) lounge, shall be fixed at the relative
rate of base value of the building or part thereof, if
any of these items are part of the building or part
thereof; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
17. Fixation of capital value in respect of demolished
building :­
(1) Where a building is fully demolished, or has fully
collapsed, the land beneath it shall be deemed to be
open land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed
accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
Explanation – For the purpose of this rule, it is
hereby declared that where a building is, or is being,
demolished, or has collapsed, resulting in the land on
which it stood or stands being rendered open land, or
only walls or the like are standing but there is no
structure as such which can be occupied, and on
such demolition, or collapse, debris or any remains of
the demolished or collapsed building are not yet
removed, the land beneath such building shall be
deemed to be open land.
(2) Where only part of a building is demolished or has
partly collapsed and the remaining part is yet
occupied by occupiers, land beneath the portion of
the building which is demolished or has collapsed
shall be deemed to be open land and the portion of
the structure which is occupied shall be treated as a
27
building, for the purpose of fixing the capital value
thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub rules
(1) and (2), where a cessed building is, or is being,
demolished, or has collapsed, the land beneath the
building or portion of the building which is
demolished or collapsed shall be deemed to be open
land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed as
open land and assigning thereto a weightage by
multiplication of 0.30 of the base value of open land.
18. The capital value of storage tank .­The capital
value of storage tank shall be fixed in the following
manner, namely : –
(1) storage tank above the ground level :­
(a) land ­ at the rate of open land in the Ready
Reckoner and weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be 1.25,
(b) storage tank ­ capacity of storage tank in
litres multiplied by the rate of Rs.40 per litre, with
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto on
account of age factor as in schedule ‘C’,
(c) total capital value of a storage tank = total of
items (a) and (b).
(2) storage tank below the ground level :­
(a) land ­ at the rate of open land in the Ready
Reckoner and weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be 1.25,
(b) storage tank ­ capacity of storage tank in
litres multiplied by the rate of Rs.50 per litre, with
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto on
account of age factor as in schedule ‘C’,
(c) total capital value of a storage tank = total of
items (a) and (b).
19. Capital value of amenities of luxurious RCC
building not to be separately fixed again.­ Where the
capital value of a luxurious RCC building is fixed
under these rules, then no capital value of the
amenities specified in the definition of the expression
‘luxurious RCC building’ shall be separately fixed for
the purpose of levy of property tax.
20. Valuation of open land capable of utilising more
than 1 floor space index (F.S.I) or transfer of
28
development right (T.D.R.) ­As the Ready Reckoner
provides for the rate of base value of open land with 1
floor space index, open land which is capable of
utilizing more than 1 floor space index or any transfer
of development right shall be valued at an increased
rate in proportion to the higher floor space index or
transfer of development right proposed to be utilized
and approved under the building plan submitted to
the Corporation for approval.
21. Capital value of open land or building or part
thereof.­Capital value of open land or building shall
be fixed under the provisions of the Act and these
rules in the following manner, namely:
(1) Capital value (CV) of open land
     Rate of base value (BV) of a open land according
     to Ready Reckoner X weightage by multiplication
     as per user category (UC) (Part I of schedule 'A')
     X permissible or approved floor space index (FSI)
     X area of land (AL).
CV = BV x UC x FSI x AL
(2) Capital value (CV) of a building –
     Relative rate of base value (BV) of a building
     according to Ready Reckoner X weightage by
     multiplication as per user category (UC) (Parts II,
     III, or as the case may be, IV of schedule 'A') X
     weightage by multiplication as per the nature
     and type of building (NTB) (schedule 'B') X
     weightage by multiplication on account of age of
     building (AF) (schedule 'C') X weightage by
     multiplication on account of floor factor (FF) for
     RCC building with lift (schedule 'D') X carpet
     area (CA).
CV = BV x UC x NTB x AF x FF x CA
Examples: ­ Some examples based and worked out on
the formulae as aforesaid are shown in the Appendix.
22. Non­application of Guidelines of Stamp Duty
Valuation. ­ Notwithstanding anything contained in
the "Important Guidelines of Stamp Duty Valuation"
as specified in the Ready Reckoner, the provisions
made in these rules shall have primacy over those
guidelines and none of those guidelines shall apply
for fixing capital value under the Act and these rules.”
29
11. The relevant portion of Capital Value Rules of 2015 is as

under: ­

           “No.AC/NTC/1147/2014­15. In exercise of the powers
           conferred by clause (e) of sub­section (1A), sub­section
           (1B) and sub­section (1C) of
section 154
of the Mumbai
           Municipal Corporation Act (Act No.Bom.III of 1888), and
           of all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the
           Commissioner, after having obtained the approval of the
           Standing Committee, as required under the said sub­
           section (1B), hereby makes the following rules to provide
           for the factors and categories of users of lands and
           buildings and the weightage by multiplication to be
           assigned to various such factors and categories for the
           purpose of fixing the capital value of lands and buildings
           in Brihan Mumbai, namely: ­
1. Short title and commencement: ­(1) These rules may
           be called the Factors and Categories of Users of
           Buildings or Lands (Assignment of Weightages by
           Multiplication) Fixation of Capital Value Rules, 2015.
(2) They shall come into force from 1st April 2015.
2. Definitions – In these rules, unless the context
           otherwise requires:­
                  xxx           xxx         xxx
(c) “hoarding” includes boards used to display
           advertisements, erected on poles, on the ground or on a
           building;
xxx             xxx         xxx
(g) “open land” includes land not built upon or land
           being built upon, but does not include land appurtenant
           to a building;
(h) “Ready Reckoner” means the Stamp Duty Ready
           Reckoner, for the time being in force, referred to in sub­
           section (1A) of
section 154
of the Act;
xxx            xxx         xxx
3. Capital value of open land :­ Save otherwise provided
           in these rules, where, within the precincts of a building
           there is vacant land other than the land appurtenant to
           the building, such land shall be treated as open land and
30
the capital value thereof shall be fixed accordingly, as
provided for in rule 21.
4. User categories of open land and weightages by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User categories of
open land shall be as specified in column (2) of Part 1 of
schedule ‘A’ and the weightages by multiplication to base
value, to be respectively assigned thereto the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be as shown in column (3) of
the said Part I of schedule ‘A’.
5. User categories of buildings or part thereof and
weightages by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User
categories of buildings or part thereof shall be as
specified column (2) of each of Parts II, III and IV of
schedule 'A' and the weightages by multiplication to the
relative base value, to be respectively assigned thereto for
the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be as in column
(3) of each of the said Parts II, III and Iv of schedule 'A'.
6. The nature and type of building and the weightage by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ The nature and
type of a building and type of building shall be as
specified in column (2) of schedule "B" and the
weightages assigned thereto for the purpose of fixing
capital value, shall be shown in column (3) of the said
schedule ‘B’.
7. The weightage by multiplication to be assigned to a
building on account of the age thereof: ­ The weightage by
multiplication to be assigned to a building on account of
age factor, for the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be
according to the age of the building as shown in column
(2) of schedule ‘C’ and the weightage by multiplication be
assigned thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of the
said schedule "C".
8. The weightage by multiplication on account of floor
factor to be assigned to RCC building with lift: ­
Weightage by multiplication on account of floor factor to
be assigned to a RCC building with lift, for the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be according to the number of
floors as shown in column (2) of schedule 'D' and the
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto shall
be as shown in column (3) of the said schedule 'D'.
9. Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose of fixing
capital value: ­Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose
of fixing capital value thereof shall mean, ­
31
(a)in the case of a hoarding, the area of the square of the
extremities of the poles on which the hoarding is erected
plus the area of the hoarding; and
(b)in the case of a tower, the area covered by the
extremities of the foundation of the tower.
10.      Carpet Area area of a flat or a building: (1) The
total carpet area of a flat shall be reckoned by including
the area of the following items, namely: (i) terrace in
exclusive possession, (ii) mezzanine floor, (iii) loft
(excluding loft in residential flat) or attic, (iv) dry balcony
and (v) niches; and
(2) The total carpet area area of a building shall be
reckoned by including the areas of the following items,
namely:­ (i) total area of the flats in the building
computed in accordance with sub rule (1), (ii) basement,
(iii) stilt, (iv)porch, (v) podium, (vi) service floor, (vii) refuge
area, (viii) entrance lobby, (ix) lounge, (x) air­ conditioning
plant room, (xi) air handling room, (xii) the structure for
an effluent treatment plant room and (xiii) watchman
cabin (xix)sewerage treatment plant room (xv) water
treatment plant room
(3) The carpet area of any of the following items shall not
be reckoned while computing the carpet area of a
building or part thereof, namely:
(i) lift room above topmost storey, (ii) lift well, (iii)
   stair­case and passage thereto including staircase
   room, (iv) chimney and elevated tank, (v) meter
   room, (vi) pump room, (vii) underground and
   overhead water tank, (viii) septic tank, (ix)flower­
   bed and (x) loft in residential flat, (xi) entrance
   lobby of residential building
(4) "deleted"
11. Fixation of capital value of a flat or building or part
thereof.­ (1) While fixing the capital value of a flat, the
capital value of any one or more of the relevant items
specified in sub­rule (1) of rule 10, as fixed in accordance
with the provisions of rules 14,15, or sub­rule(1) of rule
16, as the case may be, shall be added to the capital
value of the flat.
(2) While fixing the capital value of a building or part
thereof, the capital value of any of the one or more of the
relevant items specified in sub­rule (2) of rule 10 as fixed
in accordance with the provisions of sub­rule (2) or, as
32
the case may be, (3) of rule 16, shall be added to the
capital value of the building or part thereof.
12. "deleted"
13. Fixation of capital value of religious buildings :­ The
capital value of a religious building which is a temple,
math, gurudwara, mosque, takth, church, durgah,
synagogue, or agiary or the like, and is used or intended
to be used for the purpose of religious worship or offering
prayers or performance of any religious rites or rituals by
a person of, or belonging to, the relevant religion, creed,
or sect, shall be fixed at the rate of base value applicable
to a residential building as indicated in the Ready
Reckoner; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
14. Fixation of capital value of open terrace: ­ If an open
terrace in exclusive possession is attached to a flat, the
capital value of such terrace of a non­residential flat shall
be fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of such
flat, and of residential flat at 20% of the relative rate of
base value of such flat; and by applying the relevant
weightages by multiplication provided for in these rules.
15. Fixation of capital value of mezzanine floor, loft and
attic floor:­
(a) the capital value of mezzanine floor shall be
fixed at 70% of the relative rate of base value of the flat
beneath the mezzanine floor; and by applying the
relevant weightages by multiplication provided for in
these rules;
(b) the capital value of loft or attic floor shall be
fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of the flat
beneath the loft, or as the case may be, the attic; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules;
Provided that, where the rate of base value
applicable to the mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor having
regard to its user is higher or, as the case may be, lower
than the rate of base value applicable to the flat beneath
such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor, the capital value
of such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor shall be fixed at
70% or 50%, as the case may be, of such higher or lower
rate of base value; and by applying the relevant
weightages by multiplication provided for in these rules.
16."deleted"
33
17. Fixation of capital value in respect of demolished
building :­
(1) Where a building is fully demolished, or has fully
collapsed, the land beneath it shall be deemed to be open
land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed
accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
Explanation ­ “deleted"
(2) Where only part of a building is demolished or has
partly collapsed and the remaining part is yet occupied
by occupiers, land beneath the portion of the building
which is demolished or has collapsed shall be deemed to
be open land and the portion of the structure which is
occupied shall be treated as a building, for the purpose of
fixing the capital value thereof.
(3) "deleted"
18, "deleted"
19. "deleted".
19 A Assessment of Amenities in Luxurious RCC bldg
     Where Property tax in respect of amenities of
  luxurious RCC building was not levied since 1 st April
  2010 as per Rule 19, while determining the property
  tax leviable from 1st April 2015, subject to capping as
  provided for in
section 140A
such tax shall be
  considered which would have been continued to levy
  from 1st April 2010.
20. Valuation of open land capable of utilising more than
1 floor space index (F.S.I) or transfer of development right
(T.D.R.) ­As the Ready Reckoner provides for the rate of
base value of open land with 1 floor space index, open
land which is capable of utilizing more than 1 floor space
index or any transfer of development right shall be valued
at an increased rate in proportion to the higher floor
space index or transfer of development right proposed to
be utilized and approved under the building plan
submitted to the Corporation for approval.
21. Capital value of open land or building or part
thereof.­Capital value of open land or building shall be
fixed under the provisions of the Act and these rules in
the following manner, namely:
(1) Capital value (CV) of open land
     Rate of base value (BV) of a open land according to
Ready Reckoner X weightage by multiplication as per
34
user category (UC) (Part I of schedule 'A') X permissible or
         approved floor space index (FSI) X area of land (AL).
CV = BV x UC x FSI x AL
         (2) Capital value (CV) of a building –
               Relative rate of base value (BV) of a building
         according to Ready Reckoner X weightage by
         multiplication as per user category (UC) (Parts II, III, or as
         the case may be, IV of schedule 'A') X weightage by
         multiplication as per the nature and type of building
         (NTB) (schedule 'B') X weightage by multiplication on
         account of age of building (AF) (schedule 'C') X weightage
         by multiplication on account of floor factor (FF) for RCC
         building with lift (schedule 'D') X carpet area (CA).
CV = BV x UC x NTB x AF x FF x CA
22. Non­application of Guidelines of Stamp Duty
         Valuation. ­ Notwithstanding anything contained in the
         "Important Guidelines of Stamp Duty Valuation" as
         specified in the Ready Reckoner, the provisions made in
         these rules shall have primacy over those guidelines and
         none of those guidelines shall apply for fixing capital
         value under the Act and these rules.”
12. In Appendix II of Capital Value Rules of 2010, 13 examples

are provided. Examples 12 and 13 from said appendix are as

under:
“(12) OPEN LAND WHERE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PLAN
         WITH HIGHER F.S.I. HAS BEEN APPROVED


                                                     Weightage
           Rate of base value   Rs.36,400          not applicable
           User Category        Open Land (Resi)   1.00
           Nature and Type      not applicable     not applicable
           of Building
           Age of Building      not applicable     not applicable
           F.S.I. Factor        2.50               2.50
           Land Area            80 sq. mtr.        not applicable
35
CV = BV X UC X FSI X LA
                = 36400 X 1.00 X 2.50 X 80
          C.V.= Rs.72,80,000


       (13)       OPEN LAND IN SUBURBAN AREA


                                                 Weightage
         Rate of base value   Rs.33,200        not applicable
         User Category        Residential      1.00
         Nature and Type      not applicable   not applicable
         of Building
         Age of Building      not applicable   not applicable
         F.S.I. Factor        1.00             1.00
         Land Area            80 sq. mtr.      not applicable



              CV = BV X UC X FSI X LA
                  = 33200 X 1.00 X 1.00 X 80
              C.V. = Rs.26,56,000”
13. Number of petitions were filed challenging the validity of

computation and levy of property tax based on capital value

system. The petitions also challenged the vires of Capital Value

Rules of 2010 and Capital Value Rules of 2015.               Some of the

petitions also challenged the amendment effected to the
MMC

Act
pertaining to the implementation of the Capital Value

System for computing and assessing property tax. During the

pendency of these matters before the High Court interim orders

were passed by the High Court on or about 29.01.2014 which
36
were thereafter modified by subsequent order dated 24.02.2014.
The operative part of the order dated 24.02.2014 was as under: ­

        “5. In the meantime the petitioners shall pay municipal
        taxes at the pre­amended rates and also the additional
        tax at the rate of 50% of the differential tax between the
        tax payable under the old regime and now payable on
        the basis of capital value of the property.           The
        petitioners will pay such amounts and the Municipal
        Corporation shall accept the amounts within prejudice
        to rights and contentions of parties.”

After exchange of pleadings, all the matters were taken up for

hearing with Writ Petition No. 2492 of 2014 filed by the Property

Owners’ Association and others as the lead matter.                   Having

considered the rival submissions, the High Court rejected the

challenge as to the validity of various provisions of the
MMC Act
.
It, however, held Rules 20, 21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules

2010 and 2015 to be ultra vires the provisions of the
MMC Act
.
14. Before considering the challenge raised on various grounds,

at the outset the High Court dealt with the approach to be

adopted by a Court while dealing with the challenge to the

validity of tax laws, and concluded that in case of taxing statute,

more latitude would be required to be given to the legislature

and that the burden on the petitioners challenging the validity
37
would be more onerous.             Thereafter    the challenge     was

considered under following heads: ­
(a)   The argument on legislative competence.
The submission that the tax in terms of the instant

     legislation would be one covered by Entry 86 of List I of the

     Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, was not accepted and

     the challenge in that behalf was rejected with following

     conclusions: ­

           “155.    The legislation providing for the levy of
           property tax by a municipality on the basis capital
           value will be covered by Entry 49 of List­II. Now
           coming to the impugned provisions, we find that
           capital value of lands and buildings is adopted only
           as a measure to determine the tax on lands and
           buildings. There is no attempt to levy a tax on
           capital value of assets. Therefore, the conclusion
           which can be drawn is that the State Legislature was
           competent to enact provisions regarding property tax
           based on capital value under Entry­49 of List­II of
           Seventh Schedule. The argument that the impugned
           amended provisions of the
BMC Act
impinge upon
           the powers of the Central Legislature covered by
           Entry­86 of List­I of Seventh Schedule deserves to be
           rejected. The adoption of capital value as a basis or
           measure of tax on land and building will not attract
           Entry­86 of List­I of Seventh Schedule.
           ….”
(b)   Challenge to the validity of sub­Sections (1)(a) and
           (1)(b) of
Section 140
regarding water tax and
           sewerage tax.
38
The    submissions        were    rejected     with        following

observations: ­

     “158. …..
A tax is a compulsory exaction as a part of common
     burden without promise of any special advantages to
     classes of taxpayers, whereas a fee is a payment for
     services rendered, benefit provided or privilege
     conferred. Coming back to sub­sections (1)(a) and (1)
(b) of
section 140
, the same provide for levy of such
     water tax as the Standing Committee may consider
     necessary for providing water supply. The imposition
     of this tax does not depend on whether the water is
     being supplied to the premises or property in respect
     of which water tax is demanded. Similarly, in case of
     additional water tax, the expenditure incurred or to
     be incurred for capital works for making or improving
     the facilities of water supply may not be for a direct
     benefit to the premises or property subject matter of
     levy of tax. The Municipal Corporation may not be
     providing water supply to a particular premises or
     land at a particular point of time but it may be
     providing it to other properties in the city. Similarly,
     in respect of sewerage tax or additional sewerage tax,
     in case of an open land there may not be any
     requirement for collection or removal and disposal of
     human and other wastes or for doing capital works
     for making and improving the facilities for collection
     and removal of waste. Thus, in case of these four
     taxes, it is a compulsory exaction as part of a
     common burden without promise of any special
     advantages or promise to the tax payers. The said
     taxes are imposed to generate revenue. Even
     assuming that in the levy of tax under these four
     heads, an element of quid pro quo exists, that by
     itself does not mean that the levy ceases to be in the
     nature of tax. We, therefore, reject the argument that
     these four taxes cannot be levied in respect of vacant
     land or a land under construction which is not
     enjoying any service such as water supply or
     collection of sewerage or waste.
159. Where the facilities of water supply or sewerage
     collection are provided to a land or building, as per
     the Rules framed under
sections 169
and
170
of the
     BMC Act, the water charges or sewerage charges, as
39
the case may be, by way of fees can be recovered
      which would have direct nexus with the quality and
      quantity of services provided. Where charge is
      collected, taxes covered by the above four heads
      cannot be levied. Therefore, we do not agree that the
      aforesaid four taxes are not in substance a tax but
      the same are in the nature of fees.”
(c)   Challenge to the validity of sub­Section (1) (c) (a) of
Section 140
regarding levy of Education Cess.
      The submissions were rejected thus:­
      “160. …..
On plain reading of sub­section (1) of
section 195E
, it
      is clear that this section provides for levy of additional
      tax on buildings and lands which is called as
      education cess of so many per centum not exceeding
      12 per centum of their rateable value or so many per
      centum of their capital value, as the case may be, as
      may be determined by the Corporation. Sub­section
      (1) of
section 195E
provides that levy of said
      additional tax is for the purposes of clause (q) of
section 61
. Under clause (q) of
section 61
, it is an
      obligation of the BMC to maintain and aid schools of
      primary education. Therefore, as in the case of the
      aforesaid four taxes which we have discussed above,
      this tax is a compulsory exaction as a part of a
      common burden. We, therefore, do not see any merit
      in the submission that the aforesaid provisions
      are ultra vires the provisions of the Constitution of
      India. The argument whether education cess can be
      levied on the basis of capital value is dealt with
      separately.”
(d)   Similarly, the argument with regard to sub­Section (1)
(d) of
Section 140
dealing with levy of Betterment Charges

was rejected with following observations: ­

      “162. In none of the Petitions in this group, it is
      demonstrated that a demand is made from the
      petitioners for payment Betterment Charge. Elaborate
40
procedure for determination thereof is laid down. The
      Authority which has power to determine the charge is
      the Improvement Committee. As per
section 49B
of
      the BMC Act, the said Committee consists of 26
      elected councilors of BMC. Moreover, the betterment
      charge is not payable on the basis of the capital
      value. Hence, the main ground of attack in these
      petitions about the levy of property taxes based on
      capital value has no relevance to levy of Betterment
      charges.”
(e)   Consideration of challenge on the basis of violation
      of provisions of Chapter IXA and in particular,
      Article 243­X of the Constitution of India.
The substratum of the challenge was that the levy and

collection as provided in clauses (a) and (b) of Article 243­X

of the Constitution must be by the Corporation consisting of

the elected and nominated councillors and not by any other

authority    under
Section     4
of   the   MMC     Act.   The

submissions in that behalf were rejected as under:­

      “173. `We, firstly, deal with the argument that as the
      power to levy and collect property taxes has been
      assigned to the Municipality i.e. the Corporation, the
      power must be exercised by the Corporation
      consisting of elected and nominated councilors and
      not by any other municipal authority. If the said
      argument is accepted, it will lead to absurdity for the
      reason that the exercise of fixing the capital value of
      all properties, fixing the rate of tax at a particular
      percentage of capital value, imposition, levy and
      collection will have to be done by the Corporation
      which consists of the elected councillors and
      nominated councillors and by no other municipal
      authority. It will be impossible for the Corporation to
      do so.”
            xxx                xxx               xxx
41
“181. To conclude, the
BMC Act
has been already
amended in terms of Article 243­ZF. Perusal of
various provisions of Part­IXA of the Constitution of
India shows that the constitutional provisions itself
provide for the State Legislature enacting law
providing for constitution of committees and
conferring them with powers and authority. We have
already referred to the various provisions including
clause (b) of Article 243­W. Therefore, the provision of
section 4
of the BMC Act is consistent with the
provision of Part­IXA. Clauses (a) and (b) of Article
243­X cannot be read in isolation and merely because
Legislature authorizes the Standing Committee to fix
the rates of property taxes and to approve rules
framed by the Commissioner in accordance with sub­
section (1B) of
section 154
, the relevant provisions of
the
BMC Act
cannot be said to be ultra vires Article
243­X. The powers under the charging sections in
Chapter VIII are conferred on the Corporation itself
including the power to exercise option of taking
recourse to capital value regime for the levy of
property taxes. Moreover, we have pointed out that
certain provisions of Chapter VIII are machinery
provisions. As required by law, the decision adopting
Capital Value System has been taken by the
Corporation consisting of 227 elected and nominated
councillors. This power cannot be said to be unguided
power only because sub­section (1) of
section 140A
does not expressly lay down any specific conditions
for exercise of the option. The provisions which confer
power on the Standing Committee to fix the rates of
taxes contain sufficient guidelines. Even the provision
of sub­section (1A) of
section 154
which confer power
on the Commissioner to determine capital value
contains more than sufficient guidelines. We see no
violation of Article 243­X or any other provisions of
Part­IX­A.
182. If we accept the submissions canvassed across
the bar by the petitioners, not only the decision to
adopt capital value system but the job of fixing rates
in case of all categories of property taxes,
determination of capital value of all properties liable
to taxes, process of serving notices under
section 162
,
giving hearing on complaints and deciding the
complaints will have to be done by the Corporation
consisting of elected councillors and nominated
councillors and by no one else. Such interpretation
put to clauses (a) and (b) of Article 243­X will lead to
42
absurdity and the provisions will become unworkable.
      Such interpretation will defeat the object of 74th
      Amendment to the Constitution and, therefore, the
      challenge on the ground of violation of Article 243­X
      must fail.”
(f)   Submissions on the ground of excessive delegation.
While observing that the power conferred in sub­

Section (1A) of
Section 154
of the MMC Act on the

Commissioner to fix capital value, was not at all an

unguided power and that sufficient guidelines were set out,

it was concluded thus: ­

      “185. …. There are sufficient guidelines and
      safeguards. Moreover, in case of taxes where power to
      fix rates is given to the Standing Committee, the same
      will always form part of proposals of the Standing
      Committee which will be considered by the
      Corporation in accordance with clause (e) of
      subsection (1) of
Section 128
for determination of
      rates.
The BMC Act
does not provide for delegation of
      essential functions of the Corporation. Conferment of
      powers on the Standing Committee and Improvement
      Committee and other municipal authorities is within
      the four corners of Part­IXA of the Constitution.
      Therefore, the argument of excessive delegation has
      no merit and deserves to be rejected.”
(g)   Submission based on violation of
Article 14
of the
      Constitution of India.
The submission that there was manifest arbitrariness

in the impugned provisions and that the provisions were

confiscatory in nature, were rejected by the High Court. It

was observed thus: ­
43
“189. …. There is an argument canvassed that there
      is a disparity of tax payable in respect of residential
      and hotel properties. An argument is canvassed that
      there is disparity between five star hotel properties
      and other hotel properties. On first principle, the
      submissions cannot be accepted.            The user of
      residential properties, 5­Star hotel properties and
      other hotel properties is different. These properties
      form part of distinct classes and by its vary nature
      cannot be treated as equal. Therefore, it is very
      difficult to sustain an argument that there is manifest
      arbitrariness in the impugned provisions. As the
      provisions do not lead to confiscatory nature of taxes,
      violation of
Article 14
is not attracted.”
(h)   Challenge to the notification issued under the
Maharashtra Education Cess Act, 1962
The submissions in that behalf were also negatived

with observation that by adopting capital value system, only

the computation of property tax was altered.
(i)   The ground of retrospective operation of the
      impugned provisions of the
BMC Act
.
The contentions advanced in that behalf were rejected

by the High Court after making following observations: ­

      “205. The liability to pay property taxes was always
      provided in the
BMC Act
. By the impugned
      amendments, only the basis of computing property
      taxes has undergone a change. Assuming that there
      is any retrospective operation, it is no facilitate
      transition form one regime to another. As per the
      amendments, the final assessment for the years
      2010­11, 2011­12 and 2012­13 can be made after
      expiry of the respective years. But provisional
      assessment has to be made during the respective
      three years. The impugned provisions do not take
      away or affect any vested right as only the
44
procedure/method of computing the property taxes
            has undergone a change. By virtue of the impugned
            amendments, a property in respect of which taxes
            were not payable earlier does not become subject to
            taxes. It cannot be said that by the impugned
            amendment, from an earlier date, any new obligation
            or disability has been attached in respect of any
            earlier transactions. The impugned amendments will
            affect the properties which even under the
            unamended Act, were subject to payment of property
            tax. The impugned provisions do not bring about any
            unreasonable or arbitrary consequences. Thus, there
            is no merit in the contention based on retrospective
            operation.”



     Thus, the majority of submissions advanced on behalf of the

writ petitioners were rejected by the High Court.
15. The High Court however accepted the challenge on three

grounds, namely: ­
(i)   Challenge to the Capital Value Rules of 2010 on

           retrospective operation,
(ii) Challenge to the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015,

           on the ground that the rule making power did not

           permit the Commissioner to determine capital value.
(iii) Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 was held to

           be ultra vires the provisions of sub­Section (1A) and (1B)

           of
Section 154
of the MMC Act.
45
16. On the first issue, the High Court observed that neither

clause (e) of sub­Section (1A) nor sub­Section (1B) of
Section 154
of the MMC Act conferred powers to frame rules with

retrospective effect.    The Capital Value Rules of 2010, which

came into effect from 20.3.2012, were, therefore, held to be

applicable prospectively and that said Rules could not be applied

from          1st April, 2010.
17. With regard to the second issue, it was observed that there

was no provision in the
MMC Act
regarding consideration of

development potential of vacant land for determining its capital

value.   The conclusion arrived at by the High Court in that

behalf was as under: ­

         “211. Now we turn to the Capital Value Rules of 2010.
         As stated earlier, there is no provision which enables
         the Commissioner to frame rules for laying down
         guidelines for determining capital value. Rule 2
         contains definition. Rule 3 provides that where within
         the precincts of the building there is a vacant land
         other than the land appurtenant to the building, such
         land shall be treated as open land and capital value
         thereof shall be fixed as provided in Rule 21. As
         observed earlier, the rule making power is confined to
         the three aspects mentioned above. As Rule 3 refers to
         Rule 21, we will have to consider the provision of Rule
21. Perusal of Rule 21 and, particularly clause (1)
         thereof shows that it lays down how the capital value
         of the open land is to be determined. It provides for a
         formula. It provides that the capital value of open land
         will be equal to rate of base value of open land
         according to SDRR multiplied by weightage by
         multiplication as per user category. The said weightage
         is provided in Part­I under heading "Open Land"
46
multiplied by permissible or approved FSI multiplied
by area of the land. Once the base value is determined
as per SDRR, it is obvious that the said value is fixed
taking into consideration potential of the land. The
rates in SDRR are fixed after taking into consideration
all the aspects of market value. The capital value has
to be decided in accordance with the base value which
has to be taken as per SDRR. Clause (1) of Rule 21
provides for weightage by multiplication as per user
category. It also provides that the rate of base value
shall be multiplied by permissible FSI for determining
the capital value of the land. There is no provision
under the
BMC Act
to take into consideration
development potential of vacant land for determining
its capital value. When the substantive provision i.e
sub­section (1A) of
Section 154
lays down that the base
value has to be in terms of SDRR rates, the
subordinate legislation cannot provide for adding
additional value to SDRR rates on account of
availability of FSI. Thus, the provision of multiplying
base value with permissible or approved FSI is ultra
vires the provisions of the
BMC Act
. Moreover, the rule
making power does not permit the Commissioner to
frame the rules for determining what is the capital
value. The rule making power is confined to three
aspects which are pointed out earlier. Clause (1) of
Rule 21 which provides for taking into consideration
the potential FSI is not covered by any of the three
categories. Under sub­section (1B) of
section 154
of the
BMC Act, the rules can be framed providing for details
of categories of buildings or land and the weightage by
multiplication to be assigned to various such
categories. Under clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
section 154
, factors which are to be taken into
consideration for determining base value can be
subject matter of rules. The factors referred in clause
(e) will have to be considered ejusdem generis. The
other factors provided are nature of the land, type of
land and structure, areas of land or building, user
category such as residential or commercial and the age
of the building. Under clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
section 154
, rules cannot be framed to decide how the
capital value should be determined. In fact, framing
rules for laying down the method of calculating the
capital value is itself ultra vires the statutory rule
making power.”
47
18. Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 was struck

down by the High Court on the reasoning that the effect of said

rule would be that the value higher than what was provided for

in   Stamp   Duty     Ready     Reckoner     would     be   taken   into

consideration while computing the property tax. The High Court

observed as under: ­

        “216. Rule 20 of Capital Value Rules, 2010 deals with
        valuation of open land capable of utilizing more than
        1.0 FSI or transfer of development right (TDR). It
        provides that as the Ready Reckoner provides for the
        rate of base value of open land with 1.0 FSI, open land
        which is capable of utilizing more than 1.0 FSI or any
        TDR shall be valued at an increased rate in proportion
        to the higher FSI or TDR proposed to be utilized and
        approved under the building plan submitted to the
        Corporation for approval. Thus, the effect of rule 20 is
        that while fixing capital value of open land, its
        potential for development by using additional FSI or
        TDR has to be considered. Thus, a value higher than
        what is provided in SDRR should be taken into
        consideration.”



     It was further observed thus: ­
        “218. Rule 20 provides for taking into consideration
        potential of construction on the vacant land for making
        valuation. For the purpose of property taxes, not only a
        vacant land but even a land under construction will
        have to be treated as a vacant land. Wherever SDRR is
        applicable, in view of sub­section (1A) of
section 154
,
        the base value has to be as per SDRR rate for vacant
        land. Rule 20 provides for taking into consideration
        potential for development. It is completely contrary to
        the provisions of the
BMC Act
as interpreted in the case
        of Polychem Limited (supra) which requires even the
        land under construction to be treated as a vacant land.
Moreover, rule 20 purports to lay down how valuation of
        the land has to be made. The rule making power under
        sub­section (1B) or clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
48
section 154
does not confer any such power. Moreover,
        if rule 20 is implemented, capital value which is higher
        than SDRR rate will have to be fixed which will be in
        violation of sub­section (1A) of
section 154
which
        mandates that the Commissioner will take into
        consideration SDRR rate while finalizing capital value.
        Thus, rule 20 is ultra vires the provisions of sub­
        sections (1A) and (1B) of
section 154
of the BMC Act.
        There is no difference in Rule 20 of the Capital Value
        Rules of 2010 and 2015.”
19. In the end, the conclusions arrived at and the directions

issued by the High Court were as under: ­

        “229. Our conclusions can be summarized as under:
(i)     We uphold the constitutional validity of
                  the sprovision of the
BMC Act
which are
                  under challenge;
(ii)    The Capital Value Rules of 2010 shall
                  apply prospectively from the date on
                  which the same were made;
(iii)   We strike down rules 20, 21 and 22 of
                  Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015. As
                  far as rules 3 and 17 are concerned, we
                  hold that as rule 21 has been struck
                  down, the capital value of properties
                  covered by the said rules shall not be
                  fixed in accordance with rule 21. As a
                  result of striking down of rules 20, 21
                  and 22, in those cases where the capital
                  value has been finally fixed either by
                  issuing notice under
section 162
of the
                  BMC Act or by issuing final bills, the
                  Commissioner or the officer empowered to
                  exercise delegated powers will have to re­
                  determine the capital value in accordance
                  with sub­section (1A) of
section 154
and
                  serve a fresh special assessment notice.
We hold that if a complaint is filed after
                  service of special assessment notice, the
                  same shall be disposed of only after giving
                  an opportunity of being heard to the
                  assessee filing such complaint. Only after
49
the complaint is disposed of in such a
               fashion, a final bill can be served.
(iv)     As the Municipal Commissioner will
               require a reasonable time to do the tasks
               as aforesaid, the interim orders which are
               operating in these petitions will have to
               be continued till the service of final bills.
               We also make it clear that though we are
               setting aside the final bills issued, no
               party will be entitled to claim refund of
               the amounts paid under the interim
               orders and till the final bills are served,
               the petitioners will have to pay the
               amounts as per the interim orders.
(v)      This judgment will apply only to the
               properties subject matter of the petitions
               in this group except Writ Petition No.
               2592 of 2013 and PIL 46 OF 2014. We
               make it clear that only those special
               assessment notices and final bills which
               are specifically challenged will stand set
               aside. In Writ Petition No. 2592 of 2013,
               the fresh exercise will have to be
               undertaken only in relation to the
               properties in respect of which there is a
               specific prayer for quashing the notices
               and bills based on final assessment. The
               details of properties held by 610 members
               in the lead petition are not set out.
Hence, no relief can be extended to the
               properties of the said members save and
               except the properties subject matter of
               bills and notices which are expressly
               challenged.
(vi)     This judgment will not affect the final
               bills which are accepted by the concerned
               owners.
230. We record our appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered by the learned counsel appearing
for various parties. We dispose of the petitions by
passing the following order:
ORDER
(i)          We reject the prayers made for challenging the
             constitutional validity of various provisions of the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888
as
50
prayed in the writ petition/PIL. We hold that
        Rules 20, 21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules of
        the years 2010 and 2015 are ultra vires the
        provisions of the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation
        Act, 1888
and, therefore, the same are struck
        down;
(ii)    We quash and set aside the special assessment
        notices and final bills based on final capital value
        fixed which are specifically the subject matter of
        challenge in this group of petitions. The demand
        of provisional taxes is not disturbed. The orders
        specifically impugned which are passed on the
        complaints do not survive. We direct the Mumbai
        Municipal Corporation to re­fix the capital value
        in respect of the properties subject matter of the
        notices/final bills which are set aside in the light
        of the findings recorded earlier. After re­
        determination of capital value, special assessment
        notices be issued to the persons primarily liable to
        pay property taxes in respect of subject
        properties. Thereafter, further steps shall be taken
        by the Municipal Corporation in accordance with
        law;
(iii)   We hold that the complaints filed objecting to the
        special assessment notices issued under sub­
        section (2) of
section 162
shall be disposed of only
        after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
        complainants.
(iv)    Till the expiry of a period of 21 days from the date
        on which fresh special assessment notices are
        served in accordance with clause (ii) above, the
        ad­interim/interim orders which are operating in
        these petitions till today shall continue to operate
        subject to compliance of requirement of deposit of
        amounts by the petitioners as set out in those
        orders. In those cases where the complaints are
        lawfully filed within stipulated time pursuant to
        the special assessment notices, the ad­
        interim/interim reliefs will continue to operate on
        the same conditions till the date of service of fresh
        final bills;
(v)     Rule is made partly absolute on the above terms;
(vi)    All pending chamber summonses and notices of
        motion stand disposed of.”
51
20. The Corporation being aggrieved by the decision of the High

Court on three issues as stated above, approached this Court by

filing Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 17009 of 2019.              While

issuing notice in the matter on 29.7.2019, by way of interim

relief, it was directed:
“Pending further consideration, the relationship
         between the parties shall be governed by interim order
         dated 24.2.2014 passed by the High Court and more
         particularly by para 5 as quoted above.
We are conscious of the fact that there were more
         than 150 petitions before the High Court but special
         leave petition has been filed only in one matter.
         However, since the issues in question are common to all
         the matters and go to the root of the controversy, we
         direct that this interim order shall apply in every single
         petition which was considered by the High Court.”


Various interim applications have since then been preferred by

certain parties seeking impleadment and projecting their view

points. At the same time, some of the parties who were aggrieved

by the rejection of their submissions challenging the validity of

the various provisions of
MMC Act
and other issues which were

answered against them also preferred Special Leave Petitions.
21. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India and

Mr. V. Sreedharan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of the Corporation initially advanced submissions on the issues

which were answered against the Corporation.               However, after
52
the submissions were advanced on behalf of various impleading

applicants and other parties including substantive petitions

challenging the correctness of the decision of the High Court,

submissions were also advanced in response.
22. The factual aspects regarding framing of the Capital Value

Rules of 2010 and 2015, as well as the background for some of

the amendments effected to the
MMC Act
, have been dealt with

in the written submissions of the Corporation, as under:
“2. The amendment to the
MMC Act
introducing the
        capital value system was brought about inf 2009 (Act No.
        XI of 2009 on Pg 24­39 in Compilation of Corporation –
        Vol 4). Pursuant to the same, the Corporation passed
        resolution dated 27.01.2010 for adoption of capital value
        with effect from 01.04.2010 (Pg 6 of consolidated counter
        affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4). Accordingly,
        the section was already enacted by State Legislature
        providing for levy of tax on capital value basis from
        01.04.2010.
3. In January 2010, the Corporation appointed an expert
        committee composing of Appointment of expert
        committee comprising of Shri D.M. Sukthankar, Ex Chief
        Secretary of the State of Maharashtra, Shri D.N.
        Chaudhri, Ex Chairman of Maharashtra Law Commission
        and Dr. Roshan Namavati, expert on valuation to make
        recommendation on the introduction and smooth
        implementation of capital value system. (Para 13, Pg 9 of
        consolidated counter affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2
        to 4)
4. On 08.10.2010, the expert committee published draft
        rules in various newspapers for comments of public at
        large (Pg 79 to 94 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
The committee received 254 objections and suggestions
        all of which were considered and scrutinized by the
        committee. Thereafter, certain benevolent changes were
        made by the committee and draft rules were
53
recommended to the Corporation on 29.12.2010. (Para
14, Pg 10 of consolidated counter affidavit)
5. After the rules were published, the Corporation
appointed a chartered accountant firm to suggest a
revenue neutral rate. Revenue neutral rate means such
rate as would yield the same amount of property tax as
being levied by the Corporation before introduction of
capital value system. (Para 39, Pg 22 of consolidated
counter affidavit)
6. Evidently, the rates can be determined only after
capital value of all properties are calculated on
memorandum basis. The work of fixing the capital value
of land and buildings across Greater Mumbai took time.
The scale of the work involved was very large and
extremely time consuming. The data of the old rateable
value system which was in physical form had to be
digitized for the purposes of the new capital value system.
This voluminous data covered approximately 2.75 lakh
properties (or 27.5 lakh individual units). In some cases
however, the data was not complete and the carpet area
was not available. In these cases the property owners
were given notices under
Section 155
of the MMC Act to
furnish the details in the prescribed format.           The
response was however very limited and the officers of the
MCGM had to physically ascertain the required
information. (Para 31, Pg 19 of consolidated counter
affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4)
7. In light of the same, the State Legislature stepped in
and introduced L.A. Bill No. LXXIV of 2010 whereby
inserting sub­section (2) in
Section 140A
to enable the
Corporation to issue provisional bills for the year 2010­
11 and treat the rateable value of the building or land as
provisional capital value.    (Statement of object and
reasons on Pg 48 and 49 in Compilation of Corporation –
Vol 4). The said bill culminated into Act No. XXVII of
2010 (Pg 51 to 58 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
8. The amendments to the
MMC Act
provided that once
the capital value was fixed, final bills would be issued. If
the final bill was lower than the provisional bill, the
MCGM would refund the excess payment made with
interest at the rate of 6.25% p.a., or with the consent of
the tax payer, adjust the excess amount against future
bills (
Section 140A(2)
. (Para 32, Pg 19 of consolidated
counter affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4)
54
9. Pursuant to the same, the Corporation started
implementation of the capital value system by issuing
provisional property tax bills.
10. In March 2011, the State Legislature observed that
the process of fixing the capital value which had started
in August, 2010 is bound to stretch beyond 31 st March
2011. This is so because there are more than 3 lakh
properties of which capital value has to be fixed for the
purposes of such levy of property tax thereon, but the
volume of work of fixing the capital value of all these
properties being so large that it may not be possible for
the Corporation to complete the fixation of capital value
of all these properties before 31st March 2011. As a
result of this, the work of fixing capital value would
continue during the year 2011­2012 also. Unless the
capital value of all the properties is fixed and the total
extent thereof is ascertained, it may not also be feasible.
11. Accordingly, by Maharashtra Ordinance No. X of
2011, the State Legislature expanded the scope of certain
transitory provisions as contained in
sections 128
,
140A
,
154A
and
219A
of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act, so as to enable the Corporation to separately issue
the provisional bills on the basis of rateable value
treating it as provisional capital value for the years 2010­
11 and 2011­12. Further, with a view to prevent loss of
revenue in respect of tax on properties which have
escaped from assessment, a new
section 216B
has also
been inserted in the Act to enable the Corporation to
assess such properties at any time within six years from
the date on which such properties should have been
assessed. (Statement of object and reasons on Pg 141
and 142 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4). The said
ordinance culminated into Act No. XI of 2011 (Pg 143 to
148 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
12. In March 2012, the State Legislature observed that
the process of fixing the capital value which had started
in August, 2010 is bound to stretch beyond 31 st March
2012. This is to because the proposal submitted to the
Standing Committee of the Corporation for rules and
rates have not yet received the approval. The general
election of the Corporation is due in February, 2012 and
new Standing Committee will be operative only from the
end of March, 2012.
13. Accordingly, the bill proposed to expand the scope of
transitory provisions so as to enable the Corporation to
separately issue the provisional bills on the basis of
rateable value treating it as provisional capital value for
55
the years 2012­13, as was done for the period 2010­11
        and 2011­12. (Statement of object and reasons on Pg
        155 and 156 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4). The
        said ordinance culminated into Act No. VI of 2012 (Pg
        157 to 162 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
14. It is submitted that, in present case there is no
        retrospective levy of tax. The section for imposition of tax
        on capital value was already in force from 01.04.2010.
        Draft rules were already published in October, 2010. The
        levy is broadly speaking on assesses who were paying tax
        under earlier regime also.
15. The statute provided for transitionary arrangement
        pursuant to which provisional bills were issued as per
Section 140A(2)
read with
Section 154A
of the MMC Act
        from official year 2010­2011 (under the capital value
        system), 2011­2012 and till 2012­2013. Refunds are
        granted, or shortfall recovered after the capital values are
        fixed.
16. It is submitted that, time taken in assessment can
        never make the levy retrospective when the section
        imposing a tax is already in force. In case contention
        raised by assesses is accepted, it would amount to
        imposition of tax on rateable value even when the statute
        provides for imposition of tax on capital value w.e.f.
        01.04.2010.
Law laid down in
Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel and Co.
        v. Union of India
AIR 1962 SC 1006. The same notes and
        proves the practice in USA of levying taxes from the
        beginning of year even when the law is made during the
        year.”
23. In response, the submissions advanced by various learned

counsel, in the order that they appeared, were as under:
(A) Mr.   Neeraj   Kishan     Kaul,    learned     Senior    Advocate

        appearing for Indian Hotels Company Limited which has

        intervened in the proceedings as well as filed substantial

        challenge in the form of Special leave Petition (Civil)

        No.2568 of 2019 submitted that the property tax as a
56
percentage of value was confiscatory and exorbitant. On

          facts it was stated that initially for a property situated in

          the city a property tax was to the tune of Rs.6.29 crores

          per annum which had now risen to Rs.17.78 crores

          showing an increase of 275 %. Reliance was placed on

          paragraph 34 of the decision of this Court in
Patel

          Gordhandas      Hargovindas     &    Ors.   vs.   Municipal

          Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr.4
. It was further

          submitted that the impugned provisions suffered from

          excessive delegation which was without any guidelines

          and in any case could not be retrospective in operation.
In support of the submission, reliance was placed on the

          decisions of this Court in
Marathwada University vs.

          Seshrao Balwant Rao Chavan5
,
Delhi Race Club

          Limited v. Union of India & Ors.
6, Devi Das Gopal

          Krishnan etc.
vs. State of Punjab & Ors.7 and

          Avinder Singh & Ors. vs. State of Punjab & Ors.8.
4 AIR 1963 SC 1742.
5 (1989) 3 SCC 132.
6 (2012) 8 SCC 680.
7 AIR 1967 SC 1895.
8 (1979) 1 SCC 137.
57
Learned Senior counsel then submitted that the tax

          could be levied by the body constituted of elected

          representatives and not by the Standing Committee and

          that the power to tax could not be delegated.       It was

          further submitted that since a new method of levying and

          computing property tax was revised, it was rightly denied

          retrospective application.
On facts, it was also submitted that certain areas of

          the properties of the entity which housed pump rooms

          and other facilities ought to be excluded while arriving at

          the determination.
(B) Dr. Milind Sathe, learned Senior Advocate appeared for

          certain entities in IA Nos.110990 of 2019, 163118 of

          2019 and 160953 of 2019 and submitted that Rules 20,

          21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules, 2010 and 2015

          were rightly struck down by the High Court. Relying on

          the    decision   of   this   Court   in
The   Municipal

          Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Polychem Ltd.9
, it

          was submitted that till the potential of the property was

          translated into a habitable building, the land must be

9 (1974) 2 SCC 198
58
treated and taxed only as land and not going by its

          buildable potential.   It was further submitted that the

          process of fixing and/or changing the value, must be

         done in the same financial year.
(C) Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned            Senior   Advocate

          appearing for intervenors in IA Nos.110998 and 158888

          of 2019 submitted that the existing buildings having

          been demolished, the property could be taxed only as

          land and not going by the projected or contemplated

         developments as a shopping centre or a mall.
     (D) Mr. H. Devarajan, learned Advocate who appeared for the

          Property Owners Association submitted that in terms of
Article 243Y(1)(b)
of the Constitution the matter ought to

          have come through the suggestions of the Finance

          Commission.    But the entire process was initiated as a

          result of the suggestions made by the TISS.
              It was also submitted that the exercise adopted in

          the instant case was in violation of Article 243­X of the

          Constitution. Reliance was placed on the decision of this

          Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. v. Systematic

          Conscom Ltd.10
to submit that the four components of

          incidence of tax as explained in Paragraphs 17 and 18 of

10 (2014) 13 SCC 627.
59
said decision were not satisfied.   The learned counsel

   further submitted that
Sections 125
to
128
of the MMC

   Act deal with budget, but by virtue of amendments to the
MMC Act
, the rates were now being fixed without a

   budget. According to the learned counsel, the element of

   property tax under the new regime would be almost

   twenty times the rent and thus would be confiscatory.
       It was submitted that tax on lands and buildings

   must be directly on the land as a unit and must have a

   definite relationship with the land. The learned counsel

   further submitted that the unit for calculation according

   to SDRR and the Capital Value Rules, was not the same.
In one case, the reckonable unit was the built­up area

   while under the second, the reckonable unit was the

   carpet area.
(E) Mr. Darius Khambata, learned Senior Advocate who

   appeared in I.A. No.157014 of 2014 submitted that Rules

   20, 21, 22 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015

   were rightly held to be ultra vires. It was further

   submitted that the factors delineated in sub­clause (a) to
(d) of
Section 154 (A)
of the MMC Act would be matters
60
“in presenti” and not with regard to future prospects and

          that no reliance could be placed on sub­clause (e) to

          introduce the concept of something “in futuro” i.e., the

          potential in the market or capital value. It was further

          submitted that there could be no retrospectivity to any

          delegated legislation when the parent Act did not give

          any    indication in   that behalf and   that the   final

          assessment could have altered the basis in the same

          financial year and not otherwise.
(F) Mr. Abhishek Bharti, learned counsel relied upon the

          decision of this Court in
State of Himachal Pradesh &

          Ors. vs. Nurpur Private Bus Operators’ Union &

          Ors.11, Mr. Shikhil Suri
, learned counsel who appeared

          for National Centre for Performing Arts and Tata Power

          Company Limited adopted the submissions of Dr. Milind

          Sathe and Mr. Darius Khambata, learned senior counsel.
Mr. Bhushan Deshmukh who appeared for the petitioner

          in SLP(C) No. 25689/2019, also adopted the submissions

          of Dr. Sathe and Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel.
Mr. Satish Muley, learned counsel appearing for a

11 (1999) 9 SCC 559.
61
subsequent purchaser, also adopted the submissions of

        Dr. Sathe and Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel.
24. Mr.    V.   Sreedharan,   learned   senior   counsel     for   the

Corporation made submissions in rejoinder. He also submitted

that the overall tax demand of the Corporation under the capital

value assessment actually decreased by 12% to Rs.2908 crores

as compared to Rs.3308 crores under the Relatable Value

System. The tax demand for residential units got reduced from

Rs.1030 crores to Rs.949 crores while that for the Offices and

Banks was reduced from Rs.979 crores to Rs.65 crores and from

Rs.342 crores to Rs.222 crores respectively. Thus, according to

the Corporation, under the new system only 32.20% units

suffered an increase while 21.95 % of the units actually got

benefitted as a result of reduction in the property taxes.
25. We will first deal with the submission that any proposal for

change or modification in the methodology adopted for levy of

property tax ought to have been initiated through the Finance

Commission alone.
Article 243Y
of the Constitution deals with

constitution of Finance Commission whose principal duty is to

review the financial position of the municipalities and to make
62
recommendations to the Governor as to the relevant principles

which should govern distribution of the net proceeds of the taxes

and the measures needed to improve the financial position of the

municipalities.
In Campaign for People Participation in
Development Planning vs. Lieutenant Governor of NCT of

Delhi & Ors.12
, a Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi had

the occasion to consider the scope of
Article 243Y
of the

Constitution. It was observed: ­

          “14.
Article 243I
of the Constitution of India mandates
          constitution of a Finance Commission by the Governors of
          the States at the expiration of every 5th year.
Article
          243Y
further mandates that the Finance Commission
          constituted under
Article 243I
shall also review the
          financial position of the municipalities and make
          recommendations to the Governors as to the various
          aspects specified therein. As per Clause (2) of
Article 243Y
,
          the Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
          the Finance Commission under the said Article together
          with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
          thereon to be laid before the legislature of the State.”
26. It is true that certain functions are entrusted to the

Finance Commission and the recommendations made by the

Finance Commission must carry great weightage. However, the

matter has to be seen from the perspective: whether any

“measures needed to improve the financial position of the

municipalities”        must     necessarily       emanate       from      the

12 (2016) SCC Online Del 80
63
recommendations of the Finance Commission. Sub­Article (2)

contemplates that the recommendations made by the Finance

Commission along with the explanatory memorandum as to the

action taken thereon must be laid before the Legislature of the

State.   Thus, it is the Legislature of the State which will

ultimately take an appropriate action with respect to the

recommendations made by the Finance Commission and the

papers placed before it. If the Legislature itself has taken into

account certain prevailing situation, which according to the

Legislature is causing some prejudice to the financial health and

condition of the municipalities and, therefore, the method of

imposition of property tax ought to be changed, it cannot then

be said that the matter must necessarily and ought to have

emanated from the Finance Commission or that in the absence

of such recommendations by the Finance Commission, no steps

could have been taken by the Legislature.
27.
Article 243X
of the Constitution states that the Legislature

of a State may by law authorize a municipality to levy, collect

and appropriate such taxes etc. in accordance with such

procedure and subject to such limits as may be specified in law.
The exercise undertaken by the Legislature in the instant case is
64
completely consistent with the empowerment relatable to
Article

243X
of the Constitution and does not in any way go counter to

said empowerment.
28. Coming to the effect and scope of the statutory provisions,

it must be stated that
Sections 123
to
128
of the MMC Act deal

with accounts and annual budget estimates.       With the fixed

parameters and scope of taxation, as well as, the elements that

can be covered by levy of such taxes, depending upon the

annual budget estimates, the rates of municipal taxes, fares and

charges can certainly be fixed in terms of
Section 128
of the

MMC Act. In such cases, the width of the tax regime is already

decided and the rates of taxes would be dependent upon the

annual estimates.    What the present amendments seek to

achieve is to change the methodology on the basis of which

property tax can be levied.     Instead of rateable value, the

property tax can now be levied going by the capital value. Such

exercise could not have been undertaken through the process of

annual estimates and in terms of
Sections 120
,
123
,
125
and
128
of the MMC Act. All that could be done under these

provisions would be to vary or change the rates and not the very
65
basis of taxation. The submission in that behalf, therefore, does

not merit acceptance.
29. We now turn to the scheme relating to property tax as is

discernable from the provisions of the
MMC Act
.
Section 139
deals with taxes including property taxes that can be imposed.
Section 139A
deals with the kinds of property taxes while
Section 140
deals with the per centum of their rateable value or

the capital value as the case may be.
Section 140A
enables the

Corporation to adopt levy of property tax on the basis of Capital

Value of buildings and lands and puts a cap in the proviso to

sub­section (1).
Section 154
then deals with how rateable value

and capital value are to be determined. Sub­section (1) deals

with rateable value while sub­section (1A), (1B) and (1C) deal

with capital value. The first part of
Section 154(IA)
contemplates

that the value indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for

the time being in force, would be the “base value.” According to

the second part, if such ready reckoner value is not available,

the market value can be taken into account while arriving at a

base value. According to the provision, while fixing the capital

value, the Commissioner “shall have regard” to the factors

enumerated in sub­clauses (a) to (e). Thus, the factors on the
66
basis of which capital value can be arrived at are delineated in

sub­clauses (a) to (e) of sub­section (1A) of
Section 154
. While

sub­clause (a) to (d) are clear and well defined, sub­clause (e)

refers to the factors as may be specified by rules under sub­

section (1B).    Said sub­section (1B) in turn authorizes the

Commissioner, to frame such rules, with the approval of the

Standing Committee as respects details of categories of building

or land and the weightage by multiplication to be assigned to

various such factors and categories for the purpose of fixing the

capital value.
30.
Section 154(1A)
of the MMC Act is the crucial provision for

the present discussion. The opening part of sub­Section (1A)

states that in order to fix the capital value of any building or

land assessable to property tax, regard shall be had to the value

of any building or land as indicated in the SDRR for the time

being in force. The value so indicated in SDRR is to be the base

value to which certain factors delineated in clauses (a) to (e) of

sub­Section (1A) are to be applied while fixing the capital value.
Clauses (a) to (d) are physical features or attributes of the land

or building which are in existence when the value is to be

reckoned. In essence, as submitted by Mr. Khambata, learned
67
senior counsel, these attributes are situations “in praesenti”.
The buildable potential of the land in future is not an attribute

“in praesenti” but is in the nature of likelihood of user or

exploitation of the asset “in futuro”.
31. The crucial question is: whether such potential of the land

or the likelihood of exploitation in future can also be taken into

consideration while fixing the capital value in terms of sub­

Section (1A), especially when none of the factors delineated in

clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) speaks of future prospects or such

likelihood?
32. At this stage, we may deal with two decisions of this Court

having bearing on the controversy before us.
(A) It was observed in Patel Gordhandas4 that the

              statutory provision did not contemplate levying of the

              rates as a percentage of capital value. The relevant

              portion of Paragraph 34 of the decision was:
“34. ….
..… We are therefore of opinion that though
                   mathematically it may be possible to arrive at the
                   same figure of the actual tax to be paid as a rate
                   whether based on capital value or based on
                   annual value, the levying of the rate as a
                   percentage of capital value would still be illegal
                   for the reason that the law provides that it
68
should be levied on the annual value and not
          otherwise. By levying it otherwise directly at a
          percentage of the capital value, the real incidence
          of the rate is camouflaged, and the electorate not
          knowing the true incidence of the tax may
          possibly be subjected to such a heavy incidence
          as in some cases may amount to confiscatory
          taxation. We are therefore of opinion that fixing
          of the rate at a percentage of the capital value is
          not permitted by the Act and therefore R. 350­A
          read with R. 243 which permits this must be
          struck down, even though mathematically it may
          be possible to arrive at the same actual tax by
          varying percentages in the case of capital value
          and in the case of annual value...”
                                        (emphasis supplied)


(B) In Polychem Ltd.9, a part of the land was being

   constructed upon while the rest was lying vacant.
The Assessor divided the plot notionally into two

   parts – one, which was being built upon and the

   other which was lying vacant. One of the questions

   was:     whether      during     the    period     when      the

   construction was going on and was not completed,

   what     should     be   the    approach?      The    following

   observations are noteworthy:
“12. The principles upon which lands are rated
          in this country have been practically settled by
          the decisions of this Court. But, no case was
          brought to our notice in which an application of
          these principles to land upon which a building
          was being constructed was involved. In other
          words, no case was cited by any party in which
          the doctrine of sterility, as indicated above, was
          invoked. We will, however, glance at the cases
          cited before deciding the question raised before
          us.
69
xxx          xxx         xxx
22. The abovementioned authorities of this
Court, which were cited before us, enable us to
hold that the mode of assessment in every case
must be directed towards finding out the annual
letting value of land which is the basis of rating
of land, and, by definition, “land” includes land
which is either being built upon or has been
built upon. Nevertheless, a reference to the
provisions of the Act shows that, after a building
has been completed, the letting value of the
building, which becomes part of land, will be the
primary or determining factor in fixing the
annual rent for which the land which has been
built upon “might reasonably be expected to be
let from year to year”. All that
Section 154
seems
to contemplate, by mentioning “land or building”,
is that land which is vacant or which has not
been built upon may be treated, for purposes of
valuation, on a different footing from land which
has actually been built upon. But, relevant
provisions of the Act do not mention and seem to
take no account, for purposes of rating, of any
building which is only in the course of being
constructed although
Section 3(r)
of the Act
makes it clear that land which is being built
upon is also “land”. Hence, so long as a building
is not completed or constructed to such an
extent that atleast a partial completion notice
can be given so that the completed portion can
be occupied and let, the land can, for purposes
of rating, be equated with or treated as vacant
land. It is only when the building which is being
put up is in such a state that it is actually and
legally capable of occupation that the letting
value of the building can enter into the
computation        for    rating     “Rebus     sic
Stantibus”. Although, the definition of land,
which is rateable, covers three kinds of “land”,
yet, for the purposes of rating
Section 154
recognises only two categories. Therefore, all
“land” must fall in one of these two categories for
purposes of rating and not outside.”
                                (emphasis supplied)
70
33. Both the decisions were rendered in the regime when the

property tax could be levied on rateable value.      In the first

decision, it was found that fixing of the rate at a percentage of

the capital value was not a modality permitted by the Act and,

therefore, Rules 350­A read with Rule 243, which permitted

such exercise, were struck down. Therefore, to the extent the

rules went beyond the statutory import and extent, the

transgression was not accepted by this Court.     In the second

decision, it was held that so long as the building was not

completed and ready for occupation, the land in question for the

purposes of rating must be equated with and treated as “vacant

land”.   In the second decision, the construction was actually

going on but the building was not ready. The conclusion from

the second decision is quite clear that unless and until the

building was ready to be occupied, the land must be treated as

vacant land. Notably, the second decision was premised on the

methodology where the rateable value was the determining

criteria. Therefore, so long as the building could not be let out

in open market, the land would continue to be treated as “vacant

land”.
71
34. However, after the amendments, the emphasis has now

changed and the basis for taxation is now to be capital value of

land   and building.     Capital value again can have two

dimensions.   First, the value of land or building as it stands

today or secondly, the value as may be in future as per

anticipated development. However, the legislative intent, as is

clear from clauses (a) to (d), is about actual status and user as

on the date the capital value is to be reckoned or considered.
These clauses clearly show that the features contemplated

therein must be in existence as on such date and not what

would be the projection in future.
35. There are two ways in which sub­clause (e) of sub­Section

(1A) of
Section 154
can be construed.     In the first case, said

clause can be read ejusdem generis along with sub­clauses (a) to
(d), in which event the scope of any rules to be made in terms of

power granted by sub­clause (e) read with sub­Section (1B),

would be relatable to the factors actually in existence and not as

something contemplated in future.     On the other hand, if the

clause is read independently, there is nothing in clause (e) or in

the language of sub­Section (1B) that the future prospects of the

land in question could be reckoned or noted for arriving at the
72
capital value. The conclusion is thus quite clear that the width

of clauses (a) to (e) read with sub­Section (1B) do not by any

stretch of imagination contemplate taking into account the

future prospects of the land in question.
36. Viewed thus, the conclusion arrived at by the High Court

on the second and third grounds, as stated in paragraph 15

(supra) are quite correct.       We, therefore, hold that the

empowerment in terms of clauses (a) to (e) read with sub­Section

(1B) or the conferral of rule­making power would not permit the

Corporation to determine the capital value beyond the scope of

said clauses (a) to (e).   Thus, for the purpose of determining

capital value, only the present physical attributes and status of

the land and building can be considered and not the future

prospects of the land.
37. At this stage, we may consider the scope of Rule 20 of the

Capital Value Rules of 2010 and the Capital Value Rules of

2015.   The said Rule refers to the Ready Reckoner which

provides for the rate of base value of open land with 1 (one) floor

space index.    However, the open land in question may be

capable of utilizing more than 1 (one) floor space index, for
73
instance in certain areas the floor space index may be 1.5 or 2.
Such component i.e. the capability of the land in question in

utilizing more then 1 (one) floor space index is a postulate which

is sought to be reckoned by Rule 20. The second component to

be added in terms of Rule 20 is the intended or proposed

utilization of Transfer of Development right which has been

approved under the building plan submitted for approval.
Nonetheless, this component is the intended use or exploitation

in future and not something which is available in presenti.
38. To the extent Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010

and the Capital Value Rules of 2015 empower the Commissioner

to consider the capability of the open land of utilizing more than

1 floor space index (FSI) or any transfer of development right

(TDR), would go well beyond the permissible scope delineated by

the provisions of
Section 154
of the MMC Act. The High Court,

in our view, was, therefore, right in concluding that Rule 20 of

the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and the Capital Value Rules of

2015 would be ultra vires the provisions of sub­Sections (1A) and

(1B) of
Section 154
of the MMC Act.
74
39. We now turn to the issue regarding retrospectivity of the

Capital Value Rules of 2010. The factual narration relied upon

by the learned counsel for the Corporation does show that the

preparatory steps were being undertaken since 2010 with the

appointment of an expert committee and publication of draft

rules. It appears that the Corporation had to collect voluminous

data. But in order to enable the Corporation to compute or levy

property tax based on capital value, the concerned rules had to

be in force. There being no empowerment to compute and/or

levy property tax with retrospective effect by the statute itself,

the rule making power, in any view of the matter, could not have

created a liability pertaining to the period well before the Rules

came into effect. The first ground as set out in paragraph 15

(supra) was, therefore, rightly answered by the High Court

against the Corporation. Logically, the Rules having come into

force on 20.3.2012, the levy and computation of property tax on

capital value would be available and possible on and with effect

from 20.3.2012 and not with any retrospective operation.
40. The question then arises as to what would be the scope

and extent of the present property tax regime. It is quite clear

that with the amendment to
Section 154
and other provisions,
75
the property tax can be levied on the basis of capital value of the

land or building. To that extent, there would be departure from

the regime which was in existence when Patel Gordhandas4

and Polychem Ltd.9 were decided by this Court.              Now, the

statute certainly empowers and contemplates imposition of

property tax on the capital value.     However, the capital value

must be one which answers the postulates in sub­clauses (a) to
(e) of sub­Section (1A) read with sub­Section (1B) of
Section 154
.
At the cost of repetition, we may say that since the statutory

provisions do not contemplate any likelihood of exploitation of

capacity in future, the capital value of the land and building

must be based on situation “in presenti”.     It must be clarified

here that in projects which are in progress, the value addition to

the property would be ongoing feature.      However, considering

clauses (a) to (d), it would mean that the governing principle

must be the actual use and not the intended use in future.
41. In   the   circumstances,    the   challenge   raised    by   the

Corporation must fail and we dismiss the appeal preferred by

the Corporation.
76
42. We now turn to the challenges raised by the original writ

petitioners.   Those challenges on various grounds as detailed

hereinabove including the grounds of legislative competence;
validity of certain provisions and basis of alleged violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution, were considered by the High Court

in extenso. We do not find any reason or room to take a different

view. We, therefore, affirm the view and dismiss the challenge.
Consequently, the appeals preferred by the original writ

petitioners are dismissed.
43.   These appeals are disposed of in aforesaid terms without

any order as to costs.
……………………………..CJI.
[Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                     ………………………………..J.
                                            [Ajay Rastogi]
New Delhi;
November 07, 2022.