[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd. vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 17 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8260 OF 2022


         M/s Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.                                 …Appellant


                                    Versus


         The Commissioner of Income Tax & Another                       …Respondents




                                                JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order dated 25.02.2014 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at

         Bengaluru in Income Tax Appeal No. 623/2007, by which the High Court

         has allowed the said appeal preferred by the Revenue, the assessee

         has preferred the present appeal.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.11.17
17:01:11 IST
Reason:
2.              The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
1
That the appellant – assessee is having a manufacturing unit at

Pune in which the appellant – assessee is manufacturing ‘polyurethane

foam,’ which is ultimately used as automobile seat. The assessee filed

its return of income for the assessment year 2003-04 and claimed

deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the Income Tax Act (for short, ‘
IT Act
’).

The assessing officer disallowed the deduction under
Section 80-IB
of

the IT Act by observing that the nature of the business of the assessee is

“manufacturer of polyurethane foam seats” which falls under entry 25 to

the
Eleventh Schedule of the IT Act
and therefore the assessee shall not

be entitled to deduction under
Section 80-IB
. However, it was the case

on behalf of the assessee that different sizes of polyurethane foam are

used as automobile seats and therefore the end product can be said to

be the automobile seat which is different than the polyurethane foam and

therefore the same does not fall under entry 25 to the
Eleventh Schedule

of the IT Act
. However, the assessing officer did not accept the same by

observing that as ‘polyurethane foam’ is made of Polyol and Isocyanate

and other components, the deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act

cannot be given to the assessee-company as
Section 80-IB(2)(iii)
states

that the benefit of deduction under the said section cannot be given if the

assessee manufactures or produces any article or thing specified in the

list in the
Eleventh Schedule of the IT Act
.
2
2.1   The assessee preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of

Income Tax (Appeals) (for short, ‘CIT(A)) against the assessment order.
The CIT(A) upheld the order of the assessing officer.        The CIT(A)

observed that the two chemicals, namely, Polyol and Isocyanate used in

the manufacture of polyurethane foam seats assemblies were the basic

ingredients of polyurethane foam and therefore the case would squarely

fall in what is specified in the Eleventh Schedule.
2.2   Against the order of the CIT(A), the Assessee filed an appeal

before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘ITAT’). The ITAT set

aside the assessment order as well as the order passed by the CIT(A)

and allowed the appeal filed by the assessee by observing that

polyurethane foam was neither produced as a final product nor is an

intermediate product nor is a by-product by the assessee and the same

was used as automobile seat and therefore does not fall within entry 25

to
Eleventh Schedule of the IT Act
and therefore the assessee shall be

entitled to claim deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act. The order

passed by the ITAT has been set aside by the High Court, by the

impugned judgment and order specifically observing that what is

manufactured by the assessee is polyurethane foam in different

sizes/designs and there is no further process undertaken by the

assessee to convert it into automobile seats and therefore what is
3
manufactured by the assessee is polyurethane foam falling in entry 25 to

Eleventh Schedule and therefore the assessee shall not be entitled to

deduction claimed under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act. Consequently, the

High Court has allowed the appeal preferred by the revenue and has

quashed and set aside the order passed by the ITAT and has restored

the assessment order denying the deduction claimed under Section 80-

IB of the IT Act. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court is the subject matter of present appeal.
3.    Shri Preetesh Kapur, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on

behalf of the assessee and Shri Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor

General of India has appeared on behalf of the revenue.

3.1   Shri Preetesh Kapur, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

assessee has vehemently submitted that when on appreciation of the

entire evidence on record and after considering the process undertaken

by the assessee and after considering the fact that the end product was

automobile seat, the ITAT allowed the appeal and held that the assessee

is entitled to claim deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act, the same

was not required to be interfered with by the High Court.

3.2   It is submitted that the relevant pre-condition for the assessee to

be eligible for the benefit under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act in the present

case is that the final product manufactured and sold by the assessee
4
ought not to have an article classifiable in the Eleventh Schedule. It is

submitted that the final product manufactured by the assessee is not

polyurethane foam, but automobile seat in which polyurethane foam is

used. It is submitted that the learned ITAT returned a categorical finding

of fact that the final product manufactured by the assessee is automobile

seat in which polyurethane foam is used. It is submitted that if that be

so, the manufactured item shall not come within any of the entry of

Eleventh Schedule and therefore the assessee shall be entitled to

deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act.
3.3    It is submitted that in fact the assessee received orders for supply

of automobile seats and even paid the sales tax as automobile seats. It

is submitted that the final product is commercially distinct from

polyurethane foam.
3.4    It is submitted that the High Court ought to have appreciated that

in fact in assessee’s own case in respect of the very same product, in

relation to classification for the purposes of payment of excise duty, the

CEGAT has observed that the product manufactured by the assessee

can never be said to be known in trade parlance as articles of

polyurethane foam and hence cannot be classified as polyurethane

foam. It is submitted that the order passed by the CEGAT had attained

finality.   It is submitted that therefore once the articles/goods
5
manufactured cannot be classified as polyurethane foam under the
Excise Act
, the same cannot be treated and/or considered as

polyurethane foam under the
IT Act
.
3.5   It is submitted that in the present case the Tribunal noted in detail

the elaborate manufacturing process undertaken by the assessee

whereby the final product, namely, car seats are manufactured. It is

submitted that after elaborating the process, the Tribunal has returned a

finding of fact that the said process clearly results in the emergence of a

final product which is commercially distinct and different from

polyurethane foam and is known in the market as car seats and not as

polyurethane foam.
3.6   It is submitted that the High Court has reversed the decision of the

ITAT without even noticing the above process or the CEGAT’s order and

also without giving any reason as to how the above finding of fact was

perverse. It is submitted that at no stage the department has denied that

the final product sold by the assessee is the car seat.

3.6   It is further submitted that it is a settled position of law that the

moment a commercially distinct commodity, known in trade parlance by

a different name and having a different use, comes into being, it ceases

to be classifiable as the raw material/ingredient from which it is made.
6
3.7   It is further submitted by Shri Preetesh Kapur, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the assessee that entry 25 of Eleventh Schedule

specifically talks about “latex foam sponge and polyurethane foam” and

it does not talk about the “latex foam sponge and polyurethane foam

preparations” and/or items and/or articles made from the aforesaid foam.

It is submitted that whenever the legislature wanted, there is a specific

entry like entry 2 and 3 in which it is specifically mentioned “tobacco and

tobacco preparations and cosmetics and toilet preparations”.          It is

submitted therefore that when the final product is automobile seat and

the polyurethane foam loses its characteristics which is used as

ingredient, the assessee shall be entitled to deduction under Section 80-

IB of the IT Act.
3.8   Making the above submissions and relying upon the decisions of

this Court in the cases of Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras v.

Vinbros and Company, (
2015) 14 SCC 483 and Commissioner of

Income Tax-I, Mumbai v. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
,

(2017) 15 SCC 254, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
4.    Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the revenue

has vehemently submitted that what is manufactured by the assessee is

polyurethane foam in different shapes/designs and what is sold is

different sizes/designs of polyurethane foam which ultimately is being
7
used    by    the   assembly   operator    for   manufacturing    of     car

seats/automobile seats and the same is used as ingredient and after the

process of moulding etc., the seats are manufactured. It is submitted

that therefore, by no stretch of imagination, it can be said that the

assessee is manufacturing and selling automobile seats. It is submitted

that what is manufactured and sold is the polyurethane foam which is

manufactured by using two chemicals Polyol and Isocyanate.

4.1    It is submitted that the High Court has specifically observed and

held   that   except   manufacture of     polyurethane   foam    which    is

manufactured by injecting two chemicals, there is no further process

undertaken by the assessee. It is submitted that as rightly observed by

the High Court the assessee produces the polyurethane foam seats

which are used for making end product to be fixed in different vehicles.

It is submitted that the assessee as such is not manufacturing the end

product, namely, automobile seats to be fixed in the vehicles. For the

aforesaid, Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG has taken us to the findings

recorded by the CIT(A) and has submitted that after considering the

detailed process undertaken by the assessee, the CIT(A) opined that the

assessee is not the manufacturer of the car seats and what is

manufactured is the polyurethane foam which is being sold in different

designs/shapes/sizes.
8
4.2   It is submitted that therefore as the assessee is manufacturing

polyurethane foam which falls under entry 25 of the Eleventh Schedule

and therefore considering
Section 80-IB(2)(iii)
, the assessee shall not be

entitled to deduction under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act. It is submitted

that therefore the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court is not required to be interfered with.
5.    We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at

length.
6.    The short question which is posed for the consideration of this

Court is, “whether the assessee is eligible for the benefit under
Section

80-IB
of the IT Act?”
7.    The assessee shall not be eligible for the benefit under Section 80-

IB of the IT Act if it is found that the articles and/or goods manufactured

by the assessee do not fall and/or classifiable under Eleventh Schedule.

According to the revenue, the assessee is manufacturing polyurethane

foam which falls under the Eleventh Schedule. However, it is the case

on behalf of the assessee that the final product manufactured and sold

by the assessee is automobile seats/car seats which is other than the

manufacture of polyurethane foam.
8.    By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has

specifically observed and held that what is manufactured and sold by the
9
assessee is polyurethane foam which is manufactured by injecting two

chemicals, namely, Polyol and Isocyanate and the polyurethane foam

which is manufactured by the assessee is used as ingredient for

manufacture of automobile seats.        The assessee is manufacturing

polyurethane foam and supplying the same in different sizes/designs to

the assembly operator, which ultimately is being used for car seats. The

assessee is not undertaking any further process for end product, namely,

car seats.   The polyurethane foam which is supplied in different

designs/sizes is being used as ingredient by others, namely, assembly

operators for the car seats. Merely because the assessee is using the

chemicals and ultimately what is manufactured is polyurethane foam and

the same is used by assembly operators after the process of moulding

as car seats, it cannot be said that the end product manufactured by the

assessee is car seats/automobile seats.       There must be a further

process to be undertaken by the very assessee in manufacturing of the

car seats. No further process seems to have been undertaken by the

assessee except supplying/selling the polyurethane foam in different

sizes/designs/shapes which may be ultimately used for end product by

others as car seats/automobile seats.
9.   So far as the reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court in

the cases of Vinbros and Company (supra) and
Hindustan
10
Petroleum Corporation Limited
(supra), relied upon by the learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee is concerned, the same

shall not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand and/or the same

shall not be of any assistance to the assessee in view of the findings

recorded hereinabove.
10.   In view of the above when the articles/goods which are

manufactured by the assessee, namely, polyurethane foam is an article

classifiable in the Eleventh Schedule (entry 25), considering
Section 80-
IB(2)(iii), the assessee shall not be entitled to the benefit under
Section

80-IB
of the IT Act. The High Court has rightly held so and has rightly set

aside the order passed by the ITAT and has rightly restored the order

passed by the assessing officer denying the deduction/benefit claimed

under
Section 80-IB
of the IT Act. We are in complete agreement with

the view taken by the High Court and that of the assessing officer,

confirmed by the CIT(Appeals).
11.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present

appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly

dismissed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]

NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
November 17, 2022.                 [M.M. SUNDRESH]
11