[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Amy Mehta vs State Of Karnataka on 17 November, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
M. R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1981 OF 2022


         Amy Mehta                                                 ..Appellant(S)

                                               Versus

         State of Karnataka & Anr.                               ..Respondent(S)



                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 10.06.2022 passed by the High

                         Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal Petition No.

                         3492/2022, by which, the High Court has released

                         respondent No. 2 herein on bail in connection with an

                         FIR/Crime No. 8/2022 registered with Laxmipura Police

                         Station, Mysuru City for the offences punishable under
Sections 376
,
354
,
328
and
120B
of IPC, the original
Signature Not Verified
informant/complainant/prosecutrix/victim has preferred
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.11.17
17:01:10 IST
Reason:
the present appeal.
1
2.    We have heard Ms. Jayna Kothari, learned Senior Advocate

      appearing on behalf of the appellant, Shri Shubhranshu

      Padhi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State

      and Dr. Aditya Sondhi, learned Senior Advocate appearing

      on behalf of respondent No. 2 – accused. We have gone

      through and perused the impugned judgment and order

      passed by the High Court releasing respondent No. 2 on

      bail.
2.1   From the impugned judgment and order passed by the

      High Court, it appears that what has weighed with the

      High Court is that the complaint was filed after five days

      and the allegations that the accused had mixed some

      substance in the drinks that made her lose consciousness

      and thereafter, he committed the offence on intoxicating

      her and subjected her to the sexual act, is a matter of trial

      and that the accused is in custody from 11.02.2022 and

      there is no need of further custodial trial. The relevant

      observations made in paragraph 6 of the impugned order

      while releasing respondent No. 2 – accused on bail are as

      under: ­
2
“6. Having heard the respective counsel
          appearing for the parties and also on perusal of
          the material available on record, the Court has
          to take note of the contents of the allegations
          and also the complaint is filed after five days,
          wherein an allegation is made that this
          petitioner mixed some substance in the drinks
          to loose her conscious and thereafter he
          committed the offence and the fact that both of
          them went to Bopy’s Bar & Restaurant in order
          to take food and also had alcohol. Having taken
          note of the said fact into consideration whether
          intoxicating her subjected her to sexual act is a
          matter of trial and this petitioner is in custody
          from 11.02.2022 and no need of further
          custodial trial. Hence, it is a fit case to exercise
          the powers under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C., subject
          to imposing certain conditions to protect and
          safeguard the interest of the prosecution.”


2.2   However, the High Court has failed to appreciate the

      allegations in the FIR that immediately on the occurrence,

      when the prosecutrix/victim regained consciousness, she

      first went to the hospital and thereafter, tried to lodge the

      FIR but no complaint was taken. In a case like this, the

      High Court has not properly appreciated the fact that there

      could have been some delay (though in the present case, it

      may not be said that there was any inordinate delay in

      lodging the FIR) as sometime could have been consumed

      for the victim/prosecutrix to get out of the shock. Even the
3
said aspect is required to be considered at the time of the

      trial.
2.3   Even otherwise, from the reasoning given, it appears that

      the High Court has not at all considered the seriousness of

      the allegations and the gravity of the offences alleged

      against the accused. It is reported that the chargesheet

      has already been filed. So, whatever material has been

      collected during the investigation was required to be

      considered by the High Court while considering the

      application under
Section 439
of Cr.PC.



2.4   Even the observation that there is no need of further

      custodial trial is also not relevant aspect while considering

      the bail application under
Section 439
of Cr.P.C.        The

      same may have some relevance while considering the

      application for anticipatory bail.
2.5   Having regard to the fact that while releasing respondent

      No. 2 – accused on bail the High Court has not taken into

      consideration the relevant aspects which are required to be

      kept in mind while considering the bail application,
4
namely, seriousness of the offence alleged; material

     collected   during   the   investigation;   statement   of   the

     prosecutrix recorded under
Section 161
of Cr.PC, etc., the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is

     unsustainable. Considering the fact that the chargesheet

     has already been filed, the accused is already charge­

     sheeted and the relevant material is also now a part of the

     chargesheet, the same is required to be considered by the

     High Court. Therefore, the matter ought to be remitted to

     the High Court to consider the bail application afresh and

     pass appropriate orders after considering the relevant

     material/evidence collected during the investigation which

     are now a part of the chargesheet.
3.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present Appeal Succeeds. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court releasing respondent No. 2

     – accused on bail, deserves to be quashed and set aside

     and is accordingly quashed and set aside. The matter is

     remitted to the High Court to decide the bail application

     afresh in accordance with law and on its own merits after
5
perusing    the   material/evidence     collected   during   the

     investigation which are now a part of the chargesheet and

     upon taking into consideration the relevant aspects which

     are required to be kept in mind while examining the prayer

     for bail.
4.   As the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

     Court releasing respondent No. 2 – accused on bail has

     been set aside, respondent No. 2 – accused is directed to

     surrender before the concerned Court/Jail Authority

     within a period of one week from today and only thereafter,

     the High Court shall decide and dispose of the bail

     application   afresh,   as   observed   hereinabove,    at   the

     earliest. With this, the present appeal is allowed.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)



                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (HIMA KOHLI)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 17, 2022.
6