[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
V.P.Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 24 November, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 1326



                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2103/2010

           V.P.SINGH ETC.                                                 Appellant(s)

                                                      VERSUS

           THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                                     Respondent(s)

                                                      WITH

                                             Crl. A. No. 2104/2010

                                             Crl. A. No. 2105/2010


                                                   O R D E R
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
The criminal justice system of ours can itself be

                            a punishment! It is exactly what has happened in this

                            case. 14 years on an issue of abetment of suicide in an

                            episode where a student was reprimanded for misconduct

                            in the College and on endeavor to take disciplinary

                            action and call the father, though the parent did not

                            turn up and subsequently the child committed suicide. An

                            unfortunate situation! However, we are concerned with

                            the issue whether there is any element of an abetment to
Signature Not Verified
suicide in the present case which was at the threshold
Digitally signed by
RASHMI DHYANI
Date: 2022.11.28
17:20:21 IST
Reason:
of charges having been framed.
1
On 16.4.2008, the deceased viz. Mr. Gaurav Wahi

was attending the last lecture under Mr. Nitin Shyam,

one of the accused, and is alleged to have misbehaved

with him in the class under the influence of alcohol.

When Mr. Shyam asked Mr. Gaurav to leave the class, he

ran out of the class. This incident was reported by Mr.

Nitin Shyam to Mr. Sarabjit Singh, the acting Head of

the Department. The incident was reported in writing by

Mr. Nitin Shyam on the next date i.e. 17.4.2008 to the

then    Head     of       the   Department.        An    order     was   passed

suspending the deceased from the class and calling upon

him to call his parents as an exercise of legitimate

disciplinary action.
To redeem himself, Mr. Gaurav Wahi, the deceased

wrote a letter of apology to the Head of the Department

on 21.4.2008 in a way accepting the incident but denying

that    he     was    under       the       influence        of   alcohol.    On

23.4.2008,      the       Principal,        Mr.   V.    P.   Singh   issued   a

notice whereby he directed action against two students

including the deceased in separate incidents calling for

a security amount of Rs.10,000/- to be deposited with

the    College       as     security        deposit     as    a   disciplinary

exercise and to bring the parents to the office. This
2
deposit was to be refunded at the end of completion of

course.
Unfortunately the deceased, instead of complying

with the disciplinary action, chose to take his own life

by jumping in the canal. Before doing so, he sent an SMS

to his brother viz. Mr. Himmat Wahi. The purport of the

message when translated into English and even read in

the original language, was an intimation that he was

jumping into the deep side of the river. He stated that

amongst all, he loved his mother the most and wanted his

father not to be troubled. The obvious purport of this

is that while he was closest to his mother, he sought to

anticipate that his father may be blamed for the episode

and that the father should not be troubled by it.
On the complaint of the father, an FIR No.62 of

2008 was registered at P.S. Sardar Rupnagar District,

Punjab on 29.4.2008 under
Section 306
of Indian Penal

Code (
IPC
) on the complaint that the said suicide was

instigated by the three accused i.e. the teacher, the

Head of the Department and the Principal.
It   is   interesting   to   note   that   on   the   bail
3
application    on   06.8.2008,       one   of   the   factors   which

weighed with the High Court while granting bail was that

the conduct could not be construed to make the accused

liable for offence under
Section 306
of IPC as it was to

ensure discipline in the class and the campus and even

if the teachers are stated to be acting harshly, it

could not be said that they wanted to incite, urge or

provoke the deceased to commit suicide.
On investigation the charge sheet was filed on

13.9.2008     and   charges   were         framed     on   16.4.2009.

Aggrieved by the said order, three accused preferred

criminal revision petition before the High Court which

was dismissed on 30.4.2009 with a cryptic order only

stating that the proceedings were at an early stage and

did not call for any interference.
The present appeals were preferred assailing that

order and interim stay was granted at the threshold. The

trial of course naturally did not proceed in view of the

stay by this Court. The matter has rested at that for

the last thirteen years!



     In the present appeal proceedings, the appellants
4
were called upon to file the complete records of the

trial Court proceedings vide order dated 26.9.2019 which

has been accordingly filed.
We     have    heard    learned    counsel      for   parties    and

examined the record.
If we turn to the complaint, the charge sheet is

simply    an   incorporation      of    what   the   complainant      has

said. It is the say of the father, complainant (who was

certainly not present to witness what happened) that

some students were causing the noise and it was not the

son/deceased. The son stated that he was not at fault

but he was shouted at by Mr. Nitin Shyam to go out of

the classroom. The deceased did so and closed the door.

It is alleged that thereafter Mr. Nitin Shyam ran after

the son and caught hold of him by the arm and dragged

him towards the office of the Head of the Department. On

the next day i.e. 17.4.2008, when the deceased went to

college, he found the notice to him pasted on their

notice board recording that he had been suspended and

calling upon his parents, failing which, he will not be

permitted      to   appear   in   the   examination.       He   was   not

permitted to enter the classroom on 17.4.2008 and even
5
on making a grievance to the Head of the Department, he

did not succeed as he was threatened to spoil his career

but on meeting Mr. Nitin Shyam, he was turned away and

also stated that if he were to die, it would not bother

him.   Since     nothing   happened   for   the   next   few   days

despite the best endeavour of the deceased, he committed

suicide.
On perusal of the charge sheet, it was found that

there is no other independent witness whose statement

was recorded or who is cited as a witness to the actual

incident. In view of the letter exchanged including his

apology letter, it is quite obvious that the complaint

has embellishments and endeavour to make out a case of

abetment of suicide. If one may say, on even reading of

the charge sheet, on the basis of the complaint as it

is, there is still no case made out for abetment of

suicide.
Learned    senior   counsel    for   the   appellants    has

relied inter alia on the judgment of this Court in
“S.

S. Chheena Vs. Vijay Kumar Mahajan and Anr.”
reported as

(2010) 12 SCC 190 more specifically paragraph 24 & 25.

The Court examined the matter in the conspectus of the
6
prevalent legal position in the Country. While suicide

by itself is not an offence but an attempt to suicide is

an   offence     under
Section    309
of    IPC.   The        Court

thereafter turned to the definition of abetment under
Section 107
of IPC which reads as under:-
“107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the
     doing of a thing, who—

     First.—Instigates any person to do that thing;
     or

     Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person
     or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of
     that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes
     place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in
     order to the doing of that thing; or

     Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act                      or
     illegal omission, the doing of that thing.

     Explanation   1.—A   person   who,   by   wilful
     misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a
     material fact which he is bound to disclose,
     voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to
     cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to
     instigate the doing of that thing”


      In   the     conspectus    of     the    different       judgments

referred to
in that case
it was opined that the words

“instigation”      and    “goading”     should      be   intention       to

provoke, incite or encourage the doing of an act by the

latter.    While   each    person’s     suicidability      pattern       is

different from others, each person has his own idea of

self-esteem      and     self-respect    and       therefore     it     was
7
difficult    to    lay   down   any   straightjacket   formula    in

dealing with such cases. In this context paragraph 25

reads as under:-
“25. Abetment involves a mental process of
     instigating a person or intentionally aiding a
     person in doing of a thing. Without a positive
     act on the part of the accused to instigate or
     aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be
     sustained. The intention of the legislature and
     the ratio of the cases decided by this Court is
     clear that in order to convict a person under
Section 306
IPC there has to be a clear mens rea
     to commit the offence. It also requires an
     active act or direct act which led the deceased
     to commit suicide seeing no option and that act
     must have been intended to push the deceased
     into such a position that he committed suicide.”


      Learned counsel has also referred to the judgment

in
“Sanju Alias Sanjay Singh Sengar Vs. State of M.P.”
reported as 2002 (5) SCC 371 to contend that the opinion

of this Court is that even where a person stated that

his death would not make any difference or that he could

go   and    die.   That    itself     would   not   amount   to   an

instigation in absence of mens rea.
One other judgment referred before us is in the

case of
“State of West Bengal Vs. Indrajit Kundu and

Ors.”
reported as 2019 (10) SCC 188 in which earlier

judgment in
“Ramesh Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh”
reported as (2001) 9 SCC 618 cited for approval setting
8
out the consideration of the scope of
section 306
and

ingredients which are essential for abetment as set out

in
Section   107
IPC.
While     interpreting   the     word

instigation it was observed in paragraph 20 of
Ramesh

Kumar
Case (Supra) as under:
“20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward,
     provoke, incite or encourage to do “an act”. To
     satisfy the requirement of instigation though
     it is not necessary that actual words must be
     used to that effect or what constitutes
     instigation must necessarily and specifically
     be suggestive of the consequence. Yet a
     reasonable certainty to incite the consequence
     must be capable of being spelt out. The present
     one is not a case where the accused had by his
     acts or omission or by a continued course of
     conduct created such circumstances that the
     deceased was left with no other option except
     to commit suicide in which case an instigation
     may have been inferred. A word uttered in the
     fit of anger or emotion without intending the
     consequences to actually follow cannot be said
     to be instigation.
In   fact   in
Indrajit      Kundu
case   (Supra)   the

judgment referred to us in
Sanju
case (supra) was once

again referred to where the husband and wife’s quarrel

resulted in the husband telling the wife “to go and die”

and the suicide was committed two days later, was not

said to have proximity to the quarrel even if stated in

the suicide note.
9
To examine the factual matrix in the present case,

in view of the aforesaid legal position, we find not an

iota of material on record even assuming the complete

charge   sheet   to   be   correct    which   could     lead   to   a

conviction in a case of abetment as there was absence of

the necessary ingredients to make the offence. While we

appreciate the anguish of a father who has lost a young

son, that cannot result in blaming the world (in the

present case, the institution and its teachers) for what

is a basic disciplinary action necessary for running the

institute. A contra position would create a lawless and

unmanageable situation in an educational institution.

The suicide note further shows that there is something

to be said about the relationship between the deceased

and his father where in fact the deceased thought that

his father could be blamed for the episode and thus

asked to not to trouble his father. The anguish of the

father ought not to have been converted into a case of

abetment of suicide and certainly the investigation and

the approach of the trial Court could have been more

realistic   keeping   in   mind     the   surrounding    facts   and

circumstances in which the suicide episode occurred.
We thus set aside the order framing charges dated
10
16.4.2009    and    impugned    order   of   the   High    Court

   sustaining the same and discharge the accused in respect

   of FIR No.62 of 2008.
The   appeals    are     accordingly   allowed      leaving

   parties to bear their own costs.
………………………………………………………J.
                                              (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)




                                           ………………………………………………………J.
                                                    (ABHAY S. OKA)

NEW DELHI
 24th November, 2022
11
ITEM NO.101                COURT NO.2                SECTION II-B

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                    Criminal Appeal No(s).    2103/2010

V.P.SINGH                                            Appellant(s)

                                 VERSUS

THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                           Respondent(s)


WITH

Crl.A. No. 2104/2010 (II-B)

Crl.A. No. 2105/2010 (II-B)


Date : 24-11-2022 These appeals were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ABHAY S. OKA

For Appellant(s)    Mr. Sudarshan Rajan, AOR
                    Mr. Mahesh Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Hitain Bajaj, Adv.
Mr. Rohit Bhardwaj, Adv.
Mr. P. S. Patwalia, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Saksham Maheshwari, Adv.
Mr. Jagjit Singh Chhabra, AOR
                    Mr. Manoj Rajpoot, Adv.
Petitioner-in-person


For Respondent(s)   Ms. Rooh-E-Hina Dua, AOR
                    Mr. Harshit K., Adv.
Mr. Prem Malhotra, AOR

                    Respondent-in-person
12
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

         The appeals are allowed in terms of the signed reportable
order.
Pending application(s) stand disposed of.
(RASHMI DHYANI PANT)                            (POONAM VAID)
   COURT MASTER                                 COURT MASTER
(signed reportable order is placed on the file)
13