[Cites
7
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Prof Narendra Singh Bhandari vs Ravindra Jugran on 10 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8184 OF 2022


          Prof. Narendra Singh Bhandari                            …Appellant


                                        Versus


          Ravindra Jugran and Others                               …Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

          and order dated 10.11.2021 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at

          Nainital in Writ Petition No. 190/2020, by which the High Court has

          allowed the said writ petition preferred by respondent No.1 herein and

          has quashed and set aside the appointment of the appellant herein –
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
original respondent No.5 as the Vice-Chancellor of Soban Singh Jeena
Date: 2022.11.10
15:09:01 IST
Reason:
University (hereinafter referred to as the ‘University’), original respondent
1
No.5 – Vice-Chancellor of the said University has preferred the present

appeal.
2.    That the appellant herein was appointed as Professor and worked

as such for the period between 23.5.2009 to 7.10.2017 till he was

appointed as Member of the Uttarakhand Public Service Commission.

That thereafter he was appointed by the State Government as Vice-

Chancellor of the University by order dated 11.08.2020. He assumed

the charge as Vice-Chancellor on 13.08.2020. The appointment of the

appellant was challenged before the High Court by way of present writ

petition, inter alia, on the ground that at the time when he was appointed

as Vice-Chancellor, i.e., on 11.08.2020, he was not having the requisite

experience of minimum 10 years as Professor, which was required as

per the University Grants Commission Regulations, 2018 (for short,

‘UGC Regulations, 2018’) which were adopted by the State Government.

2.1   It was also the case on behalf of the original writ petitioner that

even otherwise his appointment as Vice-Chancellor was illegal inasmuch

as his name was not recommended by the Search Committee and only

one name was placed before the Chief Minister and thereafter without

any advertisement he was selected and appointed as Vice-Chancellor.

2.2   The said writ petition was opposed by the appellant contending,

inter alia, that as per the Soban Singh Jeena University Act, 2019
2
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
University Act, 2019
’), there was no such

requirement of having minimum 10 years’ experience as Professor. It

was submitted that at the relevant time, the length of service as

Professor as on 01.11.2017 was more than 8 years and 5 months. It

was submitted that while he continued as Member of the Uttarakhand

Public Service Commission, he was on long leave as Professor and his

lien on the post of Professor was continued. It was also the case on

behalf of the appellant that while serving as Member of the Public

Service Commission, he was supervising PhD scholars and therefore

the same was required to be counted for considering the minimum 10

years’ experience. It was also the case on behalf of the appellant that

he was found to be meritorious and looking to his academic career the

merit was not compromised. By the impugned judgment and order, the

High Court has allowed the said writ petition and has quashed and set

aside the appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the

University by holding that as the appointment of the appellant as Vice-

Chancellor was just contrary to
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC

Regulations, 2018 which prescribes the eligibility requirements for

appointment as Vice-Chancellor. While setting aside the appointment of

the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the University, the High Court has

observed and held that even otherwise the appellant was not having the
3
minimum 10 years’ experience as Professor, even as required as per
Section 10(1)
of the University Act, 2019.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court, quashing, and setting aside the

appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the University,

original respondent No.5 – Vice-Chancellor of the University has

preferred the present appeal.
3.      We have heard Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the appellant – Vice-Chancellor of the University,

Shri Sanjay Parikh, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

respondent No.1 – original writ petitioner, Shri Atul Sharma, learned

Advocate for the State, Shri Jatinder Kumar Bhatia, learned Advocate

appearing on behalf of the Uttarakhand Public Service Commission and

Shri Harmeet Singh Ruprah, learned Advocate appearing for the

University.
3.1   Shri Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant and learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State as well

as University have vehemently submitted that
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the

UGC Regulations, 2018 shall not be applicable. It is submitted that UGC

Regulations, 2018 were adopted by the State Government, subject to

the modifications. It is submitted that
Regulation 7
.3.0 therefore was
4
adopted by the State, subject to modification.       It is submitted that

therefore there was no requirement of having minimum 10 years’

experience as a professor for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of the

University.
3.2   It is further submitted that as it was a case of appointment of the

first Vice-Chancellor of the University, as per proviso to
Section 10(1)
of

the University Act, 2019, it was open and permissible for the State

Government to appoint a Vice-Chancellor of his choice and as it was a

case of appointment of first Vice-chancellor, it was not required to have

the name recommended by the Search Committee.
3.3   Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate has further submitted that

even otherwise it cannot be said that the appellant was not having

requisite minimum 10 years’ experience as a professor. It is submitted

that as on 1.11.2017, the appellant had rendered 8 years and 5 months

service as a professor. That thereafter when he was appointed as a

member of the Public Service Commission, he was on long leave and

his lien continued on the post of professor on which he was working

earlier. It is submitted that even as a member of the Public Service

Commission, he was supervising the PhD scholars. It is submitted that

therefore it cannot be said that the appellant was not having the requisite

minimum 10 years’ experience as a professor.
5
3.4   It is further submitted by Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the appellant that the appellant was appointed as

Vice-Chancellor after complete satisfaction of the State Government

regarding the eligibility.   It is submitted that the appellant is a

distinguished person in the filed of the study of the University or from

equivalent position in Administration. It is submitted that all through his

academic years from matriculation to masters he stood first throughout

and he is an awardee of PhD. Degree from prestigious Indian Institute of

Technology, New Delhi. He had research and publication in national and

international journals, books, internship participation in academic

seminars and conferences.       It is submitted that therefore when, in

exercise of powers under
Section 10(1)
of the University Act, 2019 and

considering his academic career and as he was found to be most

meritorious and being the appointment of first Vice-Chancellor, the

appellant was rightly appointed as Vice-Chancellor of the University by

the State Government.
3.5   Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions of this Court

in the case of
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi v. State of Gujarat
, (2022) 5

SCC 179 as well as the recent decision of this Court in the case of
State

of West Bengal v. Anindya Sundar Das & Others
, 2022 SCC Online

SC 1382 is concerned, it is submitted by the learned counsel appearing
6
on behalf of the appellant that the said decisions shall not be applicable

to the facts of the case on hand, inasmuch as those were not the cases

of appointment of first Vice-Chancellor. It is submitted that in the present

case, it is the case of the appointment of the first Vice-Chancellor of the

University and therefore proviso to
Section 10(1)
of the University Act,

2019       shall   be   applicable,   which   permits/authorises   the   State

Government to make the appointment of Vice-Chancellor.
4.        The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Sanjay Parikh,

learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the original writ

petitioner. In support of the impugned judgment and order passed by

the High Court, quashing and setting aside the appointment of the

appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the University, Shri Sanjay Parikh,

learned counsel has made the following submissions:
i)   that the UGC Regulations, 2018 were adopted by the State

     Government and
Regulation 7
.3.0 prescribes that for the post of Vice-
Chancellor, a person must have minimum 10 years’ experience as a

     professor in any University and the appointment of the Vice-

     Chancellor of the University shall be by the Search Committee which

     will submit the panel of 3-5 persons and thereafter amongst those,

     appointment of the Vice-Chancellor can be made;
7
ii) in the present case, the appellant admittedly was not having the

requisite minimum 10 years’ teaching experience as Professor;
iii) service rendered as Member of the Uttarakhand Public Service

Commission cannot be considered for the purpose of experience as a

professor because as a Member of the Public Service Commission he

was not required to teach and therefore the service rendered as a

Member of the Public Service Commission cannot be said to be

having the experience in teaching;
iv) having a lien on the post of professor while serving as a member

of the Public Service Commission cannot be said to be having

teaching experience;
v) proviso to
Section 10(1)
of the University Act, 2019 shall not be

applicable.   It is submitted that proviso to
Section 10(1)
of the

University Act, 2019 does not provide that the requirement of
Section

10
is to be given go-bye. Proviso to
Section 10(1)
of the University

Act, 2019 does not give any unfettered powers to the State

Government to appoint Vice-Chancellor of the University de hors
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019 and UGC Regulations, 2018,

which were adopted by the State Government;
vi) UGC Regulations, 2018 including
Regulation 7
.3.0 for appointment

of the Vice-Chancellor have been specifically adopted by the State
8
Government except the requirement of consideration of the Search

  Committee;
vii) neither there was any advertisement given nor the applications

  were invited from eligible and meritorious candidates nor the name of

  the appellant was recommended by the Search Committee as the

  Search Committee was not constituted at all and therefore the name

  of the appellant was not recommended by the Search Committee;
viii)in view of
Article 319
of the Constitution of India, the appellant

  could not have worked on any other post in any other institution while

  continuing as a member of the Public Service Commission and

  therefore the submission on behalf of the appellant that while the

  appellant was a member of the Public Service Commission, his lien

  was continued and/or that he was supervising the Ph.D. scholars and

  therefore the period during which he continued as a member of the

  Public Service Commission        may be treated for the purpose of

  teaching experience cannot be accepted.
4.1   Shri Parikh, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the

original writ petitioner has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court

in the case of
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi
(supra) and
Anindya Sundar

Das
(supra) and a recent decision of this Court in the case of
Professor

(Dr.) Sreejith P.S. v. Dr. Rajasree M.S. and Others
, 2022 SCC Online
9
SC 1473 in support of his submission that the State Government is

bound by the UGC Regulations, 2018 and that if there is any conflict

between the State University Act and the UGC Regulations, 2018 to the

extent the provisions of the State University Act are repugnant, UGC

Regulations, 2018 shall prevail.
4.2   Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid

decisions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
5.    At this stage, Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the appellant – Vice-Chancellor of the University

has made an alternative submission that in case this Court is of the

opinion that the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court

quashing and setting aside the appointment of the appellant as Vice-

Chancellor of the University is not required to be interfered with
,
in that

case
, the appellant proposes to resign and therefore he may             be

permitted to resign as Vice-Chancellor of the University.
6.    We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at

length.
7.    The short question which is posed for consideration of this Court

is, “whether the appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the

University was legal and valid and whether it was after following the due

procedure, as required”?
10
8.    While considering the aforesaid issue/question, the relevant

provisions of the
University Act, 2019
and UGC Regulations, 2018 are

required to be referred to, which are as under:
Section 10 of the State University Act, 2019:
“10. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor with the
     concurrence of the State Government from among the distinguished
     persons in the field of study of the University or from equivalent position in
     Administration, Industry or Research Institute whose names are submitted
     to him by search committee constituted by the State Government in
     accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2).
     Provided that fist Vice-Chancellor of University Shall be appointed by State
     Government and Shall hold the Post for duration of three years.
     (2)      The committee referred in sub-section (1) shall consist of the
     following persons:
(a) One person nominated by the Chancellor.
(b) One person nominated by the University Grants Commission (U.G.C.).
(c) The Secretary/Principal Secretary of the State Government higher
     education department, who shall be the convener of the committee.
     (3)      Based on the qualification and eligibility prescribe in the
     regulations of the University Grant Commission, the committee shall
     prepare a panel of three persons who shall be suitable for the post of the
     Vice-Chancellor. The committee while presenting the nominations to the
     Chancellor, shall forward a brief descriptive note of every nominee’s
     academic background/ qualifications and any specializations, but shall not
     show any preferences.
xxx                  xxx                   xxx
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018:


     i.       A person possessing the highest level of competence, integrity,
morals and institutional commitment is to be appointed as Vice-Chancellor.
The person to be appointed as a Vice-Chancellor should be a
     distinguished academician, with a minimum of ten years’ of experience as
     Professor in a University or ten years’ of experience in a reputed research
11
and / or academic administrative organisation with proof of having
     demonstrated academic leadership.
ii.     The selection for the post of Vice-Chancellor should be through
     proper identification by a Panel of 3-5 persons by a Search-cum-Selection-
     Committee, through a public notification or nomination or a talent search
     process or a combination thereof. The members of such Search-cum-
     Selection Committee shall be persons’ of eminence in the sphere of higher
     education and shall not be connected in any manner with the University
     concerned or its colleges. While preparing the panel, the Search cum-
     Selection Committee shall give proper weightage to the academic
     excellence, exposure to the higher education system in the country and
     abroad, and adequate experience in academic and administrative
     governance, to be given in writing along with the panel to be submitted to
     the Visitor/Chancellor. One member of the Search cum Selection
     Committee shall be nominated by the Chairman, University Grants
     Commission, for selection of Vice Chancellors of State, Private and
     Deemed to be Universities.
iii.    The Visitor/Chancellor shall appoint the Vice Chancellor out of the
     Panel of names recommended by the Search-cum-Selection Committee.
     iv.      The term of office of the Vice-Chancellor shall form part of the
     service period of the incumbent making him/her eligible for all service
     related benefits.
9.    It is not in dispute that UGC Regulations, 2018 have been adopted

by the State Government vide GO dated 6.9.2019 and
Regulation 7
.3.0

of Regulations, 2018 has been specifically adopted with a modification

that the process of selection of Vice-Chancellor needs to be adopted but

selection committee and search committee would be constituted as per

the prevalent provisions of the Act at that point of time. Meaning thereby,

the selection committee and search committee would have to be

constituted as per the
University Act, 2019
(
Section 10
). Otherwise, the

eligibility criteria provided under
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC

Regulations, 2018 shall be applicable which, as observed hereinabove,

has been adopted by the State Government vide GO dated 6.9.2019.
12
9.1   On a fair reading of
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019 and
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018, a person to be

appointed as a Vice-Chancellor should be a distinguished academician,

with a minimum of 10 years’ teaching experience as Professor in a

University. As per
Section 10(1)
, the Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed

by the Chancellor with the concurrence of the State Government from

among the distinguished persons in the field of study of the University or

from equivalent position in Administration, industry or Research Institute

whose names are submitted to him by search committee

constituted by the State Government in accordance with the

provisions of sub-section (2).
Section 10(2)
of the University Act, 2019

provides for constitution of the search committee.
Section 10(3)
of the

University Act, 2019 provides that based on the qualification and

eligibility prescribe in the regulations of the University Grant Commission,

the committee shall prepare a panel of three persons who shall be

suitable for the post of the Vice-Chancellor. It further provides that the

committee while presenting the nominations to the Chancellor, is

required to forward a brief descriptive note of every nominee’s academic

background/qualifications and any specializations, but shall not show any

preferences.
13
9.2
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018 prescribes that the

person to be appointed as a Vice-Chancellor should be a distinguished

academician, with a minimum of ten years’ teaching experience as

Professor in a University. As per UGC Regulations, 2018, the selection

for the post of Vice-Chancellor should be through proper identification by

a panel of 3-5 persons by a Search-cum-Selection Committee, through a

public notification or nomination or a talent search process or a

combination thereof.
Regulation 7
.3.(ii) provides for constitution of a

Search Committee. As per
Regulation 7
.3.(iii), the Visitor/Chancellor shall

appoint the Vice-Chancellor out of the panel of names recommended by

the Search-cum-Selection Committee.
10.   Thus, on conjoint reading of
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019

and
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018, a person to be

appointed as Vice-Chancellor shall have a minimum of 10 years’

teaching experience as Professor in a University or ten years of

experience in a reputed research and/or academic administrative

organisation with proof of having demonstrated academic leadership.

On conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions, the selection for the post

of Vice-Chancellor should be through proper identification by a panel of

3-5 persons by a Search-cum-Selection Committee and the Vice-

Chancellor shall be appointed out of the panel of the names
14
recommended by the Search-cum-Selection Committee. In the present

case, the appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor cannot be said

to be as per the requirement of
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019 r/w
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018.           It is an admitted

position that no advertisement was issued before appointing the

appellant as Vice-Chancellor.     The name of the appellant was not

recommended by the Search-cum-Selection Committee. The selection of

the appellant for the post of Vice-Chancellor was not by a panel of

persons by Search-cum-Selection Committee and therefore he was not

appointed as Vice-Chancellor out of the panel of the names

recommended by Search-cum-Selection Committee.
11.   It is the case on behalf of the appellant and the University and the

State that as it was a case of appointment of first Vice-Chancellor and

therefore considering proviso to
Section 10(1)
of the University Act,

2019, the procedure as required for appointment as Vice-Chancellor as

provided under
Section 10
is not required to be adhered to and it is open

for the State Government to appoint the first Vice-Chancellor of the

University. The aforesaid has no substance. On a fair reading of proviso

to
Section 10(1)
of the University Act, 2019, it does not provide that with

respect to appointment of first Vice-Chancellor of the University, the other

requirements of selection and appointment of Vice-Chancellor as
15
provided under
Section 10
are not required to be followed and/or

adhered to.        Even while making the appointment of the first Vice-

Chancellor of the University, the procedure required for selection and

appointment of Vice-Chancellor is not required to be given go-bye. If the

submission on behalf of the appellant, the State and the University is

accepted
,
in that case
, the other provisions of
Section 10
shall become

otiose and/or redundant.
12.    At this stage, it is required to be noted that the post of Vice-

Chancellor of the University, as observed by this Court in catena of

decisions, more particularly in the cases of
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi
(supra);
Anindya Sundar Das
(supra); and
Dr. Rajasree M.S.
(supra),

is a very important post and therefore the most meritorious person

should be appointed as Vice-Chancellor of the University from and

amongst the other eligible meritorious candidates out of the panel of the

names recommended by the Search-cum-Selection Committee.
On the

importance of the post of Vice-Chancellor, this Court in the case of
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi
(supra), in paragraphs 53 to 56, has observed

as under:
53. It is to be noted that the post of Vice-Chancellor of the university is a
      very important post so far as the university is concerned. Being a leader
      and head of the institution, the Vice-Chancellor of the university has to
      play very important role. While academic qualifications, administrative
      experience, research credentials and track record could be considered as
      basic eligibility requirements, the greater qualities of a Vice-Chancellor
      would be one who is a true leader and a passionate visionary. A Vice-
16
Chancellor needs to be one who understands and handles the affairs of
the university as ethical business and maintains a pellucidity in his conduct
towards the betterment of the university as well as the students therein. A
Vice-Chancellor should be one who can inspire students and guarantee
entry of high quality teachers into the university system. A Vice-Chancellor
functions as a bridge between the executive and academic wings of a
university as he is the head of both a “teacher” and an “administrator”.
54. We may refer to some of the significant Commission Reports
concerning the personality and role of a Vice-Chancellor of a university as
under:
54.1. The 1949 Radhakrishnan Commission stated that originally, the
  Vice-Chancellorship of an Indian university was regarded as an
  honorary post to be filled by a prominent man in his leisure time. But
  now the position has changed, there is enough work to justify a full-time
  appointment and the universities should have full-time paid Vice-
Chancellors. While discussing the duties of a Vice-Chancellor, the
  Commission stated that a Vice-Chancellor must be the chief liaison
  between the university and the public and must be a keeper of the
  university's conscience, both setting the highest standard by example
  and dealing firmly and promptly with indiscipline and malpractice of any
  kind. He/she must have the strength of character to resist unflinchingly
  the many forms of pressure. Being a full-time task, it needs an
  exceptional man (or woman) to undertake it. The Commission rejected
  the proposal of selecting the Vice-Chancellor by an external body and
  recommended that the Chancellor should appoint the Vice-Chancellor
  upon the recommendation of the executive.
54.2. The 1971 Report of the Committee on Governance of Universities
  and Colleges by the University Grants Commission chaired by Dr P.B.
  Gajendragadkar, former Chief Justice of India while reiterating the
  recommendations and observations made by the aforesaid
  commissions also stated that the selection of a Vice-Chancellor is the
  single most important decision that the governing body of the university
  may be called upon to make. While the Chancellor of a university may
  be a high dignitary of the State of the Union of India or an eminent
  scholar or eminent person in public life of the State, the appointment of
  Vice-Chancellor, being the important functionary of the university is
  most strategic. The powers of proper maintenance of discipline and a
  healthy environment for both teachers and students in the university is
  vested with the Vice-Chancellor along with all the other powers vested
  in him/her by various Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations. The
  Commission also stated that appointment of a Vice-Chancellor is made
  in most of the universities out of a panel of at least three names by the
  Chancellor in case of State Universities and by the Visitor in case of
  Central Universities. The panel of names is prepared by a Search
  Committee constituted in accordance with the provision of the
  Act/Statute. Since it was difficult to have a uniform system of forming a
  committee in all the States, the alternatives to constitute the Search
  Committee were also provided in the Report.
17
54.3. The 1990 Report of the UGC Committee towards New
  Educational Management by Professor A. Gnanam (also called as the
  Gnanam Committee Report, 1990) accentuated the role of a Vice-
  Chancellor, stating that the Vice-Chancellor should be a person with
  vision and qualities of academic leadership and with a flair for
  administration because what the universities need is a sensitive,
  efficient, fair and bold administrator. The Vice-Chancellor should be a
  distinguished educationist from the higher education system having
  highest level of competence, integrity, morals and self-respect.
  54.4. The Ramlal Parikh Committee 1993 accented that the universities
  need distinguished and dignified persons as Vice-Chancellors and it is
  necessary to ensure that they are treated with dignity and regard, which
  the office merits.
54.5. The University Grants Commission in its handbook titled Governance
  in Higher Education: Handbook for Vice-Chancellors published in 2019 has
  penned down the role of Vice-Chancellor of Indian universities having gained
  a paramount importance in the recent times. In the words of Prof. D.P. Singh,
  the then Chairman of University Grants Commission and former Director of
  National Assessment and Accreditation Council (“NAAC”):
“As Chief Executives and Academic Heads of Universities, the Vice-
   Chancellors are expected to be efficient and effective in terms of:
(a) Implementation of National Higher Education Policy and programmes,
(b) Institutional change in tune with the national reforms package,
(c) Quality and innovation enhancement and their sustainability,
(d) Productive engagement with ‘communities of scholars’ from within their
     universities and from national and international domains,
(e) Nurturing of ‘Research and Innovation Ecosystem’ and translation of
     deliverables to society and economy,
(f) Adoption of international best practices of ‘Good Governance’.”
     “The Vice-Chancellor has to evolve as the leader of a symphony of
     orchestra with the attributes of:
(a) Developing teams and teamwork, building partnerships and
     collaborations delicately interwoven by collegiality, friendship and
     intellectual engagement;
(b) Devising a strategy and action plan with defined milestones and
     deliverables;
(c) Ensuring primary accountabilities of self and the abovementioned
     university governing bodies; and
(d) Steering an institutional monitoring and evaluation mechanism on
     university performance built on principles of transparency.”
55. Discussing the situation in the backdrop of principle of governance as
quoted by Chanakya in his Nitishastra — “Yatha Raja Tatha Praja”, the
sense of morality must begin from the door of the leader who preaches it.
18
56. Thus, universities are autonomous and the Vice-Chancellor is the
      leader of a higher education institution. As per the norm, he/she should be
      an eminent academician, excellent administrator and also someone who
      has a high moral stature. The aforesaid reports of the Radhakrishnan
      Commission, Kothari Commission, Gnanam Committee and Ramlal Parikh
      Committee have highlighted the importance of the role of Vice-Chancellor
      in maintaining the quality and relevance of universities, in addition to its
      growth and development, keeping in view, the much needed changes from
      time to time. Further, these committees have also made suggestions and
      recommendations for identifying the right person for the said position. At
      this stage, it is correct to say that a Vice-Chancellor is the kingpin of a
      university's system and a keeper of the university's conscience.”
13.    Thus, considering the aforesaid relevant provisions, a Vice-

Chancellor should have a minimum teaching experience of 10 years as a

Professor in the University and his name should be recommended by the

Search-cum-Selection Committee and the appointment of the Vice-

Chancellor is to be made out of the panel recommended by the Search-

cum-Selection Committee. At this stage, it is required to be noted that

even as per
Section 10(3)
of the University Act, 2019, based on the

qualification and eligibility prescribe in the regulations of the University

Grant Commission, the committee shall prepare a panel of three persons

who shall be suitable for the post of the Vice-Chancellor. Therefore,

even as per
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019, the qualification and

eligibility prescribed in the UGC Regulations shall have to be considered

by the Search-cum-Selection Committee.
14.    In the present case, at the time when the appellant was appointed

as Vice-Chancellor, even according to the appellant he was having a
19
teaching experience of 8 years and 5 months as Professor in the

University. The appellant rendered service as a professor for the period

between 2009 to 2017 till he was appointed as member of the

Uttarakhand Public Service Commission on 7.10.2017. He continued as

a member of the Public Service Commission till 13.08.2020 when he was

appointed as Vice-Chancellor of the University. It is the case on behalf of

the appellant that while serving as a member of the Public Service

Commission, the appellant was on a long leave and his lien was

continued on the post of Professor and therefore the said period between

7.10.2017 to 13.08.2020 may be considered for the purpose of counting

the experience cannot be accepted.         Merely because his lien was

continued on the post of a Professor, it cannot be said that he continued

to teach and/or he was having the teaching experience during the period

of lien. Even considering
Article 319
of the Constitution of India, while

working as a member of the Public Service Commission, he could not

have rendered any other work on any other post. Therefore, the

contention on behalf of the appellant that the period spent by the

appellant from 7.10.2017 to 13.08.2020 as a member of the Public

Service Commission should be added to his teaching experience,

holding lien on the substantive post, cannot be accepted.           Merely

because such lien is held, the period of lien, by no stretch of imagination,

can be treated and/or considered as teaching experience.
20
15.   Similarly, the submission on behalf of the appellant that while

serving as a member of the Public Service Commission, he was

supervising the Ph.D scholars and therefore the period during which he

worked as a member of the Public Service Commission may be counted

for the purpose of experience has also no substance. Supervising the

Ph.D. scholars cannot be said to be having a teaching experience as a

Professor in the University, which is the requirement. Thus, as rightly

observed by the High Court, the appellant was not having the

required/requisite minimum 10 years’ teaching experience as a Professor

in the University, which is the requirement under the UGC Regulations,

2018. As observed hereinabove, before appointing the appellant as a

Vice-Chancellor of the University, neither any advertisement was issued,

nor the names were called for from the eligible meritorious candidates,

nor his name was recommended by the Search-cum-Selection

Committee, nor there was any search committee and therefore there was

no occasion for the Search-cum-Selection Committee to recommend the

panel of persons.
16.   From the note sheet dated 5.8.2020, it appears that only one name

was placed before the State Government/the Chief Minister for approval.

Under the circumstances, the appointment of the appellant as Vice-

chancellor of the University was just contrary to
Section 10
of the
21
University Act, 2019
r/w
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018.

At this stage, it is required to be noted that as observed and held by this

Court in the cases of
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi
(supra);
Anindya Sundar

Das
(supra); and
Dr. Rajasree M.S.
(supra), in a case where there is a

conflict between the State University Act and the UGC Regulations, 2018

to the extent State legislation is repugnant, the UGC Regulations, 2018

shall prevail. As observed hereinabove, UGC Regulations, 2018 were

adopted by the State Government and the State Government was

otherwise bound to follow and/or act as per the UGC Regulations, 2018.
17.   Now so far as the submission on behalf of the appellant that the

appellant was the most meritorious person and looking to his academic

career and having been satisfied that he is the suitable and meritorious

person to be appointed as Vice-Chancellor, thereafter he was appointed

as Vice-Chancellor by the State Government is concerned, it may be true

that the appellant might have a very good/bright academic career.

However, at the same time, it cannot be said that he was the most

meritorious person as his case was not compared with other meritorious

persons.    Therefore, the State Government had no opportunity to

compare his case with other eligible meritorious candidates.            As

observed hereinabove, and as per the requirement of
Regulation 7
.3.0 of

the UGC Regulations, 2018 and even as per
Section 10
of the University
22
Act, 2019, the selection for the post of Vice-Chancellor should be through

proper identification by a panel of 3-5 persons by Search-cum-Selection

Committee and the members of such Search-cum-Selection Committee

shall be the persons of eminence in the sphere of higher education and

shall not be connected in any manner with the University concerned or its

colleges. While preparing the panel, the Search Committee shall give

proper weightage to the academic excellence etc. and thereafter the

Visitor/Chancellor shall appoint the Vice-Chancellor out of the panel of

the names recommended by the Search-cum-Selection Committee. The

reason behind this seems to be that the person who is ultimately

selected and appointed as Vice-Chancellor, his case is compared with

other eligible meritorious candidates who were part of the panel

recommended by the Search Committee. In the present case, such a

procedure has not been followed at all. The merit of the appellant has

not at all been compared with other eligible meritorious persons who may

be more meritorious than the appellant.
18.   In view of the above, the High Court has rightly quashed and set

aside the appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the

University. We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the

High Court. The appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the

University is just contrary to
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019 r/w
23
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the UGC Regulations, 2018, which has been

specifically adopted by the State Government. Therefore, this is a fit case

to issue a writ of quo warranto, which is rightly issued by the High Court.

No interference of this Court is called for.
19.   Now so far as the prayer on behalf of the appellant that the

appellant is ready and willing to resign as Vice-Chancellor of the

University is concerned, the appellant may resign as Vice-Chancellor, if

so advised.    It is ultimately for him to resign as a Vice-Chancellor.

However, the appointment of the appellant as Vice-Chancellor of the

University is held to be illegal and de hors the statutory requirements

under
Section 10
of the University Act, 2019 r/w
Regulation 7
.3.0 of the

UGC Regulations, 2018.
20.   In view of the aforesaid discussion and for the reasons stated

above, the present appeal fails and deserves to be dismissed and is

accordingly dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the

case, there shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………………J.
                                     [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                           …………………………………..J.
NOVEMBER 10, 2022.                   [M.M. SUNDRESH]
24