[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re Perry Kansagra vs . on 3 November, 2022
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     INHERENT JURISDICTION

                  SUO-MOTU CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3 OF 2021


          IN RE: PERRY KANSAGRA                                         .....CONTEMNOR


                                           JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.             This decision on Sentencing will be in continuation of our

          judgment dated 11.07.2022 by which Perry Kansagra (hereinafter

          referred to as the ‘contemnor’) was convicted for acts of civil as

          well as criminal contempt of this Court. For passing the

          consequential order of Sentence, we adjourned the case several

          times1 and after being satisfied that sufficient opportunity was

          given to the contemnor, we proceeded to hear the learned Senior

          Counsel Ms. Sonia Mathur for Smriti Kansagra (wife of the

          contemnor and mother of their son Aditya) and the Additional
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.11.04
After the judgment dated 11.07.2002 the case was listed on 22.07.2022, 27.09.2022,
1
10:35:11 IST
Reason:
30.09.2022, 17.10.2022 and 21.10.2022.
Page 1 of 30
Solicitor General and reserved the case for orders. By this

judgment, we will consider and pass appropriate orders of

Sentence.
2.   The facts necessary for the disposal of this order may briefly

be stated as under. The contemnor married Smriti, an Indian

citizen, on 29.07.2007 in New Delhi. Initially, the couple stayed

in Nairobi, Kenya but Smriti returned to India in 2009, and the

couple was blessed with a son - Aditya, on 02.12.2009 in New

Delhi. Except for a brief period, when the couple went to Kenya in

2012, Aditya always stayed with Smriti in Delhi. We may mention

here itself that this position continued till the custody of Aditya

was handed over to the contemnor for moving him to Kenya as

per the orders of this Court. The subsequent incidents that led to

the recall of the orders of this Court and the judgment of

conviction for contempt are all part of the Court proceedings,

which unfolded as follows.
3.   A Guardianship Petition No. 53 of 2012 was filed by the

contemnor before the District Court, Saket, for declaration of legal

guardianship. After the contest, the petition came to be allowed
Page 2 of 30
by order dated 12.01.2018. Smriti challenged the said order

before the High Court of Delhi. By its judgment dated 25.02.2020,

the High Court affirmed the decision of the District Court granting

custody of Aditya to his father, the contemnor. By a separate

order passed on the same date, the High Court recorded the

willingness of the contemnor and his mother, holding an Indian

passport, to ensure compliance with the order of the Family Court

granting continued access and visitation rights to Smriti. The

direction of the High Court that the contemnor shall also file an

undertaking before the Indian Embassy that he would submit to

the jurisdiction of the Indian Courts was complied with, and it is

part of the court record.
4.   Smriti challenged the decision of the High Court before this

Court in Civil Appeal No. 3559 of 2020. The majority decision of

this Court, while affirming the findings of the High Court,

disposed of the Civil Appeal on 28.10.2020 with the following

observations: -
“(a) To safeguard the rights and interest of Smriti, we
          have considered it necessary to direct Perry to obtain
          a mirror order from the concerned court in Nairobi,
Page 3 of 30
which would reflect the directions contained in this
Judgment.
(b) Given the large number of cases arising from
transnational parental abduction in inter-country
marriages, the English courts have issued protective
measures which take the form of undertakings,
mirror orders, and safe harbour orders, since there is
no accepted international mechanism to achieve
protective measures. Such orders are passed to
safeguard the interest of the child who is in transit
from one jurisdiction to another. The courts have
found mirror orders to be the most effective way of
achieving protective measures.
(c) The primary jurisdiction is exercised by the court
where the child has been ordinarily residing for a
substantial period of time, and has conducted an
elaborate enquiry on the issue of custody. The court
may direct the parties to obtain a “mirror order” from
the court where the custody of the child is being
shifted. Such an order is ancillary or auxiliary in
character, and supportive of the order passed by the
court which has exercised primary jurisdiction over
the custody of the child. In International Family Law,
it is necessary that jurisdiction is exercised by only
one court at a time. It would avoid a situation where
conflicting orders may be passed by courts in two
different jurisdictions on the same issue of custody
of the minor child. These orders are passed keeping
in mind the principle of comity of courts and public
policy. The object of a mirror order is to safeguard the
interest of the minor child in transit from one
jurisdiction to another, and to ensure that both
parents are equally bound in each State.
The mirror order is passed to ensure that the courts
of the country where the child is being shifted are
aware of the arrangements which were made in the
country where he had ordinarily been residing. Such
an order would also safeguard the interest of the
parent who is losing custody, so that the rights of
visitation and temporary custody are not impaired.”
Page 4 of 30
The Court, further directed as follows: -
“(a) We direct Perry Kansagra to obtain mirror order
     from the concerned court in Nairobi to reflect the
     directions contained in this judgement, within a
     period of 2 weeks from the date of this judgment. A
     copy of the Order passed by the court in Nairobi must
     be filed before this Court;
(b) After the mirror order is filed before this Court,
     Perry shall deposit a sum of INR 1 Crore in the
     Registry of this Court, which shall be kept in an
     interest-bearing fixed deposit account (on auto-
renewal basis), for a period of two years to ensure
     compliance with the directions contained in this
     judgment.
If this Court is satisfied that Perry has discharged all
     his obligations in terms of the aforesaid directions of
     this Court, the aforesaid amount shall be returned
     with interest accrued, thereon to the respondent;
(c) Perry will apply and obtain a fresh Kenyan
     passport for Aditya, Smriti will provide full co-
     operation, and not cause any obstruction in this
     behalf;
(d) Within a week of the mirror order being filed
     before this Court, Smriti shall provide the Birth
     Certificate and the Transfer Certificate from Delhi
     Public School, to enable Perry to secure admission of
     Aditya to a School in Kenya;
(e) Smriti will be at liberty to engage with Aditya on
     a suitable video-conferencing platform for one hour
     over the weekends; further, Aditya is a liberty to
     speak to his mother as and when he desires to do so;
(f) Smriti would be provided with access and
     visitation rights for 50% once in a year during the
     annual vacations of Aditya, either in New Delhi or
Page 5 of 30
Kenya, wherever she likes, after due intimation
         to Perry;
(g) Perry will bear the cost of one trip in a year for a
         period of one week to Smriti and her mother to visit
         Aditya in Kenya during his vacations. The costs will
         cover the air fare and expenses for stay in Kenya;
(h) Smriti will not be entitled to take Aditya out of
         Nairobi, Kenya without the consent of Perry;
(i) We direct Perry and Smriti to file Undertakings
         before this Court, stating that they would abide and
         comply with the directions passed by this Court
         without demur, within a period of one week from the
         date of this judgement.
21. As an interim measure, we direct that till such
         time that Perry is granted full custody of the child, he
         will be entitled to unsupervised visitation with
         overnight access during weekends when he visits
         India, so that the studies of Aditya are not
         disturbed. Perry and his parents would be required
         to deposit their passports before the Registrar of this
         Court during such period of visitation. After the
         visitation is over, the passports shall be returned to
         them forthwith.
22. This appeal shall be listed before the Court after
         a period of four weeks to ensure compliance with the
         aforesaid directions, and on being satisfied that all
         the afore-stated directions are duly complied with,
         the custody of Aditya Vikram Kansagra shall be
         handed over by his mother Smriti Kansagra to the
         father Perry Kansagra.”
5.   Taking note of certain specific requirements and also to

ensure smooth transition of Aditya’s custody in favour of the
Page 6 of 30
contemnor, yet another order was passed on 08.12.2020 with the

following directions: -
“A) Except for direction issued earlier in paragraph
           20 of this Order, and matters accepted by the learned
           counsel for the respondent, no orders are called for
           in respect of any of the directions sought for by the
           appellant.
B) All the directions issued in paragraph 20 of the
           Judgment hold good, with the addition of the one
           issued in paragraph 20 of this Order.
C) A further affidavit shall be filed by the respondent
           within three days of this Order, that he shall abide
           by this Order and the additional direction issued in
           paragraph 20 of this Order.
D) The respondent is not required to obtain any fresh
           Mirror Order in respect of the aforesaid additional
           direction, before Aditya is taken to Kenya, and it
           shall be sufficient if an appropriate application to
           have this Order registered, in the same manner as
           the Judgment was registered, is preferred within two
           weeks of Aditya reaching Kenya, and the copy of
           such registration is thereafter filed in this Court at the
           earliest.
E) After filing of the further affidavit as stated above,
           the respondent shall be at liberty to take Aditya to
           Kenya as directed earlier in the Judgment.”
6.   After the above-referred orders dated 28.10.2020 and

08.12.2020, followed by custody of Aditya to the contemnor, what

really transpired came to light with the filing of M.A. No. 1167 of
Page 7 of 30
2012 by Smriti complaining of total and absolute disobedience of

this Court’s Orders.
7.   Having considered the matter in detail, this Court, by its

judgment dated 07.10.2021, recalled its earlier orders dated

20.08.2020 and 08.12.2020. The relevant portion of the order is

as under:-
“34. The documents and the developments referred
             to hereinabove show:-
(i) Perry had given an unequivocal undertaking to the
             High Court that he would submit to the jurisdiction of
             the Indian Courts. He had also given a solemn
             undertaking to this Court that he would comply with
             the Order dated 28.10.2020 in addition to the
             Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
(ii) In response to a specific submission raised in
             Miscellaneous Application No. 2140 of 2020 (quoted
             in paragraph 16 hereinabove), it was submitted
             by Perry that he had subjected himself to the
             jurisdiction of this Court. While dealing with the rival
             submissions in the Order dated 8.12.2020, this Court
             made it clear that the undertaking given by Perry to
             the High Court would continue to be operative, in
             addition to the undertaking given to this Court.
(iii) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 had called
             upon Perry to obtain a ‘Mirror Order’ from the
             concerned Court in Nairobi to reflect the directions
             contained in the Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
Thereafter, the Order dated 9.11.2020 passed by the
             High Court of Kenya at Nairobi along with the
             relevant    application   moved    by Perry seeking
Page 8 of 30
registration of the Judgment dated 28.10.2020, was
filed in this Court.
(iv) There was a dispute whether the registration
granted vide order dated 9.11.2020 by the High
Court of Kenya at Nairobi amounted to fulfilling the
requirement of a “Mirror Order”. The submissions on
the point were dealt with in paragraphs 8 and 9 of
the Order dated 8.12.2020. The learned counsel
appearing for Perry had relied upon the opinion given
by M/s. GMC Advocates which in turn had relied
upon the decision of the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi in Re : Matter of I W P (Infant) [2013] eKLR to
submit that the registration itself was a “Mirror
Order” in compliance of the requirements of the
Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
Relying on the submissions so advanced on behalf
of Perry and in deference to the Order dated
9.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi, in paragraph 10 of the Order dated
8.12.2020, this Court observed that the registration
of the Judgment of this Court by the High Court of
Kenya at Nairobi was sufficient compliance of the
directions to obtain a “Mirror Order” issued from a
Competent Court in Kenya.
(v) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 and the Order
dated 8.12.2020 passed by this Court were thus
premised on the submission that the Order dated
9.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi while registering the Judgment dated
28.10.2020 passed by this Court was in fact the
“Mirror Order”.
(vi) It now transpires that by a subsequent Order
dated 21.5.2021, the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi
in Paragraph 13 of its order observed that the
judgment of this Court was not registrable and
Page 9 of 30
dismissed the Originating             Summons    dated
30.10.2020 filed by Perry.
(vii) At no stage Perry brought this development to
the notice of this Court that the Originating Summons
moved by him seeking registration of the Judgment
dated 28.10.2020 passed by this Court was
dismissed by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi on
21.5.2021. Having submitted to the jurisdiction of the
Indian Courts it was the bounden duty of Perry to
keep this Court appraised of all the developments
particularly when the “Mirror Order” was the fulcrum
on the basis of which this Court handed over to him
the custody of Aditya.
(viii) This infraction gets more pronounced in the light
of the stand taken in his Affidavit dated 5.8.2021
filed in this Court and referred to in Paragraph 22
hereinabove. In that affidavit Perry unequivocally
stated that he had not even the remotest intention to
disobey the Order passed by this Court including the
Judgment dated 28.10.2020. Yet, something as
basic and fundamental like the Order dated
21.05.2021 was not brought to the notice of this
Court. Logically, Perry should have brought back
Aditya to this country so that status quo ante could
be restored and appropriate orders could thereafter
be passed by this Court.
(ix) Miscellaneous Application No. 1167 of 2021 filed
by Smriti had annexed e-mails exchanged between
her and Perry and prayed that Perry be directed to
comply with directions regarding vacation access. In
response, apart from stating that he had no
intentions to disobey the orders passed by this
Court, Perry voiced concern about sending Aditya to
India. Being well aware of the conditions in this
Country, a solution was devised by this Court in its
Order dated 11.08.2021 and certain directions to
facilitate the entry of Aditya into and his exit from
Page 10 of 30
India in a safe manner were issued. Pertinently on
11.08.2021, the attention of this Court was not
invited to the fact that the Situational Report dated
09.08.2021 as referred to hereinabove was made or
that the matter was being looked into by the
concerned authorities in Kenya.
(X) Despite clear directions issued in the Order dated
11.08.2021 Perry had not taken any steps to comply
with the Order. As a matter of fact, by the time the
matter was taken up for further hearing on
16.08.2021, Perry      sought    to    withdraw    the
authorization in favour of the learned counsel who
were all the while representing him before this Court.
(XI) As disclosed in I.A. 100550 of 2021 week-end
Skype meetings between Smriti and Aditya were not
facilitated from the week-end of 14.08.2021 and
15.08.2021. Perry also blocked all means of
communications with Smriti. Though in law the
learned advocates who had entered appearance on
behalf of Perry would continue to represent him,
notice was additionally directed to be served
on Perry through Indian embassy of Nairobi.
(XII) In the light of the defiant attitude exhibited
by Perry and his refusal to abide by the Orders
passed by this court, ad-interim relief in terms of
prayers (d)(e) and (f) made by Smriti in her I.A. No.
100550 of 2021 was granted by this Court vide its
order dated 17.08.2021.
(XIII) Finally, Petition No. E301 of 2021 and - Notice
of Motion were moved on behalf of Perry, filed in the
High Court of Kenya at Nairobi on 26.08.2021. The
stand taken by Perry in said Petition and Notice of
Motion is that it would be humiliating to compel
Aditya to take OCI Card; that wishes of Aditya were
not ascertained by this Court; that there was no valid
Mirror Order and that the orders passed by this Court
Page 11 of 30
were without jurisdiction. He has prayed for
declaration that there existed no valid “Mirror Order”
and in the circumstances the orders passed by this
Court are incapable of compliance and/or
enforcement.
35. These developments not only show the defiant
and contumacious posture now adopted by Perry
but prima facie support the submissions of Smriti
made in Interim Applications referred to in
paragraphs 25, 27, and 28 herein above. There
appears to be concrete material and reason to believe
that it was a well-planned conspiracy on part
of Perry to persuade this Court to pass orders in his
favour and allow him the custody of Aditya and then
turn around and defy the Orders of this Court.
36. It is fundamental that a party approaching the
Court must come with clean hands, more so in child
custody matters. Any fraudulent conduct based on
which the custody of a minor is obtained under the
orders of the Court, would negate and nullify the
element of trust reposed by the Court in the
concerned person. Wherever the custody of a minor
is a matter of dispute between the parents or the
concerned parties, the primary custody of the minor,
in parens patriae jurisdiction, is with the Court which
may then hand over the custody to the person who
in the eyes of the Court, would be the most suitable
person. Any action initiated to obtain such custody
from the Court with fraudulent conduct and design
would be a fraud on the process of the Court.
39. Though, at every juncture solemn undertakings
were given by Perry to the High Court and this Court,
such undertakings were not only flagrantly violated
but a stand is now taken challenging the very
jurisdiction of the Indian Courts, despite having
submitted himself to the jurisdiction of the Indian
Page 12 of 30
Courts. Such conduct, prime facie, can certainly be
     said to be contumacious calling for an action in
     contempt jurisdiction. Moreover, the non-disclosure of
     material facts by Perry at the relevant junctures also
     shows that he approached the Indian Courts with
     unclean hands.
40. It was only on the basis of the solemn
     undertakings given by Perry and the order dated
     09.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
     Nairobi which was projected to be a “Mirror Order” in
     compliance of the directions issued by this Court,
     that the custody of Aditya was directed to be handed
     over to Perry. Since the false and fraudulent
     representations made by Perry were the foundation,
     on the basis of which this Court was persuaded to
     handover custody of Aditya to him, it shall be the
     duty of this Court to nullify, in every way, the effect
     and impact of the orders which were obtained by
     playing fraud upon the Court. All the decisions
     referred to hereinabove point in that direction. This
     Court would therefore be well within its power and
     justified to recall all the orders and continue to
     assume jurisdiction to ensure that the situation as it
     prevailed prior to the passing of the orders by the
     Trial Court, the High Court and this Court, gets
     restored, whereafter appropriate decision can be
     taken in parens patriae jurisdiction.”


Finally, the Court directed as under: -
“42. In the premises, we pass following directions: —
     (A) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 and the Order
     dated 08.12.2020 passed by this Court are recalled.
     (B) The Guardianship Petition No. 53 of 2012 filed by
     Perry in the District Court, Saket, New Delhi seeking
     permanent custody of Aditya and the resultant
Page 13 of 30
proceedings arising therefrom including MAT APP
(F.C.) No. 30 of 2018 filed in the High Court, are
dismissed.
(C) The Orders granting custody having been
recalled, the custody of Aditya with Perry is declared
to be illegal and ab initio void.
(D) Issue notice to Perry as to why proceedings in
contempt jurisdiction be not initiated against him for
having violated the solemn undertakings given to this
Court, returnable on 16th November, 2021. The
Registry is directed to register Suo Motu Contempt
Case and proceed accordingly.
(E) The notice shall additionally be served through e-
mail directed at the e-mail id used by Perry in
communicating with Smriti. The details in that behalf
shall be furnished to the Registry by Smriti within
two days.
(F) The Central Bureau of Investigation, New Delhi
through its Director is directed to initiate appropriate
proceedings by registering criminal proceedings
against Perry and to secure and entrust the custody
of Aditya to Smriti.
(G) The Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi and the Indian
Embassy in Kenya are directed to ensure that all
possible assistance and logistical support is
extended to Smriti in securing the custody of Aditya.
(H) From and out of the amount of Rs. 1 crore
deposited by Perry in this Court, at this stage, an
amount of Rs. 25 lakhs be handed over to Smriti
towards legal expense incurred or required to be
incurred hereafter. Rest of the money shall continue
to be kept in deposit with the Registry till further
orders.”
Page 14 of 30
8.   On 25.01.2022, following the suo-moto notice for contempt

of Court, this Court framed charges and issued notice to the

contemnor. The matter was adjourned from time to time to give

further opportunities to the contemnor. Finally, by its judgment

dated 11.07.2022, this Court convicted the contemnor for having

committed civil and criminal contempt of this Court’s orders. The

relevant portion of the order is as follows:
“15. It is thus well settled that a person who makes
           a false statement before the Court and makes an
           attempt to deceive the Court, interfered with the
           administration of justice and is guilty of contempt of
           Court. The extracted portion above clearly shows that
           in such circumstances, the Court not only has the
           inherent power but it would be failing in its duty if
           the alleged contemnor is not dealt with in contempt
           jurisdiction for abusing the process of the Court.
16. The essential features of the matter as culled
           out in paragraph 34 of the Order dated 07.10.2021
           were relied upon to arrive at a prime facie
           observation that Perry was guilty of contempt of
           Court. Though notice was issued to Perry, no
           response has been tendered. We find that the
           material on record clearly shows violation on part of
           Perry. The observations made in paragraph 34 of the
           order dated 07.10.2021 were on the basis of record.
Having considered the entirety of the matter, in our
           view, Perry is guilty of having committed criminal
           contempt of Court part from the contempt for violating
           express undertakings given to the Courts, including
           this Court. We accordingly hold Perry guilty under
           the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
.
17. Though the instant proceedings can be taken
           to logical conclusion and order of sentence can be
Page 15 of 30
awarded even in the absence of Perry, we give final
          opportunity to Perry to present himself before this
          Court on 22.07.2022 at 3.00 pm along with Aditya.
          He shall then have an opportunity to advance
          appropriate submissions on the issue of punishment
          to be awarded to him. It shall also be open to Perry
          to purge himself of contempt in which case a
          sympathetic view may be taken in the matter.
Let copy of this Order be served upon Perry
          through email ID used by him in serving process upon
          Smriti. Additionally, a copy shall be given to Mr. P.K.
          Manohar, learned Advocate.”
9.   It is in the above-referred background that the present

proceedings for imposition of sentence are being taken up. These

proceedings for sentence were spread over three months. During

this period, the case was listed on 22.07.2022, 27.09.2022,

30.09.2022 and 17.10.2022. It was finally heard on 21.10.2022

when it was decided that sufficient opportunity had been granted

to the contemnor to appear and explain his actions or to purge

his conduct. However, he continued to be defiant & did not enter

appearance personally or through counsel.
10. We heard Ms. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate on behalf of Smriti

Kansagra, and also heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG, who

assisted the Court as per our request on 30.09.2022. Having

examined the merit in detail, we hold that:
Page 16 of 30
10.1 The contemnor had given an unequivocal undertaking to the

High Court that he would submit to the jurisdiction of the Indian

Courts. In response to a submission raised in Miscellaneous

Application No. 2140 of 2020, he specifically stated that he had

subjected himself to the jurisdiction of this Court. In its Order

dated 08.12.2020, this Court made it clear that the undertaking

given by him to the High Court would continue to be operative in

addition to the undertaking given to this Court. The contemnor

blatantly breached the undertaking. This is a deliberate

disobedience of Courts order.
10.2 The contemnor gave a solemn undertaking to this Court that

he would comply with the judgment dated 28.10.2020 and the

order dated 08.12.2020. However, he breached this undertaking

also. It had become evident that the contemnor has, in his well-
calculated and deliberate scheme of things, given assurances and

undertakings to mislead the Courts in India, including this Court,

when he had no intention to comply or abide by any of his

assurances. The following acts would demonstrate that they are

not only willful disobedience of the judgment of this Court but are
Page 17 of 30
calculated to obstruct the administration of Justice and interfere

with the due course of judicial proceedings. They had the clear

effect of lowering the authority of the Court.
10.3 The judgment dated 28.10.2020 called upon the contemnor

to obtain a Mirror Order from the concerned Court in Nairobi to

reflect   the   directions   contained        in   the   judgment   dated

28.10.2020. Following this, the order dated 09.11.2020 passed by

the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi along with the relevant

application moved by the contemnor seeking registration of the

judgment dated 28.10.2020, was filed in this Court. There was a

dispute whether the registration granted vide order dated

09.11.2020 by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi amounted to

fulfilling the requirement of a Mirror Order. The counsel

appearing for the contemnor relied upon the opinion given by M/s

GMC Advocates which in turn had relied upon the decision of the

High Court of Kenya at Nairobi in Re: Matter of I W P (Infant)

[2013] eKLR to submit that the registration itself was a “Mirror

Order” in compliance of the requirements of the Judgment dated

28.10.2020. Through submissions advanced on behalf of the
Page 18 of 30
contemnor based on the order dated 09.11.2020 passed by the

High Court of Kenya at Nairobi, this Court was persuaded to

believe that registration of the judgment of this Court by the High

Court of Kenya at Nairobi was sufficient compliance of the

directions to obtain a “Mirror Order”. It now transpires that the

High Court of Kenya at Nairobi by its order dated 21.05.2021 held

that the judgment of this Court was not registrable and dismissed

the Originating Summons.
10.4 The proceedings and the order of the High Court of Kenya at

Nairobi were suppressed. The contemnor deliberately and with

the clear intention to defeat the judgment and order of this Court

did not bring these facts to the notice of this Court.     Having

submitted to the jurisdiction of the Indian Courts it was the

bounden duty of the contemnor to keep this Court appraised of

all the developments particularly when the “Mirror Order” was the

fulcrum on the basis of which this Court handed over to him the

custody of Aditya. This act has clearly lowered the authority of

this Court.
Page 19 of 30
10.5 This infraction gets more pronounced in the light of the

stand taken in his Affidavit dated 05.08.2021 filed in this Court,

where the contemnor unequivocally stated that he had not even

the remotest intention to disobey the Order passed by this Court

including the Judgment dated 28.10.2020. These equivocal and

contradictory acts clearly demonstrate that the contemnor was

acting with a design and a clear intention to defeat the orders of

this Court. He obstructed the course of Justice.
10.6 Being well aware of the procedure devised by this Court in

its Order dated 11.08.2021 to facilitate the safe entry and exit of

Aditya into India, the contemnor did not inform this Court about

the fact that a Situational Report dated 09.08.2021 was made or

that the concerned authorities were looking into the matter in

Kenya. All these acts were done and contrary steps were taken

even while the contemnor was assuring this Court that he had no

intention to disobey the orders passed by this Court. All this

demonstrates a clear intention to mislead this Court.
10.7 Despite   clear   directions    issued   in   the   Order   dated

11.08.2021 Perry had not taken any steps to comply with the
Page 20 of 30
Order. He failed to renew OCI and failed to have Aditya board the

flight on 13.08.2021. Weekend Skype meetings between Smriti

and Aditya were not facilitated from the weekend of 14.08.2021.
In total and complete disregard for all orders, the contemnor

blocked all means of communication with Smriti.
10.8 Though in law the learned advocates appearing on behalf of

the contemnor would, as per our orders, continue to represent

him, we have additionally directed that notice be served on him

through Indian embassy of Nairobi. Contemnor has failed to

appear since 16.08.2021 despite repeated directions. As a matter

of fact, by the time the case was taken up for further hearing on

16.08.2021, the contemnor sought to withdraw the authorization

in favour of the learned counsel who were all the while

representing him before this Court. By this deliberate and well

thought out actions, contemnor obstructed the administration of

justice.
10.9 In Petition No. E301 of 2021 and Notice of Motion before the

High Court of Kenya at Nairobi on 26.08.2021, the contemnor

submitted that it would be humiliating to compel Aditya to take
Page 21 of 30
OCI Card. He also stated that the wishes of Aditya were not

ascertained by this Court. He further pleaded that there was no

valid Mirror Order and that the orders passed by this Court were

without jurisdiction. He specifically prayed for declaration that

there existed no valid “Mirror Order” and in the circumstances the

orders passed by this Court are incapable of compliance and/or

enforcement. This is the most egregious part of the contumacious

acts committed by the contemnor. The statements made by him

were false, and in fact, being fully aware that these were false

statements, he proceeded to invoke the jurisdiction of the Kenya

High Court to hold that Judgments and Orders passed by Indian

Courts were unenforceable.
10.10 These developments show the defiant and contumacious

posture now adopted by the contemnor. There is concrete material

and reason to believe that it was a well-planned conspiracy on

part of Perry to persuade this Court to pass orders in his favour

and allow him the custody of Aditya and then turn around and

defy the orders of this Court.
Page 22 of 30
11.
Article 129
of the Constitution of India empowering this

Court to punish for contempt of self is as follows: -
“129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.-
                 The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and
                 shall have all the powers of such a court including
                 the power to punish for contempt of itself.”
12. It is now well settled that the power of the Supreme Court to

punish for contempt is not confined to the procedure under the

Contempt of Courts Act2.
In
Pallav Sheth v. Custodian and

Others3
, this Court held that: -
“30. There can be no doubt that both this Court and
                 High Courts are courts of record and the Constitution
                 has given them the powers to punish for contempt.
                 The decisions of this Court clearly show that this
                 power cannot be abrogated or stultified. But if the
                 power under
Article 129
and
Article 215
is absolute,
                 can there by any legislation indicating the manner
                 and to the extent that the power can be exercised? If
                 there is any provision of the law which stultifies or
                 abrogates the power under
Article 129
and/or
Article
                 215
, there can be little doubt that such law would not
                 be regarded as having been validly enacted. It,
2
“12. Punishment for contempt of court.-
(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in any other law, a contempt
of court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that the accused may be discharged or the punishment awarded may be
remitted on apology being made to the satisfaction of the Court.
Explanation.—An apology shall not be rejected merely on the ground that it is
qualified or conditional if the accused makes it bona fide.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no
court shall impose a sentence in excess of that specified in sub-section (1) for any contempt
either in respect of itself or of a court subordinate to it.”

3 (2001) 7 SCC 549
Page 23 of 30
however, appears to us that providing for the
              quantum of punishment or what may or may not be
              regarded as acts of contempt or even providing for a
              period of limitation for initiating proceedings for
              contempt cannot be taken to be a provision which
              abrogates or stultifies the contempt jurisdiction under
Article 129
or
Article 215
of the Constitution.”
13. The above said principle is followed in Re: Vijay Kurle and

Ors.4, where this Court reiterated the above referred principle and

held as under: -
“38. The aforesaid finding clearly indicates that the
              Court held that any law which stultifies or abrogates
              the power of the Supreme Court under
Article 129
of
              the Constitution or of the High Courts under
Article
              215
of the Constitution, could not be said to be validly
              enacted. It however, went on to hold that providing
              the quantum of punishment or a period of limitation
              would not mean that the powers of the Court under
Article 129
have been stultified or abrogated. We are
              not going into the correctness or otherwise of this
              judgment but it is clear that this judgment only dealt
              with the issue whether the Parliament could fix a
              period of limitation to initiate the proceedings under
              the Act. Without commenting one way or the other
              on
Pallav Seth
's case (supra) it is clear that the same
              has not dealt with the powers of this Court to
              issue suo motu notice of contempt.
39. In view of the above discussion we are clearly of
              the view that the powers of the Supreme Court to
              initiate contempt are not in any manner limited by the
              provisions of the Act. This Court is vested with the
              constitutional powers to deal with the contempt.
Section 15
is not the source of the power to issue
4 (2020) SCC online SC 407.
Page 24 of 30
notice for contempt. It only provides the procedure in
              which such contempt is to be initiated and this
              procedure provides that there are three ways of
              initiating a contempt - (i) suo motu (ii) on the motion
              by the Advocate General/Attorney General/Solicitor
              General and (iii) on the basis of a petition filed by any
              other person with the consent in writing of the
              Advocate       General/Attorney       General/Solicitor
              General. As far as suo motu petitions are concerned,
              there is no requirement for taking consent of anybody
              because the Court is exercising its inherent powers
              to issue notice for contempt. This is not only clear
              from the provisions of the Act but also clear from the
              Rules
laid down by
this Court.”
14. It is within the constitutional power of this Court to consider

the contumacious acts of a contemnor and to punish him/her for

the same. It is in exercise of such a power, unrestricted by the
Contempt of Court Act
that this Court had imposed a sentence of

more than six months and also directed in some cases that the

contemnor shall undergo rigorous imprisonment5.
15. We are of the view that the contemnor had deliberately, and

with a clear design, made it appear as if he was willing to comply

with the Judgment and direction of the Indian Courts. The

repeated statements and affidavits affirming to comply with the
5
Zahira Habibullah Sheikh and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Ors
, (2006) 3 SCC 374; and
Afzal
and Anr. v. State of Haryana and Ors
, (1996) 7 SCC 397.
Page 25 of 30
directions of this Court were given only to ensure that the custody

of Aditya is given to him. We are of the clear opinion that the

contemnor had no intention to comply with the directions of the

Court even while he gave the undertaking, filed solemn affidavit

or even instructed his lawyer to so represent on his behalf.
16. The subsequent conduct of the contemnor after taking

Aditya out of India leaves no doubt in our mind that the entire

proceedings were conducted with the deliberate and mala-fide

intention to mislead the Supreme Court in permitting the

contemnor to shift Aditya out of India.
17. This Court in
Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of India
and ors.6

while articulating the powers under
Article 129
held as follows: -
“19. …It is therefore that
Article 142
of the
              Constitution of India mandates that this Court
              “… in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such
              decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
              complete justice in any cause or matter pending
              before it, and any decree so passed or order so made
              shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India
              …”.
6
(2014) 8 SCC 470.
Also see: Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union of India
and anr. (1998) 4 SCC 409, para
38.
Page 26 of 30
And it is also inter alia for the above enforcement,
that
Article 129
of the Constitution of India, vests in
the Supreme Court the power, amongst other things,
to enforce compliance with the Court directions. The
Supreme Court has the jurisdiction and power to
punish for its contempt. It is this dispensation which
authorises the Supreme Court to enforce compliance
with its orders. For, the power to punish would serve
no purpose if the power to enforce compliance was
lacking. It was, therefore, that this Court in
Maninderjit Singh Bitta v. Union of India
[(2012) 1
SCC 273 : (2012) 1 SCC (Civ) 88 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri)
528 : (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 83] with reference to its
contempt jurisdiction observed, thus : (SCC pp. 282-
85, paras 26-27 & 34)
“26. It is also of some relevance to note that
disobedience of court orders by positive or active
contribution or non-obedience by a passive and
dormant conduct leads to the same result.
Disobedience of orders of the court strikes at the very
root of the rule of law on which the judicial system
rests. The rule of law is the foundation of a
democratic society. Judiciary is the guardian of the
rule of law.
If the judiciary is to perform its duties and
functions effectively and remain true to the spirit with
which they are sacredly entrusted, the dignity and
authority of the courts have to be respected and
protected at all costs (refer
T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulpad (102) v. Ashok Khot
[(2006) 5 SCC 1] ,
SCC p. 6, para 5)...
130. ...The scope of the instant contempt jurisdiction
extends to punishing contemnors for violating the
Court's orders; punishing contemnors for disobeying
the Court's orders; punishing contemnors for breach
of undertakings given to the Courts. It also extends
to enforcement of the Court's orders. The contempt
jurisdiction even extends to punishing those who
Page 27 of 30
scandalise (or lower the authority of) any court;
punishing those who interfere in due course of
          judicial proceedings; and punishing those who
          obstruct the administration of justice...”
18. We have already convicted Perry Kansagra for contempt. The

above referred facts are mentioned only to demonstrate that the

contemnor has deliberately and with a clear intention committed

egregious acts of contempt. These acts constitute willful

disobedience of the judgment, direction and order of this Court

coupled with willful breach of the undertaking given by the Court

which constitute civil contempt. The contemnor has falsely

represented before the foreign jurisdiction that Indian Courts

have not sought the consent of Aditya and that the decision of the

Supreme Court of India is unenforceable. These acts clearly lower

the authority of this Court. We have also indicated that the

contemnor has interfered with the due course of judicial

proceedings and obstructed the administration of justice which is

a clear case of criminal contempt.
19.   In the circumstances and in order to mention the majesty

of law, we must impose upon adequate punishment on the
Page 28 of 30
contemnor. We have also noted that the contemnor never showed

any remorse or tender any apology for his conduct.
20.   For the reasons stated above, we direct that the contemnor

be:
a)   Punished with simple imprisonment for a term of six
      months for civil contempt of Court for his acts of deliberate
      and willful disobedience of the orders passed by this Court
      and to pay a fine of Rs. 12,50,000/- (Twelve Lakhs Fifty
      Thousand), in default he shall further undergo simple
      imprisonment for one month.
b)   Punished with simple imprisonment for a term of six
      months for criminal contempt of Court for obstructing the
      administration of Justice and lowering the authority of this
      Court and to pay a fine of Rs. 12,50,000/- (Twelve Lakhs
      Fifty Thousand), in default he shall further undergo simple
      imprisonment for one month.
21. In view of the egregious acts of civil as well as criminal

contempt, we further direct that the sentences shall be served

consecutively.
22. We further direct that the total fine of Rs. 25,00,000/-
(Twenty-Five Lakhs) as indicated above, to be deposited by the
Page 29 of 30
contemnor in the Registry of this Court within four weeks from

today and the same shall be released to Smriti Kansagra upon an

application filed by her.
23. We also direct the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of

India to secure the presence of the contemnor to undergo the

imprisonment imposed upon him. Needless to say, Government

of India including the Ministry of External Affairs and other

agencies or instrumentalities shall carry out the directions issued

by the Court with due diligence and utmost expediency.
Compliance report shall be filed in the Registry of this Court by

09.12.2022.
24. We further direct the case to be listed for hearing for further

orders on 15.12.2022.
....................................CJI.
[UDAY UMESH LALIT]


                                    ........................................J.
                            [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]


New Delhi;
November 03, 2022.
Page 30 of 30