[Cites
8
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh G. Ramnani vs Aurelia Ana De Piedade Mirnada @ Ariya ... on 10 November, 2022
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Aniruddha Bose
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.             OF 2022
                           (Arising out of SLP (CIVIL) NO. 20623 of 2019)

          SURESH G. RAMNANI                                        …APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS

          AURELIA ANA DE PIEDADE
          MIRANDA @ ARIYA
          ALVARES (DEAD THR. LRS) & ORS.                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH,J.
Leave granted.
2.             This is defendant’s appeal assailing the correctness of the

          order dated 16.07.2019 passed by Justice Prithviraj K. Chavan,

          rejecting the Misc. Civil Application No.526 of 2019 in Civil

          Application (Review) No.7 of 2019. The order reads as under:
Signature Not Verified
“Heard Mr. M. Amonkar, learned Advocate for the
Digitally signed by
Jatinder Kaur
applicant.
Date: 2022.11.10
12:52:45 IST
Reason:
2. In view of the clause (3) of Chapter 13 of the
                             Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules prayer (a)
                             of the application cannot be granted.
1
3. Mr. N. Fernandes, learned Counsel submits that
             matter be placed after 5th October, 2019.
4.   At his request, stand over to 07.10.2019”
3.   A bare reading of the impugned order extracted above

would raise a hundred doubts in the mind as to why this petition

has been filed. However trivial, we may consider the issue at

hand, but considering the seriousness and the length of

arguments advanced by the learned Senior Counsels, we were

compelled to reserve the judgment and give a serious thought to

the issue.
FACTS
4.   The respondent instituted a suit on 11.01.1985 for

declaration and permanent injunction registered as Regular Suit

No.21 of 1985 in the court of Civil Judge, Junior Division, at

Margao titled “Mrs. Aurelia Ana da Piedade Miranda Araujo

Alvares and others vs. Mr. Gobindram Jethanand Ramnani and

others”. After the contest, the Trial Court decreed the suit vide

judgment and order dated 26.08.2003.
The appellant preferred
2
an appeal under
section 96
of Code of Civil Procedure, 19081, in

the court of District Judge at Margao, Goa, registered as Regular

Civil Appeal No.83 of 2013, titled
“Mr. Suresh G. Ramnani Vs.

Mrs. Aurelia Ana
da Piedade Miranda alias Araiyo Alvares and

others”. This appeal initially came to be dismissed vide judgment

and order dated 22.04.2008. The second appeal under
section

100
CPC was preferred by the appellant which came to be

allowed vide judgment and order dated 02.03.2012. The High

Court remanded the matter to the First Appellate Court for a

fresh decision. After remand the first appeal was again dismissed

vide judgment and order dated 09.07.2012.
5.      Aggrieved by the same, Second Appeal No.98 of 2013 was

preferred by the appellant in the High Court of Bombay at Panaji,

Goa, titled
“Mr. Suresh G. Ramnani vs. Mrs. Aurelia Ana
da

Piedade Miranda alias Araiyo Alvares and others”. In the second

appeal judgment was reserved by Justice G.S. Patel vide order

dated 10.12.2017. It would be relevant to note that Justice Patel



1 In short “
CPC
”
3
at the relevant time was sitting at the Goa Bench of the Bombay

High Court.
6.   To complete the facts, it would be relevant to mention that

Justice Patel returned to the Principal Bench at Bombay on

24.10.2017. It is also an admitted fact that on 01.11.2017,

certain clarifications were made before the Court (Justice Patel)

by the parties through Hybrid mode regarding the issue of

whether the parties are arriving at a settlement or not. The

second appeal was allowed vide judgment and order dated

30.01.2019. The judgment was delivered through virtual mode

by the learned Judge while sitting at Bombay.
7.   A Review petition was filed by the respondent on

12.02.2019 registered as Civil Review Application No. 7 of 2019.

It was listed before Justice Nutan D. Sardessai and after hearing

learned counsel for the review applicant, the same was ordered

to be admitted on 04.03.2019. The said order is reproduced

below:
“Heard Shri A. Diniz, learned Advocate for the
         applicants.
2. Admit.”
4
8.   At this stage when the notice of the review was served, an

application was moved by the appellant on 16.07.2019

registered as Misc. (Civil) Application No.526 of 2019 with the

prayer that the Civil Review Application No.7 of 2019 be ordered

to be transferred and be placed before Justice G.S. Patel for final

disposal. The said application was supported by an affidavit

dated 06.06.2019. The prayer clause as contained in paragraph

9 of the application is reproduced below:
“9. It is therefore prayed that:
(a) The above Civil Review Application
                       No.7/2019 be ordered to be transferred
                       and be placed before his Lordship
                       Justice G.S.Patel in Mumbai for final
                       disposal.
(b) Early date for hearing in the matter be
                       fixed.”
9.   The above application has been rejected vide impugned

order dated 16.07.2019 by Justice Prithviraj K. Chavan. We are

conscious of the fact that normally the names of the judges may

not be required to be mentioned in the order but considering the

issue involved in the matter, the names have been mentioned.
5
10. We have heard learned senior counsel for the parties and

perused the material on record.
11. Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel for the

appellant submitted that review petition should be heard by the

same Hon’ble Judge under the provisions of
Order 47 Rule 5 of

the CPC
read with High Court amendments made thereunder for

the State of Maharashtra. Order 47 Rule 5 was substituted by

Maharashtra Government Gazette dated 15.09.1983 to be

effective from 01.10.1983. The said provision reads as under:
“5. Application for review in Court consisting of
         two or more judges.- Where the Judge or Judges,
         or any one of the Judge, who passed the decree or
         made the order, a review of which is applied for,
         continues or continue attached to the Court at the
         time when the application for a review is presented,
         and is not or are not precluded by absence or other
         cause for a period of six months next after the
         application from considering the decree or order to
         which the application refers, such Judge or Judges
         or any of them shall hear the application, and no
         other Judge or Judges of the Court shall hear the
         same.
HIGH COURT AMENDMENTS

         Bombay - In Order XLVII, for rule 5, substitute the
         following rule, namely:
“ 5. Application for review in Court consisting
         of two or more Judges.- Where the Judge or Judges,
         or any one of the Judges who passed the decree or
6
made the order, a review of which is applied for,
                 continues or continue to be attached to the Court
                 at the time when the application for a review is
                 presented, and is not or are not precluded by
                 absence or other cause for a period of two months
                 next after application from considering the decree
                 or order to which the application refers, such Judge
                 or Judges or any of them shall hear the application,
                 and no other Judge or Judges of the Court shall
                 hear the same:
Provided that if in the case of a decree or order
                 passed by a Division Bench of two or more Judges
                 of the High Court sitting at any place in the State of
                 Maharashtra, all the said Judges are not available
                 for sitting together at one place when the review
                 application is ready for hearing, the application
                 may be heard by a Division Bench of two or more
                 Judges, at least one of whom, if available, should
                 be the Judge who had passed the decree or order a
                 review of which is applied for.””
12. Our attention was also drawn to Chapter XXX Rule 3(1) of

the Rules of the Court applicable for the Bombay High Court2

which also provided that it should be heard by the same Judge,

however, subject to certain situations where such Judge has

ceased to be Judge of the High Court or have ceased to sit at the

particular Bench, in that event, it would be placed before the

Regular Court of the single Judge dealing with that category of




2 In short “Rules”
7
the matters. The said provision i.e. Rule 3(1) of Chapter XXX of

the Rules is reproduced below:
“3.(1) An application for review or for amendment of
         an order or a decree, for speaking to the minutes
         passed by a Single Judge of this Court shall be
         placed before that Judge: provided, however, where
         such Judge has ceased to be the Judge of the High
         Court or has ceased to sit at the particular Bench,
         such application shall be placed before the regular
         Court of the Single Judge dealing with the category
         of matters to which the proceedings relates as for
         example: -
(a) Writ petition, if the original order had been
                passed in a Writ Petition;
(b) First Appeals, if the original order had been
                passed in any other Civil matters;
(c) Criminal Appeals, if the original order had
                been passed in any Criminal matters;
Provided that, where the Single Judge
                concerned is not available for the time being
                by reason of he being on leave or otherwise as
                aforesaid such application shall be placed
                before the Court of Single Judge to which the
                matter may be assigned by the order of the
                Honourable Chief Justice.”
13. Referring to the above rule, Shri Ahmadi submitted that the

Rules having been framed more than 25 years back and

considering the advancement of technology and present setup

available for virtual hearing through video conferencing and the

same Judge being available at the principal seat of the Bombay

High Court, the review should have been heard by the same
8
Judge. Shri Ahmadi has also
placed reliance upon
the following

judgments of this Court i.e.:
●
Malthesh Gudda Pooja vs. State of Karnataka3
●
Goel Ganga Developers India Pvt. Ltd. versus Union
              of   India
through    Secretary     Ministry   of
              Environment and Forests and others4
14. On the other hand, Shri Nakul Dewan, learned senior

counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that the

appellant ought not to have carried the matter to this court

where the proceedings were being conducted as per the Rules.

Shri Dewan has sought to impress upon us by analyzing Rule

3(1) of Chapter XXX of the Rules to state and to submit that as

Justice Patel was no longer sitting at the Goa Bench, Review

Petition had to be heard by the Judge having roster of the said

categories of the matters to which the proceedings relate i.e. the

learned Judge at the Goa Bench hearing second appeals.

Further, reliance has been placed upon by Shri Dewan on the


3 (2011)15 SCC 330
4 (2018) 18 SCC 257
9
same judgment of
Malthesh Gudda Pooja
(supra).
He has also

sought to distinguish the judgment in the case of
Goel Ganga

Developers India Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), relied upon by the appellant

as the said proceedings were relating to National Green Tribunal

and the procedure prescribed therein. Further reliance is place

upon the following two judgements:
•
Maharashtra     Housing    &              Development
                     Authority vs. P V Anturkar5
.
•
Ratanlal Nahata v. Nandita Bose6
.
15. Having considered the submissions, we find that the matter

does not raise any factual issue, but it is only a question of

interpretation            of   the   Rules,   the   Court’s   propriety   and

jurisdiction. We do not wish to go into the issue of interpreting

the Rules in order to hold as to whether the review should be

heard by Judge ‘A’ or any other Judge. However, we are of the

view that considering the overall facts and circumstances of the

case, once an application was preferred by any of the parties that

5 (2009) 3 Mh Lj 266
6 (1998) 3 CALLT 348 HC
10
a review may be heard by the Judge who had decided the matter

and had passed the order from which the review arose, the

matter ought to have been placed before the Chief Justice on the

administrative side rather than order being passed on the

judicial side. The proviso to Rule 3(1) of Chapter XXX of the

Rules confers this power on the Chief Justice to assign a

particular matter to a single Judge for hearing of the review

application where the single Judge concerned was not available

for the time being by reason of being on leave or otherwise as

aforesaid i.e. where he had ceased to sit at a particular Bench.

The Chief Justice, being the master of roster and being conferred

with specific powers of assigning review petitions in given

circumstances under the Rules, the learned single Judge ought

not to have dealt with the application dated 16.07.2009 (Misc.

Civil Application No.526 of 2019), but should have referred the

matter to be placed before the Chief Justice.
11
16. Accordingly, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we

allow the appeal, set aside the impugned order dated 16.07.2019

and direct the registry of the High Court to place the said

application (Misc. Civil Application No.526 of 2019) on the

administrative side before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for

appropriate orders.
……………………………………J.
                                     (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)


                                 …………………………………..J.
                                       (VIKRAM NATH)
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 10, 2022
12