[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sansera Engineering Limited vs Deputy Commissioner on 29 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8717 OF 2022


          Sansera Engineering Limited                              …Appellant


                                        Versus


          Deputy Commissioner, Large Tax
          Payer Unit, Bengaluru                                    …Respondent




                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

          and order dated 23.07.2021 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at

          Bengaluru in Writ Appeal No. 249/2020, whereby the Division Bench of

          the High Court has dismissed the said appeal preferred by the appellant

          herein and has confirmed the common judgment and order dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2022.11.29
17:18:12 IST
Reason:
22.11.2019 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ

          petitions, upholding the order passed by the respondent rejecting the
1
claim of the appellant for rebate on the ground that the claim was barred

by time/limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Central Excise

Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’), the original writ

petitioner/appellant herein has preferred the present appeal.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
That the appellant herein – M/s Sansera Engineering Limited is a

manufacturer of excisable goods.      It exported goods on payment of

excise duty between August, 2015 and October, 2015 and filed claims

for rebate of duty paid on the goods exported    on 10.02.2017 to the

tune of Rs. 29,47,996/- and Rs. 42,27,928/- under Rule 18 of Central

Excise Rules, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘2002 Rules’) in

respect of these exports. Subsequently on 14.02.2017, for the period

October 2015 to March 2016, the appellant claimed rebate of Rs.
1,47,27,766/-.
2.1   The original authority rejected the above-mentioned rebate claims

as barred by time prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act vide three

different Orders-in-Original.   Aggrieved by the respective Orders-in-
Original rejected the respective claims as barred by time prescribed

under
Section 11B
of the Act, the appellant preferred writ petitions

before the learned Single Judge.       The learned Single Judge vide

common order dated 22.11.2019 dismissed the said writ petitions
2
holding that the claims for rebate were made beyond the period of one

year prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act. The judgment and order

passed by the learned Single Judge has been confirmed by the Division

Bench of the High Court by the impugned judgment and order in Writ

Appeal No. 249/2020. Hence, the present appeal.
3.        Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of the appellant has made the following contentions in support of his

submission that for rebate claim, the period prescribed under
Section

11B
of the Act shall not be applicable:
i)   that the grant of rebate of duty paid on excisable goods or duty

     paid as provided under Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules is different than that

     of refund of duty entitled under
Section 11B
of the Act;
ii) that the rebate of duty is on export of the goods and is in the form

     of an incentive and on furnishing the form R within six months from the

     date of export, the exporter is entitled to the rebate of duty on fulfilling

     the relevant conditions as mentioned in the notification No. 19/2004

     dated 6.9.2004;
iii) that neither Rule 18 nor notification dated 6.9.2004 specifically

     provided for the applicability of
Section 11B
of the Act for the period

     between 2000 to 2016;
3
iv) that by notification dated 1.3.2016, notification dated 6.9.2004

came to be amended under heading “(3) Procedures” and the words

“before the expiry of the period specified in
Section 11B
of the Act”

came to be inserted. Therefore, a conscious decision was taken that

for the period between 2000 to 2016, the period prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall not be applicable;
v) that in absence of specific provision either in Rule 18 or in

notification dated 6.9.2004 which came to be issued in exercise of

powers under
Section 37
of the Act specifically making
Section 11B
of

the Act applicable which provides for the limitation to make an

application within six months/one year applicable, subject to fulfilling of

all conditions mentioned in the notification dated 6.9.2004, the

exporter shall be entitled to the rebate of duty paid on excisable goods

exported;
vi) that as per notification dated 6.9.2004 on fulfilling of such

procedure and the conditions as specified in the notification, there

shall be granted rebate of the whole of the duty paid on the excisable

goods falling under the
First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,

1985
exported to any country other than Nepal and Bhutan. As it was

found that the exporters were causing great hardship in getting the

remittance certificates within six months, a conscious decision was
4
taken at the time when Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules was enacted and

  when    notification   dated   6.9.2004   was   issued    excluding     the

  applicability of Section 11B. As subsequently the period of six months

  was increased to one year, it appears that thereafter vide notification

  dated 1.3.2016, again the applicability of
Section 11B
of the Act was

  introduced;
vii) that there is a vast difference and distinction between the refund of

  duty and the rebate claim; and
viii) that as Rule 18 is a special provision for the grant of rebate of

  duty, general provision of
Section 11B
of the Act which is for refund of

  duty shall not be applicable. Reliance is placed on the decision of this

  Court in the case of Collector of Central Excise, Jaipur v.
Raghuvar (India) Limited, (2000) 5 SCC 299 = 2000 (118) ELT 311

  (SC).
3.1   Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of the appellant has heavily relied upon the observations made in

paragraphs 13, 14 & 17 of the decision in the case of Raghuvar (India)

Limited (supra), in support of his submission that
Section 11B
of the Act

shall not be applicable while considering the claim for rebate of duty.
Shri Datar, learned Senior Advocate has also relied upon the

following decisions of the High Courts of Madras, Allahabad, Punjab &
5
Haryana and Rajasthan taking the view, after following the decision of

this Court in the case of Raghuvar (India) Limited (supra), that the

claim for rebate of duty under Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules is different and

distinct than the claim for refund under
Section 11B
of the Act and

therefore the limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall not

be applicable with respect to claim for rebate of duty paid:
1. Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise v. M/s Dorcas Market

      Makers Pvt. Ltd., 2015 SCC OnLine Mad 8492 : 2015 (321)

      ELT 45(Madras);
2.
Camphor and Allied Products Ltd. v. Union of India
, 2019 SCC

      OnLine All 4705 : 2019 (368) ELT 865 (Allahabad);
3.
JSL Lifestyle Ltd. v. Union of India
, 2015 SCC OnLine P&H

      13023 : 2015 (326) ELT 265 (P&H) (paragraphs 14,15,16 & 17);
and
4.
Gravita India Ltd. v. Union of India
, 2016 (334) ELT 321

      (Rajasthan) (Paragraphs 12, 14 & 16).
3.2   Shri Arvind P. Datar, Learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the appellant has further submitted that the decision of this

Court in the case of
Union of India v. Uttam Steel Limited
, (2015) 13

SCC 209 = 2015 (319) ELT 598 (SC) is distinguishable and shall not be

applicable while considering the claim for rebate of duty payable under
6
Rule 18 r/w notification dated 6.9.2004. It is submitted that in the case

before this Court, this Court was considering Rule 12 of the 2002 Rules,

which subsequently came to be deleted by insertion of Rule 18.
3.3   Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has

also relied upon the decision of the Gujarat High Court in the case of
Cosmonaut Chemicals v. Union of India
, 2009 (233) ELT 46 (Gujarat)

in support of his submission that as observed and held by the Gujarat

High Court mitigating circumstances and when the assessee is not in a

position to get the necessary documents within the prescribed period of

limitation, the refund under
Section 11B
of the Act cannot be denied. It

is submitted that it is observed and held by the Gujarat High Court in the

aforesaid decision that any procedure prescribed by a subordinate

legislation has to be in aid of justice and procedural requirements cannot

be read so as to defeat the cause of justice. It is submitted that applying

the same to the rebate claim, many a times the exporters were facing

the difficulty in getting the requisite remittance certificates and therefore

in such a situation the exporter who has in fact exported the goods and

earned the foreign remittance cannot be denied the rebate claim.

3.4   Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of the appellant has submitted that the object and purpose of the rebate

of duty on export of goods can be termed as “incentive” to boost the
7
export and earn foreign remittance. It is submitted that therefore if such

a claim for rebate of duty is denied despite earning foreign remittance on

the goods exported on such technical grounds, it may defeat the object

and purpose for grant of rebate.
3.5   Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid

decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
4.    The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Siddhant Kohli,

learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the revenue.

4.1   It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the revenue that as such the issue involved in the present case

is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in the case of
Uttam

Steel Ltd.
(supra).
It is submitted that in the case of
Uttam Steel Ltd.
(supra), it is specifically observed and held by this Court that the period

of limitation prescribed under
Section11B
of the Act shall be applicable

with respect to rebate of duty.
It is submitted that after considering the

decision of this Court in the case of
Mafatlal Industries Ltd. v. Union of

India
, (1997) 5 SCC 536 = 1997 (89) ELT 247(SC), it is observed and

held that the claim for rebate can only be made under
Section 11B
of the

Act within the period of limitation stated therefor.
4.2   It is further submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra), which has been relied upon on behalf of
8
the appellant, shall not be applicable at all and/or the same shall not be

of any assistance to the appellant. It is submitted that in the case before

this Court, this Court was considering
Section 11A
of the Act, vis-à-vis

Rule 57-I. It is submitted that as it was found that
Section 11A
of the Act

is a general provision for recovery of duties not levied or not paid or

short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded, the same shall not be

made applicable with respect to recovery of credit wrongly availed of or

utilized in an irregular manner under Rule 57-I. It is submitted that there

is a vast difference and distinction between Section 11A and
Section

11B
of the Act. It is submitted that as per Explanation (A) to
Section 11B
of the Act, for the purpose of Section 11B, “refund” includes rebate of

duty of excise… It is submitted that therefore the period of limitation of

one year prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall be applicable

with respect to the rebate of duty.
4.3   It is further submitted that as per
Section 11B (1)
of the Act, an

application for rebate of duty has to be made before the expiry of one

year from the “relevant date”. It is submitted that as per Explanation (B)

to
Section 11B
of the Act, “relevant date” means in the case of goods

exported out of India where a refund of excide duty paid is available in

respect of the goods themselves or, as the case may be, the excisable

materials used in the manufacture of such goods. It is submitted that
9
therefore in
Section 11B
of the Act, there is a specific reference to the

rebate of duty and such claim of rebate of duty shall have to be made

before the expiry of one year from the relevant date. It is submitted that

therefore the period of limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act

shall be applicable with respect to claim for rebate of duty also.

4.4   It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the revenue that
Section 11B
of the Act can be said to be a parent

statute and Rule 18 and notification dated 6.9.2004 can be said to be a

subordinate legislation.   Notification dated 6.9.2004 which has been

issued in exercise of powers under
Section 37
of the Act provides for

“procedure”. It is submitted that as per
Section 37(xxiii)
of the Act, the

Central Government may make rules to specify the form and manner in

which application for refund shall be made under
Section 11B
of the Act.

It is submitted that in exercise of such powers, notification dated

6.9.2004 has been issued in exercise of powers conferred under Rule 18

of the 2002 Rules.
4.5   It is further submitted that Rule 18 cannot be read in isolation. It is

further submitted that Rule 18 being subordinate legislation cannot

override the main statute. It is submitted that notification dated 6.9.2004

cannot be read de hors the statute and
Section 11B
of the Act.
10
4.6   It is further submitted that the rebate of duty is an export incentive

benefit granted under the subordinate legislation and any such benefit

has to be governed by the statute.
4.7   It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the revenue that the decision of this Court in the case of
Raghuvar

(India) Ltd.
(supra), which has been relied upon by the Allahabad High

Court in the case of
Camphor & Allied Products Ltd.
(supra), shall not

be applicable to the facts of the case on hand, while considering the

rebate claim.
It is submitted that the question involved in the case of
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra) was with respect to recovery of Modvat

credit wrongly availed of. In the said case, it was the manufacturer who

claimed the benefit of
Section 11A
of the Act by stating that no recovery

could be made from him during the period of limitation of one year under
Section 11A
of the Act. It is submitted that this Court negated the said

claim on the reasoning that recovery contemplated under
Section 11A
of

the Act is different and distinct from recovery of Modvat wrongly claimed.

It is submitted that for reaching that conclusion this Court considered the

separate nature of duties contemplated under
Section 11A
of the Act

and the Modvat Scheme envisaged by Rule 57A to 57P of the Rules

prevalent at the relevant time. It is submitted that in the present case the

rebate claim shall be governed by
Section 11B
of the Act. It is submitted
11
that by virtue of Explanation (A) appended to
Section 11B
of the Act, the

claims of rebate of excise duty have been specifically included in the

statutory definition of claims for refund.
4.8   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the revenue has also

relied upon the subsequent decision of the Madras High Court in the

case of
Hyundai Motors India Limited v. Department of Revenue
,

2017 (355) ELT 342 (Madras) (paras 24 & 25) as well as the decision of

the Bombay High Court in the case of
Everest Flavours Ltd. v. Union

of India
, 2012 (282) ELT 481 (Bombay) (paras 10,11 & 12).

4.9   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Revenue has further

submitted that if the submission on behalf of the appellant that the period

of limitation of one year prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall

not be applicable with respect to claim for rebate is accepted
,
in that

case
, there shall not be any limitation at all and at any time, exporter can

make an application for rebate claim. It is submitted that therefore Rule

18 and notification dated 6.9.2004 are to be read harmoniously with the

parent statute –
Section 11B
of the Act.
4.10 Making above submissions and relying upon the decision of this

Court in the case of
Uttam Steel Ltd.
(supra) and the decision of the

Madras High Court in the case of
Hyundai Motors India Ltd.
(supra)
12
and the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of
Everest

Flavours Ltd.
(supra), it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
5.
In rejoinder, Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the appellant has submitted that if the contention

on behalf of the appellant that the period of limitation of one year

prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall not be applicable with

respect to rebate claim is accepted
,
in that case
also, the exporter has to

make an application within a reasonable time.
6.   We have heard Shri Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Advocate

appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri Siddhant Kohli, learned

Advocate appearing on behalf of the Revenue at length.
The short question which is posed for consideration of this Court

is, “whether the claim for rebate of duty provided under Rule 18 of the

Central Excise Rules, 2002, the period of limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Central Excise Act, 1994 shall be applicable or not?
7.   It is the case on behalf of the appellant that as in Rule 18 of the

2002 Rules and notification dated 6.9.2004, there is no mention to the

applicability of
Section 11B
of the Act and that the claim for rebate of

duty under Rule 18 is different and distinct than that of the claim for

refund of duty under
Section 11B
of the Act, the period of limitation
13
prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall not be applicable, while

considering the claim for rebate of duty under Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules.
8.    While considering the aforesaid issue, first of all, relevant

provisions of
Section 11B
of the Act are required to be referred to and

considered.
Section 11B
of the Act is as under:
“11-B. Claim for refund of [duty and interest, if any, paid on such
     duty].— (1) Any person claiming refund of any [duty of excise and interest,
     if any, paid on such duty] may make an application for refund of such [duty
     and interest, if any, paid on such duty] to the [Assistant Commissioner of
     Central Excise or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise] before the
     expiry of [one year] [from the relevant date] [in such form and manner] as
     may be prescribed and
     Provided that where an application for refund has been made before the
     commencement of the Central Excises and Customs Laws (Amendment)
     Act, 1991 (40 of 1991), such application shall be deemed to have been
     made under this sub-section as amended by the said Act and the same
     shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) as
     substituted by that Act:]
     Provided further that the limitation of [one year] shall not apply where
     any [duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty] has been paid under
     protest.
[* * *]

     [(2)   If,   on   receipt  of    any    such   application,   the
     [Assistant Commissioner       of      Central      Excise      or
Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise is satisfied that the whole
     or any part of the [duty of excise and interest, if any, paid on
     such duty] paid by the applicant is refundable, he may make an
     order accordingly and the amount so determined shall be
     credited to the Fund:
Provided that the amount of [duty of excise and interest, if any, paid on
     such duty] as determined by the [Assistant Commissioner of Central
     Excise or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise] under the foregoing
14
provisions of this sub-section shall, instead of being credited to the Fund,
be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to—
(a) rebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India or
  on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods which are
  exported out of India;
(b) unspent advance deposits lying in balance in the applicant's account
  current maintained with the [Principal Commissioner of Central Excise
  or Commissioner of Central Excise];
(c) refund of credit of duty paid on excisable goods used as inputs in
  accordance with the rules made, or any notification issued, under this
  Act;
(d) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] paid by the
  manufacturer, if he had not passed on the incidence of such [duty and
  interest, if any, paid on such duty] to any other person;
(e) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] borne by
  the buyer, if he had not passed on the incidence of such [duty and
  interest, if any, paid on such duty] to any other person;
(f) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] borne by
  any other such class of applicants as the Central Government may, by
  notification in the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided further that no notification under clause (f) of the first proviso
  shall be issued unless in the opinion of the Central Government the
  incidence of [duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty] has not been
  passed on by the persons concerned to any other person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment,
decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any Court or in any
other provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any other law
for the time being in force, no refund shall be made except as provided in
sub-section (2).
(4) Every notification under clause (f) of the first proviso to sub-section (2)
shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if it is sitting, as soon as
may be after the issue of the notification, and, if it is not sitting, within
seven days of its reassembly, and the Central Government shall seek the
approval of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a
period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the notification is so
laid before the House of the People and if Parliament makes any
modification in the notification or directs that the notification should cease
15
to have effect, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any notification
issued under clause (f) of the first proviso to sub-section (2), including any
such notification approved or modified under sub-section (4), may be
rescinded by the Central Government at any time by notification in the
Official Gazette.]

[Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, —
(A) “refund” includes rebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported
out of India or on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods
which are exported out of India;
(B) “relevant date” means, —
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of excise
  duty paid is available in respect of the goods themselves or, as the case
  may be, the excisable materials used in the manufacture of such goods,
  —
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the ship
     or the aircraft in which such goods are loaded, leaves India, or
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such goods
     pass the frontier, or
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of goods
     by the Post Office concerned to a place outside India;
(b) in the case of goods returned for being remade, refined,
  reconditioned, or subjected to any other similar process, in any factory,
  the date of entry into the factory for the purposes aforesaid;
(c) in the case of goods to which banderols are required to be affixed if
  removed for home consumption but not so required when exported
  outside India, if returned to a factory after having been removed from
  such factory for export out of India, the date of entry into the factory;
(d) in a case where a manufacturer is required to pay a sum, for a
  certain period, on the basis of the rate fixed by the Central Government
  by notification in the Official Gazette in full discharge of his liability for
  the duty leviable on his production of certain goods, if after the
  manufacturer has made the payment on the basis of such rate for any
  period but before the expiry of that period such rate is reduced, the date
  of such reduction;
16
[(e) in the case of a person, other than the manufacturer, the date of
      purchase of the goods by such person;]
      [(ea) in the case of goods which are exempt from payment of duty by a
      special order issued under sub-section (2) of Section 5-A, the date of
      issue of such order;]
      [(eb) in case where duty of excise is paid provisionally under this Act or
      the rules made thereunder, the date of adjustment of duty after the final
      assessment thereof;]
      [(ec) in case where the duty becomes refundable as a consequence of
      judgment, decree, order or direction of appellate authority, Appellate
      Tribunal or any court, the date of such judgment, decree, order or
      direction;]
(f) in any other case, the date of payment of duty.]”
9.   On a fair reading of
Section 11B
of the Act, it can safely be said

that
Section 11B
of the Act shall be applicable with respect to claim for

rebate of duty also. As per Explanation (A) to Section 11B, “refund”

includes “rebate of duty” of excise. As per
Section 11B(1)
of the Act, any

person claiming refund of any duty of excise (including the rebate of duty

as defined in Explanation (A) to
Section 11B
of the Act) has to make an

application for refund of such duty to the appropriate authority

before the expiry of one year from the relevant date and only in the

form and manner as may be prescribed. The “relevant date” is defined

under Explanation (B) to
Section 11B
of the Act, which means in the

case of goods exported out of India where a refund of excise duty paid is

available in respect of the goods themselves or, as the case may be, the

excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods…..                  Thus, the
17
“relevant date” is relatable to the goods exported.        Therefore, the

application for rebate of duty shall be governed by
Section 11B
of the Act

and therefore shall have to be made before the expiry of one year from

the “relevant date” and in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

The form and manner are prescribed in the notification dated 6.9.2004.

Merely because in Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules, which is an enabling

provision for grant of rebate of duty, there is no reference to
Section 11B
of the Act and/or in the notification dated 6.9.2004 issued in exercise of

powers conferred by Rule 18, there is no reference to the applicability of
Section 11B
of the Act, it cannot be said that the provision contained in

the parent statute, namely,
Section 11B
of the Act shall not be

applicable, which otherwise as observed hereinabove shall be applicable

in respect of the claim of rebate of duty.
10.   At this stage, it is to be noted that
Section 11B
of the Act is a

substantive provision in the parent statute and Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules

and notification dated 6.9.2004 can be said to be a subordinate

legislation.   The subordinate legislation cannot override the parent

statute.   Subordinate legislation can always be in aid of the parent

statute.   At the cost of repetition, it is observed that subordinate

legislation cannot override the parent statute. Subordinate legislation

which is in aid of the parent statute has to be read in harmony with the
18
parent statute. Subordinate legislation cannot be interpreted in such a

manner that parent statute may become otiose or nugatory.               If the

submission    on   behalf   of   the   appellant   that   as    there   is   no

mention/reference to
Section 11B
of the Act either in Rule 18 or in the

notification dated 6.9.2004 and therefore the period of limitation

prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall not be applicable with

respect to claim for rebate of duty is accepted
,
in that case
, the

substantive provision –
Section 11B
of the Act would become otiose,

redundant and/or nugatory. If the submission on behalf of the appellant

is accepted
,
in that case
, there shall not be any period of limitation for

making an application for rebate of duty. Even the submission on behalf

of the appellant that in such a case the claim has to be made within a

reasonable time cannot be accepted.          When the statute specifically

prescribes the period of limitation, it has to be adhered to.
11.   It is required to be noted that Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules has been

enacted in exercise of rule making powers under
Section 37(xvi)
of the

Act.
Section 37(xxiii)
of the Act also provides that the Central

Government may make the rules specifying the form and manner in

which application for refund shall be made under
section 11B
of the Act.

In exercise of the aforesaid powers, Rule 18 has been made and

notification dated 6.9.2004 has been issued. At this stage, it is required
19
to be noted that as per
Section 11B
of the Act, an application has to be

made in such form and manner as may be prescribed. Therefore, the

application for rebate of duty has to be made in such form and manner

as prescribed in notification dated 6.9.2004. However, that does not

mean that period of limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act

shall not be applicable at all as contended on behalf of the appellant.

Merely because there is no reference of
Section 11B
of the Act either in

Rule 18 or in the notification dated 6.9.2004 on the applicability of
Section 11B
of the Act, it cannot be said that the parent statute –
Section

11B
of the Act shall not be applicable at all, which otherwise as observed

hereinabove shall be applicable with respect to rebate of duty claim.
12.   As such, the issue involved in the present appeal is squarely

covered by the decision of this Court in the cases of
Mafatlal Industries

Ltd.
(supra) and
Uttam Steel Limited
(supra).             After taking into

consideration
Section 11B
of the Act and the notification and procedure

under Rule 12, it is specifically observed and held that rebate of duty of

excise on excisable goods exported out of India would be covered under
Section 11B
of the Act.
After referring to the decision of this Court in the

case of
Mafatlal Industries Ltd.
(supra), it is further observed in the

case of
Uttam Steel Limited
(supra) that such claims for rebate can only

be made under Section 11B within the period of limitation stated therefor.
20
On the argument based on Rule 12, this Court has specifically observed

that such argument has to be discarded as it is not open to subordinate

legislation to dispense with the requirements of Section 11B.
The

aforesaid observations made by this Court in the case of
Uttam Steel

Limited
(supra) clinches the issue.
The said decision has been

subsequently rightly followed by the Madras High Court in the case of
Hyundai Motors India Limited
(supra).
13.   Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this Court in

the case of
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra), relied upon by the learned

senior counsel on behalf of the appellant is concerned, on considering

the relevant provisions of
Central Excise Act
, namely,
Sections 11A
&
11B
of the Act, we are of the opinion that
the said decision
shall not be

applicable with respect to the period of limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act with respect to claim for rebate of duty.
The

question involved in the
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra) was with respect

to recovery of Modvat wrongly availed.        In that case, it was the

manufacturer who claimed the benefit under
Section 11A
of the Act by

stating that no recovery could be made beyond the period of one year

limitation under
Section 11A
of the Act. This Court negated that claim by

observing that recovery contemplated under Section11A is different and

distinct from the Modvat wrongly availed. For reaching that conclusion,
21
this Court considered that the recovery of Modvat would be governed by

a special provision contained in Rule 57-I and therefore the provision of
Section 11A
of the Act, which is a general provision, shall not be

applicable. In the present case, as observed hereinabove,
section 11B
of the Act shall be specifically applicable with respect to claim for rebate

of duty. Therefore, as such,
section 11B
of the Act cannot be said to be

a general provision. Therefore, the period of limitation prescribed under
Section 11B
of the Act shall have to be made applicable with respect to

claim for rebate of duty.
The decision of the Allahabad High Court in the case of
Camphor

and Allied Products Ltd.
(supra) and other decisions of the Madras

High Court, Punjab & Haryana High Court and Rajasthan High Court

taking a contrary view, relying upon the decision of this Court in the case

of
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra), are not a good law and shall not be of

any assistance to the appellant.
14.   At this stage, the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of
Everest Flavours Ltd.
(supra) is required to be referred to. In the said

case, the Bombay High Court was considering the limitation prescribed

under
Section 11B
of the Act with respect to rebate of excise duty. In
the

said decision
, it is specifically observed that since statutory provision for

refund in Section 11B ibid brings within its purview, a rebate of excise
22
duty, Rule 18 of the 2002 Rules cannot be read independent of

requirement of limitation prescribed in Section 11B.
Before the Bombay

High Court, the decision of the Madras High Court in the case of
Dorcas

Market Makers Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), which is relied upon on behalf of the

appellant was also pressed into service by the assessee. However, the

Bombay High Court did not agree with
the said decision
.
The Bombay

High Court also distinguished the decision of this Court in the case of
Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
(supra). In paragraphs 7 to 10, it is observed and

held as under:
“7. Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner sought to place reliance
    on a decision of the Supreme Court in
Collector of Central
    Excise v. Raghuvar (India) Ltd.
– (2000) 5 SCC 299. The issue which fell
    for determination before the Supreme Court, inter alia, was whether action
    for the recovery of MODVAT credit wrongly availed of or utilised in an
    irregular manner under Rule 57-I would be governed by the period of
    limitation of six months (at the relevant time) prescribed in Section 11A.
    The Supreme Court noted that Section 11A is not an omnibus provision
    which provides any period of limitation for all or any and every kind of
    action to be taken under the Act or the Rules but would be attracted only
    to cases where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been
    short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded. The judgment of the
    Supreme Court holds that Rule 57-I envisages disallowance of the credit
    and consequential adjustment in the credit account or the account current
    maintained by the manufacturer and it is only if such adjustments are not
    possible, that an amount equivalent to the credit illegally availed of could
    be recovered. Consequently Rule 57-I, it was held, could not involve a
    case of manufacture and removal of excisable goods without subjecting
    such goods to levy or payment in the various circumstances enumerated
    in Section 11-A. Hence, on its own terms, it was held that Section 11A will
    have no application or operation to cases covered under Rule 57-I. The
    Supreme Court ruled that the situation on hand and the one which is to be
23
dealt with under Rule 57-I as it stood prior to amendment, did not fall
under any of those contingencies provided in Section 11A.
8. In contrast, in so far as Section 11B is concerned, the provision
categorically comprehends a rebate of excise duty on excisable goods
exported out of India or on excisable materials used in the manufacture of
goods which are exported out of India. Since the statutory provision for
refund in Section 11B brings within its purview, a rebate of excise duty on
goods exported out of India or materials used in the manufacture of such
goods, Rule 18 cannot be read independent of the requirement of
limitation prescribed in Section 11B. The Judgment of the Supreme Court
in Raghuvar dealt with a situation where Section 11A did not bring within
its purview an action for the recovery of MODVAT credit wrongly availed of
which formed the subject matter of Rule 57-I. It was in this view of the
matter that the Supreme Court held that the period of limitation prescribed
under Section 11A would not apply to an action for recovery of MODVAT
credit under Rule 57-I. This can have no application in the present
situation which is clearly distinctive, in the sense that Section 11B
specifically comprehends an application for rebate of excise duty on goods
exported or materials used in their manufacture.
9. A judgment of the Madras High Court in
Dorcas Market Makers Private
Limited, Chennai v. CIT (Appeals
) 2012 (281) E.L.T. 227 (Mad.) was
sought to be relied upon to submit that
Section 11B
of the Central Excise
Act would not operate in respect of an application under Rule 18 of the
Central Excise Rules, 2002. The learned Single Judge of the Madras High
Court held that when a statutory Notification which was issued under Rule
18 does not prescribe any time limit, Section 11B would not be attracted.
With respect, the learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court has not
had due regard to the specific provision of Explanation (A) to
Section 11B
of the Act under which the expression “refund” is defined to include rebate
of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India or on excisable
materials used in the manufacture of such goods. The judgment of the
Supreme Court in Raghuvar which has been relied upon by the learned
Single Judge of the Madras High Court has already been considered
hereinabove.
24
10. In exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 18, the Central
Government has issued a Notification 3. The Notification prescribes the
conditions and limitations upon which a claim for rebate can be granted.
Among the conditions and limitations under Clause (2) of the Notification is
the requirement that the excisable goods shall be exported within six
months from the date on which they were cleared from the factory of
manufacture or warehouse. The procedures are stipulated in Clause (3).
Sub-clause (iv) provides for the sealing of goods intended for export, at
the place of dispatch and the exporter shall present goods along with four
copies of an application in Form ARE-I specified in the Annexure to the
Notification to the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having
jurisdiction over the factory of production or manufacture or warehouse.
Sub-clause (v) then stipulates that the Superintendent or Inspector shall
verify the identity of goods mentioned in the application, the particulars of
the duty paid or payable and if found in order, shall seal each package or
the container and endorse each copy of the application in token of having
carried out the examination. The original and duplicate copies of the
application are returned to the exporter. The triplicate copy of the
application is to be sent to the Officer with whom a rebate claim is to be
filed either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a sealed cover
after posting the particulars in the official record or to be sent to the Excise
Rebate Audit Section at the place of export in case rebate is to be claimed
by electronic declaration. Sub-clause (b) of Clause (3) of the Notification
makes a provision for presenting a claim for rebate of Central Excise duty
in the following terms:
“(b) Presentation of claim for rebate to Central Excise: —
(i) Claim of the rebate of duty paid on all excisable goods shall be
  lodged along with original copy of the application to the Assistant
  Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central
  Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture or warehouse
  or, as the case may be, the Maritime Commissioner;
(ii) The Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy
  Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of
  manufacture or warehouse or, as the case may be, Maritime
  Commissioner of Central Excise shall compare the duplicate copy of the
  application received from the officer of customs with the original copy
  received from the exporter and with the triplicate copy received from the
  Central Excise Officer and if satisfied that the claim is in order, he shall
  sanction the rebate either in whole or in part.”
25
The provisions of the Notification thus make it abundantly clear that a
      mere submission of the ARE-I form does not constitute the presentation of
      a claim for rebate of Central Excise. Form ARE-1 in turn has various parts
      including Part A which deals with the certification by Central Excise
      Officer, Part B which deals with certification by the Officer of Customs and
      Part D which is the actual Rebate Sanction Order. Moreover, it would be
      necessary to take note of the fact that under
Section 11BB
of the Act,
      interest is liable to be paid if any duty which is ordered to be refunded
      under sub-section (2) of Section 11B to any applicant is not refunded
      within three months from the date of receipt of application under sub-
section (1) of Section 11B. For the purpose of Section 11BB, presentation
      of the application is the relevant date from which the period of three
      months has to be reckoned. If the submission of the petitioner were to be
      accepted, viz. that the mere presentation of the ARE-1 form would
      constitute an application for rebate of Central Excise Duty, that would
      defeat the whole scheme that has been enunciated in Section 11B and
      Section 11BB. Before the application for rebate can be allowed, an
      exporter has to furnish various documents including a request on the
      letterhead of the exporter containing a claim for rebate, the ARE-1
      numbers and dates, corresponding invoice numbers and dates, the
      original copy of the ARE-1, invoice issued under Rule 11, self-attested
      copy of shipping bill and self-attested copy of bill of lading together with a
      Disclaimer Certificate in case where a claimant is other than the exporter.
      These requirements have been spelt out in para 8.3 of the CBEC Excise
      Manual. The mere presentation of an ARE-1 form does not, therefore,
      constitute the filing of a valid application for rebate. An application for
      refund has to be filed, together with documentary material as required.
      We, therefore, do not accept the second submission which has been
      urged on behalf of the petitioner.”


       We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the Bombay

High Court in the case of
Everest Flavours Ltd.
(supra).                       Contrary

decisions of Madras High Court, Allahabad High Court, Punjab &

Haryana High Court and Rajasthan High Court, referred to hereinabove,

are hereby overruled.
15.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, it is

observed and held that while making claim for rebate of duty under Rule

18 of the Central Excise Rules, 2002, the period of limitation prescribed
26
under
Section 11B
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 shall have to be

applied and applicable. In the present case, as the respective claims

were beyond the period of limitation of one year from the relevant date,

the same are rightly rejected by the appropriate authority and the same

are rightly confirmed by the High Court. We see no reason to interfere

with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court. Under

the circumstances, the present appeal fails and deserves to be

dismissed and is accordingly dismissed. However, there shall be no

order as to costs.
…………………………………….J.
                                  [M.R. SHAH]




NEW DELHI;                        …………………………………….J.
NOVEMBER 29, 2022.                [M.M. SUNDRESH]
27