[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Seshareddy (D) Rep. By His Lr Cum ... vs State Of Karnataka on 9 November, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
B.R. Gavai
1

                                                                          NON-REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS._________ OF 2022
                         (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 6354-6356 of 2020)



                 P. SESHAREDDY (D) REP. BY HIS
                 LR. CUM IRREVOCABLE GPA HOLDER AND
                 ASSIGNEE KOTAMREDDY KODANDARAMI                     Appellant(s)


                                               VERSUS


                 STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.                          Respondent(s)



                                          J U D G M E N T
1.       Leave granted.
2.       The appeals challenge the judgment and order

                 dated     12.11.2019     passed       by    the    learned    Single

                 Judge, High Court of Karnataka, Kalaburagi Bench in

                 W.P.Nos.201087-88/2018        c/w      W.P.       No.    201321/2016

                 (GM-
CPC
),      thereby    allowing         the    writ   petition(s)

                 filed by the respondent-State.
3.
Signature Not Verified
The facts giving rise to the present appeals
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2022.11.16
14:36:58 IST
Reason:
arise out of the following narrow compass:
4.       One   P.   Seshareddy         S/o       P.C.    Venkatreddy
2
entered into a contract with State of Karnataka

for    execution       of    UKP    project.        He    executed   a

General       Power    of     Attorney      dated    21.10.1982      in

favour      of       one     Kotermreddy       Kodandarami       Reddy

authorising him to do all the acts necessary with

regard to the execution of the said contract.
5.     It      appears       that     certain       disputes     arose

between P. Seshareddy and the respondent-State with

regard to the          execution of the work, allotted to

said     P.      Seshareddy.         As    such,     he     initiated

arbitration       proceedings        by    making   an    application

under
Section 8
of the Arbitration Act, 1940.
6.     The said petition was presented through his

General       Power    of    Attorney     holder    Sri    Kotemreddy

Kodandarami Reddy.
7.     The       original       contractor,         namely,          P.

Seshareddy, died on 13.11.1995. After his death,

his legal heirs were brought on record. However, it

appears       that     the    said       Arbitration      Case   being

Arbitration Case No.03/2004 came to be dismissed

for default on 30.05.2008.
8.     Thereafter, an application came to be made by

Sri Kotemreddy Kodandarami Reddy for restoration of
3
the Arbitration Application under Order IX Rule 9

read with Sections 151 read with
Section 146
of

Code     of    Civil     Procedure,       1908.    The      aforesaid

application came to be allowed by the learned Trial

Judge.
9.     Being aggrieved thereby, the respondent-State

filed the aforesaid writ petition(s). The learned

Single    Judge        vide    impugned       judgment     and     order

allowed the the writ petitions and set aside the

order(s) passed by the learned Trial Judge.
10.    We have heard Ms. Kiran Suri, learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant and Ms. Soumyan

Tandon,        learned        counsel     appearing        for       the

respondent-State.
11.    Ms.      Kiran     Suri,        learned    senior         counsel

appearing       for     the    appellant,       submits     that     the

learned       Single     Judge    of    the     High     Court     while

allowing the writ petition(s) has only considered

the provision of
Section 201
of the Indian Contract

Act, but has ignored the provision of Sections 202

and 209 of the said Act. She submits that since the

appellant had an interest in the said contract, he

was entitled to continue with the proceedings in
4
spite of the death of the original contractor. She

submits that the learned Single Judge of the High

Court has failed to take into consideration this

aspect of the matter.
12.    Ms. Soumyan Tandon, learned counsel for the

State, on the contrary, submits that merely on the

basis of General Power of Attorney, it cannot be

construed that the appellant had an interest in the

contract.        In so far as the assignment deed is

concerned,    she   submits   that   since   there   was   no

consent of the State for the said assignment deed,

the same was not valid in law.        She further submits

that the rights in the contract could not have been

transferred by way of an assignment deed.
13.    Learned counsel for the respondent-State has

relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Indu    Kakkar      Vs.   Haryana        State   Industrial

Development    Corporation    Ltd.   &    Anr.-reported
in

(1999) 2 SCC 37 and also on the judgment of this

Court in C.A. Nos.
10683-10686 of 2014 titled as

“Kapilaben & Ors. Vs. Ashok Kumar Jayantilal Sheth

Through POA Gopalbhai Madhusudan Patel & Ors”.
14.    We    have   perused   the    material    placed    on
5
record.
15.     The   perusal     of    the   assignment      deed      dated

02.07.1990      clearly        reveals      that    the   original

contractor-P.     Seshareddy          had    assigned     all     the

rights    and   liabilities       arising     out   of    the    said

contract in favour of Sri Kotemreddy Kodandarami

Reddy.
16.     The perusal of the order passed by the Trial

Court would show that, it has held that leaving

apart the nature of GPA, the appellant was entitled

to prosecute the arbitration proceedings in view of

the rights accrued to him by way of the assignment

deed.
17.     We find that the view taken by the learned

Single Judge was not in consonance with of
Section

202
of the Indian Contract Act, which read thus:
“202. Termination of agency, where agent has an
  interest in subject-matter-where the agent has
  himself an interest in the property which forms
  the subject-matter of the agency, the agency
  cannot, in the absence of an express contract,
  be   terminated  to  the   prejudice  of   such
  interest.”
18.     No doubt, the learned Single Judge was right

in holding that on account of the death of the
6
original contractor, it amounted to termination of

the agency.      However, learned Single Judge could

not have read
Section 201
of the Indian Contract

Act in isolation by ignoring
Section 202
of the

Indian     Contract       Act.     The     learned     Single      Judge

failed to take into consideration that on account

of the assignment deed, an interest accrued in the

said     contract     in         favour     of   the      appellant.
Indisputably,       the    said     contract     was    the     subject

matter of the agency and as such in the absence of

an express provision to the contrary, the appellant

was entitled to continue with the said agency.
19.    The   learned       trial    Judge     rightly     construing

this     position,    allowed        the     application      of     the

appellant. In a jurisdiction under
Article 227
of

the Constitution of India, the learned Single Judge

could not have interfered with the order of the

trial Court , unless he found the view taken by the

learned trial Judge was perverse or impossible.
20.    In so far as the judgments relied upon by Ms.

Soumyan Tandon are concerned, the same are related

to an issue where the contract is contingent upon

certain rights and liabilities. One party cannot
7
not be compelled to do something unless the other

party which was required to perform its obligation

has performed it. As such, the said judgments would

not be applicable in the facts of the present case.
21.     In so far as the contention of Ms. Soumyan

Tandon with regard to the question as to whether

the contract could be assigned or not is concerned,

the said question is touching the merits of the

matter and cannot be gone into at this stage. These

questions can be raised by the respondent(s) in the

appropriate proceedings, if entitled in law.
22.     In    the   result,   the   impugned     judgment     and

order    is   not   sustainable     and   thus   the   same   is

quashed and set aside. The order of the learned

trial judge is restored.
23.     Since the proceedings are pending from 1992,

i.e. almost a period of more than 30 years, we

expedite the proceedings before the Trial Judge and

direct the same to be disposed of within a period

of six months from today.
8
24.   The   appeals   are   disposed   of   in   the   above

terms.
25.   Pending applications, if any, stand disposed

of.
….........................J
                             (B.R. GAVAI)



                             ...........................J
                             (B.V. NAGARATHNA)



New Delhi
November 09, 2022
9