[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Wg.Cdr. A.U. Tayyaba ( Retd) vs Union Of India on 16 November, 2022
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CA 79-82/2012
2022 INSC 1206
                                                          1


                                                                                     Reportable


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                              Civil Appeal Nos 79-82 of 2012




                        Wg Cdr A U Tayyaba (Retd) and Others                    …Appellants




                                                       Versus




                    Union of India and Others                                  …Respondents




                                                         WITH


                                          Civil Appeal Nos 192-196 of 2012
                                            Civil Appeal Nos 83-84 of 2012
                                            Civil Appeal No 5164 of 2012




      Signature Not Verified

      Digitally signed by
      CHETAN KUMAR
      Date: 2023.01.03
      09:48:31 IST
      Reason:
CA 79-82/2012
                                                          2


                                                  JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI
1.       The batch of appeals which forms the subject matter of the present dispute

emanates from a judgment of the Delhi High Court dated 11 August 2011. The High

Court in its lead judgment dated 12 March 2010 in Babita Puniya’s case 1 issued

specific directions for considering women Short Service Commissioned Officers 2 in the

Air Force and in the Army for the grant of Permanent Commission 3. Following the

decision of the Delhi High Court in Babita Puniya, a batch of writ petitions under
Article

226
of the Constitution of India came to be instituted before the Delhi High Court

seeking the benefit of the Babita Puniya judgment. The Delhi High Court by its

judgment dated 11 August 2011 dismissed the batch of six writ petitions. The High

Court held that the petitioners who had moved the specific proceedings were not

covered by the directions contained in Paragraph 61 of the earlier decision in Babita

Puniya. This batch of appeals has questioned the manner in which the decision of the

Delhi High Court in Babita Puniya has been implemented by the Indian Air Force.




1
Babita Puniya v. Secretary & Anr
, (2010) 168 DLT 115 (DB)
2 “SSCOs”
3 “PC”
CA 79-82/2012
3
Brief Background
2.        The appellants are women officers who joined the Indian Air Force4 as SSCOs

between 1993 and 1998. They were appointed in terms of a circular dated 25

November 1991 issued by the IAF which provided that the officers would initially be

granted Short Service Commission 5 for a period of five years, at the end of which they

would be considered for the grant of Permanent Commission 6 subject to suitability and

availability. The circular noted that women officers who were unwilling to opt for PC but

sought extension would be granted an extension for six years. The terms and

conditions, as referred to in paragraph 4 of the Circular dated 25 November 1991,

specified the tenure of engagement in the following terms:
“Clause 5: Tenure of Engagement: Initial engagement period
                would be for 5 years from the date of commissioning. On
                completion of this period, the officer may opt for PC or another
                SCC tenure of 6 years. The officers seeking such extension will
                not be eligible for PC. Grant of extension or PC would be
                subjected to suitability and requirement of the Air Force.

                Clause 6: Permanent Commission: SSC Officers granted PC will
                be eligible for all benefits/privileges, which are admissible to the
                regular PC Officers”
3.        The Indian Air Force issued advertisements pursuant to the policy circular inviting

applications from women to join as SSCOs, with a representation that the women

officers would be initially granted SSC for a period of 5 years, but at the end of tenure,


4 “IAF”
5 “SSC”
6 “PC”
CA 79-82/2012
4
PC would be granted subject to vacancies and suitability of the officer. The relevant

portion of the advertisement is extracted below :
“A Unique opportunity for dynamic young girls: march to a new
                horizon as a commissioned officer in the Indian Airforce training:
…

                TENURE OF ENGAGEMENT: Initial engagement would be for a
                period of 5 years from the date of commissioning with the
                provision to opt for PC or another tenure of six years. Grant of
                permanent commission depend upon vacancy and suitability of
                the officer.”

                CAREER PROSPECTS: SSC Officers will be entitled for
                promotion under conditions as applicable to Permanent
                Commissioned officers of Non-Tech Ground Duties Branches.”
4.     However, after rendering five years of service, the authorities offered an

extension of a period of six years to all the women officers, including the appellants.
Their cases for the grant of PC were not considered at that stage. However, the Indian

Air Force, considered only male officers for PC. Women were excluded.
5.     In 2003, a Public Interest Litigation was instituted before the High Court of Delhi

by Babita Puniya, an advocate, for the grant of PC to women SSC Officers, highlighting

the gender discrimination being meted out to women officers in the armed forces. Some

of the SSCOs belonging to the Army and the Air Force were also impleaded as co-

petitioners through various writ petitions. However, the appellants had not filed any writ

petitions during these proceedings.
CA 79-82/2012
5
6.        On 10 September 2004, a policy was promulgated for the grant of PC to SSCOs

with a rider that “Permanent Commission” would not be offered to Women Short

Service Commission Officers.
7.        By a policy issued in 2006, the respondents decided to stop PC to all SSCOs

irrespective of gender, due to cadre management considerations. On 25 May 2006, a

policy was issued by which provision of PC to male officers was discontinued and the

stipulation of women officers for consideration of PC as mentioned in the policy circular

of 1991 was withdrawn. The policy circular dated 25 May 2006 only provided for a

further extension of Commission to SSCOs. The corresponding Human Resources

Policy 7 specified the Qualitative Requirements 8 for extension of service. Accordingly,

the QR for grant of a second extension of service was increased from a minimum

average of 6.5 to 7.0 in the last three annual reports.
8.        In terms of the HRP dated 25 May 2006, some of the appellants qualified and

were granted a second extension of Short Service Commission for the period 2003-

2008, and were later released during the period between 2007 and 2010, having

rendered the maximum permissible service. Some of the appellants could not be

considered for second extensions since they did not meet the higher QR of getting a

minimum average of 7.0 in their last three years, and were released after serving the

IAF for 11 years between the years 2007 and 2009.
7 “HRP”
8 “QRs”
CA 79-82/2012
6
9.     Finally, on 26 September 2008, the President of India sanctioned a policy

decision to offer PC prospectively to women officers across the three armed forces in

select branches, specifically the JAG Department and the Army Education Corps of the

Army and their corresponding branches in the Indian Navy and Air Force, along with the

Accounts Branch of the Air Force and Naval Constructor in the Indian Navy.
10.    In Babita Puniya’s case, the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi decided

all the writ petitions by a judgment dated 12 March 2010. The principal grievance of the

women SSCOs was that by denying them PC, they had been subjected to gender

discrimination. While allowing the writ petitions, the High Court held that on grounds of

gender equality under
Articles 14
, 16
and
21
of the Constitution of India and the

doctrine of legitimate expectation, women SSCOs (in certain branches), who were

commissioned prior to 2006, were entitled to be considered for PC at par with male

SSCOs along with consequential benefits. The High Court observed:
“52. The women Air Force officers joined the
                          service on the assurance as held out to them in
                          terms of the Circular dated 25.11.2009 read with
                          its appendix and as advertised for their
                          recruitment. A representation was made to them
                          that though they were initially to be granted a
                          SSC for a period of 5 years, they were entitled to
                          a PC so long as they were willing and subject to
                          their suitability. The women officers opted for PC
                          but despite this fact only their SSC was extended.
53. As noticed above neither is the question of
                          suitability nor the absence of requirement in
                          doubt which was the twin condition even as per
CA 79-82/2012
7
Clause (v) of the appendix. Once male officers
                          who had been granted PC, there could be no
                          question of absence of requirement of officers for
                          PC. The advertisement also held out a promise to
                          the women Air Force officers of grant of PC
                          depending upon two factors, which are:
(i) Vacancy.
(ii) Suitability of the officers.
54. …..
55. Once these two conditions are satisfied,
                          which is so in the present case, the women Air
                          Force officers cannot be denied PC on the
                          specious plea that the SSC was only on
                          experimental basis and there was no entitlement
                          to PC despite satisfaction of the two terms and
                          conditions.
56. ….
57. ….
58. The doctrine of legitimate expectation as
                          observed in various judgments referred to
                          aforesaid is granted on the rule of law as
                          requiring regularity, predictability and certainty in
                          Government dealings with the public, operating
                          both on procedural and substantive matters. The
                          fair play would be the expectation from the
                          Government.”
11.    The High Court issued the following directions in Paragraph 61 of the judgment:
“61. We are, thus, of the considered view that the
                          following directions are required to be issued:
i. The claim of absorption in area of operation not
                          open for recruitment of women officers cannot be
                          sustained being a policy decision.
                          ii. The policy decision not to offer PC to Short
CA 79-82/2012
8
Service Commissioned Officers across the board
                          for men and women being on parity and as part
                          of manpower management exercise is a policy
                          decision which is not required to be interfered
                          with.
iii. The Short Service Commissioned women
                          officers of the Air Force who had opted for PC
                          and were not granted PC but granted extension
                          of SSCs and of the Army are entitled to PC at par
                          with male Short Service Commissioned officers
                          with all consequential benefits. This benefits
                          would be conferred to women officers recruited
                          prior to change of policy as (ii) aforesaid. The
                          Permanent Commission shall be offered to
                          them after completion of five years. They
                          would also be entitled to all consequential
                          benefits such as promotion and other
                          financial benefits. However, the aforesaid
                          benefits are to be made available only to
                          women officers in service or who have
                          approached this Court by filing petitions and
                          have retired during the course of pendency of
                          the petitions.
iv. It is made clear that those women officers
                          who have not attained the age of retirement
                          available for the Permanent Commission
                          officers shall, however, be reinstated in
                          service and shall be granted all consequential
                          benefits including promotion, etc. except for
                          the pay and allowances for the period they
                          have not been in service.
The necessary steps including release of
                          financial benefits shall be done by the authorities
                          within two (2) months of passing of this order.”
12.    The decision of the High Court was questioned in appeal by the Army authorities

and by the Union of India. This led to the decision of this Court reported in Secretary,
CA 79-82/2012
9
Ministry of Defence versus Babita Puniya and Others.9 The
following directions

were issued by this Court:
“87. We accordingly take on record the statement
                             of policy placed on the record in these
                             proceedings by the Union Government in the
                             form of the Letter dated 25-2-2019 and issue the
                             following directions:
87.1 The policy decision which has been taken by
                             the Union Government allowing for the grant of
                             PCs to SSC women officers in all the ten streams
                             where women have been granted SSC in the
                             Indian Army is accepted subject to the following:
87.1.1 All the serving women officers on SSC
                             shall be considered for the grant of PCs
                             irrespective of any of them having crossed
                             fourteen years or, as the case may be, twenty
                             years of service.
87.1.2 The option shall be granted to all women
                             presently in service as SSC officers.
87.1.3 Women officers on SSC with more than
                             fourteen years of service who do not opt for being
                             considered for the grant of the PCs will be
                             entitled to continue in service until they attain
                             twenty years of pensionable service.
87.1.4 As a one-time measure, the benefit of
                             continuing in service until the attainment of
                             pensionable service shall also apply to all the
                             existing SSC officers with more than fourteen
                             years of service who are not appointed on PC.
9 (2020) 7 SCC 469
CA 79-82/2012
10
87.1.5 The expression “in various staff
                          appointments only” in Para 5 and “on staff
                          appointments only” in Para 6 shall not be
                          enforced.
87.1.6 SSC women officers with over twenty
                          years of service who are not granted PC shall
                          retire on pension in terms of the policy decision.
87.1.7 At the stage of opting for the grant of PC,
                          all the choices for specialisation shall be available
                          to women officers on the same terms as for the
                          male SSC officers. Women SSC officers shall be
                          entitled to exercise their options for being
                          considered for the grant of PCs on the same
                          terms as their male counterparts.
87.2 We affirm the clarification which has been
                          issued in sub-para(i) of Para 61 of the impugned
                          judgment and order of the Delhi High Court.
87.3 SSC women officers who are granted PC in
                          pursuance of the above directions will be entitled
                          to all consequential benefits including promotion
                          and financial benefits. However, these benefits
                          would be made available to those officers in
                          service or those who had moved the Delhi High
                          Court by filing the writ petitions and those who
                          had retired during the course of the pendency of
                          the proceedings.”
13.    The grant of PC to women SSCOs is no longer res integra in so far as the Air

Force is concerned since the judgment of the Delhi High Court was not challenged

before this Court by the Indian Air Force. As a matter of fact, the judgment was said to

be implemented by the IAF for only those officers who were in service as on 12 March

2010 or those retired/ released officers who were not in service as on 12 March 2010
CA 79-82/2012
11
but had filed writ petitions before their release. Forty-four women SSCOs (twenty-three

who had been released and twenty-one who were then serving) were considered for the

grant of PC. A total of forty-one women SSCOs were granted PC. Three women

SSCOs intimated their unwillingness.
14.    The appellants were left out from the reinstatement plan of the IAF as they were

all released from service prior to 12 March 2010 and had not filed writ petitions

independently prior to the lead judgment in Babita Puniya’s case. Without any undue

delay, the appellants immediately approached the Delhi High Court challenging the

manner of implementation of the decision in Babita Puniya’s case by the IAF.
15.    The Delhi High Court in the impugned judgment dated 11 August 2011 held that

the benefit of the Babita Puniya judgment was limited to those women officers who

were still in service when the writ petition was decided or those who had approached

the Court by filing petitions but had retired during the pendency of the proceedings in

Babita Puniya’s case. The High Court further noted that if the benefit of the directions

in Babita Puniya’s case were to be extended to all women officers who were inducted

as SSCOs, the directions issued would have to be recalled since the grant of a PC was

subject to the twin requirements of suitability and availability of vacancies. By an order

dated 27 September 2011, the Delhi High Court dismissed the review petitions filed

against the impugned judgment.
CA 79-82/2012
12
Submissions
16.          We have heard Mr Krishnan Venugopal, Mr Huzefa A Ahmadi and Ms Meenakshi

Arora,        senior   counsel   appearing   on    behalf   of   the   appellants,   and   Mr   R

Balasubramanian, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.
17.          Five submissions have been urged on behalf of the appellants in support of the

challenge to the judgment of the High Court:
i.       Though the appellants were not parties to the proceedings before the High

                Court which resulted in the decision in Babita Puniya and would hence not

                be governed by paragraph 61(3) of the operative directions, they would fall

                within the purview of paragraph 61(4), which is an additional category over

                and above the category specified in paragraph 61(3);

      ii.       The appellants had a legitimate expectation in terms of the prevailing policy

                circular dated 25 November 1991 and the advertisement in pursuance of

                which they were recruited that they would be considered for the grant of PC at

                the end of five years of service but they were deprived of their legitimate

                expectation;
iii.      Following the decision of the High Court in Babita Puniya, the claim of the

                women SSCOs was required to be considered in terms of the Human

                Resources Policy promulgated by the IAF on 19 November 2010 but

                consideration has not taken place in pursuance of the applicable policy
CA 79-82/2012
13
circular;
iv.     In applying the Qualitative Ratings for considering the women SSCOs for the

              grant of PC, a crucial aspect is that at the relevant time such officers were not

              entitled to the grant of PC in view of the policy circular dated 10 September

              2004, consequent upon which the QRs were assessed on a casual basis

              without due application of mind; and

      v.      In any event, should this Court come to the conclusion that the women

              SSCOs cannot be reinstated in service at this point of time having regard to

              the years which have elapsed since they have been released from service,

              they should be granted pensionary benefits in terms of the decision in
Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya
rendered by this Court in

              the exercise of its jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India.
18.         Controverting these submissions, Mr R Balasubramanian, senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that:
i.     The appellants were neither serving in the IAF on 12 March 2010 when the

              judgment of the Delhi High Court in Babita Puniya was rendered nor had

              they approached the High Court while they were in service.                    As a

              consequence, none of the appellants are governed by the operative directions

              contained in paragraph 61 of the judgment of the Delhi High Court in Babita

              Puniya;
CA 79-82/2012
14
ii.    The IAF has duly complied with the operative conditions contained in the

            decision in Babita Puniya rendered by the High Court by considering forty-

            four women SSCOs of whom forty-one were granted PC;

     iii.   During the pendency of these proceedings, by an interim direction, this Court

            directed the IAF to consider the plea for reinstatement subject to the women

            SSCOs meeting the QRs reflected in the policy of 2007. Accordingly, the

            cases of fourteen appellants were considered in terms of the order dated 20

            February 2013 passed by this Court. Eight women SSCOs were reinstated

            while the rest were not found to be suitable; others had expressed their

            unwillingness; and yet others failed to meet the medical criteria;

    iv.     Subsequent to the above interim order, this Court on 23 August 2013 and 27

            September 2013 declined to grant interim relief to other officers;

     v.     On the date of the order of the High Court dated 12 March 2010, there were

            811 SSCOs of whom 348 had been released while 463 were serving. While

            implementing the judgment of the Delhi High Court, the Government of India

            and the Ministry of Defence issued orders on 5 August 2011 in terms of which

            463 serving SSCOs (88 male and 375 female) were considered for PC in

            addition to the 44 women SSCOs who had already been considered for the

            grant of PC under the judgment of the Delhi High Court. Out of these 463

            officers, 371 SSCOs were granted PC comprising of 70 men and 301 women;
CA 79-82/2012
15
and

    vi.     There has been no discrimination between men and women officers in terms

            of the application of the QR requirements in considering their claims for the

            grant of PC. The uniform QR requirement of 6.5 has been applied across the

            board to both men and women SSCOs as reflected in the following tabular

            chart:
AOP           Minimum AR Requirement for Extension        Minimum AR Requirement for Grant of
  Directive                                                                 PC
                          Average               Mandatory              Average                Mandatory
                                                 Qualities                                     Qualities
AOP Directive 5.5 in last two years                5.0       6.5 in last two years reports       6.0
   01/98      reports


HRP 04/04         (a) 6.00 in last three Ars       6.00      (a) 6.50 in last three Ars for
                  for     officers      from                 officers from Rationalised
                  Rationalised       scheme                  scheme and who are
                  and who are already on                     already on first Extn of
                  first Extn of other                        other scheme.
scheme.
(b) 6.5 in last two Ars for
                  (b) 6.0 in last two Ars for                officers who are in initial
                  officers who are in initial                term of Pre-Rationalised
                  term of Pre-Rationalised                   scheme.
                  scheme.
HRP 21/06         (a) 1st Extn – 6.5 in last       6.00      Nil                                 Nil
                  three Ars

                  (b) 2nd Extn – 7.00 in last
                  three Ars
CA 79-82/2012
16
HRP 11/07       (a)   Pre-Rationalised        6.00   Nil                               Nil
                scheme:-

                1st Extn – 6.5 in last
                three Ars

                (b) 2nd Extn – 7.00 in last
                three Ars


                (b) Rationalised scheme
                – 7.00 in last three Ars



HRP 04/10       Nil                           Nil    6.50 in Ars preceeding            6.00
                                                     three years prior to 25 May
06
HRP 04/10       Nil                           Nil    Pre Rationalised Scheme.          6.00
                                                     Should have either of the
                                                     following:-

                                                     (a) At Initial Extn
                                                     (i) Minimum average of
                                                     6.50 in the last two Ars (for
                                                     those who were due for
                                                     extension prior to 09 Sep
                                                     04)/ last three Ars (for
                                                     those who were due for
                                                     extension on/after 10 Sep
                                                     04) prior to the end of initial
                                                     term of engagement.

                                                     OR

                                                     At Second Extn Minimum
                                                     average of 7.00 in last
                                                     three Ars prior to Second
                                                     extension
CA 79-82/2012
17
Rationalised Scheme

                                                    Should      have    Minimum
                                                    average of 7.00 in last
                                                    three Ars prior to the end of
                                                    initial term of engagement.



Analysis
19.    The principal issue which falls for determination turns on the interpretation of

paragraphs 61(3) and 61(4) of the decision of the Delhi High Court in Babita Puniya.
The decision of the High Court eventually resulted in a judgment of this Court, as

already noted above. The IAF did not challenge the judgment of the Delhi High Court

dated 12 March 2010, unlike the Army authorities which were in appeal before this

Court. The IAF authorities have purported to implement the judgment. The issue which

falls for determination is whether the judgment has been duly observed.
20.    Paragraph 61(3) of the judgment of the Delhi High Court provided that women

SSCOs of the IAF who had opted for PC but were not granted PC but allowed only an

extension of their Short Service Commissions were entitled to PC at par with men

SSCOs with all consequential benefits. PC was to be offered to them after the

completion of five years. This will cover consequential benefits including promotion and

other financial benefits. However, the benefits were to be made available only to those

women officers who were in service and to those who had approached the High Court

by filing petitions though they had retired during the course of the pendency of the
      CA 79-82/2012
18
petitions. In other words, paragraph 61(3) covers two categories:
i.          Serving women SSCOs as on the date of the judgment; and

ii.         Women SSCOs who had instituted writ petitions before the High Court but who had

            retired during the course of the pendency of the petitions.
21.      The reference to the expression “retired” has to be construed as a release from

     service as accepted on both sides during the course of the hearing, since the SSCOs

     were governed by a release from service following the initial tenure of five years

     followed by two extensions of six years and four years, respectively.
22.          Paragraph 61(4), according to the submission of the appellants, postulates an

  additional category of officers who would not fall within the ambit of paragraph 61(3).

  This submission has been opposed by Mr R Balasubramanian, senior counsel

  appearing on behalf of the respondents who urges that paragraph 61(4) is clarificatory

  in nature.
23.          Before we resolve the area of contentious dispute, it would be appropriate to

  advert to the reasoning contained in paragraph 16 of the impugned judgment which

  reproduces paragraph 60 of the earlier decision. Paragraph 60 of the decision of the

  Delhi High Court in Babita Puniya is extracted below:
“60. A PC carries with it certain privileges of rank including
                      pension. These women officers have served well the Armed
                      Forces of the country in the areas of operation they were
                      recruited for and have worked in this capacity for 14 to 15 years.
                      They deserved better from the respondents. There is no reason
                      why these persons who have knocked the door of the court
CA 79-82/2012
19
should be deprived of their benefit and the benefit extended only
                  in future for grant of PC to women. It is not as if a complete
                  chapter can be opened by persons who have chosen to
                  accept the SSC and on completion of period decided to go
                  out of service. The benefit is only available to serving
                  officers and the ones who knocked the court but during the
                  period of consideration of the matter retired from service. Lt
                  would have been in the fitness of things if the respondents
                  having taken the decision to offer PC prospectively should have
                  favourably examined as a policy itself, the plea of the petitioners
                  who were in service or retired from service during pendency of
                  petition to grant them an equivalent benefit. In matters of gender
                  discrimination a greater sensitivity is expected and required.”
24.         The above observations of the Delhi High Court make it abundantly clear that at

that stage, it was inclined to grant the benefit to:
i.       Serving officers; and

      ii.      Officers who had moved the Court, but had retired or been released
from service during the pendency of the proceedings.
25.         The operative directions cannot be read in a manner isolated from the main text

of the judgment, which is evident from the intent underlying the ultimate directions. This

interpretation of the decision of the Delhi High Court is also reinforced by the operative

directions which were issued by this Court in
Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita

Puniya
, in the batch of appeals arising from the judgment of the Delhi High Court at

the instance of the Army authorities. This Court observed that the directions of the Delhi

High Court in its judgment dated 12 March 2010 envisaged that the benefits were to be

made available to those “women officers in service who had instituted proceedings
CA 79-82/2012
20
before the High Court and had retired during the pendency of the writ petitions”, and

that by virtue of direction (iv), it was envisaged that those women officers who had not

attained the age of superannuation for PC officers would be reinstated with all

consequential benefits. In paragraph 87 of its judgment, this Court observed as follows:
“87.3 SSC women officers who are granted PC in pursuance of
                the above directions will be entitled to all consequential benefits
                including promotion and financial benefits. However, these
                benefits would be made available to those officers in service or
                those who had moved the Delhi High Court by filing the writ
                petitions and those who had retired during the course of the
                pendency of the proceedings.”
26.    In other words, it was clarified that the benefits would extend to those officers

who were in service and to those who had moved the Delhi High Court by filing writ

petitions and had retired during the pendency of the proceedings. Hence, it is not

possible to accept the wider submission which has been urged on behalf of the

appellants that they were expressly covered by para 61 of the decision of the Delhi High

Court in Babita Puniya.
27.    The issue which falls for determination as to whether the appellants stand in the

same position as the officers who were governed by the decision in Babita Puniya.
28.    It needs to be emphasized that the entire litigation initially was pursued in the

form of a PIL which was moved by an advocate. During the pendency of the

proceedings, officers of the Air Force and the Army joined in the proceedings. The

appellants are all officers who are in service since their initial appointment in 1993. In
CA 79-82/2012
21
terms of the policy circular which held the field as well as the advertisements in

pursuance of which they were recruited, they were under a legitimate expectation that

they would be considered for the grant of PC at the end of five years. However, they

were not offered PC and were instead granted extensions in service.
29.     A person is said to have a reasonable or legitimate expectation if a

representation or a promise made by an authority, either expressly or impliedly, gives

room for such expectation in the normal course. While applying the doctrine of

legitimate expectation, the primary considerations are reasonableness and fairness of

the state action.
In
State of Jharkhand v. Brahmputra Metallics Ltd., Ranchi,10
this

Court     speaking        through      of    one      us    (D.Y. Chandrachud J)         elaborated   on

the doctrine of legitimate expectation in the following terms:
“45. …The state must discard the colonial notion that it is a
                sovereign handing out doles at its will. Its policies give rise to
                legitimate expectations that the state will act according to what it
                puts forth in the public realm. In all its actions, the State is bound
                to act fairly, in a transparent manner. This is an elementary
                requirement of the guarantee against arbitrary state action which
Article 14
of the Constitution adopts.”
30.     In the present case, the appellants had a legitimate expectation since the

respondents by their representations in the policy circular dated 25 November 1991 and

10 Civil Appeal Nos. 3860-3862 of 2020; 2020 SCC OnLine SC 968
CA 79-82/2012
22
in published advertisements created expectations among the women SSCOs regarding

the grant of PC on completion of       five years of service, subject to vacancies and

suitability. All the women officers were eligible to be considered for grant of PC between

years 2000 to 2003, but they were only given an extension of SSC in teeth of the

legitimate expectation which was held out in the initial terms and conditions of

appointment. The male counterparts of the appellants were considered for and granted

PC after their five years of service. The women SSCOs continued to be under a

legitimate expectation that their extended SSC tenure would be converted into a PC as

they were induced in service with a specific representation of being considered for PC.

The Delhi High Court in the Babita Puniya judgment dated 12 March 2010 had also

applied the doctrine of legitimate expectation and observed that the doctrine of

legitimate expectation, grounded in the rule of law, required regularity, predictability and

certainty in government dealings with the public, operating on procedural and

substantive matters.
31.    Most of these officers joined service between 1993 and 1998 and were

eventually released from service between December 2006 and 2009. They have put in

long years of service for the IAF. During the course of the hearing, the Court has been

fairly apprised on behalf of the Air Force authorities that the officers have an excellent

track record.
CA 79-82/2012
23
32.     In this backdrop, we are of the view that this batch of officers who moved the

Delhi High Court soon after the decision in Babita Puniya and within a reasonable

period from the date of their release should not be denied the benefit which emanates

from that judgment. At the same time, the Court cannot be oblivious of the fact that the

officers have been released from service on diverse dates between December 2006 to

December 2009. Reinstatement in service would not therefore be a viable option

particularly having regard to the exigencies of service in an armed force of the nation.

However, following the logic of the earlier decision of this Court in
Secretary, Ministry

of Defence v. Babita Puniya
, we are of the view that the officers should be considered

for the grant of pensionary benefits. This direction shall emanate in exercise of the

jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India to bring about

complete and substantial justice and remove the pernicious effects of gender

discrimination which had taken place in the past in the Indian Air Force.
The extra-

ordinary constitutional power entrusted under
Article 142
has been earlier invoked by

this Court in
Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya, Lt. Col
.
Nitisha and

Others v. Union of India
, 11 and
Union of India v. Lt. Cd. Annie Nagaraja
12 to

compensate and/or grant pensionary benefits to women officers, belonging to the Army

and Navy, in the interest of justice.
11 WP(C) No. 1109 of 2020; 2021 SCC OnLine SC 261
12 (2020) 13 SCC 1
CA 79-82/2012
24
33.    The officers shall be considered for the grant of PC on the basis of the HRP

dated 19 November 2010. The policy document specifically enunciates the QRs for the

grant of PC to women SSCOs in the following terms:
“5. Qualitative Reguirements(QRs.) - Q.Rs for grant of PC in respect of SSC
                 Women officers would be as follows: -
(a) No of ARs. ARs of the preceding three years prior to 25 May 06 would be
                 considered for grant of PC.
(b) AR Grades. For grant of PC an officer must have Minimum average
                 grading of 6.5 in the three ARs under consideration. For the grant of PC, an
                 officer must have a minimum grading of 6 (in ARs under consideration), in each
                 of the professional and behavioral factors listed below
(i)          Professional Factors

                              (aa) Professional Knowledge.
(ab) Job proficiency.
(ii)         Behavioral Factors

                              (aa) Integrity and Loyalty.
(ab) Dependability and Sense of Responsibility.
(ac) Courage (Physical and Moral)

          The policy also specifies other requirements including medical conditions.”
CA 79-82/2012
25
Directions
34.          We accordingly order and direct as follows:
i.       All the women SSCOs governed by the present batch of cases shall be

                considered for the grant of one-time pensionary benefits on the basis that

                they have completed the minimum qualifying service required for pension;

      ii.       The cases of the appellants shall be evaluated on the basis of the HRP dated

                19 November 2010 bearing Part No 5; and

      iii.      The officers who are found eligible for the grant of pensionary benefits in

                terms of the present direction shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary, but

                the arrears of pension shall be payable with effect from the date on which the

                officers are deemed to have completed twenty years of service;
iv.       We also clarify that we have dismissed several other petitions filed by officers

                who had moved the Delhi High Court after a considerable degree of delay

                following their release from service; and

      v.        In the present batch of cases, there are three officers who have scored QRs

                between 6.29 and 6.41. The case of these officers shall be considered

                sympathetically by the Air Force authorities on the same footing.
CA 79-82/2012
26
35.    The civil appeals are accordingly disposed of in the above terms.
36.    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
……….....…...….......…………………..CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                 ……..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                  [Hima Kohli]




                                                  …….…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                   [J B Pardiwala]

      New Delhi;
November 16, 2022
      CKB