[Cites
7
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Amit Singh Assistant Consolidation ... vs Ravinder Nath Pandey on 11 November, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8324-8327 OF 2022
                         [Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 30734-
                                              30737 of 2014]


                         AMIT SINGH                              …APPELLANT (S)

                                                 VERSUS

                         RAVINDRA NATH PANDEY & ORS.
                         ETC. ETC.                            …RESPONDENT(S)




                                               JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The appeals challenge the judgment and order dated

                         4th September 2014, passed by the Division Bench of the

                         High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench,

                         Lucknow, in Special Appeal No. 625 of 2008 and other
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
connected Appeals, thereby, while upholding the order
Date: 2022.11.11
14:10:02 IST
Reason:
1
passed by the learned Single Judge, modifying it to the

extent that the seniority list shall be prepared by applying

the rota system to direct recruits and promotees appointed

in one recruitment year.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
3.    The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeals

are as under:
3.1   The writ petitioners, who were promoted to the post of

Assistant Consolidation Officers (hereinafter referred to as

“the ACOs”) against the recruitment year 1997-1998,

approached the learned Single Judge of the High Court,

claiming that their seniority was above the direct recruits of

the same recruitment year. It was the contention of the writ

petitioners that the ACOs who were directly appointed were

erroneously given seniority over the promotees. It was their

contention that the seniority was required to be given in

accordance with Rule 8(3) of the U.P. Government Servants

Seniority Rules, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as “the 1991
2
Rules”) and their names had to be placed in a cyclic order,

i.e. a promotee followed by a direct recruitee.

3.2   The    writ   petitioners   were   initially   appointed   as

Consolidators in the Consolidation Department in various

districts.   They were promoted to the post of ACOs on

various dates in the year 1997. The respondents in the writ

petitions, i.e. direct recruits were directly appointed to the

post of ACOs, on the basis of the recommendation of the

Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission

and as per the recruitment process under the Uttar Pradesh

Revenue Consolidation Service Rules, 1992 (hereinafter

referred to as “the 1992 Rules”). The direct recruits were

appointed on 18th August 1997.              As such, both the

promotees as well as the direct recruits came in the cadre of

the ACOs in the recruitment year of 1997-1998, i.e. between

1st July 1997 and 30th June 1998.
3.3   The claim of the writ petitioners was resisted by the

State as well as by the direct recruits. It was contended on

behalf of the State as well as the direct recruits that the
3
seniority has to be assigned on the basis of the year of

vacancy.   It was submitted that, in the case of direct

recruits, though for an earlier year there existed vacancy for

them, they were appointed subsequently and as such, they

were given seniority in the quota available in the earlier

years.
3.4   The learned Single Judge of the High Court came to

the conclusion that the direct recruits were appointed on

18th August 1997, whereas the writ petitioners were

promoted on 16th December 1997. The learned Single Judge

found that both the promotees as well as the direct recruits

became members of the cadre of ACOs in the same

recruitment   year,   i.e.   1997-1998,   and,   therefore,   in

accordance with Rule 8 of the 1991 Rules, they had to be

placed in the seniority list in a cyclic order. It was found

that the said exercise was carried out in the year 2003;
however, the same had been abruptly changed through the

seniority list dated 29th July 2005, impugned before the

High Court.   The learned Single Judge found that in the
4
recruitment year 1997-1998, there were requisite number of

posts available for promotees and as such, the action of the

State in denying the seniority to the promotees was not

sustainable.   The learned Single Judge, therefore, allowed

the writ petitions and quashed and set aside the impugned

seniority list dated 29th July 2005.      The learned Single

Judge further directed that the promotees of 1997 to be

placed above the direct recruits of that year.

3.5   Being aggrieved thereby, the direct recruits preferred

appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court of

Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow.        The

learned Judges of the Division Bench of the High Court, vide

the impugned judgment and order dated 4 th September

2014, upheld the findings of the learned Single Judge of the

High Court, but modified the same to the extent that the

State shall apply rota system to direct recruits and

promotees appointed in one recruitment year.

3.6   Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant-direct recruit

has approached this Court.
5
SUBMISSIONS
4.   We have heard Mr. S.R. Singh, learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Pradeep Kant,

learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Rakesh K. Sharma, and Mr.

Tanmaya Agarwal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondents.
5.   Mr. S.R. Singh, learned Senior Counsel, submitted

that the direct recruits were appointed as ACOs on 18 th

August 1997, whereas the promotees came to be promoted

vide order dated 16th December 1997.       It is, therefore,

submitted that the promotees had not even entered the

cadre of ACOs when the appellant was appointed. It is

submitted that, since the appellant was appointed much

prior to the date on which the promotees were promoted,

the 2005 seniority list rightly placed the direct recruits

(including the appellant herein) above the promotees. It is

submitted that the learned Single Judge as well as the

Division Bench of the High Court have grossly erred in

setting aside the said seniority list.
6
6.   Mr. Singh further submitted that the 1991 Rules had

an overriding effect, and in view of Rule 8 of the 1991 Rules,

the seniority of persons appointed has to be determined

only from the date of the order of their substantive

appointments. It is submitted that the 1991 Rules will have

no application to the facts of the present case. It is

submitted that the finding of the learned Judges of the

Division Bench that, if the selection is made in one

recruitment/selection year the rota rules will apply, is

without any basis.
7.   Mr. Singh further submitted that if the judgments of

the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High

Court are upheld, it would amount to permitting the

promotees to get seniority retrospectively, which is not

permissible in view of the law as laid down by this Court in

the case of
Uttaranchal Forest Rangers’ Assn. (Direct

Recruit) and others vs. State of U.P.
and others1.




1    (2006) 10 SCC 346
7
8.   Mr. Pradeep Kant, learned Senior Counsel, on the

contrary, submits that the learned Single Judge as well as

the Division Bench of the High Court have rightly held that

since both the promotees as well as the direct recruits have

entered      the    cadre    of       ACOs   in    the   same

recruitment/selection year, i.e. 1997-98, no interference

would be warranted with the impugned order.

CONSIDERATION
9.   For considering the rival submissions of the parties, it

will be apposite to refer to the relevant Rules.
10. Rule 8 of the 1991 Rules reads thus:
“8. Seniority where appointments by
          promotion and direct recruitment.-
(1) Where according to the service rules
          appointments are made both by
          promotion and by direct recruitment, the
          seniority of persons appointed shall,
          subject to the provisions of the following
          sub-rules, be determined from the date
          of the order of their substantive
          appointments, and if two or more
          persons are appointed together, in the
          order in which their names are arranged
          in the appointment order:
8
Provided that if the appointment
order specifies a particular back date,
with effect from which a person is
substantively appointed, that date will be
deemed to be the date of order of
substantive appointment and, in other
cases, it will mean the date of issuance
of the order:
Provided further that a candidate
recruited directly may lose his seniority if
he fails to join without valid reasons,
when vacancy is offered to him the
decision of the appointing authority as to
the validity of reasons, shall be final.
(2) The seniority inter se of persons
appointed on the result of any one
selection,--
(a)   through direct recruitment, shall be
      the same as it is shown in the merit
      list prepared by the Commission or
      by the Committee, as the case may
      be;
(b)   by    promotion,     shall  be   as
      determined in accordance with the
      principles
laid down in
Rule 6 or
      Rule 7, as the case may be,
      according as the promotion are to
      be made from a single feeding cadre
      or several feeding cadres.
(3) Where appointments are made both
by promotion and direct recruitment on
the result of any one selection the
seniority of promotees vis-a-vis direct
recruits shall be determined in a cyclic
order (the first being a promotee) so far
9
as may be, in accordance with the quota
       prescribed for the two sources.
Illustrations.--(1) Where the quota of
       promotees and direct recruits is in the
       proportion of 1 : 1 the seniority shall be
       in the following order :
First ...... Promotee
       Second ...... Direct Recruits
       and so on
       (2) Where the said quota is in the
       proportion of 1 : 3 the seniority shall be
       in the following order:
First . . . . . . Promotee
       Second to fourth .... Direct Recruits
       Fifth ...... Promotee
       Sixth of eight ..... Direct recruits
       and so on
       Provided that:
(i)    where appointment from any source are
       made in excess of the prescribed quota,
       the persons appointed in excess of quota
       shall be pushed down, for seniority, to
       subsequent year or years in which there
       are vacancies in accordance with the
       quota;
(ii)   where appointment from any source fall
       short of the prescribed quota and
       appointment against such unfilled
       vacancies are made in subsequent year
       or years, the persons so appointed shall
       not get seniority of any earlier year but
       shall get the seniority of the year in
       which their appointments are made, so
10
however, that their names shall be
           placed at the top followed by the names,
           in the cyclic order of the other
           appointees;
(iii)   where, in accordance with the service
           rules the unfilled vacancies from any
           source could, in the circumstances
           mentioned in the relevant service rules
           be filled from the other source and
           appointment in excess of quota are so
           made, the persons so appointed shall get
           the seniority of that very year as if they
           are appointed against the vacancies of
           their quota.”
11. The perusal of sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of the 1991 Rules

would reveal that, where according to the service rules

appointments are made both by promotion and by direct

recruitment, the seniority of persons appointed shall,

subject to      the    provisions    of   the   said sub-rules, be

determined from the date of the order of their substantive

appointments.         It further provides that, if two or more

persons are appointed together, then, it shall be in the order

in which their names are arranged in the appointment

order.
11
12. Sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the 1991 Rules would be most

important. It provides that, where appointments are made

both by promotion and by direct recruitment on the result

of any one selection, the seniority of promotees vis-à-vis

direct recruits shall be determined in a cyclic order, i.e. the

first being a promotee, so far as may be, in accordance with

the quota prescribed for the two sources.
13. The illustration given is clear that, where the quota of

promotees and direct recruits is in the proportion of 1:1, the

first post will go to a promotee; and the second post will go

to a direct recruit and so on, and where the quota is in the

proportion of 1:3, then the first post will go to a promotee,

and second to fourth posts will go to direct recruits, the fifth

post will go to a promotee and sixth to eighth posts will go

to direct recruits, and so on. The proviso thereto clarifies

that, where appointments from any source are made in

excess of the prescribed quota, the persons appointed in

excess of the quota shall be pushed down, for the purposes

of seniority, to a subsequent year or years in which there
12
are vacancies in accordance with the quota.        Similarly, it

provides that, where appointments from any source fall

short of the prescribed quota and appointment against such

unfilled vacancies are made in a subsequent year or years,

the persons so appointed shall not get seniority of any

earlier year but shall get the seniority of the year in which

their appointments are made, so however, that their names

shall be placed at the top followed by the names, in the

cyclic order of the other appointees.      It further provides

that, where in accordance with the service rules, the

unfilled   vacancies   from     any   source   could,   in   the

circumstances mentioned in the relevant service rules be

filled from the other source and appointments in excess of

quota are so made, the persons so appointed shall get the

seniority of that very year as if they are appointed against

the vacancies of their quota.
14. It will also be relevant to note that, in the 1991 Rules,

the term recruitment/selection year is not defined.
13
15. On 25th March 1992, the 1992 Rules were notified.

The perusal of the 1992 Rules would reveal that they have

been made in supersession of all existing Rules and Orders

on the subject.   Clause (m) of Rule 3 of the 1992 Rules

defines “Year of recruitment’ to mean, a period of twelve

months commencing from the first day of July of a calendar

year.
16. Rule 5 of the 1992 Rules provides that, insofar as

posts of ACOs are concerned, 67% posts would be filled by

direct recruitment through the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate

Services Selection Commission and 33% posts by promotion

from amongst the substantively appointed Consolidators

and Rectangulators through the Selection Committee.

Rules 18 and 19 of the 1992 Rules would be vital, which

read thus:
“18. Combined select list.- If in any year
        of recruitment appointments are made
        both by direct recruitment and by
        promotion, a combined select list shall
        be prepared by taking the names of
        candidates from the relevant list, in such
        manner that the prescribed percentage is
14
maintained, the first name in the list
       being of the person appointed by
       promotion.
Part   VI-   Appointment,     Probation,
       Confirmation and Seniority
19. Appointments.- (1) Subject to the
       provisions of sub-rule (2) the appointing
       authority shall make appointment by
       taking the names of candidates in order
       in which they stand in the list prepared
       under Rule 15, 16 or 17, as the case may
       be.
(2) Where in any year of recruitment,
       appointments are to be made both by
       direct recruitment and by promotion,
       regular appointments shall not be made
       unless selections are made from both the
       sources and a combined list is prepared
       in accordance with Rule 18.
(3) If more than one orders of
       appointments are issued in respect of
       anyone selection, a combined order shall
       also be issued, mentioning the names of
       the persons in order of seniority as
       determined in the selection or, as the
       case may be, as it stood in the cadre
       from which they are promoted. If the
       appointments are made both by direct
       recruitment and by promotion, names
       shall be arranged in accordance with the
       cyclic order referred to in Rule 18.”
17. Rule 18 of the 1992 Rules mandates that, if in any

year of recruitment, appointments are made both by direct
15
recruitment and by promotion, a combined select list shall

be prepared by taking the names of candidates from the

relevant list, in such manner that the prescribed percentage

is maintained, the first name in the list being of the person

appointed by promotion.
18. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 19 of the 1992 Rules specifically

provides   that,   where   in    any   year   of   recruitment,

appointments are to be made both by direct recruitment

and by promotion, regular appointments shall not be made

unless selections are made from both the sources and a

combined list is prepared in accordance with Rule 18. Sub-

rule (3) of Rule 19 of the 1992 Rules further provides that, if

more than one orders of appointments are issued in respect

of any one selection, a combined order shall also be issued,

mentioning therein the names of the persons in order of

seniority as determined in the selection or, as the case may

be, as it stood in the cadre from which they are promoted.

It further provides that, if the appointments are made both

by direct recruitment and by promotion, names shall be
16
arranged in accordance with the cyclic order referred to in

Rule 18.
19. The position is thus clear. The 1992 Rules, which are

framed in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India, are in supersession

of all existing Rules and Orders on the subject. Insofar as

the contention of Mr. S.R. Singh, learned Senior Counsel,

on Rule 3 of the 1991 Rules is concerned, the said Rules

reads that, “these rules shall have effect notwithstanding

anything to the contrary contained in any other service rules

made hereto before”.     As such, the 1991 Rules will have

effect only if there is anything inconsistent therein with any

of the provisions in the earlier service rules.            This

submission is without merit inasmuch as the 1992 Rules

specifically state that they are in supersession of all existing

rules and orders.
20. This Court in the case of
Pawan Pratap Singh and

others vs. Reevan Singh
and others2 observed thus:
2     (2011) 3 SCC 267
17
“44. The Constitution Bench of this
Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engg.
Officers'        Assn. v. State         of
Maharashtra
[(1990) 2 SCC 715 : 1990
SCC (L&S) 339 : (1990) 13 ATC 348]
stated the legal position with regard to
inter se seniority of direct recruits and
promotees and while doing so, inter alia,
it was stated that once an incumbent is
appointed to a post according to rules,
his seniority has to be counted from the
date of his appointment and not
according to the date of his confirmation.
45. From the above, the legal position
with regard to determination of seniority
in service can be summarised as follows:
(i) The effective date of selection has to
be understood in the context of the
service     rules     under     which     the
appointment is made. It may mean the
date on which the process of selection
starts with the issuance of advertisement
or the factum of preparation of the select
list, as the case may be.
(ii) Inter se seniority in a particular
service has to be determined as per the
service rules. The date of entry in a
particular service or the date of
substantive appointment is the safest
criterion for fixing seniority inter se
between one officer or the other or
between one group of officers and the
other recruited from different sources.
Any departure therefrom in the statutory
18
rules, executive instructions or otherwise
        must      be    consistent     with    the
        requirements of
Articles 14
and
16
of the
        Constitution.
(iii) Ordinarily, notional seniority may
        not be granted from the backdate and if
        it is done, it must be based on objective
        considerations       and    on    a     valid
        classification and must be traceable to
        the statutory rules.
(iv) The seniority cannot be reckoned
        from the date of occurrence of the
        vacancy      and     cannot   be    given
        retrospectively unless it is so expressly
        provided by the relevant service rules. It
        is so because seniority cannot be given
        on retrospective basis when an employee
        has not even been borne in the cadre
        and by doing so it may adversely affect
        the employees who have been appointed
        validly in the meantime.”
21. This Court in the said case held that the effective date

of selection has to be understood in the context of the

service rules under which the appointment is made. It may

mean the date on which the process of selection starts with

the issuance of advertisement or the factum of preparation

of the select list, as the case may be. This
Court further

held
that the inter se seniority in a particular service has to
19
be determined as per the service rules. It held that the date

of entry in a particular service or the date of substantive

appointment is the safest criterion for fixing seniority inter

se between one officer or the other or between one group of

officers and the other recruited from different sources.    It

further held that any departure therefrom in the statutory

rules,   executive   instructions   or   otherwise   must   be

consistent with the requirements of
Articles 14
and
16
of

the Constitution of India. It further held that the seniority

cannot be reckoned from the date of occurrence of the

vacancy and cannot be given retrospectively unless it is so

expressly provided by the relevant service rules. It held that

the seniority cannot be given on retrospective basis when an

employee has not even been borne in the cadre and by doing

so it may adversely affect the employees who have been

appointed validly in the meantime.
22. A bench of three learned Judges of this Court in the

case of
P. Sudhakar Rao and others vs. U. Govinda Rao
20
and others3 has approved the law as
laid down by
this

Court in the case of
Pawan Pratap Singh and others
(supra).
23. It is thus clear that the inter se seniority between the

promotees and the direct recruits will have to be determined

in accordance with the 1992 Rules. The 1992 Rules fix the

quota of 67% for direct recruits and 33% for promotees. A

“year of recruitment” has been defined to be a period of

twelve months, commencing from the first day of July of the

calendar year and as such, in the present case, the year of

recruitment would be from 1st of July of 1997 to 30 th of June

1998.
24. Admittedly, the direct recruits were appointed on 18th

August, 1997, whereas the promotees were appointed on

16th December, 1997, i.e. both were appointed in the

selection/recruitment year 1997-98. In view of sub-rule (2)

of Rule 19 of the 1992 Rules, where the appointment of both

the direct recruits and of the promotees were to be made in


3       (2013) 8 SCC 693
21
the same year of recruitment, regular appointments should

not have been made unless selections were made from both

the sources and a combined list was prepared in accordance

with Rule 18 of the 1992 Rules. In view of sub-rule (3) of

Rule 19 of the 1992 Rules, since the appointments in the

same selection/recruitment year were made both by direct

recruitment and by promotion, the names were required to

be arranged in accordance with the cyclic order referred to

in Rule 18 of the 1992 Rules. In view of Rule 18 of the 1992

Rules, a combined select list has to be prepared by taking

the names of candidates from the relevant list, as per the

quota for the direct recruits. In other words, the first name

in the list was required to be that of a promotee.
25. A combined seniority list was initially prepared in

accordance with the said provisions of the 1992 Rules on

18th September 2003.     However, it had been erroneously

changed on 29th July, 2005, thereby giving undue benefits

to the direct recruits over the promotees. Such a list was in

contravention of the provisions of Rules 18 and 19 of the
22
1992 Rules. When the 1992 Rules specifically emphasized

that, where in any year of recruitment, appointments were

to be made both by direct recruitment and by promotion,

regular appointments could not have been made unless

selections were made from both the sources and a combined

list was to be prepared in accordance with Rule 18 of the

1992 Rules, the seniority list dated 29 th July 2005, which

provided a higher seniority to the direct recruits, is, for the

aforesaid reasons, not sustainable in law.
26.
Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of
Uttaranchal Forest Rangers’ Assn. (Direct Recruit) and

others
(supra) is concerned, the same would not be

applicable to the facts of the present case. In the said case,

the promotees, who were promoted in 1991, claimed

seniority over the direct recruits who were substantively

appointed at a prior point of time in 1990. In any case, the

1992 Rules did not fall for consideration in the said case.
27. As already discussed herein above, we are of the

considered view that, in view of Rules 18 and 19 of the 1992
23
Rules, the seniority list dated 29th July 2005, impugned

before the High Court, is not sustainable in law.
28. In the result, we find no merit in the present appeals.

The appeals deserve to be dismissed and, as such, are

dismissed.
29. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.

No costs.
..............................J.
                                                    [B.R. GAVAI]

                                       .............................J.
                                       [ B.V. NAGARATHNA]

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 11, 2022
24