[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Chief Executive Officer, Zilla ... vs Santosh Tukaram Tiware on 24 November, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2022
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 3466 OF 2022)


          Chief Executive Officer,                                    .Appellant(S)
          Zila Parishad, Thane & Ors.

                                               Versus

          Santosh Tukaram Tiware & Ors.                            ..Respondent(S)


                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 16.12.2021 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No.

                         4731/2021, by which, the High Court has set aside the

                         order of termination issued to respondent No. 1 herein –

                         original writ petitioner and directed the appellant – Zila

                         Parishad to grant him the benefits as regular employee
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2022.11.24
12:53:48 IST
Reason:
1
from the date of termination i.e., 15.07.2021, the Zila

      Parishad, Thane has preferred the present appeal.
3.    The facts leading to the present appeal in a nutshell are as

      under: -
3.1   That the Zila Parishad, Thane issued communication dated

      29.03.2010 to the Block Development Officer, Panchayat

      Samiti requesting for immediate recruitment of ambulance

      drivers at primary health centres on contractual basis till

      the tender process for supplying/providing driver on

      contract basis is completed. It was directed to complete the

      process of appointing the drivers on contract basis locally

      and on the maximum honorarium of Rs. 7,600/- for each

      driver. Pursuant to the said communication, the Block

      Development Officer initiated the process. Vide office order

      dated 24.05.2010, respondent No. 1 – original writ

      petitioner was appointed temporarily and on contract basis

      as a driver for a period of two months and an agreement

      was executed between respondent No. 1 and Health Officer,

      Primary Health Centre agreeing with the terms and

      conditions of the employment. One of the conditions was
2
that the appointment of candidate is on the contract basis

and is exclusively temporary in nature. That another

condition was that if at the appointed place appointment of

zila parishad driver is done then the appointment of

concerned driver will be terminated. As it took time in

completing tender process the tenure/engagement of

respondent No. 1 was extended from time to time but for

every two months on the same terms and conditions on

which earlier he was engaged. Thereafter, respondent No. 1

in the year 2019 gave a representation to the Zila Parishad

for permanency on the post of driver and the concerned

medical officer issued the experience certificate. That

thereafter   Taluka   Health   Officer   issued   order   dated

18.08.2020 for re-employment of respondent No. 1 for

temporary basis from 01.11.2019 to 30.09.2020. Again, in

the year 2020 respondent No. 1 was re-appointed on

contractual basis for a period of 11 months. That

respondent No. 1 again submitted his representation and

prayed for permanency submitting, inter-alia, he has been

working approximately for nine years. That thereafter

respondent No. 1 – original writ petitioner filed Writ
3
Petition   No.   4731/2021    before   the   High   Court   on

31.07.2021 and prayed for regularization and to confer

permanency. Before that by order dated 15.07.2021 and in

compliance with order dated 06.07.2021 of CEO, Zila

Parishad, Thane, Taluka Health Department terminated

the appointment of respondent No. 1 and appointed an

outsourcing agency. At this stage, it is required to be noted

that appointment of respondent No. 1 as contractual driver

was put to an end as by that time the tender process was

completed and the contract for providing contractual driver

was given to one M/s Rakshak Security Services and

Systems Pvt. Ltd., Pune. That the High Court issued the

notice in Writ Petition on 30.08.2021 and by an interim

order the High Court allowed the original writ petitioner to

sign the muster roll and to continue his work. That

thereafter by the impugned judgment and order the High

Court has not only set aside order of termination dated

15.07.2021 though no such prayer was made, but has

ordered regularization and permanency on the ground that

he has been continued in service for more than nine years

as a driver without break and/or with artificial break.
4
3.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court, Zila

      Parishad has preferred the present appeal. By order dated

      07.03.2022 while issuing the notice this Court stayed the

      operation of the impugned judgment and order passed by

      the High Court.
4.    Shri A. Karthik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellants has vehemently submitted that in the facts and

      circumstances of the case the Hon’ble High Court has

      seriously erred in directing to regularize services of

      respondent No. 1.
4.1   It is submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the appellants that the Hon’ble High Court has not

      properly appreciated the fact that the initial appointment

      of respondent was on contractual basis and till the tender

      process for providing services of the driver is completed.


4.2   It is submitted that the Hon’ble High Court has not

      properly appreciated that fact that respondent No. 1 was

      neither appointed on regular basis nor was appointed after
5
following due procedure as required and was appointed as

      stopgap and on contractual basis. It is submitted that

      merely because it took a longer time to complete the tender

      process and that respondent No. 1 continued for a long

      time on contractual/temporary basis, the respondent has

      not acquired any right to get his services regularized.



4.3   It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the appellants that the post of driver was

      vacant at Primary Health Centre, Sendrun. Considering

      the fact that the medical service is an emergency service

      and for 24 hours and the ambulance cannot be without

      any driver, the service of driver was temporarily required

      and therefore, the applications for the post of temporary

      driver on the contract basis was called by the panchayat

      samiti office from District Health Officer, Zila Parishad,

      Thane. It is submitted that respondent No. 1 applied for

      the post of driver on temporary contract basis and his

      application for the said post was considered and the

      direction was given to appoint him on the post of driver

      only for temporary contract period. It is submitted that in
6
the appointment order itself it is specifically mentioned

      that he is appointed as a driver on temporary basis and

      his services shall be put to an end as and when the

      appointment of the driver is made by the Zila Parishad.



4.4   It is further submitted that thereafter the tender process to

      award the contract commenced in the month of March,

      2021 and having come to know about the tender process

      respondent No. 1 filed the writ petition before the High

      Court praying for the regularization. It is submitted that

      the same petition was filed on 31.07.2021. But by the time

      the contract was given/awarded to one M/s Rakshak

      Security Services and Systems Pvt. Ltd., Pune and

      therefore, by order dated 15.07.2021 the services of

      respondent No. 1 along with other similar situated

      contractual drivers were put to an end. It is submitted that

      though order dated 15.07.2021 was not specifically

      challenged before the High Court and it was also brought

      to the notice of the High Court by way of counter, without

      any challenge the Hon’ble High Court has set aside order
7
dated    15.07.2021      and      thereafter,   has      ordered

      regularization which is impermissible.



4.5   Making the above submissions it is prayed to allow the

      present appeal.
5.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Mrs. V. Mohana,

      learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent

      No. 1.
5.1   It is submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the

      case and more particularly, when respondent No. 1 was

      continued in service for more than ten years the Hon’ble

      High Court has not committed any error in ordering

      regularization of his services.
5.2   It is submitted that before appointing respondent No. 1

      applications were invited by the District Health Officer, Zila

      Parishad, Thane and thereafter, respondent No. 1 was

      appointed in the year 2010 and thereafter, his services

      have been continued from time to time by giving him

      artificial break which continued up to July, 2021. It is

      submitted    that   therefore     in   the   above    facts   and
8
circumstances no error has been committed by the High

      Court in ordering regularization. Reliance is placed upon

      the decisions of this Court in the case of
Pandurang

      Sitaram Jadhav and Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra
;

      (2020) 17 SCC 393 as well as on the decision of this

      Court in the case of
Sheo Narain Nagar and Ors. Vs.

      State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr.
; (2018) 13 SCC 432.



5.3   Making the above submissions and relying upon the above

      decisions it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
6.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length. At the outset, it is required to

      be noted that by the impugned judgment and order the

      High Court has directed the appellants – Zila Parishad to

      regularize the services of respondent No. 1 as a driver.

      However, it is required to be noted that when respondent

      No. 1 was initially appointed in the year 2010, he was

      appointed on temporarily contractual basis till the tender

      process to award the contract for availing the services of

      the   driver   is   completed.   In   communication     dated
9
29.03.2010, the District Health Officer, Zila Parishad

communicated to the Block Development Officer as under:
-
“HEALTH DEPARTMENT, ZILLA PARISHAD, THANE
                     Outward No. ZP/AV/Vehicle/Vshi/68
                Health Department, Zilla Parishad, Thane
                                         Date: 29.03.2010
    To, Block Development Officer
    Panchayat Samiti---------(concerned)

    Subject: In respect of appointment of driver on
    contractual basis.
Within your jurisdiction, new TATA Sumo
    ambulance are provided to primary health centre
    through this office. And those public health centres
    which has been provided with new ambulance, the old
    vehicle of that place is given to other primary health
    centre. Those primary health centre were the posts of
    drivers are vacant, at those primary health centres, for
    supplying / providing drivers on contract basis society
    the procedure for tender is being done at the
    department level. For this tender process, minimum
    two month period may be required.
Therefore, on your level, the process of appointing
    driver may be done locally. The monthly 41
    honorarium maximum limit will be amount of Rs.
    7600/- for each driver. Any more amount than this
    will not be payable. For inviting quotation, driving
    license of the driver, insurance of the vehicle etc record
    should be included.
Before this, the contract of vehicles taken on lease
    in the financial year 2009-10 is expiring on
    31.03.2010. Therefore, vehicle of medical aid squad is
    being closed. However, those primary health centres /
    squad who has not been provided with government
    vehicle till today, those health centres and squad are
    hereby permitted to ply vehicle on lease basis until
    further orders. The list of said societies is annexed
    herewith.
10
Those primary health centres where the posts of
          drivers are to be filled on contractual basis, the list of
          those primary health centres is annexed herewith.
Sd/-
District Health officer,
                                                    Zilla Parisahd,
                                                             Thane”

          That thereafter only applications were invited and the

      appointment of driver of ambulance on contractual basis

      was made.
6.1   In the appointment order itself it was specifically provided

      that if at the said place appointment of Zila Parishad driver

      is done then the appointment of concerned driver will be

      terminated. Therefore, at the relevant time neither there

      was any selection process followed nor it can be said that

      the appointment of respondent as driver was made after

      following due procedure as required. It appears that at the

      relevant time the appointment on contractual basis was

      made looking to the public interest and to see that the

      ambulance is not without any driver. At this stage, it is

      required to be noted that after G.O. issued by the

      Government, the regular appointments were banned and

      services of the driver were to be provided by the
11
contractor/agency. It is true that for whatever reason the

tender process to award the contract could not be

completed and therefore, respondent No. 1 continued to

render services as a driver on contractual basis. That the

further tender process was started in the month of March,

2021 which was awarded in the month of July, 2021 and

therefore, as the contract was awarded to the agency to

provide services of the drivers, the services of respondent

No. 1 along with other similarly situated drivers were put

to an end by order dated 15.07.2021. That thereafter

respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition before the High Court

praying for regularization which was filed on 31.07.2021,

and by that time vide order dated 15.07.2021 the services

of respondent No. 1 was put to an end. Despite the above

and solely on the ground that respondent No. 1 has

rendered his services for longer period the High Court has

ordered regularization. The High Court has also set aside

order   dated   15.07.2021    though   the   same   was   not

challenged before the High Court. Without challenging

order dated 15.07.2021 the High Court ought not to have
12
set aside order dated 15.07.2021 which was on the award

      of the contract to the agency.
6.2   Merely because respondent No. 1 continued in service for

      longer period on contractual basis the High Court ought

      not to have passed the order of regularization more

      particularly, when a policy decision was taken to avail the

      services of the driver by the agency/contractor and that

      the appointment of respondent No. 1 and other similarly

      situated   drivers   was   not   made   after   any   selection

      procedure. The appointment of respondent No. 1 was

      purely on stopgap and on contractual basis. Under the

      circumstances, the High Court has committed a very

      serious error in ordering regularization as well as quashing

      and setting aside order dated 15.07.2021 by which on the

      contract being awarded to M/s Rakshak Security Services

      and Systems Pvt. Ltd., the services of respondent No. 1

      was put to an end.
6.3   Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of this

      Court in the case of
Pandurang Sitaram Jadhav
(supra) is

      concerned, on facts
the said decision
shall not be
13
applicable to the case on hand and/or of any assistance to

     respondent No. 1. It was a case where this Court found an

     unfair labour practice. It was found that employees

     similarly situated working in the same establishment were

     granted regularization.
Similarly, the decision of this Court

     in the case of
Sheo Narain Nagar
(supra) also shall not be

     applicable to the facts of the case on hand. It was a case

     where the authorities conferred temporary status and it

     was found that there was requirement of work and

     availability of posts too, and it was found that it was not a

     case of back-door entry, the services of the concerned

     employees    were    directed        to    be   regularized   w.e.f.,

     02.10.2002 from the date on which the authorities

     conferred the temporary status. Therefore, on facts
the

     said decision
shall not be applicable to the facts of the case

     on hand.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court

     quashing    and     setting        aside   communication      dated

     15.07.2021 putting an end to services of respondent No. 1
14
on the contract being awarded to M/s Rakshak Security

     Services and Systems Pvt. Ltd., and the order directing the

     appellants to regularize the services of respondent No. 1 as

     a driver deserves to be quashed and set aside and is

     accordingly quashed and set aside. Consequently, writ

     petition preferred by respondent No. 1 stands dismissed.

     Present appeal is accordingly allowed. In the facts and

     circumstance of the case there shall be no order as to

     costs.
…………………………………J.
                                    (M. R. SHAH)


                                    …………………………………J.
                                    (M.M. SUNDRESH)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 24, 2022.
15