[Cites
55
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Ocl India Ltd. vs State Of Orissa . on 4 November, 2022
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1


                                                          REPORTABLE

                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2348 OF 2004

M/s. OCL INDIA LTD.                                   …APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS


STATE OF ORISSA & ORS.                              …RESPONDENT(S)


                                  WITH


     SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 15179 OF 2008

               CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4649-4650 OF 2012

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 289 OF 2012


                            JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.    Since common questions of law relating to the interpretation of “local
area” occurring under Entry 52 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution are involved, this Court by its order dated 26.03.2015 referred
the issue for the decision of a larger bench. The reference order took note of a
previous Constitution Bench ruling in
Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr. v.
State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
1 where the court held that a “local area” would
be an area which is administered by a local body such as a municipality, a
district Board, a local board, a Panchayat or the like and that factory premises

1 (1961) 3 SCR 242
2
are not covered by the aforesaid expression. The court also took note of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth) Amendment Act, 1992
which introduced
Article
243-Q
relating to the constitution and administration of municipal bodies and
held that having regard to these developments, the issues which need
adjudication in the present appeals have to be considered by a larger bench.
Hence, the appeals are listed before this Bench.
2.       For a proper determination of the issues involved, it would be
necessary first to notice Entry 52 of List II which authorises State Legislatures
to levy entry tax:
“taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale
       therein”.2
3.       The term “local area” has not been defined in the Constitution;
however, by
Article 367
, provisions of the
General Clauses Act, 1897
, subject
to adaptations or modifications made under
Article 372
shall apply for
interpretation of the Constitution.
The General Clauses Act, 1897
does not
per se define a local area, however, it does define a “local authority”, by
Section 2(31)
in the following terms:
“(31) “local authority” shall mean a municipal committee, district board,
       body of port Commissioners or other authority legally entitled to, or entrusted
       by the Government with, the control or management of a municipal or local
       fund.”
4.       The State of Orissa enacted the
Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999
(hereafter,
“the Orissa Act”) which defined the local area so as to include industrial
townships among other areas3 including areas within the industrial township
constituted under
Section 4
of the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 (hereafter “the
1950 Act”), thereby subjecting goods entering into such areas, to entry tax. 4 .
2 This entry was omitted by the
Constitution (One Hundred and First) Amendment Act, 2016
.
3 (f) “Local area” means the areas within the limits of any –
(i) Municipality constituted under the
Orissa Municipal Act,1950 (Orissa Act
23 of 1950);
(ii) Grama Panchayat constituted under the
Orissa Grama Panchayats Act, 1964
(Orissa Act 1 of 1965);
(iii) Other local authority by whatever name called, constituted or continued in any law for the time being in
force, and includes the area within an industrial township constituted under
Section 4
of the Orissa
Municipal Act, 1950 (Orissa Act 23 of 1950).
4 By
Section 3
, a levy and collection of tax on the entry of scheduled goods into local area for consumption,
use or sale was imposed.
3
The 1950 Act, by
Section 4
provides that the State Government can constitute
(a) a notified area council for every “transitional” area; (b) a municipal
council for every smaller urban area; and (c) a municipal corporation for
every larger urban area. The proviso to
Section 4(1)
, however, indicates that
no such council or corporation:
“shall be constituted in any urban area or part thereof which the Governor
      may, having regard to the size of the area under Municipal services being
      provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area
      and such other factors as he may deem fit, by notification, specified to be an
      industrial township.”
5.     Two of the appellants before this Court i.e., M/s. OCL India Ltd. and
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (hereafter, “SAIL”) impugned the Orissa Act
especially the levy of entry tax. SAIL contended that imposition of entry tax
violates
Article 301
of the Constitution. It relied upon the five judge Bench
decision in
Jindal Stainless Ltd. & Anr. V. State of Haryana & Ors.
5 This
Court had held that whenever a law is impugned as violative of
Article 301
,
the court has to consider whether the enactment facially or patently indicates
quantifiable data based on which compensatory taxes sought to be levied.
The basis of SAIL’s writ petition before the High Court was that the levy of
entry tax on capital goods and raw-materials imported into India and raw-
materials used in the factories or in work was unconstitutional. The High
Court by its impugned judgment dismissed SAIL’s writ petition holding that
the Orissa entry tax did not violate any constitutional prohibition and was in
conformity with
Article 304(a)
of the Constitution. SAIL relied on notification
dated 15.04.1995 as modified on 07.03.1996 and 17.11.2014. It contended
that the effect of these was to exclude the areas in its industrial area, which
were part of the Rourkela Municipality; consequently, they ceased to be a
“local area” under the Orissa Act.
6.     OCL challenged the levy imposed upon it contending that by virtue of
certain notifications dated 23.12.1998, the industrial townships set up by it
5 (2006) 7 SCC 241
4
were excluded from the local limits of the Rajgangpur Municipality                                       It,
therefore, argued that the inclusion of its industrial township as a local area by
virtue of the definition of that term in the Orissa Act was unconstitutional.
OCL contended that having regard to the agreement (hereafter "Agreement") 6
which it had entered into with the Municipal Council, in regard to the
provision of services and the nature of services provided, its industrial
township could not be characterised as a local area. It also relied upon
Article
243-Q
of the Constitution and contended that any enactment by the
Parliament or the State Government had to conform to the amended
Constitution, especially provisions of
Article 243-Q
, the object of which was
to exclude from within the purview of municipalities and municipal bodies,
industrial establishments. Therefore, the imposed or levy of entry tax was
void. The Writ Petitions of both OCL and SAIL were rejected by the Orissa
High Court.7
7.      This batch also comprises of two appeals 8 preferred by Hindustan
Aluminium Company Ltd. (hereafter, “HINDALCO”).                                    Both appeals are
directed against the common judgment rendered by the Allahabad High Court
dated 23.12.2011, which had negatived the contentions urged by it [along
lines similar to those advanced by OCL and SAIL, before the Orissa High
Court]. The Allahabad High Court by its elaborate reasoning in the impugned
judgment noticed not only the provisions of the U.P. enactments but also took
note of the definition of local area and referred to the other cognate statutes
such as
Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916
; The Uttar Pradesh Kshetrra
Panchayats And Zila Panchayats Adhiniyam, 1961; United Provinces
Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 and
U.P. Industrial Area Development Act, 1976
(hereafter, “the UPIAD Act”).
6 Agreement for transfer of assets and liabilities etc. entered into between Rajgangpur Municipality and OCL
India Ltd, Rajgangpur dated 26-03-1999.
7 By two separate Judgments dated 28.03.2003 in OJC No. 14424/1999 (which is the subject matter of C.A.
No. 2348/2004) and dated 18.02.2008 in W.P. 3019/2007 (which is the subject matter of SLP No. 15179 /
2008).
8 Civil Appeal No 4649-50 of 2012 and Civil Appeal No 289 /2012
5
HINDALCO, in its petitions had relied on notifications dated
07.04.2000 which declared its industrial area, in Renukoot Sonebhadra, as an
“industrial township” under the UPIAD Act.
8.    It was held by the Allahabad High Court that the inclusion of industrial
townships within the definition of the local area for the purposes of entry tax
did not exceed any constitutional limit and also did not violate
Article 243-Q
of Constitution.
A Submission of Parties
      (i)    Appellants’ contentions
9.    It was argued by Mr Braj K Mishra, learned counsel for OCL, that no
octroi was being levied or leviable in its notified industrial township and
therefore, it is not covered by the definition of “local area” under Entry 52 of
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Consequently, the levy of
entry tax on entry of goods into such industrial township for use, sale or
consumption therein must be declared unconstitutional on the ground of
incompetency of the State Legislature to levy the same.
10.   It was also submitted by the counsel that interpretation of Entry 52 in
List II (of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution) declared in
Diamond
Sugar Mills
(supra) is applicable, even after introduction of
Article 243-Q
,
under Part IX-A of the Constitution. The purpose of introducing that provision
was to strengthen functioning of local bodies because they were unable to
perform effectively as vibrant units of self-government. The proviso to the
article allows the Governor to exclude an area industrial establishment in
which an industrial township may be set up and in which certain municipal
services may be provided by such establishment. Counsel submitted that such
industrial establishment cannot be equated with an area administered by local
authority i.e., local self-government such as a municipal or town area.
Therefore, its exclusion, by the proviso to
Article 243-Q
meant that it could
not be considered as a local area, under any law, made by any state. The levy
6
of entry tax, into such areas covered by industrial establishments, lawfully
declared as such, therefore, had to fail.
11.     OCL’s counsel also relied on the ruling of this Court in
Union of India
v RC Jain9
and
Housing Board of Haryana v Haryana Housing Board
Employees’ Union10
and urged that OCL does not possess attributes and
features or any power or functions of a ‘local authority’ like Municipal
Committees, District Boards, Gram Panchayats, and Panchayat Samitis. Thus,
its ‘Industrial Township’ cannot be construed to fall within the expression
“Local Area” used in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
Reliance was
also placed on
Diamond Sugar Mills Limited
(supra) to argue that though the
interpretation of the term ‘local area’ was given in respect of factory premises,
the interpretation must not be limited only to a case of factory premises.
This
Court in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) held that:
“15. The etymological meaning of the word “local” is “relating to” or
          “pertaining to”a place. It may be first observed that whether or not the
          whole of the State can be a “local area”, for the purpose of Entry 52, it is
          clear that to be a “local area” for this purpose must be an area within the
          State.
xxxxxx                           xxxxxx                    xxxxxx
28. The premises of a factory is therefore not a “local area”.
12.     OCL relied on the Agreement between OCL and the Municipality to
state that OCL’s premises are excluded from the Rajgangpur Municipal area
after its declaration as an Industrial Township. Further, Clause 5 of the
minutes of discussions11 dated 01-02-1999 between the State Government,
Rajgangpur Municipality, and OCL declares that goods procured by OCL will
not be liable for octroi. Learned counsel submitted that once the OCL is
exempted from payment of octroi, the State Government cannot impose entry


9 (1981) 2 SCC 308
10 (1996) 1 SCC 95
11 No 249/Res Re: formation of committee for settlement of assets and liabilities etc. between OCL India
Ltd. and Rajgangpur Municipality
7
tax on goods procured by it since octroi duty is basically the predecessor of
entry tax.
13.      Counsel for SAIL, Mr. S.K. Bagaria, relied on the dicta in
Diamond
Sugar Mills
(supra) and also placed reliance on
New Okhla Industrial
Development Authority v Commissioner of Income Tax12
(hereafter,
“NOIDA”) to contend that
Article 243-Q
of the Constitution of India does not
contemplate constitution of an industrial establishment as a municipality and
thus merely because OCL was providing municipal services in its area, it
cannot be said that OCL is a municipality.
The court noted in NOIDA (supra)
that:
“31. …exemption from constituting Municipality does not lead to mean that the
        industrial establishment which is providing municipal services to an industrial
        township is same as Municipality as defined in Article 243P€…..
Learned counsel also asserted that exemption given to OCL from
payment of octroi was made after taking into account that the amount of ₹ 2
crores deposited by it would be enough to set off the loss of octroi and that the
municipality was compensated for even the potential future loss of revenue.
14.      Mr Bagaria, learned senior, relied on
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) to
urge that meaning of the term ‘local area’ as expounded in that decision must
be applied in the present case to declare SAIL’s industrial area as not a ‘local
area’ within the meaning of Entry 52 of List II. It was further argued that
merely because SAIL provided municipal services within its industrial
township area, does not make its area a ‘municipality’ or ‘local authority’.
Furthermore, no powers, authority and responsibilities of municipalities under
Article 243-W13 were endowed upon SAIL by the State Government to enable
12 (2018] 9 SCC 351
13
Article 243W -
Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow--
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as in -
stitutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsi -
bilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them including
those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out the re-
sponsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
8
it to function as an institution of self-government and neither has SAIL been
authorized to levy, collect and appropriate any taxes or duties or tolls or
fee. The exclusion of industrial establishments, was also in the light of
proviso to Article 243-Q. It was submitted that by
Article 243-Q
in every
State, a Nagar Panchayat for transitional areas (areas in transition from a rural
area to an urban area); a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and a
Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, has to be constituted. However,
proviso to
Article 243-Q
exempts this requirement, in relation to declared
industrial areas:
“Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in such
      urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of
      the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided
      by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may
      deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.”
15.    It was submitted that in the present cases, notifications under the above
provisions were issued, which meant that areas falling within industrial
townships, were neither local areas, nor were they part of municipalities.
Relying extensively on
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra), it was argued that the
definition of “local area” was conclusively declared by the Constitution
Bench, in that decision, to be an area “administered by a local body like a
Municipal District Board, a local Board, a Union Board a Panchayat or the
like. The premises of a factory is therefore, not a ‘local area’”.
It was urged
that since the state law, by proviso to
Section 4 (1)
[i.e.,
Orissa Municipal Act,
1950
] excluded from its operation, industrial establishments, the declaration
of law in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) bound the state, which could not then,
include industrial establishments as local areas.
16.    It was argued by Mr Bagaria that by including the area of industrial
township in the definition of local area in Section 2(f) of the Orissa Act, the
9
State Legislature went beyond its legislative competence under
Article 246 14
read with Entry 52 of List II as there is no entry in Seventh Schedule under
which impugned legislation could have been made. Counsel also placed
reliance on
ITC Ltd v Agriculture Produce Market Committee15
and argued
that the scope of a constitutional taxation power cannot be determined with
reference to a Parliamentary enactment. Otherwise, it would result in
Parliament enacting and/or amending an enactment, thereby controlling the
ambit and scope of the constitutional provision which should not be sustained.
17.      Learned senior counsel submitted, furthermore, that levy of
retrospective tax upon entry of goods, into industrial areas, was arbitrary,
given that the original definition did not impose any tax, on goods which
entered into those areas or local limits.
18.      Learned counsel appearing on behalf of HINDALCO adopted the
submissions made on behalf of OCL and SAIL. Learned counsel additionally
argued that the
UP Entry Tax Act
of 2007, to the extent it was retrospective,
has to be struck down, as it is unfair and arbitrary.
(ii)     Respondents’ contentions
19.      Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
the State of Orissa had submitted that the notifications cover not only the
factory premises but also the other areas consisting of factory premises,
residential colonies, other areas including roads, sewage, several common

14
Article 246 -
Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States
(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with re-
spect to any of the matters enumerated in List 1 in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as
the "Union List").
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament and subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State
1[**] also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the "Concurrent List").
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State 1[***] has exclusive power to make laws for
such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule
(in this Constitution referred to as the 'State List').
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not
included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.
15 (2002) 9 SCC 232
10
amenities, play fields, open spaces, and other associated facilities and thus
claiming that only the factory premise of OCL constitute industrial township
should not be accepted.
20.    Reliance was placed on the contents of the impugned notification to
submit that the industrial township was open to public use and the concerned
Rajanagar Municipality has right of using several amenities available
including the drainage and sewage facilities to establish that the Industrial
Township was open to public use just like any other Industrial Township in
the country.
21.    Further, it was submitted that it was mutually agreed between the
parties that OCL shall pay ₹ 2 crores in four instalments by 31st March 1999
as a compensation for loss of revenue that would have otherwise accrued to
the Municipality owing to OCL being declared an industrial township. It
cannot be said that octroi was not payable by OCL ipso facto on declaration
of Industrial Township, but the mentioned amount was merely a compensation
for loss on account of revenue from octroi. Further, octroi was not payable
only by the OCL and other industrial townships were still liable to pay
octroi.
22.    It was further submitted that the judgment of this Court in
Diamond
Sugar Mills
(supra) is not applicable, as the court
,
in that case
, confined the
meaning of the expression “local area” to areas where octroi was being levied
and which were administered by a local body.
It was also argued that this
Court in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) did not consider the question of
whether entire state can be declared a “local area” which is contemplated
under the present 1950 Act. Furthermore, the mere exclusion of an industrial
estate or area does not render it immune from entry tax, and there can be no
dispute that it is a local area.
11
23.      Counsel for the State of UP also submitted that the entire State is
conglomerate of local areas and thus the distinction between ‘local area’ and
‘state’ has disappeared for all practical purposes. It was further contended that
entry tax is levied by State and not by the ‘local authority’ and the levy was
not restricted only to urban local area but each local area inside the state.
24.      It was further argued that levy imposed is compensatory in character
and cannot be considered to offend
Article 301 16
of the Constitution. Local
areas cannot be treated as insulated pockets within a State and the facilities
provided by the State are availed by local areas and they form essential part of
intra-state trade. The interest of a local area is the interest of the state and the
State cannot neglect the interests of local areas. Also, it need not be
established that every amount collected from the levy must be spent on
trading facilities and only some connection between trading facilities
provided and taxes levied needs to be established. The fact that OCL provides
compensation for making the municipal services available inside the limits of
industrial township cannot be considered to be relevant as they are already
receiving other benefits in the form of other taxation reliefs.
25.      It was further submitted that the
Article 243-Q
of the Constitution was
inserted much after the judgment in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra). The idea
behind that provision is a recent phenomenon and does not find any
correspondence history of India before the advent of the Constitution. The
concept had evolved on account of the emergence of large industries where
employees also occupied spaces which are similar to virtual townships with
municipal services being provided by industrial establishments.
26.      The counsel sought to distinguish the present case from NOIDA (supra)
by arguing that while in latter, the court held that an industrial township

16
Article 301 -
Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse:
Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India
shall be free.
12
cannot be equated with a municipality defined under
Article 243-(P)(e) 17
as
industrial township is specified on account of non-constitution of
municipality, nevertheless the court did not decide an important question that
whether an industrial township constituted under proviso to
Article 243-Q
read with provisions of the UPIAD Act is an administrative unit obligated to
provide all municipal services envisaged by the municipal enactments in the
area of the industrial township and therefore its area would be a local area.
27.     The learned senior advocate appearing for the respondents also sought
to distinguish this case from
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) to argue that the
latter involved a single factory premise while the former involved an
industrial township which is constitutionally enacted as proviso to
Article
243-Q(1)
of the Constitution. Here, the industrial township is charged with
rendering municipal services under a public notification and thus, the
Industrial Township is administering the rendering of services like municipal
services and the fact that industrial township is providing the services free of
cost would not change the constitutional status.
28.     It was lastly submitted by the senior counsel that Entry 52 must be
interpreted in light of Part IX-A and
Article 243
to the Constitution.
Rendering municipal services is a precondition for specification of industrial
area, and OCL is likely to retain substantial nexus with the erstwhile or
adjacent municipalities for certain defined purposes, namely, registration of
birth and death, planning, policing purposes, etc. It was further argued that
industrial area is not excluded from the states’ territories and remain subject to
state’s authority and legislative powers. Their inclusion as “local area” for the
levy and collection of entry tax, is therefore not violative of any provision of
the Constitution of India.
B. Analysis and Conclusions

17
Article 243P -
Definitions
… (e) 'Municipality' means an institution of self-government constituted under
Article 243Q ;
13
29.    From the facts narrated and the arguments of parties, it is quite evident
that the narrow issue requiring determination in these appeals is whether the
exclusion of an industrial area or areas from the limits of municipal councils
or municipalities under the state laws in exercise of statutory power or by
virtue of a declaration under proviso to
Article 243-Q
, would result in that
area ceasing to be a “local area” within Entry 52 of List II and consequently
precluding State from levying and collecting entry tax from those areas.
30.    The Constitution Bench ruling in
Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd.
(supra),
which was heavily relied upon by the appellants, was rendered in the context
of pointed authorization by the state enactment - U.P. Sugarcane (Regulations
of State and Purchase) Act, 1953 in
Section 20
and the
U.P. Sugarcane Cess
Act, 1956
in
Section 3
to State to collect entry tax “into the premises of a
factory”. The challenge in that judgment was on the ground that the levy was
invalid as it was beyond the legislative competence of the State – the
argument being that the factory premises could not be characterised as a
“local area”. This Court analysed Entry 52, by first considering the historical
context in which it was enacted (for which it traced the previous legislation
i.e., Entry 49 of
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Government of India
Act, 1935
). The court previously held that etymologically “local” is “relating
to” or “pertaining to” a place.
31.    Keeping these in mind, and also after considering the entry in
Encyclopaedia Britannica relating “local area” for the purpose of collection of
octroi as an indirect or consumption tax levied by political units, this Court
concluded that under the Government of India Act, 1919 imposed a levy on
import of goods into an area administered by local body i.e., a local
government authority could be levied. This Court then concluded in
Diamond
Sugar Mills
(supra) that:
22. “It was with the knowledge of the previous history of the legislation that
      the Constitution-makers set about their task in preparing the lists in the
14
seventh schedule. There can bring title doubt therefore that in using the words
      “tax on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale
      therein”, they wanted to express by the words “local area” primarily area in
      respect of which an octroi was leviable under item 7 of the schedule tax rules,
      1920- that is, the area administered by a local authority such as a municipality,
      a district Board, a local Board or a Union Board, “a Panchayat” or somebody
      constituted under the law for the governance of the local affairs of any part of
      the State. Whether the entire area of the State, as an area administered by the
      State Government, was also intended to be included in the phrase “local
      area”, we need not consider in the present case.”
32.    The next decision of note is
Shaktikumar M. Sancheti & Anr. V. State of
Maharashtra & Ors.18
, where the challenge was to levy under the
Maharashtra Tax on Entry of Motor Vehicles into Local Areas Act, 1987
. It
was contended that the incidence of tax was on purchase value of motor
vehicles and therefore the tax was really a purchase tax and further that a local
area has a connotation of its own as being understood or administered by local
authority and tax on entry of vehicle into a state as whole was invalid.
This
court, after noticing the previous decision in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra),
held that the question as to whether the entire area of a state was a local area
had been left undecided in that decision. The court then noticed that “local
area” had been used in several provisions of the Constitution, namely
Articles
3(b)
, 12
, 245(1)
, 246
, 277
, 321
, 323-A
, and 371-D. The court upheld the
decision of the High Court that the taxable event is not the entry of a vehicle
in any area of the state in a local area.
The court also cited the previous
holding in
State of Karnataka v. Hansa Corporation.19
33.
In
Saij Gram Panchayat v. State of Gujarat & Ors.
20, the panchayat
sought for quashing of certain notifications and a State Government resolution
under which, in exercise of its power under
Section 16
of the Gujarat
Industrial Development Act, 1962, the Kalol industrial area was notified as a
municipal area under
Section 264A
of the Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1963.
Another notification excluded that area from the Saij Gram Panchayat under

18 (1995) 1 SCC 351
19 (1981) 1 SCR 823
20 (1999) 2 SCC 366
15
Section 9(2)
of the Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961. The contentions urged was
that the notification and the resolution were contrary to Parts IX and IX-A of
the Constitution of India. This Court repelled the argument stating that the
Gujarat Industrial Development Act, 1962
operates in a different sphere from
Parts IX and IX-A of the Constitution as well as the
Gujarat Panchayats Act,
1961
under the
Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1962
. The later enactments dealt
with local self-government whereas the
Gujarat Industrial Development Act,
1962
operates for orderly establishment and organization of industries in the
State. It was further noticed that the industrial areas had been notified long
back in 1972.
34.    This Court repelled the argument with respect to the violation of Article
243-Q. It was noticed that
Article 243-Q
constitutes three types of
municipalities i.e. nagar panchayat, a municipal council and a municipal
corporation. It noted that by virtue of the proviso, and having regard to the
size of the area, the nature of the municipal services provided or proposed to
be provided by an industrial establishment, and other relevant factors – the
Governor could by prior notifications specified that area to be an industrial
township.
35.    It was therefore concluded that if an area under provisions of the
Gujarat Industrial Development Act, 1962
, is equated with the industrial
township under
Article 243-Q
, then there would be no breach of that
provision. The Court then concluded as follows:
20. “Explaining the purpose behind
Section 16
the High Court has rightly held
      that having regard to the power conferred upon the Gujarat Industrial
      Development Corporation in the matter of provision of amenities and common
      facilities in industrial estates and industrial areas, on levy of certain charges
      upon those who set up industries therein, an industrial area would ordinarily
      be a self-sufficient township in itself which provides its own amenities and
      recovers charges therefor. A local authority having jurisdiction over such area
      will have to perform very few of its statutory or discretionary duties in respect
      of such area. Yet it may levy and collect taxes from those who set up industries
      in the area. It is to avoid this virtual dual control and administration which
      might impede the growth and development of industries that provision has,
16
presumably, been made in
Section 16
for constituting an industrial area into a
      notified area and thereby converting it into a separate administrative unit. As
      we have stated earlier, creation of such a separate administrative unit is not
      contrary to the scheme of Parts IX and IXA of the Constitution when
Article
      243Q
provides for the creation of such a separate administrative unit in the
      form of an industrial township. It has also been pointed out by the respondents
      that neither
Article 243N
nor 243ZF invalidates any
Industrial Development
      Act
.”
36.    In two judgments i.e., MGR Industries Association & Anr. V. State of
Uttar Pradesh & Ors21 and NOIDA (supra), this Court had occasion to
consider the question of applicability of Article 243-Q. In MGR Industries
(supra), specifically the provisions of the
U.P. Industrial Area Development
Act, 1976
particularly, Section 12A was also considered. In MGR Industries
(supra) the argument urged was that the appellant was an association of
industrial areas which were declared as industrial areas under the U.P.
enactment but in respect of which no notification had been issued under
Article 243-Q
, the levy of taxes by Panchayats was questioned. The court
noticed Section 12A of the U.P. Industrial Areas Development Act, 1976,
which reads as follows:
“12-A. No panchayat for industrial township --- Notwithstanding anything
      contained to the contrary in any Uttar Pradesh Act, where an industrial
      development area or any part thereof is specified to be an industrial township
      under the proviso to clause (1) of
Article 243-Q
of the Constitution, such
      industrial development area or part thereof, if included in a Panchayat area,
      shall, with effect from the date of notification made under the said proviso,
      stand excluded from such Panchayat area and no Panchayat shall be
      constituted for such industrial development area or part thereof under the
      United Provinces Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 or the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra
      Panchayats and Zila Panchayats Adhiniyam, 1961, as the case may be, and
      any Panchayat constituted for such industrial development area or part thereof
      before the date of such notification, shall cease to exist.”
37.    The court also noted that a joint reading of Section 12A with
Article
243-Q
clarified that unless a notification under proviso to
Article 243-Q(1)
was issued, industrial development areas were not per se excluded from the


21 (2017) 3 SCC 494
17
ambit of panchayats.         The court noted crucially that “the exclusion of
industrial development area from panchayats has serious consequences since
the person residing within the industrial development are immediately
deprived of facilities and benefits extended to them by from their respective
panchayats. The deprivation of said benefits has to be a conscious decision in
accordance with condition as contained in Article 243Q.”
38.    In NOIDA (supra), the issue was with respect of whether, the appellant
authority, also constituted under the UPIAD Act could claim the benefit of
exemption under
Section 10 (20)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 as a “local
authority”. The appellant had relied upon on a notification (dated 24.12.2011)
issued by Governor under proviso to
Article 243-Q(1).
The argument made
was since the industrial area i.e. NOIDA was excluded from the requirement
of provisions of Part IX of the Constitution, it ceased to be a municipal area
and therefore was itself a local authority. This Court rejected the argument
and observed, – after noticing the
Statement of Object and Reasons to the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth) Amendment Act, 1992
and the memorandum,
moved by the Minister on the floor of Parliament by piloting the Amendment
Bill, that:
“28. The constitutional provisions as contained in Part IXA delineate that the
      Constitution itself provided for constitution of Municipalities, duration of
      Municipalities, powers of Authorities and responsibilities of the Municipalities.
      The Municipalities are created as vibrant democratic units of self-government.
      The duration of Municipality was provided for five years contemplating
      regular election for electing representatives to represent the Municipality. The
      special features of the Municipality as was contemplated by the constitutional
      provisions contained in Part IXA cannot be said to be present in Authority as
      delineated by statutory scheme of Act, 1976. It is true that various municipal
      functions are also being performed by the Authority as per Act, 1976 but the
      mere facts that certain municipal functions were also performed by the
      authority it cannot acquire the essential features of the Municipality which are
      contemplated by Part IXA of the Constitution. The main thrust of the argument
      of the learned counsel for the appellant that the High Court having not
      adverted to the notification dated 24.12.2001 issued under proviso to
Article
      243Q (1)
the judgments relied on by the High Court for dismissing the writ
      petition is not sustainable. We thus have to focus on proviso to
Article 243Q
      (1).
For the purpose and object of the industrial township referred to therein
      whether industrial township mentioned therein can be equated with
      Municipality as defined under Article 243P€.
Article 243P (e)
provides that
18
the “Municipality means an institution of self-government constituted
      under
Article 243Q.
Whether the appellant is an institution of self-government
      constituted under
Article 243Q
is the main question to be answered? Sub-
clause (1) of
Article 243Q
provides that there shall be constituted in every
      State- a Nagar Panchayat, a Municipal Council and a Municipal Corporation,
      in accordance with the provisions of this Part. The proviso to sub-clause (1)
      provides that:
“Provided that a municipality under this clause may not be constituted in such
      urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of
      the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided
      for an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as may he
      may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.”.
29.      Thus, proviso does not contemplate constitution of an industrial
      establishment as a Municipality rather clarifies an exception where
      Municipality under clause (1) of
Article 243Q
may not be constituted in an
      urban area. The proviso is an exception to the constitution of Municipality as
      contemplated by sub-clause (1) of
Article 243Q.
No other interpretation of the
      proviso conforms to the constitution scheme.”
39.    It is immediately clear that in all the decisions, which the appellants
relied upon, (save
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) and
Shaktikumar M. Sancheti
(supra)) the question which had arisen for consideration was whether after the
exclusion of an industrial area, either under the provisions of some state law,
or in terms of
Article 243-Q
, such an industrial area was part of a
municipality, or a panchayat.
In
Saij Gram Panchayat
(supra), the court
rejected the argument that exclusion of an area, which was previously
declared as an industrial area, from a panchayat, by virtue of a notification,
was contrary to the
Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961
or
Article 243-Q
of the
Constitution of India.
Likewise, in MGR Industries (supra), the court held that
without a notification under proviso to
Article 243-Q
, mere declaration of an
area as an industrial area or township, did not result in the exclusion of that
area, from the coverage of a panchayat. In NOIDA (supra), the question
which arose for decision was whether the NOIDA was a local authority for
claiming income tax exemption status, under
Section 10 (20)
of the Income
Tax Act, 1961. This Court held that the exclusion of an area from the limits of
a municipality ipso facto did not result in its eligibility to seek tax exempt
19
status, under that act. This Court’s observations about the effect of
Article
243-Q
are significant.
40.    The view expressed in
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra), was that a local
area, is an area, falling within a “local authority such as a municipality, a
district Board, a local Board or a Union Board, a Panchayat or somebody
constituted under the law for the governance of the local affairs of any part of
the State.” That articulation was relevant because the levy of tax involved in
that decision imposed a duty on the entry of goods into factory premises. The
court, in that context, held as it did, that entry tax can be imposed in relation
to a local area, and the incidence is the point of entry.
41.    In the present case, two or more sets of law, operate within the two
states. The first set of statutes are the enactments, that impose the levy, which
is entry tax. The incidence is entry into a local area. A “local area” is defined
as including industrial establishments, or estates. The second set of laws that
are involved, are the concerned municipalities laws, such as the Orissa Act of
1950- which by proviso to
Section 4 (1)
excludes industrial areas, from the
rigours and requirements of the municipalities’ enactments. In the U.P. Entry
Tax law, “local area” has been defined expansively, to cover all areas,
including industrial establishment areas.
By the UP Municipalities Act, 1916
,
a municipality and a municipal area have been defined as follows:
‘(9) “Municipality” means an institution of self Government referred to in
      clause (e) of
Article 243P
of the Constitution.
(9A) "Municipal area” means the territorial area of a municipality."
42.    The decision of this Court, in
Kishansing Tomar v. Municipal
Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad & Ors
22 , noticed the object and
purpose of Constitution (seventy-fourth) Amendment Act, 1992. The
court stated that:
22 2006 (8) SCC 352
20
“12. It may be noted that Part IX-A was inserted in the Constitution by virtue
      of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth) Amendment Act, 1992
. The object of
      introducing these provisions was that in many States the local bodies were not
      working properly and the timely elections were not being held and the
      nominated bodies were continuing for long periods. Elections had been
      irregular and many times unnecessarily delayed or postponed and the elected
      bodies had been superseded or suspended without adequate justification at the
      whims and fancies of the State authorities. These views were expressed by the
      then Minister of State for Urban Development while introducing the
      Constitution Amendment Bill before Parliament and thus the new provisions
      were added in the Constitution with a view to restore the rightful place in
      political governance for local bodies. It was considered necessary to provide a
      constitutional status to such bodies and to ensure regular and fair conduct of
      elections. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the Constitution
      Amendment Bill relating to urban local bodies, it was stated:[…]”
43.    The provisions in Part IX-A of the Constitution provide for constitution
of municipalities, their duration, powers and responsibilities of authorities of
the municipalities. Municipalities were conceived as vibrant democratic units
of self-governance. Their term or duration was provided to be for five years;
regular elections, to elect representatives of municipalities was contemplated.
The special features of the municipalities contemplated by the provisions
contained in Part IX-A, however need not be present in other bodies created
by law, such as Boards, etc. Such statutory bodies, like industrial estates may
perform some municipal functions. However, that some municipal functions
are performed by such bodies ipso facto does not result in their acquiring the
features of municipalities which are contemplated by Part IX-A of the
Constitution.
44.    The burden of the appellants’ song, so to say, is that when a notification
is issued, excluding industrial areas or estates from municipal areas, they
cease to be local areas, and cannot be treated as such for the purpose of levy
of entry tax. As noticed earlier, all the judgments, dealing with provisions of
Part IX-A of the Constitution were not rendered in the context of applicability
or imposition of entry tax, or whether such areas excluded by virtue of
notifications under proviso to
Article 243-Q(1)
ceased to be local areas. To
this Court, it is plain that the introduction of Part IX-A by the 74 th Amendment
21
to the Constitution was with the intention of strengthening units of local self-
government, and ensuring that they were subjected to minimum democratic
standards. The proviso to
Article 243-Q(1)
, therefore, has to be read in
context, that industrial areas and estates, administered in terms of some legal
regime, where some municipal services were provided, could be exempt from
the requirements spelt out in Part IX-A of the Constitution. These provisions
spell out the elements of democratic governance, such as representation of
different sections of society, regularity of elections, a three-tier structure of
local government, reservation, mechanism for deciding election disputes, and
elected bodies which were tasked with decision making in regard to various
heads or subject matter, that concerned people at village, taluk and District
levels.
45.   The focus of provisions of Part IX-A of the Constitution inserted
through the 74th Amendment was on local self-governance and all provisions
concerning it. It had no relevance to the issue of State taxation. Furthermore,
the exercise of power by the Governor to exclude from the limits of a
municipal area, industrial estates or large areas that were predominantly
industrialised areas is upon the condition that such areas provided a minimum
modicum of municipal services. The pattern of State enactments – which
emerges from a reading of various decisions of this Court is that every State
has a set of municipal or local self-governance laws, such as those dealing
with municipalities, cantonments, panchayats, gram panchayats, etc., on the
one hand, and those that deal with industrial areas – as for instance, the
UPIAD Act, Gujarat Industrial Development Act, 1962 etc. on the other. The
latter enactments prescribe the kind of services (analogous to the municipal
services provided by the municipalities) that every industrial area has to
provide.
Given these circumstances, the exemption from application of
municipality laws or such enactments in relation to industrial areas – as also
the exemption from the application of Part-IX A by virtue of proviso to
22
Article 243-Q(1)
is to exclude the application of certain requirements, such as
election etc. As far as the nature of services provided in industrial areas are
concerned, those are relevant factors taken into account by the State or
Governor while issuing exemptions under municipal laws or proviso to
Article 243Q (1).
These, however, do not in any manner impact or undermine
the fact that such industrial areas or estates are equally “local areas”.
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) itself acknowledged that the word “local”
means relating to or “pertaining to a place”. This Court also very pertinently
held that a local area is one which is administered by municipal law, district
board or a local board, union board, a panchayat or some body constituted by
the Government for the governance of local affairs of any part of the State.
The application of state laws regarding industrial areas, therefore, squarely
falls within the expression “description of a body constituted for the purposes
of local affairs of the State” since no one denies that industrial areas are also
part of the State. The record in the present case indicates that the areas
excluded from the municipality in OCL’s case comprise of several villages.
The material on record placed by SAIL also acknowledge that not less than
24,000 houses exist in its industrial area. Likewise in the case of HINDALCO
as also SAIL indicate that the industrial estates or area cover large areas. If
one keeps these facts in mind, there can be no doubt that such areas would fall
within the description “local areas”.
46.   Reliance placed upon
Diamond Sugar Mills
(supra) by the appellants in
this case is misplaced because in that decision, the Court had to deal with a
different set of facts. The levy on sugarcane imposed by the State of U.P. was
on the incidence of entry into factory premises. The Court, therefore, correctly
concluded that factory premises per se could not constitute a local area.
The
subsequent decision in
Shakti Kumar Sancheti
(supra) explained that entry
into the State with the ultimate destination within the State, constituted a
taxable event the moment the goods, i.e. the vehicles reached within the limits
23
of municipality of its ultimate destination.
In
Sahaj Gram Panchayat
(supra),
the argument that the industrial areas could not be excluded in exercise of the
powers under
Article 243-(Q)(1)
was repelled.
MGR Industries (supra) is an
important judgment because the Court held that the mere exclusion of an
industrial area under a local enactment was insufficient for it to be removed
from the coverage of Panchayat’s jurisdiction in the absence of a notification
under
Article 243-Q (1).
The judgment in NOIDA (supra) explained the intent
and purport of the provision of Part IX-A of the Constitution. None of these,
in the opinion of the Court, can be of any assistance to the appellants, who
contend that industrial areas or industrial estates can be treated as local areas
the moment they are excluded from the limits of municipality or whenever
they are excluded by virtue of exercise of power under proviso to
Article 243-
Q (1)
of the Constitution.
47.     It is also a cardinal rule of interpretation that words of a taxing statute
should be read in their ordinary, natural, and grammatical meaning. Further, in
construing the words in a constitutional enactment that confers legislative
power, a liberal construction should be placed upon the words so that they
may have effect in their widest amplitude.23
48.     The object of the levy, i.e., entry tax, is the regulation of entry of goods
in a regular area for consumption, i.e., manufacture, use or sale. There is no
dispute that entry of goods into an industrial area or estate is for their use for
manufacturing or for processing or for the purposes of their delivery as their
ultimate point of destination, i.e. for the purpose of their “consumption, use or
sale” within that area. It could even be that the goods enter within the
industrial area or estate, as the ultimate point of destination for their use. In
any case, the levy would be attracted because the incidence is the entry into
the local area.
23
Navinchandra Mafatlal v Commissioner of Income Tax
, 1955 (1) SCR 829
24
49.    The Court is of the opinion that the argument – made by counsel that
the levy could not be retrospective, in the facts of this case, is insubstantial.
The earlier effort to tax the assessee by demand led to petitions which
quashed them – where the legal regime was that some compensatory element
had to be disclosed. With the object of curing this defect, the fresh law was
enacted by the State of U.P., with retrospective effect which on the application
of principles enunciated by this Court, in
Sri Prithvi Cotton Mills v. Baroda
Borough Municipality & Ors.24
, is valid.
50.    In view of the foregoing discussions, this Court finds no reason to
interfere with the decision of the Orissa and Allahabad High Courts. The
special leave petition and appeals are consequently dismissed as unmerited
without any order on costs.
.............................................CJI.
[UDAY UMESH LALIT]



                                           .…….........................................J.
                                                [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]



                                           ..................................................J.
                                                           [J.B. PARDIWALA]



NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 04, 2022.
24 1970 (1) SCR 388