[Cites
59
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The Tata Power Company Limited ... vs Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory ... on 23 November, 2022
Bench:
As Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                Civil Appeal No. 1933 of 2022



          The TATA Power Company Limited Transmission              .... Appellant




                                           Versus



          Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.   ....Respondents
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2022.11.23
15:32:50 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT



Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI

A glossary of defined terms used in the judgment has been provided below:
Glossary of Terms
          Defined Term                             Definition
  Act                            Electricity Act, 2003

  AEMIL/                         Adani Electricity Mumbai Infra Limited
  second respondent

  AEML-T                         Adani Electricity Mumbai Limited –
  third respondent               Transmission

  APTEL                          Appellate Tribunal for Electricity

  CEA                            Central Electricity Authority

  Development Guidelines         Guidelines for encouraging Competition
                                 in Development of Transmission Projects

  DPR                            Detailed Progress Report

  EC/ fifth respondent           Empowered Committee

  FoR                            Forum of Regulators

  GoM’s GR                       Government of Maharashtra’s,
                                 Government Resolution dated
                                 04.01.2019

  HVDC                           High Voltage Direct Current
  HVDC Project                   1000 MW HVDC (VSC based) link
                                 between 400 kV MSETCL Kudus & 220
                                 kV AEML Aarey EHV Station

  MERC/ first respondent         Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
                                 Commission

  MERC MYT Regulations           Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
                                 Commission (Multi Year Tariff)
                                 Regulations 2019
  MERC MYT Amendment             Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
2
Regulations                  Commission (Multi Year Tariff) (First
                             Amendment) Regulations 2022
MoP                          Ministry of Power

MSETCL / fourth respondent   Maharashtra State Electricity Regulatory
                             Commission

NEP                          National Electricity Policy

NTP 2006                     National Tariff Policy 2006
NTP 2016                     National Tariff Policy 2016
REL                          Reliance Energy Ltd.
RInfra                       Reliance Infrastructure Limited

RTM                          Regulated Tariff Mechanism

STU                          State Transmission Utility

TBCB                         Tariff Based Competitive Bidding

TBCB Guidelines              Tariff  Based    Competitive    Bidding
                             Guidelines for Transmission Service
                             issued by the MoP dated 13.04.2006

TPC-T/ appellant             Tata Power Company Limited
                             Transmission

VSC                          Voltage Source Converter
3
This judgment has been divided into the following sections to facilitate analysis:
A. The Facts ......................................................................................................................... 5

B. Proceedings before the MERC and APTEL .................................................................... 27

C. The Submissions ............................................................................................................ 34

D. Regulatory Framework ................................................................................................... 37

   D. 1
Electricity Act
2003................................................................................................... 37

   D.2 Policy framework....................................................................................................... 42

      D. 2.1 Central Policies.................................................................................................. 43

      D. 2.2 State Policies..................................................................................................... 47

E. The Analysis ................................................................................................................... 48

   E. 1
Section 63
: The dominant route or the alternative route ........................................... 49

      E. 1.1. The value of TBCB Guidelines prescribed under
Section 63
............................. 54

   E. 2 General Regulatory Power of the Appropriate Commission ...................................... 56

      E.2.1 The nature of NTP- binding or a material consideration ...................................... 61

   E. 3 Value of GoM GR ..................................................................................................... 72

      E. 3. 1The New- Old Conundrum ................................................................................. 73

      E. 3. 2 Relevance of GoM GR for MERC’s Decision .................................................... 80

      E. 3. 3 Relevance of GoM GR vis-à-vis MSETCL’s decision ........................................ 83

F Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 89
4
PART A
1.    APTEL, by its judgment dated 18 February 2022, dismissed an appeal

under
Section 111
of the Act instituted by the appellant against a decision of

MERC dated 21 March 2021.
2.        On 21 March 2021, MERC granted a transmission licence to AEMIL under
Sections 14
and
15
of the Act for setting up a 1000 MW HVDC (VSC based) link

between 400 kV MSETCL Kudus and 220 kV AEML Aarey EHV Station.
3.    The appellant challenged MERC’s order before APTEL, inter alia, on the

ground that the grant of the licence was not preceded by a TBCB process. TPC-T

contended that the failure to adhere to a TBCB process pursuant to
Section 63
was contrary to public interest and statutory mandate. APTEL dismissed the

appeal. This has given rise to a statutory appeal under
Section 125
of the Act.
A.    The Facts
4.    On 12 November 2007, MSETCL issued a communication to CEA stating,

inter alia, that it was difficult to lay overhead AC lines to bring power from the new

400kV sub-station, which was required to meet Mumbai’s growing demand of

power, to Mumbai’s load centres due to constraints. Hence, it was proposed that

VSC based HVDC technology may be utilised to connect the new sub-station

with major load centres in Mumbai through DC cables. In that context, the letter

stated:
“M/s. Reliance energy (REL) and M/s. TATA Power Co. Ltd.
                 (TPC) has carried out necessary survey and accordingly
                 M/s. REL has proposed to connect Mumbai new location to
                 Ghodbunder partly by overhead line and partly by
                 underground cables. Further, M/s. REL also proposed to
                 connect Mumbai New Location to Aarey by HVDC (VSC
                 based technology).
M/s. TPC has planned to establish a 220 kV substation at
                 Vikhroli and have existing Salset, Dharavi and Trombay
5
PART A

               substations. These substations will be fed from 400 kV
               proposed substation at Ghatkopar.
Thus the major load centres in Mumbai will be fed as below.

               Colaba area will be fed by 220KV Dharavi S/S (Tata)
               Andheri area will be fed by 220KV Versova & Aarey S/S
               (REL)
               Bandra area will be fed by 220KV Aarey S/S

               Maharashtra State Transmission Company Ltd. (MSETCL)
               has also proposed to connect 400KV Mumbai New Location
               with 400KV New Mumbai (Panvel) for system strengthening.

               State Transmission Utility (STU) office would appoint a
               Consultant who is having sufficient knowledge in VSC based
               HVDC technology for finalizing the scheme, subject to M/s
               REL agreeing to bear the cost of the same.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)



REL envisaged a transmission project by deploying HVDC (VSC) based

technology, where the load/evacuation point for the power to be received into

Mumbai city was at Aarey. Both REL and TPC-T were to participate in identifiable

segments for bringing power to Mumbai’s load centres.
5.    On 5 May 2009, MSETCL notified a five-year plan for the period 2009-10

to 2013-14. The plan included the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC link. Likewise, details

of the on-going and new schemes of TPC-T were also provided. In terms of the

plan, REL was to execute the Nagothane - Aarey transmission project.
6.    In November 2010, Mumbai experienced a partial grid disturbance. A

Committee chaired by Professor Dr SA Khaparde of IIT Mumbai was constituted

to study the situation. The Committee recommended adopting the HVDC

technology as a long-term solution for ensuring the reliability of power supply for

Mumbai for the proposed transmission project with a 2 x 350 MW HVDC voltage
6
PART A

source converter based transmission link for Mumbai. This was identified as a

critical bulk power injection scheme.
7.    On 13 May 2011, RInfra submitted an application under the provisions of
Section 14
and
15
of the Act for the grant of a transmission licence for the entire

State of Maharashtra. By an order dated 11 August 2011, MERC observed that

R-Infra cannot be granted a transmission licence for the entire State of

Maharashtra as paragraph 5.1 read with 7.1.6 of NTP 2016 mandated TBCB for

transmission services. Instead, MERC granted RInfra a transmission licence to

establish and operate specific transmission lines for a period of twenty-five years.

The transmission lines in respect of which the licence was granted to R-Infra

were specified in the communication dated 11 August 2011.
8.    On 2 November 2012, the report of the HVDC sub-committee for

finalization of the consultant noted the reasons for adopting HVDC (VSC) based

technology to meet the power demand for Mumbai. The following extract

indicates that after exploring various operations it was found that connectivity at

Nagothane was suitable. On the other hand, Aarey being a major load centre was

a “suitable sink point for connection”:
“The First Meeting of the Sub-Committee was held on
                28.08.2012, where in following as discussed and agreed
                upon

                Following requirements were discussed & considered:
i.   Classic HVDC has limited capability of Active / Reactive
                Power control, whereas VSC HVDC has dynamic control of
                Active & Reactive Power Control
                ii. Classic HVDC has no Blackstart facility; whereas VSC
                HVDC has blackstart facility which can be a major support to
                revive Grid failures.
iii. Classic HVDC requires more footprints. VSC HVDC
                being compact and modular in design hence it requires only
                30% footprint area to setup a converter station
7
PART A

                iv. Short Circuit levels are increasing, hence HVDC link to
                Mumbai shall be ideal
                To meet the above, it is concluded that, 2x500 MW HVDC
                Voltage Source Converter (VSC) based technology for
                Mumbai is essential.
For connectivity with the grid, various options were explored
                and it is concluded that electrical connectivity at Nagothane
                is suitable. Similarly Aarey, being the major load centre, it is
                concluded that Aarey is the suitable sink point for
                connection.”
9.    On 1 February 2013, RInfra submitted a DPR to MERC for the

 appointment of a consultant for its proposed 2 x 500 MW HVDC (VSC) based

 transmission line from MSETCL’s 400 kV Nagothane station to the 220 kV Aarey

 sub-station.
10.    On 5 April 2013, MERC addressed a letter to R-Infra, granting it in-

 principle clearance for hiring a consultant for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC

 Scheme to study the system and assist in the selection and design of the

 technology and bidding process of the DPR. However, it was noted that the ‘in-

 principle’ clearance should not be construed as a final approval for the purposes

 of the Annual Recurring Revenue and the scheme would be open to scrutiny

 during the tariff determination process, particularly in the context of actual cost

 incurred, scope and objective achieved. MERC approved the hiring of the

 consultant for the implementation of R-Infra’s transmission projects. R-Infra was

 directed to submit quarterly progress reports on the transmission projects based

 on HVDC technology.
11.    The five-year plan is submitted by MSETCL in terms of
Section 39
of the

 Act and
Regulation 8
of the MERC (State Grid Code) Regulations 2006. On 7

 March 2013, MSETCL in a communication to MERC confirmed that the following
8
PART A

 scheme was being considered in the five-year plan for 2013-14 to 2017-18 for the

 Mumbai Metropolitan region:
S.    Name of Scheme                          Year            of   Remarks

      No.                                           Commissioning

      1.    2x500 MW HVDC IGBT (VSC) based          2016-17              Implementation

            Aarey – Nagothane Link (120 Ckt km)                          utility RInfra-T

            with Bays.
12.    On 19 March 2013, RInfra submitted an application to MSETCL seeking

 grid connectivity for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC Scheme. This was allowed on

 21 August 2013 by MSETCL. The letter detailed out the scope of the work to be

 carried out by R-Infra and specified the conditions for compliance.
13.    On 20 November 2013, a meeting was held between MSETCL and R-

 Infra to discuss and review the HVDC connectivity to the Aarey sub-station. In the

 meeting, MSETCL proposed availing of connectivity from the 400kV Kudus

 substation instead of the 400kV substation at Nagothane. The reason for the

 change in the point of connectivity being sought from Nagothane as originally

 envisaged to Kudus was as follows:
“
                  •    Director (Operations) suggested that R-Infra can avail
                  connectivity from 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) Substation
                  which is much near to Aarey Substation (R-Infra) as
                  compared to 400 KV Nagothane (MSETCL) substation (125
                  km). Proposed 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) Substation will be
                  commissioned within 2 years. 400 KV Kudus S/S will have
                  strong source of 765 KV Kudus (PG) and other 400 KV
                  network from Vapl(PG) 400 Bubheswar MSETCL), 400 KV
                  Nashik (MSETCL) 400 KV Padgha (MSETCL) 400 KV
                  Bolsar (PG) compared to 400 KV Nagothane (MSETCL) S/S.
                  Therefore 400 KV Kudus Substation is a better option for
                  HVDC connectivity. The route cable linkage cost will be
                  considerably lower.
9
PART A

                 •    Chief Engineer (STU) submitted that when original plan
                 was made for R-Infra HVDC project, the 400 KV Kudus s/s
                 (MSETCL) was not in the STU plan but now it has been
                 included I STU plan. Therefore it should be examined
                 positively for HVDC connection with Aarey. The cost of the
                 project will be reduced considerably.”



 Evidently, R-Infra had reservations about revising the point for HVDC connectivity

 from Nagothane to Kudus. The Minutes of the Meeting of 20 November 2013

 indicate those concerns:
“R-infra expressed their concern to consider the revision of
                 scope of connectivity which was decided by standing
                 committee. R-infra already initiated procurement of land near
                 Nagothane (MSETCL) and detail survey. All required
                 clearance proposals are initiated by R-Infra for which
                 approvals are in a pipeline and at this stage it is very difficult
                 to consider the new proposal.”



 The Director (Operations) of MSETCL advised R-Infra, while agreeing to its

 concerns, to nonetheless examine the suggested proposal and submit its

 comments.
14.    On 14 February 2014, R-Infra submitted a DPR for the transmission link

 between Nagothane and Aarey under the HVDC (VSC) project. On 10 April 2014,

 MERC granted in-principle clearance to R-Infra for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC

 Scheme. R-Infra was intimated that the in-principle approval was subject to it

 filing a petition for the amendment of its transmission licence. It was also

 mentioned that the in-principle clearance should not be construed as a final

 approval for Annual Recurring Revenue purposes and that the scheme will be

 open for scrutiny during tariff determination:
“5. Please note that this in-principle clearance should not
              be construed as final approval for ARR purpose and the
              scheme will be open for scrutiny during tariff
              determination process/ARR review, particularly in the
10
PART A

             context of actual cost incurred, scope and objective
             achieved etc. ex-post after implementation of the
             scheme. RInfra-T will be required to submit the status of
             implementation of the scheme with cost incurred till date
             along with their ARR Petition or during the tariff
             determination process at the appropriate time.
             [..]
7. Immediately after the completion/commissioning of the
             scheme, R-Infra-T should communicate to the
             Commission, the date of completion of the scheme,
             actual cost incurred, escalation in cost, if any with
             reasons, the scope and objectives of the scheme and to
             what extent they have been achieved, etc. so as to
             facilitate a comparison between the in-principle clearance
             and the actual.”
15.    On 5 January 2015, MSETCL proposed a revised scheme for

 strengthening Mumbai’s transmission system to MERC. MSETCL proposed that it

 would establish a 400kV Kudus – Aarey HVAC scheme. The reason for

 substituting the HVDC project to be executed by R-Infra with MSETCL’s HVAC

 transmission link from Kudus to Aarey was clarified in paragraph 9 of the letter

 which has been extracted below:
“9) In view of above, the HVDC project of R-Infra T is
                reviewed considering uncertainties in source generation and
                upcoming strong source of 400 KV Kudus at much shorter
                distance (approx. 80km) than 400 KV Nagothane S/s.
                Therefore, considering the above changes in network
                configuration, it is proposed to establish 400 KV substation
                in Mumbai for the enhancement of Transmission corridor
                capacity to Mumbai system through 400 KV D/C Quad line
                from 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) substation. This will enhance
                the transmission capacity by 1500-2000 MW.”

 The scope of the scheme proposed by MSECTL was delineated in paragraph 11

 of the communication which is extracted below:
“11) The scope of proposed scheme for above purpose is as
                given below:
i)  400 KV Kudus (MSETCL)-400 KV Aarey (MSETCL)
                D/C quad line-80 km.
ii) 400/200 KV, 2x500 MVA ICTs.
11
PART A
iii) 200 KV Interconnection between 400/220 KV Aarey and
                     proposed 200 KV Goregaon Film city with bays.
iv) 6x200 KV bays for 220 KV interconnection with TPC
                     and R Infra (T) lines.
v) 400 KV spare bays for interconnection with 400 KV
                     Vikhroli (TPC).
vi) 400/220 KV, 2x500 MVA ICTS for future expansion.

                     The scheme of establishment of 400 KV Aarey (MSETCL)
                     Mumbai will be included in five year STU Pan 2015-16 to
                     2019-20 for commissioning during 2017-18. The HVDC
                     project stands cancelled for the reasons as mentioned
                     above. Necessary DPR of the scheme will be submitted to
                     Hon’ble Commission in due course of time for in-principle
                     clearance.”



 In other words, instead of R-Infra developing a transmission link between

 Nagothane and Aarey using the HVDC technology, MSECTL proposed to

 establish the link between Kudus and Aarey itself using HVAC technology by

 including it in the five-year plan for 2015-16 to 2019-20.
16.           On 23 January 2015, R-Infra addressed a communication to MSETCL

 responding to the communication dated 5 January 2015. R-Infra responded to the

 proposal of the substitution of the HVDC (VSC based) scheme from Nagothane

 to Aarey with an overhead transmission line from Kudus to Aarey to be executed

 by MSETCL. The letter noted that:
(i)       The approved HVDC Scheme had been recommended by the Standing

                committee appointed by MERC;
(ii)      The HVDC project which was envisaged with VSC based technology

                had significant technological advantages over the HVAC technology

                proposed by MSETCL; and
(iii)     In the past, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and MSETCL had

                cancelled proposed HVAC transmission lines for bringing power into
12
PART A

           Mumbai or terminated them outside Mumbai on account of severe right-
of-way constraints in and around Mumbai.
R-Infra therefore reiterated that the HVDC – VSC based scheme as approved

 should be continued. However, R-Infra indicated that the injection point could be

 relocated to Kudus while retaining the HVDC Scheme for bulk power injection to

 Mumbai.
17.    On 2 May 2016, MERC cancelled the in-principle approval accorded to R-

 Infra’s HVDC Scheme. The letter of cancellation is extracted below:
“This has reference to review report of approved capex
                Schemes submitted by RInfra-T vide letter dated 5 April
                2016;
1) RInfra – T has submitted the review of 7 schemes, as inspite
                of having been approved by the Commission long back, the
                work against the schemes are yet to be initiated for various
                reasons.
2) R-Infra-T has submitted as follows;
a) 3 Schemes (EHV Scheme for 220KV Golibar S/s, 220 kV
                    Dahisar Housing S/s & 220 kV Airport S/s) amounting to
                    Rs.600.51 Crore will be submitted for revised approval
                    after allocation of land.
b) 2 Schemes (HVDC Consultancy, 2x500 MW HVDC
                    Scheme) amounting to Rs.7103.99 Crore are kept on
                    hold as the STU reply is awaited.
c) I Scheme (Land DPR) amounting to Rs.232.55 Crore is
                    withdrawn as the approved land cost is already
                    considered in the respective DPR schemes.
d) Regarding the Scheme of establishment of Nagri-Niwara
                    substation amounting to Rs.460.59 Crore, RInfra has
                    submitted that it has executed a part, i.e., the cable laying
                    portion between RInfra Aarey and MSETCL Borivali
                    stations, as MSETCL has proposed EHV station in the
                    same area catering to RInfra-D & MSEDCL load and the
                    substation portion is proposed for withdrawal.
3) Due to change in scope of work of RInfra-T (i.e. establishing
                cable connectivity between RInfra-T Aarey & MSETCL
                Borivali without installing Nagri-Niwara substation), Rinfra-T
                is required to take revised approval of the scheme along with
                STU recommendation for such change.
13
PART A
4) In view of the above, I am directed to communicate that in
                principle approvals given to DPRs submitted by R Infra-T for
                EHV Scheme for 220 kV Golibar S/s, 220kV Dahisar
                Housing S/s, 220 kV Airport S/s, Land DPR, HVDC
                consultancy, HVDC Line & substation portion of Nagri-
                Niwara scheme stand cancelled.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
18.    On 22 December 2016, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for FY 2016-

 17 to 2021-22 wherein the HVDC Scheme was removed. The HVDC Scheme

 was not included in the 5-year plan submitted for the FY 2017-18 to 2022-23. On

 29 August 2018, AEML acquired R-Infra.
19.    At this stage, it is material to note that the appellant, TPC-T, had submitted

 a DPR for commissioning a 400kV receiving station at Vikhroli which was

 approved by MERC on 2 June 2011 with a capital cost of Rs 846.19 crores. In

 terms of the DPR, the work was to be completed in March 2015. TPC-T proposed

 revised timelines for the completion of the scheme in financial year 2017-18 on

 the ground that the approval required for it including clearances from Ministry of

 Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Airport Authority of India were

 at various stages and the land required was in the final stage of being taken into

 possession. By its order dated 12 September 2018, MERC noted that TPC-T has

 submitted a revised DPR twice, pursuant to which it had approved the extension

 of the target plan date to March 2017 and later, March 2019. TPC-T proposed a

 revised completion date of March 2022. Noting the absence of any progress in

 the scheme of TPC-T, MERC closed the scheme. It observed:
“7.12.1 As regards, 400 kV Receiving station at Vikhroli, the
                Commission notes that TPC-T had submitted its DPR for
                commissioning of 400 kV Receiving Station at Vikhroli and
                the Commission has approved the same oa2 June, 2011
                with capital cost of Rs. 846.19 Cr. In the DPR, TPC-T had
                submitted that the work shall be completed in March, 2015.”
14
PART A


                “7.12.8 Based on TPC-T's submissions in the present
                Petition, the Commission further notes, TPC-T had
                envisaged imminent load requirement and exponential
                increase in the power requirement due to large scale
                development in residential and commercial properties
                (especially in Godrej area) at Vikhroli and around area. In
                actual, the predicted load growth has not come up in the
                area.”

                “7.12.9 Considering above, the Commission noted that STU
                has observed that there is an inordinate delay in completion
                of this scheme and suggested to take up this scheme under
                Tariff Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) route. The
                Commission is concerned about the approach adopted by
                TPC-T for execution of the scheme. This scheme is being
                treated as deemed closed by the Commission and the
                Commission directs STU to take a review of such critical
                schemes and propose a way forward. STU is directed to
                submit its report to the Commission on review of TPC-T's
                proposed 400 kV Vikhroli Receiving Station within a month.”

 The Vikhroli transmission scheme which envisaged the setting up of a 400kV

 receiving station by the appellant was hence deemed to be closed by MERC on

 the ground of TPC-Ts inordinate delay in completion. The project was instead

 suggested to be allotted through the TBCB route.
20.    On 23 November 2018, AEML submitted a proposal to MSETCL indicating

 that in view of the severe constraints on the construction of overhead lines in and

 around Mumbai, the 400kV Aarey – Kudus overhead transmission scheme of

 MSETCL “never took off”. Hence AEML proposed the development of a 2 x 500

 MW HVDC (VSC) based link between Kudus and Aarey and the inclusion of the

 project in the transmission licence of AEML. AEML submitted a revised

 ‘connection application’ for carrying bulk power from the state grid to Mumbai; an

 amendment to the earlier application over which grid connectivity for the

 Nagothane-Aarey HVDC project was granted by MSETCL on 21 August 2013;
15
PART A

 and for the grant of connectivity and implementation of the 2 x 500 MW HVDC

 (VSC) link.
21.    TPC-T sought a review of the order dated 12 September 2018 by MERC

 cancelling its licence for the Vikhroli transmission scheme. On 29 January 2019,

 the review petition was dismissed by MERC reiterating its earlier reasoning that

 TPC-T had substantially delayed the project and noting that there was no defect

 or error apparent on the face of the record.
22.    On 28 May 2019, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for 2018-19 to

 2023-24 to MERC under which the HVDC Scheme was included as an additional

 scheme within the scope of AEML-T. The plan included the Aarey-Kudus HVDC

 Scheme by AEML-T and was made available on the website of MSETCL.
23.    AEML-T sought the suggestion of CEA on a VSC based underground

 cable system for bulk power injection into the existing network of Mumbai. CEA in

 its communication dated 13 June 2019 stated that it had held meetings on 8 May

 2019 and 31 May 2019 with MSETCL, AEML-T and TPC-T besides the central

 transmission utility. The communication noted that in those meetings there was a

 consensus for planning a transmission scheme of feeding power to the Mumbai

 region in the time frame of 2025-26 and 2030 based on studies. AEML-T and

 TPC-T were requested to provide substation wise load data with any additional

 transmission element which was planned in the above time frames. In response,

 both AEML-T and TPC-T furnished sub-station wise load for 2024-25 and details

 of the transmission schemes planned during 2024-25. Load flow studies were

 also carried out for 2024-25 conditions considering all schemes planned by
16
PART A

 AEML-T and TPC-T till 2024-25 and schemes of the STU until 2021-22. The

 primary findings which were recorded by the CEA were in the following terms:
“1.0 Transmission elements which are not N-1
                   compliant
i)       Borivali – Array 220 kV D/c line ( caters to MMR load)
ii)      Kalwa – Mulund 220 kV S/c line (2 ckts) ( caters to load of
                   Mulund and Bhandup which are outside MMR)
              2.0 High loadings on transmission elements ( 400/220 kV ICTs
                   and 220 kV lines) with N-1 contingency criteria
i)       400/220 kV ICTs at Kalwa S/s
ii)      400/220 kV ICTs at boisar (PG) S/s
              3.0 Loading above 300 MW on 220 kV substations
i)       220 kV Array S/s
ii)      220 kV Dharavi S/s
iii)     220 kV Carnac S/s
iv)      220 kV Varsosa S/s (AEML)
               4.0 With provision of 1000 MW feed from Kudus to Array it is
                   observed that
i)       All transmission elements are N-I compliant (except for
                   Kalwa-Mulund 220 kV S/C lines – 2nos. This can be
                   overcome by LILO of either Kalwa-Trombay 220kV S/C line
                   or Kalwa-Borivali 220 kV S/C line at Mulund or by shifting of
                   LILO at Bhandup from Mulund – Borivali 220 kV line to
                   Kalwa-Borivali 220 kV line
ii)      The loadings on transmission elements are reduced.”
24.    CEA, in view of above findings found that the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW

 HVDC link will provide ‘in feed’ to Mumbai and increase reliability. Moreover,

 since the link was based on VSC technology it would help in voltage regulation.

 Keeping the power requirements in consideration, CEA proposed that the

 possibility for another 1000 MW may be explored along with the Kudus to Aarey

 HVDC link. Based on the study report of CEA, MSETCL by a letter dated 27 June

 2019 confirmed that the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW HVDC link may be required for

 pushing additional power into Mumbai as the link creates a separate and

 additional transmission corridor.
25.    On 28 June 2019, MERC issued a letter to MSETCL directing it to take

 necessary steps for the expeditious execution of Kudus-Aarey 1000 MW HVDC
17
PART A

 link by AEML-T according to the five-year transmission plan of the STU dated 28

 May 2019. MERC’s letter took note of the fact that based on the study report of

 CEA which recommended the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW HVDC based transmission

 project for increasing reliability and voltage regulation, MSETCL would take

 necessary steps for expeditious execution of the project in terms of the five-year

 transmission plan:
“5. Considering the STU Plan of incorporating 2 x 500 MW
                Kudus-Aarey HVDC link, CEA’s load flow study
                recommending 1000 MW Kudus-Aarey HVDC link for
                Mumbai region, and STU’s confirmation vide its letter dated
                27.06.2019, the Commission directs MSETCL/STU to take
                all necessary steps for expeditious execution of Kudus-
Aarey 1000 MW HVDC link by AEML-T as per 5 Year
                Transmission Plan of STU dated 28.05.2019 communicated
                to Commission. The Commission further directs
                MSETCL/STU to take similar steps for expeditious execution
                of the other Mumbai Transmission schemes proposed in its
                STU plan with the likely modifications as referred in the letter
                of STU dated 27 June 2019 under reference at sl.no. 7
                above.”
26.    On 23 September 2019, TPC-T instituted an appeal before APTEL against

 MERC’s order dated 12 September 2018 providing for a deemed closure of its

 Vikhroli scheme. In its order dated 23 September 2019, APTEL noted that there

 was an inordinate delay of eight years on the part of TPC-T as a consequence of

 which the project was directed to be placed under the TBCB route. APTEL held

 that TPC-T had not taken adequate steps since 2011 to ensure the completion of

 the project, which was envisaged in the interest of the consumers of Mumbai:
“77. The contention of the Appellant that if the
                implementation of scheme under TBCB is allowed, it would
                further delay the scheme in question is not acceptable to us,
                since in the TBCB process the scheme has to be executed
                on timely basis, which also optimises the cost of the project
18
PART A

                 thereby reducing the financial burden on the consumers. The
                 Appellant, right from 2011 till date, has not taken any active
                 steps to achieve the completion of the project, which helps
                 the consumers of Mumbai. Now, at this stage, the Appellant
                 claims that it has put in lot of efforts and is ready to complete
                 the project. The Appellant was also permitted to participate
                 in the TBCB process. Therefore, the observation of the
                 Commission pertaining to delay in implementing the scheme
                 in question by 8 years cannot be found fault with. In the
                 above paragraphs several observations on facts are made
                 how the Appellant moved at snail’s pace to start and
                 implement the project. The TBCB process is in conformity
                 with the tariff policy notified by the Ministry of Power,
                 Government of India. As far as the so called efforts and the
                 expenditure made, if any, by the Appellant, the Respondent-
                 Commission has made observations that’ the said amount
                 spent/claimed by the Appellant has to be refunded to the
                 Appellant since it is part of conditions of the bid in question.”
27.      On 2 December 2019, AEML-T filed a petition seeking to amend its licence

 so as to include the HVDC project since the licence issued to AEML-T was line

 specific, which means that it authorized AEML-T to create, operate and maintain

 assets that were specifically identified in the license. TPC-T filed its objections in

 response to a public notice issued by AEML-T, on the ground that the HVDC

 Scheme should be executed under the TBCB route in terms of GoM’s GR dated

 4 January 2019. On 15 January 2020, MERC sought the recommendations of the

 STU on the amendment application made by AEML-T. On 22 January 2020, the

 STU indicated that the HVDC project was proposed in the agenda in a

 forthcoming EC meeting for being considered under the TBCB route.
28.      On 30 March 2020, MERC issued its multi-year tariff order in case No 297

 of 2019 filed by AEML-T stating that:
(i) The HVDC project was referred to the EC whose decision was awaited;
19
PART A
(ii) The decision on implementing the HVDC project was to be taken in the

         amendment application or in any other proceedings. The relevant

         observations are extracted below:
“2.1.21      Further, AEML-T has already filed its Petition in
                 Case No. 195 of 2019 seeking of its Transmission Licence
                 which also includes the proposed HVDC scheme. The
                 Petition for Transmission Licence amendment is under
                 consideration with the Commission.
2.1.22      As regards the project to be undertaken under
                 TBCB, the STU vide its letter dated 22 January, 2020 has
                 submitted that the 1000 MW HVDC Kudus-Aarey schemes
                 has been referred to the Empowered Committee formed by
                 the Govt. of Maharashtra and the decision of Empowered
                 Committee is awaited.
2.1.23        In view of the above, the Commission will
                 decide regarding the HVDC scheme during proposed
                 Transmission Licence Amendment of AEML-T in Case No.
                 195 of 2019 or any other proceedings as deemed
                 appropriate.”
29.      In paragraph 5.3.12 of its order, MERC noted that the HVDC Scheme was

 critical for strengthening the Mumbai transmission corridor and observed:
“5.3.12       In continuation to the above, the Commission,
                 as discussed in Paras 2.1.19 to 2.1.23 of this Order
                 considers the timely implementation of the schemes
                 pertaining to the strengthening of the Mumbai transmission
                 corridor viz. Interconnection Point at Vikhroli and HVDC
                 scheme, as very critical. The HVDC scheme is already part
                 of the STU Five Year Plan (FY 2018-19 to FY 2023-24) and
                 as per the plan, the scheme is envisaged to be executed by
                 AEML-T in the year 2023-24. In this regard, AEML-T has
                 already approached the Commission with a Petition to
                 amend its existing Transmission License in Case No. 195 of
                 2019 to include the proposed HVDC scheme along with
                 other proposed amendments which is under consideration
                 with the Commission. Also, in order to assess its
                 reasonability of the cost, AEML-T has recently submitted its
                 DPR for in-principle approval of the Commission.
                 Considering the critical nature of these schemes and time
                 required for obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals,
                 the Commission directs the STU and AEML-T to initiate all
                 the necessary steps for implementing the critical schemes
                 within the timeframe envisaged in the STU Five Year Plan.
20
PART A

                    However, the implementation of the scheme would be
                    subject to necessary Regulatory approvals.”
30.    On 30 May 2020, the EC of GoM conducted its fourth meeting at which it

 opined that the HVDC Scheme which was a part of the earlier five-year plan for

 2018-19 to 2023-24 was not a part of the plan for 2019-20 to 2024-25. The

 members of the EC opined that the HVDC Scheme, not being a part of the five-

 year plan, need not be considered for TBCB at that point and deferred the

 decision. The STU was directed to send its plan for 2019-20 to 2024-25 to

 MERC.
31.    On 3 September 2020, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for financial

 years 2019-20 to 2024-25 before MERC. The plan included the HVDC project in

 FY 2024-25, subject to comments from CEA. The plan envisaged 1000 MW

 HDVC terminal stations at Kudus to Aarey for 2024-25. The note appended to the

 foot of the tabulated statement is in the following terms:
Note:
** 1000 MW HVDC Terminal Stations at Kudus & Aarey and HVDC Link
       Two HVDC schemes were part of STU plan 2018-19 to 2023-24 with a note that consolidated detail
       study will be carried out considering all Mumbai related schemes separately. Subsequent STU study
       indicated that with inclusion of 400kV Velgaon, 400 kV Kalwa Switching, 400 kV Kalwa-Padghe
       M/Cline ect., these HVDC schemes will not be required. However, in view of earlier CEA study in this
       regard and as HVAS schemes were not referred to CEA, the STU study including these HVDC
       schemes has been referred to CEA for their comments. Hence 1000 MW Kudus-Aarey HVDC link is
       included in the year 2024-25 of this STU five year plan (2019-20 to 2024-25) is subject to averse
       comments if any by CEA in the matter may lead to deletion of the scheme from STU five year plan.
32.    On 21 September 2020, AEML-T filed an application in Case 195 of 2019

 before MERC proposing to amend its licence and sought permission to delete the

 HVDC Scheme in its entirety from the scheme proposed in the petition on the

 ground that the scheme is proposed to be executed by its subsidiary company,

 AEMIL. On the same day, AEMIL and AEML-T filed a joint petition bearing Case

 No 190 of 2020 before MERC for a line specific transmission licence for the
21
PART A

 proposed HVDC project in the name of AEMIL. AEMIL and AEML-T stated that in

 view of the transmission constraints and time period involved in the

 commissioning of bulk power schemes, the need for an HVDC Scheme was

 discussed during the first meeting of the Standing Committee chaired by the

 Secretary, Energy, GoM on 29 January 2018 for strengthening the electricity

 supply system to Mumbai city. Moreover, the HVAC scheme which was proposed

 by MSETCL had not progressed beyond the stage of a route survey despite the

 passage of three years. The above amendment, this Court is informed, was in

 order to drop the transmission project which was based on HVDC technology

 from AEML -T’s scope of work. Instead, a fresh transmission licence was sought

 in the name of AEML-T’s subsidiary, AEMIL. It was stated that the amendment

 was necessitated because:
(i)       With a four to five year execution period, the scheme was capital

                intensive, requiring finance from multiple financial institutions;
(ii)      In view of the substantial financial investment which was required,

                financial institutions required identified target funds which could be

                strictly monitored and controlled; and
(iii)     There was a need to ensure timely inclusion and financial closure.
33.           On 12 October 2020, MSETCL filed its reply stating that it does not

 recommend the grant of a transmission licence for the HVDC project to AEMIL on

 the grounds that: (a) In the transmission licence granted to AEML-T on 11 August

 2011 to R-Infra, there is no mention of transfer of a part of the licence to another

 company; (b) AEMIL is a separate legal entity and would have to make a fresh

 application to MERC for a transmission licence under
Sections 14
and
15
of the
22
PART A

 Act
; and (c) If AEMIL satisfies the requirements under
Section 14
and
15
of the

 Act, the licence shall be granted at the discretion of MERC.
34.     On 23 October 2020, a communication was addressed by CEA to

 MSETCL recording that:
“iii. It may be noted that considering the need for availability
                 of power supply in the Mumbai area and ROW problem in
                 constructing overhead transmission lines to Mumbai, CEA
                 on the request of AEML has already suggested a scheme for
                 bulk power injection to Mumbai i.e. 1000 MW VSC based
                 HVDC from Kudus to Array along with future for another
                 1000 MW. This suggestion was made based on the studies
                 carried out for 2024-25 conditions. Requisite land provision
                 in AEML S/S at Kudus and Array is available for construction
                 of the VSC HVDC S/S. This system would provide the
                 required reliability of additional independent feed to Mumbai
                 area when the generation sources in TATA system is likely
                 to do down.”



 The need for implementing the HVDC Scheme as proposed was highlighted in

 the following extracts of the letter:
“iv. Recent blackout incidence (12.10.2020) of Mumbai also
                 the need for immediate implementation of the 1000 MW VSC
                 based HVDC from Kudus to Aaray system so that the
                 increasing load of MMR can be met reliably. The multiple
                 feeding points i.e. Kudus Aaray VSC link and under
                 implementation Phadge-New Mumbai-Khargar 400 kV link
                 would provide additional feeding point and enhance the
                 reliability of Mumbai system.
v. Considering the fact that the present power demand of
                 Mumbai to be around 3700-3800 MW and the maximum
                 embedded generation available in TATA area is about 1349
                 MW against generation capacity of 1627 MW. In Adani area
                 generation about 350 MW against 500 MW is available. So
                 presently under best generation availability condition, more
                 than 50% power demand of MMR is required to be imported
                 from 400 kV Pune, Phadge, Boiser link. Since the link from
                 Pune and Phadge are old and with moose conductor so in
                 case of outage of any link serious transmission constraint for
                 import of power into Mumbai area is observed. This further
                 get aggravated when the generation in TATA system is low.
                 It is also a known fact that the machines in TATA and Adani
23
PART A

                      area are going to be phased out gradually. Under that
                      circumstances the whole of power demand of MMR has to
                      be met through import only.”



 In this backdrop, the letter stated that an additional infeed to the Mumbai area

 from sources such as the 1000MV VSC based HVDC from Kudus to Aarey as

 suggested by CEA was required to be implemented on a priority basis.
35.           On 24 December 2020, the EC conducted its fifth meeting. In Agenda item

 3 pertaining to the threshold limit (according to NTP 2016) for development of

 intra state transmission projects through the TBCB route, the EC decided that:
(i)        All projects in the STU plan costing Rs 500 crore or more would be

                 referred to the EC for execution under the TBCB route;
(ii)       If the STU proposed a project costing over 500 crore would not be

                 taken under the TBCB route “for reasons peculiar to the project” and

                 would be executed under any other mechanism, the justification would

                 be placed before the EC for its consideration”;
(iii)      The threshold limit of Rs 500 crore would be reviewed annually; and
(iv)       Once the EC decides to recommend the project under TBCB route or

                 otherwise, the STU is to petition MERC for final approval “of fresh

                 transmission licence or for extending existing transmission licence by

                 following due process of law”.
Apart from the above decisions, the applicability of the limit of Rs 500 crore to

 “new / old projects” was discussed and it was decided that:
“i. All the projects that are already part of license of a
                      licensee as decided by MERC and MERC has already
                      allotted the work for execution to the licensee, will not be
                      forwarded for further consideration to the committee.
24
PART A

                ii. Projects that are under active consideration of MERC
                where STU has already recommended execution under a
                particular mechanism and where MERC has initiated
                substantially the process of inclusion of the project in scope
                of any existing or new transmission license on the basis of
                this recommendation, may not be put to committee for fresh
                consideration. Any further recommendation, if asked of STU
                by MERC or any other legal forum, STU may agitate the
                committee for the same as per the threshold limit decided
                above.”
36.    Agenda Item No 4 of the same meeting dealt with the 1000MW HVDC

 Kudus- Aarey project. On this aspect, it was decided that STU must place its

 recommendation on the tariff determination of the 1000MW HVDC Kudus- Aarey

 project based on the decision in Agenda 3. The relevant extract from the Minutes

 of the Meeting is extracted below:
“Agenda Item 4: Appraisal of inclusion of 1000 MW HVDC
                Kudus-Aarey project in the STU five Year plan
                (2019-20 – 2024-25) referred to Empowered Committee in
                last meeting.
The Agenda “1000 MW HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey to
                be taken under TBCB” was discussed in 4th Empowered
                Committee meeting on 30th May 2020.”

                At that time the HVDC project was not part of STU five-year
                plan.
Hence the agenda item was deferred. Now the Empowered
                Committee has been apprised about inclusion of 1000 MW
                HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey in the STU Five-year plan.
                Post appraisal of inclusion, the Committee informed STU
                that they should proceed as per the decision given by the
                Empowered Committee vide Agenda No.3.”
37.    On 29 December 2020, the appellant filed objections before MERC

 objecting to the transmission application filed by AEMIL and AEML-T. In their

 response dated 31 December 2020, AEMIL and AEML-T stated that the approval

 of the DPR was cancelled by MERC only due to the proposal of MSETCL that the

 technology be altered from HVDC to HVAC. However, the overhead HVAC

 scheme which was proposed by MSETCL was not implemented. Hence, the
25
PART A

 HVDC Scheme as a bulk power injection scheme for Mumbai was deliberated

 which resulted in reconsideration of the transmission project based on HVDC

 technology which had already been approved earlier.
38.           In its additional submission dated 20 January 2021 filed before MERC,

 MSETCL adverted to the CEA report and stated that it would proceed in

 accordance with the decision of the EC. On 27 January 2021, MSETCL filed

 submissions indicating that:
(i)       A 1000MW HVDC link between Kudus and Aarey for which a licence

                had been sought was part of the five-year transmission plan prepared

                by the STU;
(ii)      The HVDC Scheme was under consideration for several years and was

                recommended by several committees;
(iii)     The bulk power transmission scheme was essential for meeting the

                requirement of Mumbai’s transmission system;
(iv)      While other alternatives had been explored including HVAC technology,

                the HVDC Scheme was found to be more reliable by the CEA in its

                letter dated 23 October 2020 which emphasised the need to implement

                it on a priority basis;
(v)       The HVDC project is an old project; and

      (vi)       The threshold limit which was decided by the EC on 24 December 2020

                is yet to be approved by MERC.
In this backdrop, MSETCL stated that following the TBCB route would take

 between one to two years as was the experience in other MERC projects.
26
PART B

 However, it was indicated that MERC may suggest a suitable strategy for cost

 competitiveness which would benefit the consumers in Maharashtra.
B.            Proceedings before MERC and APTEL
39.            On 21 March 2021, MERC issued an order granting AEMIL the

 transmission licence to develop the Aarey-Kudus transmission project based on

 HVDC technology where tariff was to be determined through the RTM approach

 under
Section 62
of the Act. The Commission observed that:
(i)       The Kudus-Aarey project is essential for strengthening Mumbai’s

                 transmission system, and should be undertaken for execution on an

                 immediate basis as planned by STU;
(ii)      The Supreme Court in
Energy Watchdog v. Central Electricity

                 Regulatory Commission
1 held that NTP 2016 is a ‘statutory policy’

                 and has the ‘effect of law’. NTP 2016 mandates that the State

                 Commissions’ must notify a threshold limit to determine the projects

                 that will have to be taken through the TBCB route. MERC has not

                 notified the threshold yet;
(iii)     GoM’s GR is an executive decision under
Section 63
and not

                 subordinate legislation under
Section 180
of the Act. The relevant date

                 for determining if a project is a ‘new’ or an ‘existing’ project under the

                 GR is 4 January 2019, that is the date of notification of the GR forming

                 the EC. As on 4 January 2019, the HVDC project was an ‘existing’

                 project for the following reasons:
1
(2017) 14 SCC 80
27
PART B
(a) The cancellation of the DPR by the Commission in May 2016 was

          specific to the ‘technology’. The need for the bulk power injection for

          Mumbai was never cancelled or withdrawn. The scope of the old

          approved HVDC Scheme was changed by STU and not by AEML-T

          ; and
(b) Once the approval of a scheme is cancelled, it ceases to exist for

          consideration. However, the Kudus- Aarey HVDC Scheme was

          proposed in November 2018, before the GoM’s GR was notified.
Planning and preparatory work such as technical studies, cost

          estimation, identification of land, and preparation of DPR had also

          been initiated.
(iv)   Multiple transmission licenses in the State of Maharashtra have been

       granted under capital expenditure schemes under
Section 62
of the Act

       after the NTP 2016 was notified. If the argument that projects cannot be

       undertaken under the
Section 62
route after the GR is notified is

       accepted, it would mean that none of the other projects could have

       been notified through the RTM route as well.
(v)    Even if the GR is held to be applicable which would give the EC

       statutory force for identification of projects under the TBCB route, the

       HVDC Kudus-Aarey project is still not mandated to be allotted through

       the TBCB route since:
(a) Merely because STU has listed the HVDC Scheme in the agenda

          for the EC Meeting, it does not mean that the scheme has been

          chosen for TBCB. STU has only sought the opinion of the EC.
28
PART B

          Further, the EC has not recommended that the HVDC Scheme is to

          be undertaken under the TBCB route;
(b) The EC in its meeting held on 24 December 2020 recommended

          that all the projects in the STU plan that cost more than 500 Crore

          must be referred to EC for consideration for execution under the

          TBCB route. However, it was decided that it would only be

          applicable to new projects. It was recommended that projects that

          are under active consideration of MERC where the STU has already

          recommended execution under a certain mechanism and where

          MERC has substantially initiated the process of inclusion of the

          project in the scope of any existing or new transmission licensee on

          the basis of its recommendation shall not be put to the EC for fresh

          consideration. The HVDC project is under active consideration of

          MERC as the project has been included in STU’s five-year plan and

          the project has been allotted to AEML-T. Since the HVDC project

          falls under the exception, the EC has not recommended that the

          HVDC Scheme must be allotted through the TBCB route since it is

          an existing project and not a ‘new’ project.
(vi)   The GoM’s GR is not applicable to the Aarey-Kudus HVDC project, and

       even if applicable, it does not qualify as a ‘new’ project in view of the

       exceptions
laid down by
the EC. Thus, MERC has the discretion to

       choose from either the
Section 62
or the
Section 63
route. MERC must

       choose the most appropriate route for undertaking the project,

       considering the need for the scheme, the urgency associated with the
29
PART B

          scheme, the historical background, and the peculiarities of the scheme.

          The HVDC Scheme according to the STU Plan 2019-20 to 2024-25

          should be undertaken under
Section 62
because:
(a) The cost- benefits of the project if awarded under the TBCB route

             cannot be assessed since there is no precedent of a completed

             HVDC Scheme being awarded through the TBCB route;
(b) HVDC Scheme is a high-cost project with high end technology with

             limited international suppliers. It has relatively limited scope for cost

             reduction when compared to HVAC schemes;
(c) AEMIL has already taken steps to procure land at Aarey and Kudus

             for the HVDC Scheme. It will facilitate the timely completion of the

             project;
(d) STU has expressed reservations regarding undertaking the HVDC

             Scheme through the competitive bidding route since the competitive

             bidding process would take an additional two years for completion.
Two transmission projects that were decided to be undertaken

             under the TBCB route have still not seen any progress even after

             the completion of almost 3 years; and
(e) Projects undertaken under
Section 62
of the Act can be more

             closely monitored on aspects such as timely execution and cost

             escalation.
40.    The summary of the conclusions drawn in the order of the MERC are

 extracted below:
“38.61 In summary:
30
PART B
a) There is no right or wrong approach for undertaking this
HVDC Bulk Power Injection Scheme for Mumbai, in terms of
whether the Scheme is decided to be undertaken under
Section 62 (RTM)
or
Section 63 (TBCB)
route, as both RTM
and TBCB route can be justified for its implementation;
b) This is a case where the most appropriate route for
undertaking the Project has to be selected, considering the
need for this Scheme, the urgency associated with the
Scheme, the historical background, and the peculiarities of
this Scheme;
c) This Project is being considered by the Commission
because it is part of the STU Plan FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-
25, wherein this Scheme is allocated to AEML;
d) The cost benefits in case the Project is awarded under
the TBCB route cannot be assessed, as there is no
precedent of any completed HVDC Scheme with UG cabling
being awarded through the TBCB route;
e) HVDC Scheme is a high-cost project with high-end
technology with limited international suppliers, and hence,
has relatively limited scope for cost reduction as compared
to HVAC schemes;
f)     Steps already taken by the Petitioners for procuring
land at Aarey and Kudus for HVDC terminal station will
facilitate timely completion of the Project;
g) The Commission has asked IIT Bombay to evaluate the
Scope, design aspects, reasonability of cost, alternatives,
etc., of the Scheme to ensure a technically appropriate and
cost-effective solution for mitigating Mumbai’s transmission
constraints;
h) The contracting for the Project would be through
international competitive bidding as a pre-condition of the
Licence, and hence, the least cost is likely to be achieved.
Further, the cost incurred on the Scheme could be verified
through experts after completion of the Scheme before
allowing recovery through ARR;
i)     The Commission allows recovery of capital cost for
Section 62
Projects only after prudence check based on
detailed scrutiny, so that only justified and reasonable cost is
recovered through tariff;
j)     The STU has expressed reservations regarding
undertaking the HVDC Scheme through the competitive
bidding route, and has stated that additional time of 1-2
years may be required for completion of the competitive
bidding process;
k) The two Transmission Schemes in Maharashtra that
have been decided to be undertaken under TBCB route,
other than Kharghar Vikhroli Transmission Project, have not
seen any progress at all, even after passage of almost 3
years in one case;
31
PART B
l)     It will be in no one’s interest if the Scheme is awarded
under TBCB route especially when the planning and
feasibility of the Scheme is at final stage, even if it is at a
lower cost than that estimated by AEMIL, if it either does not
come up at all or does not come up within the desired
timelines;
m) The rationale adopted at the Central level to undertake
HVDC Projects on RTM basis despite the high cost of such
Schemes, has been the intention of compressing the
execution time schedule, which is equally applicable to the
present Mumbai transmission system;
n)
Section 62
Projects can be closely and regularly
monitored by the Commission for aspects such as timely
execution, cost escalation, etc., unlike
Section 63
Projects
where the Bidders are bound by the conditions and
responsibilities stipulated in the TSA, and on which the
Commission has a limited regulatory oversight;
o)      The Commission has already constituted the
Maharashtra Transmission Committee (MTC) in accordance
with the MEGC, under the aegis of the Grid Coordination
Committee (GCC), which shall be responsible for planning
and monitoring timely execution of transmission projects in
Maharashtra including Mumbai area. Considering the
importance of HVDC Scheme for strengthening the Mumbai
Transmission system, the Commission will separately notify
a Committee for closely monitoring the progress of this
Project to ensure strict adherence to the planned timelines
for its identified milestones;
p) The Scheme has to be undertaken at the earliest in a
time-bound manner in the interest of strengthening Mumbai’s
transmission system, especially since almost 10 years have
passed since the HVDC Bulk Power Injection Scheme was
first proposed for Mumbai;
q) The early and timely completion of the HVDC Bulk
Power Injection Scheme for Mumbai will provide access to
alternative power procurement sources as compared to the
embedded generating units; while there is no guarantee that
power procurement through competitive bidding will discover
rates lower than that of the embedded generating units, at
least the option will be available to the Mumbai Distribution
Licensees and Commission’s approval, and the lower power
procurement costs can be passed on to the consumers
through reduction in tariff;
r)     Considering the expected retirement of the embedded
generation capacity and Transmission constraints, import of
potentially cheaper power into Mumbai through competitive
bidding will be facilitated by implementation of the HVDC
Scheme, which is likely to reduce the cost of power for the
end-consumers.”
32
PART B

 MERC therefore concluded that the HVDC Scheme in terms of the STU plan for

 2019-20 to 2024-25 would be undertaken by AEMIL under
Section 62
with the

 safeguards stipulated in the order.
41.           The appellant instituted proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution

 before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. However, it withdrew those

 proceedings with liberty to move APTEL under
Section 111
of the Act. TPC-T

 filed an appeal under
Section 111
of the Act before APTEL. APTEL, by its order

 dated 18 February 2022 dismissed the appeal with the following findings:
(i)        The argument that the TBCB route under
Section 63
is the dominant

                 route is premised on a flawed reading of the Act. RTM under
Section 62
is recognized under the Act and it cannot be considered to be in a

                 position subservient or inferior to the TBCB route;
(ii)       There was no infirmity in MERC’s order granting a transmission licence

                 as the HVDC Project was an old/existing project in terms of the GoM’s

                 GR dated 1 January 2019. The earlier cancellation by MERC of the in-
principle approval did not render the project a new scheme since the

                 STU changed its stance due to its objections on the technology. The

                 change in route from Nagothane to Kudus was similar to modifications

                 that are common to all transmission projects and the project cannot be

                 considered as a new project merely due to change of connection point;
(iii)      That while the change of stance of the STU is not proper and a decisive

                 and timely approach is instead expected, the same cannot be a ground

                 to vitiate the decision taken by MERC;
33
PART C
(iv)      That the grant of licence was not contrary to
Section 15
which requires

                the publication of a notice for suggestions and objections before

                granting a licence. MERC had issued a public notice and the

                proceedings                                                          under

                Section 15 cannot be conducted de hors the entity which has to

                implement the project; and
(v)       That even though there may be reasons justifying the adoption of the

                option under
Section 63
, this is not reason enough for the Tribunal to sit

                in appeal and supplant the views of the Commission. Furthermore, in

                light of the criticality of the project for the region, interference by the

                tribunal would be improper, considering the progress that has already

                been made.
42.           The appeal has been instituted under
Section 125
of the Act for

 challenging the judgment of APTEL.
C.           The Submissions
43.           Mr Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

 appellants has urged the following submissions:
(i)       For all transmission projects, the rule for the award of transmission

                licences is competitive bidding, subject to certain exceptions;
(ii)      The rule of competitive bidding is based on statute, statutory policy, and

                guidelines of the and State Governments ;
(iii)     Two methods have been statutorily prescribed for tariff determination in
Sections 62
and
63
. However, in the facts and circumstances, the

                TBCB route under
Section 63
of the Act was required to be followed;
34
PART C
(iv)      There were no exceptional circumstances warranting a departure from

                the TBCB route;
(v)       The present project must be considered as a new project, adopting 4

                January 2019      the date on which the government of Maharashtra

                issued a GR in consonance with the NTP 2016 as the cut-off date for

                determining as to whether the project in question is old or new; and
(vi)      APTEL has misconstrued the scope of
Section 110
by disregarding the

                legal position that the provision envisages a full appeal on facts and law

                to a specialised body.
44.           On the other hand, Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr Vikas Singh,

 learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the AEML-T and AEMIL have

 urged the following submissions:
(i)       On a proper construction of the provisions of
Sections 61
,
62
and
63
,

                the legal position is that
Sections 62
and
63
stand on an equal footing

                and it would be incorrect to postulate that
Section 63
has a dominant

                character;
(ii)      The concepts of the historicity of a project, the criticality of a scheme

                and its urgency are factors that are embodied in
Section 61
;
(iii)     Irrespective of the interpretation of
Sections 62
and
63
, the application

                of the above test must render the award of the contract to AEML-T

                valid;
(iv)      MERC was correct in entering a finding of fact that the appellant is only

                interested in delaying the project. The Vikhroli transmission project was

                abandoned by the appellant and was eventually secured by the second
35
PART C

         respondent. The award of the HVDC project would inject much needed

         power to Mumbai;
(v)      TPC-T has not challenged the multi-year tariff order dated 30 March

         2020 issued by MERC which was a product of a detailed consideration

         where considering the critical nature of the schemes and the time

         required for obtaining regulatory approvals, MERC directed STU and

         AEML-T                                                                     to

         initiate the necessary steps to implement the scheme. The impugned

         order granting a transmission licence is only consequential;
(vi)     It was envisaged that from 2007 that AEML-T would obtain the HVDC

         line. The HVDC project was delayed only because MSETCL proposed

         that it would implement an overhead transmission project from Kudus to

         Aarey, which never took off. Between 2007 and 2019 there was no

         objection to the project which was envisaged to be executed by R-infra

         and later by AEML-T;
(vii)    Even as of date, no threshold limit has been prescribed by MERC for

         adopting the TBCB route for the award of a licence for an intra-state

         transmission project; and
(viii)   Both MERC and APTEL are statutory expert bodies at the primary and

         appellate level and have taken a concurrent view. Save and except in

         the case of perversity, the interference of this Court is not warranted.
36
PART D

 D.     Regulatory Framework
45.     Before proceeding to analyse the issues that fall for determination, it is

 important that we lay out the regulatory framework on determination of tariff with

 reference to the provisions of the
Electricity Act
, and the policies framed by the

 Central Government and the State of Maharashtra under the provisions of the

 Act.
D. 1
Electricity Act
2003
46.     Before the enactment of the
Electricity Act
2003, the Indian electricity

 sector was governed by the
Indian Electricity Act
1910, the
Electricity (Supply)

 Act
1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act 1998.
The Indian

 Electricity Act
1910 created a basic framework for the electricity supply industry in

 India.
The Electricity (Supply) Act
1948 mandated the creation of State Electricity

 Boards, which had the responsibility of facilitating supply of electricity within the

 State. However, the State Electricity Boards were unable to use their power to fix

 tariffs judiciously. It was noted that the State Governments were in practice fixing

 tariffs. To distance the State Governments from the exercise of tariff fixation, the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act
1998 was enacted.
47.     Parliament enacted the
Electricity Act
2003 to consolidate the laws relating

 to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity; to develop

 the electricity industry; and to promote competition.
The Electricity Act
2003 was

 enacted with the objective of encouraging the participation of the private sector in

 the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, and to harmonise and

 consolidate the provisions into a self-contained code:
37
PART D

               “With the policy of encouraging private sector
               participation in generation, transmission and distribution
               and the objectives of distancing the regulatory
               responsibilities from the Government to the Regulatory
               Commissions, the need for harmonising and rationalising
               the provisions of the
Electricity Act
1910, the
Electricity
               (Supply) Act
1948 and the
Electricity Regulatory
               Commissions Act
1948 in a new self-contained
               comprehensive legislation arose.”
48.     The long title to the Act indicates that its object is to consolidate the laws

 relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading, and use of electricity

 and to take measures conducive to the development of the electricity industry;

 promote competition and protect the interest of consumers; ensure the supply of

 electricity to all areas; rationalise electricity tariffs and ensure transparent

 policies. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act states that “it gives

 the States enough flexibility to develop their power sector in the manner they

 consider appropriate.”
49.
Section 3
provides for the formulation of a National Electricity Policy and

 National Tariff Policy:
“
Section 3
. (National Electricity Policy and Plan) --- (1)
               The Central Government shall, from time to time, prepare the
               National Electricity Policy and tariff policy, in consultation with
               the State Governments and the Authority for development of
               the power system based on optimal utilisation of resources
               such as coal, natural gas, nuclear substances or materials,
               hydro and renewable sources of energy.
(2) The Central Government shall publish National Electricity
               Policy and tariff policy from time to time.
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, in
               consultation with the State Governments and the Authority,
               review or revise, the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy
               referred to in sub-section (1) .
(4) The Authority shall prepare a National Electricity Plan in
               accordance with the National Electricity Policy and notify such
               plan once in five years:
Provided that the Authority while preparing the National
               Electricity Plan shall publish the draft National Electricity Plan
38
PART D

                 and invite suggestions and objections thereon from licensees,
                 generating companies and the public within such time as may
                 be prescribed:
Provided further that the Authority shall - (a) notify the plan
                 after obtaining the approval of the Central Government; (b)
                 revise the plan incorporating therein the directions, if any,
                 given by the Central Government while granting approval
                 under clause (a).
(5) The Authority may review or revise the National Electricity
                 Plan in accordance with the National Electricity Policy.”

 In terms of the above provision, the Union Government has to formulate the NEP

 and NTP in consultation with the State Governments and the CEA.
50.
Part III of the Act
deals with the generation of the electricity; Part IV deals

 with licensing; Part V with transmission; Part VI with distribution and Part VII with

 tariff.
51.
Section 38
provides that the Central Government may notify any

 government company as the CTU. The CTU is statutorily empowered to

 undertake the transmission of electricity through inter-state transmission systems.

 The CTU has to also discharge functions of planning and coordination relating to

 inter-state transmission systems. For this purpose, the CTU is required to

 coordinate with the STU, Central and State Governments, generating companies,

 authorities and licensees.
52.
Section 39
stipulates that the State Government may notify the Board or

 any government company as the STU. The STU shall undertake transmission of

 electricity through the intra-state transmission system and discharge functions

 relating to the planning and coordination of the intra-state transmission system.

 While discharging its functions, the STU is required to reflect the planning

 initiatives of intra-state transmission system by publishing a five-year plan

 periodically.
39
PART D
53.
Sections 76
and
82
constitute the Central Regulatory Commission and

 State Regulatory Commissions respectively. The Central and State Regulatory

 Commissions shall among other functions, determine and regulate the tariff for

 inter-state transmission of electricity and intra-state transmission of electricity

 respectively.
Sections 79(3)
and
86(3)
stipulate that the Central and State

 Commissions shall while discharging their functions ensure transparency, and

 ‘shall be guided’ by the NEP, NTP and National Electricity Plan. The Central and

 the State Commissions also discharge advisory functions, where they shall

 advise the Central Government and State Government respectively on, inter alia,

 promotion of competition in activities related to the electricity industry and in

 matters concerning generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity.
Section 25
states that the Central Government may make a region-wise

 demarcation of the country for the purpose of integrated transmission of

 electricity to facilitate inter-state, regional and inter-regional transmission of

 electricity.
Section 30
provides that the State Commission shall facilitate and

 promote transmission, wheeling, and inter-connection arrangements within its

 territorial jurisdiction for the transmission of electricity.
54.
Section 14
envisages that the Appropriate Commission, defined in
Section

 2(4)
to mean the Central or as the case may be the State Regulatory

 Commission, may grant a licence to any person:
(a) To transmit electricity as a transmission licensee;
(b) To distribute electricity as a distribution licensee; and
(c) To undertake trading and electricity in any area specified in the licence.
40
PART D
55.
Section 15
prescribes the procedure to be followed for the grant of

 licences. The application for a licence under
Section 14
has to be filed in the

 manner prescribed by the Appropriate Commission. The person who has applied

 for the grant of a licence must publish a notice of the application. The licence

 shall not be granted by the Appropriate Commission until the objection(s), if any

 received, are considered by the Commission. The application shall also be

 forwarded to the CTU or the STU, as the case may be. The CTU or STU must

 send its recommendation to the Appropriate Commission. The recommendation

 of the CTU or the STU is however, not binding on the Commission. The

 Appropriate Commission is also required to publish a notice of the application if it

 proposes to issue the licence. The Commission has to consider the objections

 and the recommendations of the Transmission Utility before granting the licence.
56.     In enacting the above provisions of law, Parliament has made a clear

 demarcation between intra-state and inter-state transmission of electricity. While

 the CTU, Central Government and the Central Regulatory Commission are

 responsible for the facilitation of inter-state transmission of electricity, the State

 Commission and the STU have been granted full autonomy with respect to intra-

 state transmission of electricity.
57.     Part VII deals with tariffs. Part VII comprises of
Section 61
(tariff

 regulations),
Section 62
(determination of tariff),
Section 63
(determination of

 tariff by bidding process),
Section 64
(procedure for tariff order),
Section 65
(provision of subsidy by the state government) and
Section 66
(development of

 market). In terms of
Section 61
, the Appropriate Commission is entrusted, subject

 to the provisions of the Act, to specify the terms and conditions for the
41
PART D

 determination of tariffs. While specifying the terms and conditions, the

 Appropriate Commission shall be guided by the requirements specified in clauses
(a) to (i). Amongst them, in clause (i) is the NEP and tariff policy, while clause (c)

 emphasizes the need to encourage competition, efficiency, economical use of

 resources, good performance and optimum investment.
Section 62(1)
empowers

 the Appropriate Commission to determine the tariff “in accordance with the

 provisions of this Act” for :
a. Supply of electricity by a generating company to a distributing licensee;
b. Transmission of electricity;
c. Wheeling of electricity; and

      d. Retail sale of electricity.
Section 63
provides that notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 62
, the

 Commission shall adopt the tariff determined through the bidding process if the

 tariff has been determined through a transparent process in accordance with the

 guidelines issued by the Central Government.
D.2     Policy framework
58.      The Central Government has under the provisions of the Act issued

 resolutions and framed policies. In order for us to understand the gamut of the

 issues before us, it is necessary that we refer to the policies notified by the

 Central Government and the State Government of Maharashtra.
42
PART D

 D. 2.1 Central Policies
59.    On 6 January 2006, the Ministry of Power notified the NTP 2006 in

 exercise of its power under
Section 3
of the Act. The NTP 2006, inter alia,

 emphasizes the need for transparency and competition in the power sector and

 the need to ensure the availability of electricity to consumers at reasonable and

 competitive rates.
60.    Clause 5.1 states that one of the key features of the Act is that it

 introduced competition in different segments of the electricity industry. The policy

 deals with transmission in clause 7. Clause 7.1(6) deals with transmission pricing

 where it is emphasised that “investment of transmission developer other than

 CTU/STU would be invited through competitive bids”. Clause 7.1(6) inter alia

 provides as follows:
“(6) Investment by transmission developer other than CTU-
                STU would be invited through competitive bids. The Central
                Government will issue guidelines in three months for bidding
                process for developing transmission capacities. The tariff of
                the projects to be developed by CTU-STU after the period of
                five years or when the Regulatory Commission is satisfied
                that the situation is right to introduce such competition (as
                referred to in para 5.1) would also be determined on the
                basis of competitive bidding.”
61.    Clause 7.1(7) stipulates that after implementing the framework for inter-

 state transmission, a similar approach shall be implemented by SERCs for intra-

 state transmission within two years after considering factors like voltage,

 distance, direction and quantum of flow. However, Clause 5.1 dealing with the

 General Approach to Tariff notes that even for public sector projects, tariff for new

 projects must be determined through the TBCB route after five years or when the

 Regulatory Commission deems it fit. The relevant clause is extracted below:
43
PART D

                   “5.1 […] Even for the Public Sector projects, tariff of all new
                   generation and transmission projects should be decided on
                   the basis of competitive bidding after a period of five years or
                   when the Regulatory Commission is satisfied that the
                   situation is ripe to introduce such competition.”
62.    On 13 April 2006, the Union MoP notified Tariff Based Competitive

 Guidelines for Transmission Services under
Section 63
of the Act to promote

 competitive procurement of transmission services and encourage private

 investment in the development of transmission lines. The objects for making the

 guidelines are:
“
             •     Promote competitive procurement of transmission services.
             •     Encourage private investment in transmission lines.
             •     Facilitate transparency and fairness in procurement
                   processes.
•     Facilitate reduction of information asymmetries for various
                   bidders.
•     Protect consumer interests by facilitating competitive
                   conditions in procurement of transmission services of
                   electricity.
•     Enhance standardization and reduce ambiguity and hence
                   time for materialization of projects;
•     Ensure compliance with standards, norms and codes for
                   transmission lines while allowing flexibility in operation to the
                   transmission service providers.”
63.    On 13 April 2006, the MoP notified Guidelines for Encouraging

 Competition in Development of Transmission Projects. In terms of Clause 13, an

 Empowered Committee was constituted to identify projects to be developed

 under the scheme. In terms of Clause 19, the selection of the developer for

 identified projects would be through TBCB for transmission services according to

 the guidelines issued by the MoP under
Section 63
. However, for intra-state

 projects the guidelines provide that the States shall have the discretion to adopt

 the guidelines. Clause 24 noted as follows:
44
PART D
24. As far as intra state projects are concerned the state
                 governments may adopt these guidelines and may constitute
                 similar committees for facilitation of transmission projects
                 within the state.
64.    On 28 January 2016, MoP issued the NTP 2016. Paragraph 5 of the policy

 spells out the “general approach to tariff”. Paragraph 5.1 indicates:
“5.1 Introducing competition in different segments of the
                 electricity industry is one of the key features of the
Electricity
                 Act
2003. Competition will lead to significant benefits to
                 consumers through reduction in capital costs and also
                 efficiency of operations. It will also facilitate the price to be
                 determined competitively. The Central Government has
                 already issued detailed guidelines for tariff based bidding
                 process for procurement of electricity by distribution
                 licensees.”
 In a similar vein, paragraph 5.3 specifies that:
“5.3 The tariff of all new generation and transmission
                 projects of company owned or controlled by the Central
                 Government shall continue to be determined on the basis of
                 competitive bidding as per the Tariff Policy notified on 6th
                 January, 2006 unless otherwise specified by the Central
                 Government on case-to-case basis.
Further, intra-state transmission projects shall be developed
                 by State Government through competitive bidding process
                 for projects costing above a threshold limit which shall be
                 decided by the SERCs.”
65.    Paragraph 5.3 which has been extracted above envisages that a

 competitive bidding process should be followed for intra-state transmission

 projects developed by the State government where the project cost is above a

 threshold limit that is to be prescribed by the SERCs.
66.    On 22 September 2017, the Forum of Regulators in its 61st Meeting, while

 reiterating the NTP 2016, urged all members to determine the threshold limits for

 their respective intra-state transmission projects above which the TBCB route

 would be followed. The relevant portion of the Minutes of Meeting is extracted

 below:
45
PART D

                 “Agenda Item No. 5 (i) Action to be taken by States to define
                 a framework (including setting a threshold limit) for
                 developing intra-State transmission projects on competitive
                 basis.
The FoR Secretariat updated the Forum that as per
                 provisions of the revised Tariff Policy notified by the Central
                 Government, development of intra-State transmission
                 projects is to be carried out by the State Government
                 through competitive bidding process for projects costing
                 above a threshold limit decided by the SERCs. In this
                 regard, it was placed before the Forum that in some States,
                 development of State-level transmission projects was carried
                 out through tariff based competitive bidding (TBCB) route
                 and in some States, the conventional route of EPC based
                 contracting is reportedly followed. Further, SERCs have not
                 determined the threshold limit of the projects to be
                 considered under TBCB route.
The Forum observed that in order to encourage
                 transparency and efficiency in project costs, threshold limit
                 for intra-State transmission projects is required to be
                 determined by the SERCs as provided for in the Tariff Policy.
                 Therefore, the Forum urged the Members to determine the
                 threshold limit for their respective State-level transmission
                 projects, while taking all relevant parameters of their State
                 into consideration.”
67.    On 15 March 2021, the MoP addressed a communication to the States and

 Union Territories recording that the NEP 2005 and the NTP 2006 had laid down

 the framework for ensuring optimal development of transmission networks to

 promote efficient utilisation of generation and transmission assets, attract

 investment in the transmission sector and provide adequate returns. It noted that

 this had resulted in
(i) A lower tariff as compared to cost plus; and
(ii) Risk sharing.
In the above backdrop, the communication stated that:
46
PART D

                “7. As intra-state transmission system has major share in the
                transmission sector in the country, adoption of Tariff Based
                Competitive Bidding (TBCB) in development of intra-state
                transmission system can effectively reduce burden on State
                Governments’ finances as well as reduce tariff of intra-State
                transmission system leading to consumers’ benefit. The
                matter was also discussed in a meeting taken by Hon’ble
                Union Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Power and
                New and Renewable Energy on 03.02.2021 and it was
                decided to request the State/UT Governments to adopt
                TBCB in development of intra-State transmission
                system.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)



 The communication urged that in the larger interest of consumers, it was strongly

 recommended that TBCB may be adopted also for the development of the intra-
state transmission system.
D. 2.2 State Policies
68.    On 4 January 2019, the GoM notified a government resolution with the

 object of setting up new transmission projects through TBCB in line with MoP’s

 guidelines dated 13 April 2006, as subsequently modified. While notifying the

 guidelines, the object of the GR was spelt out in the following terms:
“It would be possible to use state-of-the-art technology for
                transmission projects if Tariff Based Competitive Bidding is
                adopted for transmission projects in the state. Since this
                process is transparent, it will help in improving the standard
                and efficiency of the project. Thus, transmission projects can
                be established quickly. Since investment for establishing
                these projects is to be done by the developers on external
                basis, it will ease the financial burden on the state.
                Therefore, the government was considering constitution of
                committees like Empowered Committee, Bid Evaluation
                committee in accordance with the above-mentioned
                guidelines                       of                     Central
                government for undertaking transmission projects in the
                state through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding.”
47
PART E

 The GR notes that:
“For establishing new Transmission Projects, after
                considering the guidelines issued by the Central
                Government the State Government has decided to
                implement Tariff Based Competitive Bidding-TBCB process
                for new Projects….”

 In terms of the GR, an Empowered Committee was to be set up to undertake

 transmission projects in accordance with the guidelines of the Central

 Government. The functions of the Committee were:
“
                A) To provide impetus to new transmission projects in the
                state through this plan.
B) Selection of transmission projects according to
                recommendations of State Transmission Undertaking.
                C) Helping in evaluation of received tenders as well as
                formation of Bid Empowered Committee.”

 The Empowered Committee was required to appoint a Bid Process Coordinator

 in terms of paragraph 3 of the GR to co-ordinate the bidding process as per

 Central Government’s guidelines. The GR also envisaged setting up of a Bid

 Empowerment Committee inter alia for the examination of technical bids and the

 fulfilment of the technical criteria prescribed in bid documents. We have already

 laid out the decisions of the said Empowered Committee relevant to the current

 proceedings in the earlier section.
E.    The Analysis
69.    In the backdrop of the factual narration, the essential aspect that falls for

 consideration is whether the decision of MERC to allow the joint licence petition

 submitted by AEML-T and AEMIL, granting a transmission licence for the

 1000MW Aarey- Kudus HVDC project is vitiated by the failure to follow the TBCB
48
PART E

 route (the
Section 63
route). In the course of answering this question, the

 following issues fall for consideration:
(i)        Whether the Electricity Act 2003 envisages the TBCB route under
Section 63
as the dominant method to determine tariff;
(ii)       Whether the NTP framed under
Section 3
of the Act is binding on the

                 State Regulatory Commissions, particularly in view of the observations

                 made by this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra);
(iii)      Whether the Regulatory Commissions have the power to prescribe the

                 modalities to determine the tariff under the provisions of the
Electricity

                 Act
2003 (and the regulations framed under it);
(iv)       Whether MERC was bound to decide the tariff for the HVDC Project

                 through TBCB under Section 63 in view of Government of

                 Maharashtra’s Resolution dated 04 January 2019 notifying the decision

                 to allocate new intra-state transmission projects through TBCB route

                 and setting up an Empowered Committee; and
(v)        Whether MSETCL’s decision to not refer the HVDC Project to the

                 Empowered Committee for holding bidding under the TBCB route is in

                 breach of the GR.
E. 1
Section 63
: The dominant route or the alternative route
70.
Section 61
grants the Appropriate Commission the power, subject to the

 provisions of the Act, to specify the terms and conditions for the determination of

 tariff. The provision stipulates that in specifying the terms, the Commission shall

 be guided by principles that are listed in the nine clauses of the provision. Of

 particular importance are clauses (a), (c), and (i). Clause (a) provides that the
49
PART E

 Appropriate Commission shall be guided by the principles and methodologies

 specified by the Central Commission for determination of transmission tariff.

 Clause (c) states that the factors that would encourage competition and efficiency

 must be followed. Clause (i) provides that the Commission shall be guided by the

 NEP and NTP.
Section 61
reads as follows:
“
Section 61
. (Tariff regulations):
The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions
                of this Act, specify the terms and conditions for the
                determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided
                by the following, namely:-
(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the
                Central Commission for determination of the tariff
                applicable to generating companies and transmission
                licensees;
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of
                electricity are conducted on commercial principles;
(c) the factors which would encourage competition,
                efficiency, economical use of the resources, good
                performance and optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same
                time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable
                manner;
(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
(f) multi year tariff principles;
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
                electricity and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner
                specified by the Appropriate Commission;]
(h) the promotion of co-generation and generation of
                electricity from renewable sources of energy;
(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy:
Provided that the terms and conditions for determination of
                tariff under the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948
, the
Electricity
                Regulatory Commission Act, 1998
and the enactments
                specified in the Schedule as they stood immediately before
                the appointed date, shall continue to apply for a period of
                one year or until the terms and conditions for tariff are
                specified under this section, whichever is earlier.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
71.
Section 62
grants the Appropriate Commission the power to determine the

 tariff for the (i) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution
50
PART E

 licensee; (ii) transmission of electricity; (iii) wheeling of electricity; and (iv) retail

 sale of electricity. While
Section 61
stipulates the principles that shall guide the

 determination of tariff,
Section 62
grants the Commission the discretion to

 determine the tariff. Clause (3) of
Section 62
fetters the discretion of the

 Commission in determining tariff.
Section 62(3)
provides that the Commission

 while exercising its discretion to determine the tariff, shall not ‘show undue

 preference to any customer of electricity but may differentiate according to the

 customer’s load factor, power factor, voltage….’.
Section 62(3)
reads as follows:
“(3) The Appropriate Commission shall not, while
                 determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference
                 to any consumer of electricity but may differentiate according
                 to the consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage, total
                 consumption of electricity during any specified period or the
                 time at which the supply is required or the geographical
                 position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose
                 for which the supply is required.”

 This method of tariff determination is commonly referred to as the Regulated

 Tariff Mechanism.
72.
Section 63
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 62
,

 the Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff determined through bidding:
“63. Determination of tariff by bidding process -
                 Notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 62
, the
                 Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff
                 has been determined through transparent process of bidding
                 in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
                 Government.”
73.
Section 63
has five significant features: (i)
Section 63
begins with a non-

 obstante clause. The non-obstante provision overrides
Section 62
alone and not

 all the provisions of the Act; (ii) as opposed to
Section 62
where the Commission

 is granted the power to determine the tariff, under the
Section 63
route, the

 bidding process determines the tariff; (iii) the Commission is mandated to adopt
51
PART E

 such tariff that is determined by the bidding process; (iv) the Commission has the

 discretion to not adopt the tariff determined through the bidding process only if

 the twin conditions as mentioned in the provision are not fulfilled; and (v) the twin

 conditions are that (a) the bidding process must have been transparent; (b) the

 bidding process must have complied with the guidelines issued by the Central

 Government.
74.
Section 63
indicates that the provision would be invoked after the tariff has

 been determined by the bidding process. There is nothing in
Sections 62
or 63

 that could lead us to interpret that
Section 63
is the dominant route for

 determination of tariff. Both the provisions provide alternative modalities through

 which tariff can be determined. The non-obstante clause in
Section 63
must be

 read in the context of
Sections 61
and
62
.
Section 62
bestows the Commission

 with wide discretion to determine tariff.
Section 63
seeks to curtail this discretion

 where a bidding process for tariff determination has already been conducted.
Section 63
contemplates that in such situations where the tariff has been

 determined through the bidding process, the Commission cannot by falling back

 on the discretion provided under
Section 62
negate the tariff determined through

 bidding. This interpretation of
Section 63
is fortified by the use of the phrase

 ‘such’ in
Section 63
- the Commission is bound to ‘adopt’ ‘such’ tariff determined

 through bidding.
75.    The Commission under
Section 61
of the Act must frame guidelines for

 deciding the modality to determine tariff. This is evidenced from a reading of
Section 61(a)
which provides that the Appropriate Commission while specifying

 the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff shall be guided by the
52
PART E

 principles and ‘methodologies’ specified by the Central Commission for the

 determination of tariff applicable to transmission licensees.
76.
In this backdrop, it is necessary to advert to the judgment of this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra). A two-Judge Bench of this Court analysed the

 provisions of
Section 63
and its interplay with
Section 62
. The relevant

 observations are extracted below.
“19…. It may be noticed that
Section 63
begins with a non
                obstante clause, but it is a non obstante clause covering only
Section 62
. Secondly, unlike
Section 62
read with
Sections 61
and
64
, the appropriate Commission does not “determine”
                tariff but only “adopts” tariff already determined under Section
63. Thirdly, such “adoption” is only if such tariff has been
                determined through a transparent process of bidding, and,
                fourthly, this transparent process of bidding must be in
                accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
                Government. What has been argued before us is that
Section
                63
is a standalone provision and has to be construed on its
                own terms, and that, therefore, in the case of transparent
                bidding nothing can be looked at except the bid itself which
                must accord with guidelines issued by the Central
                Government. One thing is immediately clear, that the
                appropriate Commission does not act as a mere post
                office under
Section 63
. It must adopt the tariff which has
                been determined through a transparent process of
                bidding, but this can only be done in accordance with the
                guidelines issued by the Central Government. Guidelines
                have been issued under this section on 19-1-2005, which
                guidelines have been amended from time to time. Clause 4,
                in particular, deals with tariff and the appropriate Commission
                certainly has the jurisdiction to look into whether the tariff
                determined through the process of bidding accords with
                Clause 4.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)

 The observations of this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra) are summarised below:
(i) The Appropriate Commission while ‘adopting’ the tariff determined through

         bidding is not a mere ‘post office’; and
(ii) The Commission is mandated by
Section 63
to adopt the tariff determined

         through bidding only if the bidding process was transparent, and such a
53
PART E

       process has been held in accordance with the guidelines issued by the

       Central Government under
Section 63
. If the bidding process does not satisfy

       the two checks, then the Commission shall determine the tariff through the

       RTM route under
Section 62
.
77.    Thus, the Appropriate Commission is not mandated to adopt the tariff

 determined through the bidding process irrespective of the fulfilment of the

 statutory requirements. The Commission can reject the tariff determined through

 the bid if the tariff process is not (i) transparent; and (ii) in accordance with the

 guidelines issued by the Central Government. Thus, if the Commission does not

 adopt the tariff determined through bidding, and if the decision is challenged, the

 bidding process can be reviewed substantively (on the ground of transparency)

 and procedurally (on the ground of compliance with Central Government

 guidelines) to determine if the Commission could have exercised its discretion to

 determine the tariff under
Section 62
while rejecting the tariff determined under
Section 63
. Therefore,
Section 63
can only be invoked after the tariff has been

 determined through bidding. The terms and conditions notified by the Appropriate

 Commission under
Section 61
will have to be referred for the purpose of

 choosing the modality of tariff determination that the Commission should

 undertake. In view of the above discussion, the argument of the appellant that a

 reading of
Section 61
,
62
and
63
indicates that the TBCB route is the dominant

 route of tariff determination does not hold merit.
E. 1.1. The value of TBCB Guidelines prescribed under
Section 63
78.
Section 63
of the Act does not prescribe bidding as the dominant route of

 tariff determination. The Guidelines framed by the Central Government under
54
PART E
Section 63
prescribe the mechanism and procedure for bidding. The Guidelines

 framed under
Section 63
of the Act cannot be used to determine whether the

 RTM route or the TBCB route ought to be followed.
79.    On 13 April 2006, the MoP framed the TBCB Guidelines under
Section 63
of the Act. Clause 2.2 of the Guidelines states that it shall apply for the

 procurement of transmission services through competitive bidding according to

 the mechanism described in the notification. The clause reads as follows:
“2.2. The guidelines shall apply for procurement of
                transmission services for transmission of electricity through
                tariff based competitive bidding, through the mechanism
                described in this notification and to select transmission
                service provider for a new transmission line and to build,
                own, maintain and operate the specified transmission
                system elements.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)


 Clause 2.4 states that the procurement of transmission services would include

 HVDC terminal stations and HVDC transmission lines:
“2.4 Procurement of transmission services would include all
                activities related to survey, detailed project report formulation
                […] and/or HVDC links including terminal stations and HVDC
                transmission line […].”
80.    A reading of the above clauses indicates that the TBCB Guidelines shall

 apply for (i) procurement of transmission services, which would include HVDC

 links; and (ii) selecting the transmission provider for a new transmission line. The

 TBCB Guidelines also advert to the appointment of a Bid Process Coordinator

 who would be responsible for coordinating the bid process for procurement of

 required transmission services. The TBCB Guidelines prescribe the procedure for

 conducting bids for procurement of, among other services, transmission services.
55
PART E

 Clause 3.3 states that for the procurement of transmission services required for

 intra-state transmission, the State Government may notify the organisation or the

 State Public Sector Undertaking to be the Bid Process Coordinator. A reading of

 clauses 2.2 and 2.4 does not indicate that that the tariff for all new transmission

 projects shall be determined by competitive bidding. It notifies the procedural

 mechanism for competitive bidding. As observed earlier, the reference in
Section

 63
to the Guidelines framed by the Central Government is made to the limited

 extent of determining whether the procedure of bidding was in accordance to the

 Guidelines framed thereunder, which is the TBCB Guidelines.



 E. 2   General Regulatory Power of the Appropriate Commission
81.     Since the guidelines framed under
Section 63
only prescribe the procedure

 for conducting the bidding, reference has to be made to the general regulatory

 power of the Appropriate Commission under the provisions of the Act.
82.
Section 181
of the Act stipulates that the State Commission(s) may by

 notification, make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules framed by the

 State Government under
Section 180
of the Act to carry out the provisions of the

 Act. Clause (zd) of
Section 181
stipulates that the State Commission may make

 regulations on the ‘terms and conditions for determination of tariff under Section
61.’ The relevant portion of
Section 181
is extracted below:
“181. Powers of State Commissions to make
                regulations.- (1) The State Commissions may, by
                notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and
                rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
                (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
                power contained in sub-section (1), such regulations may
                provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) […]
56
PART E

                 […]
                 (zc) the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under
section 61
;”

  However, as on the date when MERC granted AEMIL the licence for the HVDC

 project from Kudus- Aarey, MERC had not framed any regulation under
Section

 181(zc)
of the Act for the determination of Tariff.
83.    At this juncture, it is necessary to refer to
Section 86
of the Act.
Section 86
lists the functions of the State Commission.
Section 86(a)
states that the State

 Commission shall discharge the function of determining the tariff for transmission.
Section 86(c)
stipulates that the State Commissions shall facilitate intra-state

 transmission of electricity.
Section 86(4)
provides that in the discharge of its

 functions, which includes the determination of tariff for the transmission of

 electricity under clause (a), the State Commission shall be guided by the NEP,

 National Electricity Plan and NTP notified under
Section 3
of the Act. The

 relevant portion of
Section 86
is extracted below:
“86. Functions of State Commission - (1) The State
                 Commission shall discharge the following functions, namely:-
(a) Determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission
                 and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the
                 case may be, within the State.
[…]
(c) facilitate intra-State transmission and wheeling of
                 electricity
                 […]
                 (3) The State Commission shall ensure transparency while
                 exercising its powers and discharging its functions.
                 (4) In discharge of its functions, the State Commission shall
                 be guided by the National Electricity Policy, National
                 Electricity Plan and Tariff Policy published under
section 3
.”
84.
In
Energy Watchdog
(supra), this Court opined that the Central

 Commission shall determine the tariff under the guidelines issued by the Central

 Government under
Section 63
of the Act. It is only in a situation where no
57
PART E

 guidelines are framed or where the guidelines do not address a specific situation

 that the Central Commission’s repository of power under
Section 79
is invoked.

 The relevant observations of the judgment are extracted below:
“20… The reason why
Section 62
alone has been put out of
                the way is that determination of tariff can take place in one of
                two ways — either under
Section 62
, where the Commission
                itself determines the tariff in accordance with the provisions
                of the Act (after laying down the terms and conditions for
                determination of tariff mentioned in
Section 61
) or under
Section 63
where the Commission adopts tariff that is
                already determined by a transparent process of bidding. In
                either case, the general regulatory power of the Commission
                under
Section 79(1)(b)
is the source of the power to
                regulate, which includes the power to determine or adopt
                tariff. In fact,
Sections 62
and
63
deal with “determination” of
                tariff, which is part of “regulating” tariff. Whereas
                “determining” tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity is
                dealt with by
Section 79(1)(d)
,
Section 79(1)(b)
is a wider
                source of power to “regulate” tariff. It is clear that in a
                situation where the guidelines issued by the Central
                Government under
Section 63
cover the situation, the
                Central Commission is bound by those guidelines and must
                exercise its regulatory functions, albeit under
Section
                79(1)(b)
, only in accordance with those guidelines. As has
                been stated above, it is only in a situation where there are no
                guidelines framed at all or where the guidelines do not deal
                with a given situation that the Commission's general
                regulatory powers under
Section 79(1)(b)
can then be used.”
85.    Thus, in the case of intra-state transmission of electricity, the State

 Commission would be bound by the guidelines issued under
Section 63
. In

 addition to the guidelines under
Section 63
of the Act, the State Commission shall

 also be bound by the regulations framed by it under
Section 181(zd)
read with
Section 61
while it discharges its function of determining the tariff under
Section

 86
of the Act. However, if the guidelines issued under
Section 63
or the

 regulations framed under
Section 181(zd)
of the Act have not been notified or if

 the guidelines do not deal with a given situation, then the Commission shall
58
PART E

 exercise its general regulatory power under
Section 86(1)(a)
of the Act to

 regulate tariff.
86.
In
PTC India Ltd. v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,2
a

 Constitution Bench of this Court referred to
Section 79
and observed that the

 Appropriate Commission is both a regulation-making authority and a decision-

 making authority. It was observed that the Regulatory Commission while

 exercising its functions must conform to the regulations that the Commission has

 formulated under
Section 178
(the corresponding provision for the State

 Commission’s power to frame Regulations in
Section 181
). However, it was held

 that the Commission would not be precluded from exercising its function under
Section 79
merely because there is no regulation framed by the Commission. In

 the context of tariff determination, it was observed that even in the absence of

 Tariff Regulations, it would be open to the Commission to frame the terms and

 conditions of tariff determination under
Section 61
of the Act:
53. Applying the abovementioned tests to the scheme of the
                    2003 Act, we find that under the Act, the Central
                    Commission is a decision-making as well as regulation-
making authority, simultaneously.
Section 79
delineates
                    the functions of the Central Commission broadly into two
                    categories —mandatory functions and advisory functions.
                    Tariff regulation, licensing (including inter-State trading
                    licensing), adjudication upon disputes involving generating
                    companies or transmission licensees fall under the head
                    “mandatory functions” whereas advising the Central
                    Government on formulation of National Electricity Policy and
                    tariff policy would fall under the head “advisory functions”. In
                    this sense, the Central Commission is the decision-making
                    authority. Such decision-making under
Section 79(1)
is not
                    dependent upon making of regulations under
Section 178
by
                    the Central Commission. Therefore, functions of the Central
                    Commission enumerated in
Section 79
are separate and
2
(2010) 4 SCC 603
59
PART E

              distinct from functions of the Central Commission under
Section 178
. The former are administrative/adjudicatory
              functions whereas the latter are legislative.
The following observations were made on the general regulatory power of the

Regulatory Commission:
54. […] On reading
Sections 76(1)
and
79(1)
one finds that
              the Central Commission is empowered to take
              measures/steps in discharge of the functions enumerated in
Section 79(1)
like to regulate the tariff of generating
              companies, to regulate the inter-State transmission of
              electricity, to determine tariff for inter-State transmission of
              electricity, to issue licences, to adjudicate upon disputes, to
              levy fees, to specify the Grid Code, to fix the trading margin
              in inter-State trading of electricity, if considered necessary,
              etc. These measures, which the Central Commission is
              empowered to take, have got to be in conformity with
              the regulations under
Section 178
, wherever such
              regulations are applicable. Measures under
Section
              79(1)
, therefore, have got to be in conformity with the
              regulations under
Section 178
.
55. To regulate is an exercise which is different from making
              of the regulations. However, making of a regulation under
Section 178
is not a precondition to the Central
              Commission taking any steps/measures under
Section
              79(1)
. As stated, if there is a regulation, then the measure
              under
Section 79(1)
has to be in conformity with such
              regulation under
Section 178
. This principle flows from
              various judgments of this Court which we have discussed
              hereinafter. For example, under
Section 79(1)(g)
the Central
              Commission is required to levy fees for the purpose of the
              2003 Act. An order imposing regulatory fees could be
              passed even in the absence of a regulation under Section
178. If the levy is unreasonable, it could be the subject-
matter of challenge before the appellate authority under
Section 111
as the levy is imposed by an order/decision-
              making process. Making of a regulation under
Section
              178
is not a precondition to passing of an order levying
              a regulatory fee under
Section 79(1)(g)
. However, if there
              is a regulation under
Section 178
in that regard then the
              order levying fees under
Section 79(1)(g)
has to be in
              consonance with such regulation.
56. Similarly, while exercising the power to frame the terms
              and conditions for determination of tariff under
Section 178
,
              the Commission has to be guided by the factors specified in
Section 61
. It is open to the Central Commission to
              specify terms and conditions for determination of tariff
              even in the absence of the regulations under
Section
60
PART E
178. However, if a regulation is made under
Section 178
,
                then, in that event, framing of terms and conditions for
                determination of tariff under
Section 61
has to be in
                consonance with the regulations under
Section 178
.
(emphasis supplied)
87.     The TBCB Guidelines issued by the Central Government under
Section

 63
of the Act prescribe the mechanism of the bidding process and do not lay

 down the criteria or guidelines for choosing between the alternative routes under
Section 62
and
63
of the Act. MERC has neither notified any Regulations under
Section 181
nor has it notified the terms and conditions under
Section 61
of the

 Act. That being the case, the Commission could choose the modality of tariff

 determination by taking recourse to the general regulatory power under Section
86.

 E.2.1 The nature of NTP- binding or a material consideration
88.     Even in the absence of guidelines under
Section 61
or Regulations under
Section 181 (zd)
, the Commission does not possess unbridled power or

 discretion while choosing the modality to determine tariff. Sub-Sections (3) and

 (4) of
Section 86
provide that the State Commission while discharging its

 functions must ensure transparency and ‘shall be guided’ by the NTP and NEP.
89.    Before proceeding to interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided’, it is necessary

 that we refer to the prominent features of the NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 vis-à-vis

 modalities of tariff determination. A comparative chart of the relevant provisions

 of NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 is set out below:
61
PART E

 NTP 2006                                     NTP 2016
 I Tariff must be determined through          I Tariff must be determined through
 bidding for all new projects.                bidding for all new projects.
 All future requirement of power must be      All future requirement of power should
 procured competitively. (Paragraph 5.1)      continue to be procured competitively.
(Paragraph 5.2)




 II Bidding route is not compulsorily         II Bidding route is applicable to
 applicable to public sector projects         government owned projects
 The tariff for public sector projects need   Tariff for projects owned or controlled
 not be determined by bidding.                by the Central Government shall be
 However, it must be decided in five          determined      by    bidding,  unless
 years or when the Regulatory                 otherwise specified by the Central
 Commission is satisfied that the             Government on a case to case basis.
situation is ripe for competition to be      (Paragraph 5.3)
 introduced. (Paragraph 5.1 and 7.6)

 III Timeline for implementation by           III    Implementation      by      State
 State Commissions                            Commissions
 After the implementation of the              A     similar   approach     shall    be
 framework for inter-state transmission,      implemented by State Commissions.
 a similar approach should            be      (Paragraph 7(8)
 implemented by State Commissions in          Intra-State transmission projects shall
 the next two years for Intra-State           be developed by State Governments
 transmission. (Paragraph 7.7)                through competitive bidding for projects
                                              costing above a threshold limit. The
                                              threshold limit shall be determined by
                                              SERCs’. (Paragraph 5.3)
90.    Both NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 as a general rule prescribe competitive

 bidding for determination of tariff for all ‘new projects’. There are two prominent

 differences between NTP 2006 and NTP 2016. Firstly, the projects owned or

 controlled by the Government were exempted from bidding under NTP 2006.
However, according to NTP 2016, the tariff for government owned projects is also

 to be determined by bidding, unless otherwise specified. Secondly, NTP 2016
62
PART E

 introduced the threshold limit rule. State Commissions are required to notify the

 threshold limit. If the cost of the project exceeds the threshold limit, then the

 Commission is mandated to follow the bidding process for the determination of

 tariff.
91.        NTP 2016, by providing that state owned projects are not exempted from

 the TBCB process, has implemented the object of the Act, which is to create a

 fine balance between promoting competition and protecting the interests of the

 consumers. NTP 2006 was formulated with the objective of enhancing the

 participation of private players in the generation, transmission and distribution of

 electricity. The Central Government adopted a policy decision to introduce the

 bidding process for the determination of the tariff for all new transmission projects

 in 2006 but excluded its application to State projects. However, the distinction

 between State and private parties for the purpose of tariff determination through

 bidding was removed in NTP 2016. This transition between NTP 2006 and NTP

 2016 depicts the intention of the Government to rationalise the tariff policy and to

 transfer the benefits of the rationalised tariff to the consumers.
92.        According to NTP 2016, the tariff for all new electricity transmission

 projects that cost above the threshold amount notified by the State Commission

 shall be determined through bidding. However, the MERC had not notified the

 threshold limit as on the date when it passed the order granting transmission

 licence to AEML-T. MERC notified the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory

 Commission (Multi Year Tariff) Regulations 2019 under
Section 181
of the Act.

 The MERC MYT Regulations does not provide the guidelines or the criteria for

 the choosing the modality of tariff determination. The guidelines for choosing the
63
PART E

modalities are sought to be introduced by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory

Commission (Multi Year Tariff) (First Amendment) Regulations 2022. MERC

circulated the draft of the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations on 19 August

2022 for comments, suggestions and objections. The preamble of the MERC

MYT Amendment Regulations reads as follows:
“The State Electricity Regulatory Commission has been
               vested with the responsibility to determine the tariff for
               generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity,
               wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the
               State under
Section 86
of the Electricity Act 2003. The tariff
               for intra-State Transmission System can be decided under
Section 62
or
Section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003.
Section
               63
provides for adoption of the tariff determined through
               transparent process of bidding. Clause 5.3 of the Tariff
               Policy 2016 as regards development of intra-State
               Transmission System stipulates that the same shall be
               executed through competitive bidding route provided for
               projects costing above a threshold limit, which shall be
               decided by the State Electricity regulatory Commission.
The Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission (Multi
               Year Tariff) (First Amendment) Regulations 2022 specifies
               such threshold limit and other conditions for intra-State
               Transmission Projects to be developed through a Tariff
               Based Competitive Bidding.”

The MERC MYT Amendment Regulations seeks to amend
Regulation 56
of the

MERC MYT Regulations by adding
Regulation 56
.3.
Regulation 56
.3 states that

‘all new’ intra-state transmission systems costing above a threshold limit shall be

developed through the
Section 63
route, provided all other conditions stipulated

in Annexure IV are also fulfilled.
Regulation 56
.3 reads as follows:
“56.3 All the new intra-State transmission systems
             costing above a Threshold Limit and meeting other
             conditions as
laid down in
Annexure IV, shall be
             developed through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding in
             accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
             Government under
Section 63
of the Act.”
64
PART E

 According to Annexure IV, which is proposed to be added to the MERC MYT

 Regulations, the threshold was determined at 200 Crores. The relevant extract of

 the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations is as follows:
“1. The Commission hereby determines the Threshold Limit
                of Rupees Two Hundred (200) Crore.
2. All new Intra-State Transmission Systems costing Rupees
                Two Hundred (200) Crore or more shall be implemented by
                STU through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding in
                accordance with the competitive bidding guidelines notified
                by the Central Government from time to time.”



 The Annexure also states that the threshold limit shall be applied to all new Intra-
State Transmission projects for which approval is yet to be accorded by the

 Commission or where the Commission’s approval is not valid or where the

 approval has been cancelled. The relevant portion is extracted below:
“3. This Threshold Limit shall be applicable for all new Intra-
                State Transmission Systems (Projects) for which approval is
                yet to be accorded by the Commission (excluding the
                projects for which application for in-principle approval is
                already submitted to the Commission and the same is under
                consideration by the Commission) or Commission’s approval
                is not valid or approval cancelled by the Commission as the
                case may be.”
93.    However, the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations are yet to be notified.

 When the application seeking licence for the HVDC Kudus- Aarey transmission

 project was filed, and when it was granted by MERC, the threshold limit as

 required to be provided by NTP 2016 was not notified by MERC. Thus, the

 question is whether in the absence of any notification of the threshold by MERC,

 would MERC still be mandated to determine tariff for the transmission project

 through the TBCB route in view of NTP 2016.
65
PART E
94.       The answer to this question turns on the interpretation of the phrase ‘shall

 be guided’ in
Section 86(3)
of the Act. This Court has previously had the

 opportunity to interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided by’ as it finds place in the Act.

 A two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Reliance Infrastructure Limited v. State of

 Maharashtra
3 interpreted the phrase with reference to
Section 61
of the Act. This

 Court observed that ‘shall be guided by’ comprises of two elements, ‘shall’ and

 ‘guided’ which would mean that the guiding factors provide considerations which

 are material to the determination of tariffs by the appropriate Commission:
“29.
Section 181
empowers the State Commissions to make
                    regulations consistent with the Act and the Rules to carry out
                    the provisions of the Act. Among the matters for which the
                    regulations may provide are “the terms and conditions for the
                    determination of tariff under
Section 61
” [
Section 181(2)(zd)
]
                    . In specifying the terms and conditions for the determination
                    of tariff, the appropriate Commission (as
Section 61
provides) “shall be guided” by the factors which are set out in
                    clauses (a) to (i). The expression “shall be guided”
                    comprises of two elements : the “shall” and, the “guidance”.
                    Clauses (a) to (i) provide guidance to the Commission in
                    specifying the terms and conditions for the determination of
                    tariff. The expression “shall” indicates that the factors which
                    are specified in clauses (a) to (i) have to be borne in mind by
                    the appropriate Commission. As guiding factors, they
                    provide considerations which are material to the
                    determination of tariffs by the appropriate Commission.
                    […]
32. The Tariff Policy provides guidance to the appropriate
                    Commission when it frames regulations. The power to frame
                    regulations is legislative in nature. It is conferred upon the
                    appropriate Commission. The Commission weighs
                    numerous factors. Its discretion in carrying out a complex
                    exercise cannot be constrained. The delegate of the
                    legislature is therefore under a mandate to bring about a
                    fair and equitable balance between competing
                    considerations. Standing at the forefront of those
                    considerations is above all the need to ensure efficiency
                    and to protect the interests of consumers. The
                    submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellant
                    would reduce tariff fixation to a rather simplistic process of
3
(2019) 3 SCC 352
66
PART E

                 bringing about equality between generating units which have
                 the same design and manufacturing origin. Such an
                 approach overlooks the complex factors which have to be
                 borne in mind in the determination of tariffs.
(emphasis supplied)


 This Court held that the principles prescribed in
Section 61
are all material

 considerations that must guide the Appropriate Commission while it prescribes

 the terms and conditions for determining the tariff. It was held that it was the

 responsibility of the Commission to ensure a delicate balance of the principles

 prescribed under
Section 61
. Thus, while the NTP which is prescribed as one of

 the principles under
Section 61
shall be a material consideration, it cannot be

 interpreted to mean that it is the ‘only’ material consideration. This interpretation

 of ‘shall be guided’ is equally applicable to the use of the phrase in
Section 86(3)
.
95.    The counsel for the appellants has relied on observations made by a two-

 Judge Bench of this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra) that the NTP 2016 is a

 ‘statutory document being issued under
Section 3
of the Act and has the force of

 law’ to argue that the NTP is binding on the Commission.
In
Energy Watchdog
(supra), Adani Enterprises Consortium submitted its bid for the proposed project

 and it was selected as the successful bidder. However, the law in Indonesia had

 changed in 2010 and 2011 which aligned the export price of coal from Indonesia

 to international market prices instead of the price that was prevalent in the last

 forty years. Adani Power filed a petition before CERC seeking relief due to the

 impact of the Indonesian Regulation to either discharge them from the

 performance of the Power Purchase Agreement on account of frustration, or to

 evolve a mechanism to restore the petitioners to the same economic condition

 prior to the occurrence of the change in law. Clause 4.7 of the Guidelines for
67
PART E

determination of Tariff by Bidding Process which was included through an

amendment stipulates that:
“any change in law impacting cost or revenue from the
                business of selling electricity to the procurer with respect to
                the law applicable on the date which is 7 days before the last
                date for bid submission shall be adjusted separately. In case
                of any dispute regarding the impact of any change in law, the
                decision of the appropriate Commission shall apply.”


In this context, this Court held that ‘law’ means all laws including electricity laws

in force in India, and that electricity laws means the
Electricity Act
, rules and

regulations made thereunder and ‘any other law’ pertaining to electricity. It was in

this context that it was observed that the NTP is ‘law’. However, to understand

the context of the observations, a brief historical background of the amendment

to the guidelines will have to be noted. CERC issued a statutory advice under
Section 79(2)
of the Act to the Central Government on the impact of domestic

coal non-availability and the additional cost of imported coal on tariff. CERC

advised that suitable amendments would have to be made to the TBCB

Guidelines that were issued under
Section 63
, the NEP, and NTP. The

amendments allow the Appropriate Commissions to take care of the situations

arising out of the ‘change in policy of the Sovereign Government.’ In view of the

advice of CERC under
Section 79(2)
, the MoP issued an advisory on 31 July

2013 stating that in view of the shortfall of domestic supply of coal, the cost of

imported coal shall be considered for being made a pass through by the

Appropriate Commission. Subsequently, in pursuance of the advisory issued by

the MoP, the NTP 2016 was amended to include Clause 6.1 providing relief as

mentioned in the advisory. The relevant extract is as under:
68
PART E

                 “6.1 Procurement of power
                 As stipulated in Para 5.1, power procurement for future
                 requirements should be through a transparent competitive
                 bidding mechanism using the guidelines issued by the
                 Central Government from time to time. These guidelines
                 provide for procurement of electricity separately for base
                 loan requirements and for peak loan requirements. This
                 would facilitate setting up of generation capacities
                 specifically for meeting such requirements.
                 However, some of the competitively bid projects as per the
                 guidelines dated 19-1-2005 have experienced difficulties in
                 getting the required quantity of coal from Coal India Limited
                 (CIL). In case of reduced quantity of domestic coal supplied
                 by CIL, vis-à-vis the assured quantity or quantity indicated in
                 letter of assurance/FSA the cost of imported market based
                 e-auction coal procured for making up the shortfall, shall be
                 considered for being made a pass through by appropriate
                 Commission on a case-to-case basis, as per advisory issued
                 by Ministry of Power vide OM No. FU-12/2011-
IPC
(Vol-III)
                 dated 31-7-2013.”
96.    It is pertinent to note that this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra) did not

 interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided’ as it finds place in the Act. This Court dealt

 with the interpretation of the phrase ‘change in law’. It was held that the

 amendment in the NTP 2016 taking cognizance of the domestic coal shortage

 was a ‘change in law’ since it is a statutory policy. There is no doubt that NEP

 and NTP are statutory policies since they were framed under the provisions of the

 Act.
However, the observation in
Energy Watchdog
(supra) that the NTP is ‘law’

 cannot be held to bind the interpretation of the phrase ‘shall be guided’.
Further, it

 must also be noted that this Court in
Energy Watchdog
(supra) was dealing

 specifically with changes due to coal procurement and the amendments in the

 policies were recommended to be made by the Central Regulatory Commission.
97.    A reading of the judgment of this Court in
PTC India
(supra) and the

 provisions of the Act indicates that the determination of tariff and framing

 regulations for the determination of tariff fall within the exclusive domain of the
69
PART E

 Appropriate Commission.
Section 61
stipulates that the Appropriate Commission

 shall ‘specify the terms and conditions’ for the determination of tariff.
Section 86
provides that one of the functions of the State Commission is to determine tariff

 for transmission.
Section 181
states that the Commission shall make regulations

 on the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff. Thus, the regulation

 and determination of tariff is the function of the Appropriate Commission.
98.    While the determination and regulation of tariff falls within the exclusive

 domain of the Regulatory Commission, it is crucial to note that
Sections 61
and
86
stipulate that the Commission shall be guided by the NTP while specifying

 terms and conditions for determining tariff. The State Commission while

 exercising its power to make regulations under
Section 181(2)(zd)
on the terms

 and conditions for determination of tariff under
Section 61
must conform to the

 provisions of the Act. Thus, while framing regulations under
Section 181(2)(zd)
,

 the Commission must be guided by the principles mentioned in
Section 61
, which

 includes the NEP and NTP.
99.    This Court in
Reliance Infrastructure
(supra) has already held that the

 NTP is one of the material considerations. The NTP is one of the many guidelines

 that the Commission must necessarily consider while regulating tariff. The State

 and the Central Government only have an advisory role in the regulation of tariff.
The Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act
1998, which was consolidated with

 other statutes on electricity while enacting the
Electricity Act
2003, was enacted

 to distance the governments from the determination of tariffs.
Further, the Act
does not seek to centralise the power to regulate tariff with the Centre. One of the

 objectives of the Act was to provide the “states enough flexibility to develop their
70
PART E

  power sector in the manner they consider appropriate.” Thus, since the

  Appropriate Commissions possess full autonomy in the determination and

  regulation of tariff, and the States have been provided flexibility to develop their

  power systems for intra-state transmission of electricity, the NTP 2016 shall be

  one of the material considerations. Further, even in the letter dated 15 March

  2021, the MoP only ‘strongly recommended’ that the states adopt TBCB for the

  development of intra-state transmission systems.
100.    In view of the above discussion, merely because the threshold limit is not

  notified, it would not mean that MERC only had to determine tariff through the

  RTM route. It is open to MERC to determine the tariff through either the
Section

  63
or the
Section 62
route. When MERC is exercising its general regulatory

  power under
Section 86
to determine tariff, the NTP is a material consideration.

  Thus, the absence of a threshold limit would not affect the power that MERC

  holds to determine tariff (and its modalities). Since MERC has the power to

  regulate and determine tariff for the intra-state transmission of electricity, the

  guidelines and regulations issued by MERC, if any, must be analysed to

  determine if MERC was mandated to choose one of the two routes for the

  determination of tariff or whether it could exercise its discretion to choose the

  modality.
101.    As already noted above, on the date when MERC determined the tariff for

  the HVDC transmission project, it had neither notified Regulations under
Section

  181(2)(zd)
nor the terms and conditions under
Section 61
of the Act. On 4

  January 2019, the Government of Maharashtra passed a resolution ‘Regarding

  Adoption of new Tariff Based Competitive Bidding Process in the State’. The
71
PART E

  resolution states that it has been issued in pursuance of the guidelines on

  competitive bidding that were issued by the MoP by Gazette Notification No.

  11/5/2005-PG(I) dated 13 April 2006 which indicated that the ‘State Government

  may adopt these guidelines for intra-state transmission projects or having

  considered these guiding principles may constitute similar committees for

  facilitating establishment of state transmission projects in the State.” The

  resolution further notes that the Government has decided to constitute

  committees such as the Empowered Committee and Bid Evaluation Committee

  for undertaking transmission projects through TBCB. The resolution notes that

  the State Government has decided to implement TBCB for new intra-state

  projects. The constitution of the Empowered Committee and Bid Evaluation

  Committee are traced to the constitution of similar committees under the TBCB

  Guidelines and Development Guidelines. The resolution notes that the

  Empowered Committee is being constituted in accordance with the Central

  Government’s guidelines. Paragraph 3 of the notification notes that the Bid

  Process Coordinator will be appointed by the Empowered Committee to

  coordinate the bid process and that the functions of the Bid Process Coordinator

  would be according to the Central Government’s guidelines.
E. 3    Value of GoM GR
102.      The GoM’s GR raises two separate issues for consideration:
a) the relevance of the GoM’s GR for MERC’s decision on the application for

          licence filed by AEML-T; and
72
PART E
b) the relevance of the GoM’s GR in terms of the decision of the MSETCL to

          not hold bidding for the HVDC project.
103.      However, before venturing into these two issues, it would be important to

  discuss the applicability of the GoM GR to the HVDC project. The GoM GR was

  notified on 4 January 2019. The GR mandates that tariff shall be determined

  through the TBCB route under
Section 63
for all ‘new projects’. Therefore, we

  need to analyse whether as on 4 January 2019, the HVDC Kudus-Aarey project

  could be considered as a ‘new project’.
E. 3.1 The New - Old Conundrum
104.      The GoM’s GR does not provide any clarity on the term ‘new’ project

  leaving it open to MERC to interpret the phrase. MERC by its order dated 21

  March 2021 granted a licence for the HVDC Kudus-Aarey transmission project

  under
Section 62
of the Act to AEML-T holding that it was an ‘existing’ project as

  on the date the GoM’s GR was notified, that is 4 January 2019. For arriving at

  this conclusion, MERC referred to the application for grid connectivity for the

  Kudus- Aarey HVDC project filed by AEML-T on 23 November 2018. By its letter

  dated 23 November 2018, AEML-T sought an amendment to the letter issued by

  MERC granting grid connectivity to the 2 x 500 HVDC (VSC based) scheme from

  Nagothane to Aarey. The amendment sought by AEML-T to the letter issued by

  MERC must be read in the context of a meeting that was held between MSETCL

  and AEML-T where MSETCL suggested that the HVDC project be considered

  from Kudus substation as opposed to Nagothane substation since it is closer to

  the Aarey substation. However, MSETCL did a turn-around and on 5 January

  2015 cancelled the Nagothane- Aarey project of R-Infra and instead proposed a
73
PART E

  Kudus-Aarey HVAC project by itself. By the proposal dated 5 January 2015,

  MSETCL altered the point from Nagothane to Kudus, and the technology from

  HVDC to HVAC. Accordingly, MERC cancelled the in-principle approval granted

  to AEML-T for the HVDC Nagothane - Aarey scheme. However, due to right of

  way issues in the construction of the overhead line, the 400KV Aarey to Kudus

  HVAC scheme never took off.
105.    MERC held that the cancellation of the in-principle approval would

  generally amount to closure of the project. However, MERC took into account the

  unique historical background of the HVDC project when the Kudus-Aarey project

  was proposed by AEML-T in November 2018. The relevant extract from the order

  of MERC is set out below:
However, the proposed HVDC Scheme, with the same
                configuration, has historical background from November
                2018. The 1000 MW HVDC VSC based link between
                MSETCL Kudus and AEML Aarey was proposed by AEML-
                T, vide its application for grid connectivity, on 23 November,
                2018. The said application thus, pre-dates the GoM GR
                dated 4 January, 2019. Certain planning and preparatory
                work such as technical studies, cost estimation, cable route
                survey, identification of land, preparation of DPR along with
                feasibility studies were also initiated. This fresh Connectivity
                Application also addresses TPC-T’s contention that a fresh
                Connectivity Application has to be made when there is a
                change in the network configuration. Hence, the proposed
                HVDC Scheme is a new Scheme qua the earlier approved
                Scheme, but the fresh Connectivity Application for this
                HVDC Scheme was filed before the notification of the GoM
                GR dated 4 January,
                2019.
In its judgment dismissing the appeal against the order of MERC, APTEL

  concurred with the observation made by MERC that the HVDC Scheme is an

  ‘existing scheme’. APTEL observed that the cancellation of the in-principle
74
PART E

approval cannot render it a new scheme since it was the STU which took an

about-turn on its objections to the HVDC technology:
“149. The cancellation of the in-principle approval earlier
               accorded cannot render it a new scheme since the STU itself
               later took an about-turn on its objections as to the
               technology for which reason the cancellation had been
               earlier commended and so acted upon by the Commission.
               The scheme has remained the same, the prime change
               being with regard to modified route (to save distance and
               costs) the HVDC technology being the one initially proposed
               and now eventually accepted by the STU upon endorsement
               by CEA. The effect of the confusion caused by the flip-flop or
               re-think more than once by the STU is being discussed by us
               in the section that follows (under the caption “Shifting stand
               of STU on HVDC project”) and dwelling upon it here will
               make the discourse repetitive. Suffice it to say here that
               such confusion for reasons attributable to the
               indecisiveness of the STU cannot divest the scheme of
               its “old” character because, with some hiatus (again on
               account of doubts over HVDC as compared to HVAC),
               the Scheme has consistently and throughout remained,
               since FY 2013-14, part of the five- year plans of the STU,
               as a project entrusted to the proponent R-Infra (now
               AEML-T or its SPV), the GR of GoM having come in
               much later in the day.
150. We, thus, do not find any error, infirmity or impropriety
               in the conclusions reached by the Commission on the
               captioned issue. The arguments of the appellant to the
               contrary are rejected.”
               […]
               “159. […] There was virtually no resistance on the
               suggestion for change of route (Kudus rather than
               Nagothane being one end) as the proponent readily agreed
               to it. The flip-flop vis-à-vis the appropriate technology (HVDC
               versus HVAC) is where the progress came stuck for a
               prolonged period. We do not find merit in the explanation of
               STU about exclusion from its published plans for a few years
               in-between. […] The temporary uncertainty in the mind of the
               STU, which had only a recommendatory role, has only
               delayed the decision-making process. It, however, cannot
               vitiate the decision taken by MERC in whose hands the
               jurisdiction is placed by the law to take a call on grant of
               license.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
75
PART E
106.     In view of the above discussion, the 1000MW Aarey-Kudus HVDC project

  by AEMIL is an ‘existing’ or an ‘old’ project with reference to the GoM GR for the

  following reasons:
106.1 Firstly, the GR does not provide or explain the meaning of the phrase ‘new’

        projects. Hence, MERC has the discretion to formulate its understanding

        of the phrase ‘new’ projects so long as it is reasonable and does not rely

        on factors extraneous to the decision making process. In view of the

        decisions of this Court discussed above and the provisions of the Act,

        MERC has the power to regulate tariff determination. MERC has not

        defined the phrase ‘new’ projects through the regulations. In this situation,

        MERC has the discretion to interpret the phrase ‘new’ projects which it did

        in the course of its judgment granting AEMIL the transmission license.
MERC held that generally the cancellation of approval would amount to the

        closure of the project, unless the peculiar nature of the facts leads to an

        alternative conclusion (as in this case);
106.2 Secondly, on applying the facts to the interpretation of the phrase ‘new’

        project, MERC observed that the HVDC Kudus-Aarey project is not a new

        project. APTEL, on appeal, upheld the observations of MERC that it is an

        ‘existing project’. The appeal against the judgment of APTEL before this

        Court under
Section 125
of the Act can only be on the grounds mentioned

        in
Section 100
of CPC.
Section 125
reads as under:
“125. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
                 Appellate Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court
                 within sixty days from the date of communication of the
                 decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any
                 one or more of the grounds specified in
section 100
of
                 the Code of Civil Procedure,1908.
76
PART E

                   Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that
                   the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
                   the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
                   further period not exceeding sixty days.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 stipulates that a second appeal

shall lie only if the court (in this case the Supreme Court) is satisfied that the case

involves a substantial question of law. It is settled law that concurrent findings of

fact recorded by the fora below (MERC and APTEL) cannot be interfered with by

this Court.
In
DSR (Steel) Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan4
, a two Judge Bench

of this Court observed that findings of fact by the Regulatory Commission and the

Tribunal cannot be reopened by this Court on appeal under
Section 125
of the

Act. The court held:
14. An appeal under
Section 125
of the Electricity Act, 2003
                   is maintainable before this Court only on the grounds
                   specified in
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 100
CPC in turn permits filing of an appeal only if the
                   case involves a substantial question of law. Findings of fact
                   recorded by the courts below, which would in the
                   present case, imply the Regulatory Commission as the
                   court of first instance and the Appellate Tribunal as the
                   court hearing the first appeal, cannot be reopened
                   before this Court in an appeal under
Section 125
of the
                   Electricity Act, 2003. Just as the High Court cannot
                   interfere with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the
                   courts below in a second appeal under
Section 100
of the
                   Code of Civil Procedure, so also this Court would be loath to
                   entertain any challenge to the concurrent findings of fact
                   recorded by the Regulatory Commission and the Appellate
                   Tribunal. The decisions of this Court on the point are a
                   legion.
Reference to Govindaraju v. Mariamman
[(2005) 2
                   SCC 500 :
AIR 2005 SC 1008] , Hari Singh v. Kanhaiya
                   Lal
[(1999) 7 SCC 288 :
AIR 1999 SC 3325] , Ramaswamy
                   Kalingaryar v. Mathayan Padayachi
[1992 Supp (1) SCC 712
                   : AIR 1992 SC 115] , Kehar Singh v. Yash Pal [
AIR 1990 SC
                   2212] and Bismillah Begum v. Rahmatullah Khan
[(1998) 2
                   SCC 226 : AIR 1998 SC 970] should, however, suffice.
(emphasis supplied)
4
(2012) 6 SCC 782
77
PART E

Since both APTEL and MERC have recorded concurrent findings that the HVDC

Aarey- Kudus project is an existing project, it would not be open to this Court in

an appeal under
Section 125
of the Act to reopen the findings..

Thirdly, even otherwise, we are in agreement with the findings of MERC and

APTEL that the 1000MV HVDC Scheme from Aarey to Kudus is an old project

considering the following factual position:
106.2.1 On 12 November 2007, MSETCL issued a communication to CEA setting

      out the steps proposed to meet the growing demand of power for Mumbai’s

      load centres. The communication stated that TPC had proposed the setting

      up of overhead lines and underground cables while REL had proposed

      connections to Aarey by using the HVDC (VSC based) technology.
MSETCL notified a five-year plan for 2009-10 to 2013-14 envisaging the

      use of the HVDC technology. The plan specifically provided for the ongoing

      schemes of R-infra together with new schemes including the HVDC based

      link between Nagothane and Aarey. Similar details were provided in

      relation to TPC’s ongoing and new schemes. Both TPC and R-infra were in

      the fray from the inception. While TPC was primarily in the overhead

      transmission line segment, R-infra had proposed the setting up of

      transmission lines on the HVDC technology.
106.2.2 The criticality of the HVDC technology assumes importance after the grid

        failure which Mumbai experienced in November 2010. The committee

        chaired by a Professor of IIT recommended the HVDC technology as a

        long-term solution for ensuring reliability of power supply for Mumbai.

        MERC granted a transmission licence to R-infra on 11 August 2011. R-
78
PART E

      infra submitted a DPR to MERC for the appointment of a consultant for

      the transmission line from Nagothane to Aarey on 1 February 2013. On 7

      March 2013, MSETCL confirmed that the Nagothane -Aarey project was

      a part of the STU five-year plan for FY 2013-14 to 2017-18. MERC

      approved the hiring of the consultant on 5 April 2013. The application for

      the grant of grid connectivity for the proposed HVDC project was allowed

      on 21 August 2013. When matters were thus progressing, in November

      2013 MSETCL had in a meeting with R-Infra proposed that R-Infra can

      avail of connectivity from the Kudus sub-station which was closer to the

      Aarey sub-station as compared to the sub-station at Nagothane. R-infra

      expressed its concern over the proposed revision on the point of

      connectivity. On 10 April 2014, MERC granted an in-principle clearance

      for the HVDC Scheme. In January 2015, MSETCL proposed a revised

      scheme for where the 400KV Kudus-Aarey HVAC scheme was proposed

      by MSETCL. On 2 May 2016, the in-principle clearance granted to the

      Nagothane-Aarey HVDC Scheme was cancelled by MERC.

106.2.3 However, since the HVAC scheme of MSETCL did not take off, AEML-T

      submitted an application for HVDC Scheme between Aarey to Kudus on

      23 November 2018 where an amendment to the letter issued by MERC

      granting grid connectivity to the 2 x 500 HVDC (VSC based) scheme from

      Nagothane to Aarey was sought.
106.2.4 The narration of facts indicates that AEML-T(or its predecessor in

      interest) has been involved in the execution of the HVDC Scheme since

      the inception of the scheme. The cancellation of the in-principle approval
79
PART E

          accorded to AEML-T by MERC cannot be held to terminate the project in

          view of the peculiar background of this case. It is due to the

          indecisiveness of MSETCL on the HVDC and HVAC technologies that

          AEML-T’s clearance was cancelled. The HVDC Scheme was attributed to

          R-Infra or, as the case may be, AEML-T since 2009. In the electricity

          regulatory sector, where the State Regulatory Commissions and STUs’

          have been functioning in an ad-hoc manner running in many loops, the

          question of whether the project is an old or a new project must be

          determined through a holistic purview of the factual background. In view

          of the above factual narration, it is evident that the HVDC Scheme is an

          old project and the change in the location of the injection point from

          Nagothane to Kudus would not lead to the closure of the old project.
107.    Regardless, we deem it appropriate to also decide upon the issues before

  us for consideration in terms of the relevance of the GoM GR in the decision

  making of MERC and holding of the bidding process by MSETCL.


  E.3.2 Relevance of GoM GR for MERC’s Decision
108.    The GR does not carry any reference to the provision of the Act under

  which it was notified. The introduction of the resolution states the following:
“With the objective of setting up New Transmission Projects
                  with Tariff Based Competitive Bidding, the Ministry of Power,
                  Government of India has issued guidelines vide Gazette
                  Notification No. 11/5/2005-PG(I) dated 13.04.2006. In
                  addition, modifications were made vide Gazette Notifications
                  on 04.07.2007 and 10.10.2008. Additionally, the revised
                  directives dated 02.05.2012 indicate, that the State
                  Government may adopt these guidelines for intra-state
                  transmission projects or having considered these guiding
                  principles may constitute similar committees for facilitating
                  establishment of state transmission projects in the State.
80
PART E

                  […]
                  Therefore, the government was considering constitution of
                  committees like Empowered Committees, Bid Evaluation
                  Committee in accordance with the above-mentioned
                  guidelines of central government for undertaking
                  transmission projects in the state through Tariff Based
                  Competitive Bidding. The government has, after thorough
                  discussion, taken the following decision in this regard.”

  The GoI Guidelines
referred to above
are the TBCB Guidelines and the

  Development Guidelines. Paragraph 3.3 of the TBCB Guidelines states that for

  the procurement of transmission services for intra-state transmission, the

  appropriate State Government may notify any organization or state public sector

  undertaking especially engaged for bidding to be the Bidding Process

  Coordinator. Paragraph 24 of the Development Guidelines stipulates that the

  State Governments may adopt these guidelines and may constitute similar

  committees for facilitation of intra-state transmission projects. The Guidelines

  stipulate that the States ‘may’ adopt these guidelines for intra-state projects.
109.    While the State Government has used the central guidelines to formulate

  its own guidelines on competitive bidding, it does note that the Empowered

  Committee being constituted will undertake transmission projects “in accordance

  with Central Government’s guidelines”. Therefore, to the extent that the GoM GR

  deals with setting up of certain bodies for conducting bidding to allocate projects

  under the TBCB route in line with the Central Government’s TBCB Guidelines, it

  can be said to be in furtherance of the guidelines referred under
Section 63
of the

  Act. However, the same is limited to committees being set up for the procedural

  aspects of the bidding process dealt by the Central Government’s guidelines.
110.    Another contentious aspect of the GoM GR is the portion wherein it notified

  that the State Government “has decided to implement Tariff Based Competitive
81
PART E

  Bidding-TBCB process for new Projects.” The GR did not define the term ‘new

  projects.’ The appellant has argued that the GR notified by the State Government

  being binding on MERC, MERC had no option but to determine tariff through the

  bidding process for all ‘new’ projects, and if the HVDC project is a ‘new project’

  then tariff could not have been determined through the
Section 62
route. While

  we have already held that the HVDC project was an existing project in terms of

  the GoM GR, we also clarify the aspect of the binding value of GoM GR upon

  MERC.
111.    As discussed above, the fixation of tariff falls within the independent

  statutory domain of the Regulatory Commission. The State Government has the

  power to issue directions to the State Commission in matters of 'policy involving

  public interest’ under
Section 108
of the Act. While stating that the State

  Government may issue directions in matters of policy involving public interest,
Section 108(2)
states that if any question arises as to whether such direction

  relates to matters of policy involving public interest, the decision of the State

  Government on it shall be final. The provision further states that the State

  Commission shall be guided by the directions of the State Government in

  discharge of its functions.
Section 108
is extracted below:
“108. Direction by State Government.- (1) In the discharge
                 of its functions, the State Commission shall be guided by
                 such directions in matters of policy involving public interest
                 as the State Government may give to it in writing.
                 (2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction
                 related to a matter of policy involving public interest, the
                 decision of the State Government thereon shall be final.”
112.
Section 108
deals with “directions in matters of policy involving public

  interest as the State Government may give to it in writing.” In the provision, the
82
PART E

  term ‘it’ refers to the State Commission. The GoM’s GR does not mention the

  State Commission and has not been issued as a direction to the MERC as

  envisaged in
Section 108
. Therefore, the HVDC Project is, firstly, an existing

  project in terms of the GoM GR, and secondly, the GoM GR has not been issued

  in terms of
Section 108
as a direction to the State Commission.



  E.3.3 Relevance of GoM GR vis-à-vis MSETCL’s decision
113.     The GoM GR provides that all new projects would be allotted under the

  TBCB route. Accordingly, the question arises whether MSETCL was bound to

  refer the HVDC Project to the Empowered Committee for the bidding to be held

  and the tariff determined through bidding to be thereafter referred to MERC under
Section 63
.
114.     MSETCL or any STU performs the following functions in terms of
Section

  39
of the Electricity Act:
“(2) The functions of the State Transmission Utility shall be–
(a) to undertake transmission of electricity through intra-
                  State transmission system;
(b) to discharge all functions of planning and co-ordination
                  relating to intra-State transmission system with–
(i) Central Transmission Utility;
(ii) State Governments;
(iii) generating companies;
(iv) Regional Power Committees;
(v) Authority;
(vi) licensees;
(vii) any other person notified by the State Government in
                  this behalf;
(c) to ensure development of an efficient, co-ordinated and
                  economical system of intra-State transmission lines for
                  smooth flow of electricity from a generating station to the
                  load centers;”
83
PART E
115.
The Act
clearly lays out the importance of the STU’s role in terms of

  planning, development and co-ordination of intra-state transmission systems of

  any State. This role is carried out in co-ordination with the other stakeholders

  listed in sub-clause (b) of
Section 39(2)
. In Maharashtra, MSETCL has been

  notifying five-year plans which reflect the upcoming projects and planning

  initiatives regarding intra-state transmission system. The requirement for

  MSETCL to publish the five-year plans has also been captured in the MERC

  Gride Code 2006.
116.    Paragraph        24   of   the   Development    Guidelines     allows   the   State

  Governments to adopt the guidelines and constitute similar committees for

  facilitation of intra-state transmission projects. In terms of the Development

  Guidelines, the Empowered Committee has been set up which will perform its

  functions in line with the Guidelines. The GoM’s GR has also notified that the

  Empowered Committee shall appoint the Bid Process Coordinator and the Bid

  Empowerment Committee.
117.       The functions of the Empowered Committee include “to identify projects to

  be developed under this Scheme.” Further, it is this Empowered Committee

  which facilitates preparation of bid documents, evaluation of bids as well as

  finalization of Transmission Service Agreements between the developer and the

  concerned utilities.
118.    Some of the relevant provisions of the Development Guidelines, including

  the functions to be performed by the Empowered Committee, are reproduced

  below:
"14. The functions of the Empowered Committee will be the
                   following:
84
PART E
a) To identify projects to be developed under this Scheme.
b) To facilitate preparation of bid documents and invitation of
                   bid through a suitable agency.
c) To facilitate evaluation of bids.
d) To facilitate finalization and signing of Transmission
                   Service Agreement (TSA) between the developer and the
                   concerned utilities.
e) To facilitate development of projects under this Scheme.
[…]
                   PROJECT FORMULATION
17. Once the Perspective Plan, covering three five year
                   plans, the Short Term Plan and the Network Plan have been
                   prepared; some of these projects will be identified as
                   projects to be covered under this Scheme for competitive
                   bidding. In order to attract private investment in the
                   transmission sector it is very important to be able to make
                   available all the information to the stakeholders, regarding
                   new projects and their technical and other specifications.
                   These identified projects would then need to be formulated
                   with adequate details to enable competitive bidding to take
                   place. Detailed Project Report (DPR) for these projects shall
                   be prepared….
[…]
                   SELECTION OF DEVELOPER
19. The selection of developer for identified projects would
                   be through tariff based bidding for transmission services
                   according to the guidelines issued by the Ministry Of Power
                   under
section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003. CTU/STUs and
                   Joint Venture Companies will also be eligible to bid, so that
                   there is sufficient competition among the bidders.
                   LICENSE FOR TRANSMISSION
20. Along with the recommendation of selection by the
                   Empowered Committee, the selected developer shall
                   approach the Appropriate Commission, within a period of 30
                   days, for grant of transmission license. If it fails to apply for
                   license within thirty days then it will be liable for cancellation
                   of its selection. Cancellation of selection as provided above
                   will be done by the Empowered Committee only after giving
                   the selected private company an opportunity to be heard.
(emphasis supplied)
119.     In line with paragraph 17 of the Development Guidelines, it shall be the

  Empowered Committee which shall identify projects from the transmission utility’s

  network plan for being covered under the competitive bidding process. In terms of

  paragraph 19 of the Development Guidelines, the relevant STU will itself be

  eligible to be a participant in the bid.
85
PART E
120.     Accordingly, it is clear from a reading of these Development Guidelines

  read with the functions of the State Utility in terms of
Section 39(2)
of the Act that

  while the State Transmission Utility shall be the apex authority for planning of

  intra-state transmission projects, the Empowered Committee is to identify

  projects to be undertaken under the TBCB route.
121.     However, as we have already noted above, the HVDC Project was an

  existing/old project in terms of the GoM’s GR. Furthermore, this is also brought

  out in terms of the Empowered Committee’s deliberations recorded in its Minutes

  of Meetings.
122.    Once the Empowered Committee was constituted, MSETCL referred the

  HVDC Project to it in terms of the GoM’s GR. The Minutes of the 4th Empowered

  Committee Meeting dated 30 May 2020, record Agenda No. 3 as the HVDC

  Project. The Empowered Committee was apprised of the developments regarding

  this as well as the objection from TPC that it should be allotted through TBCB.

  The Empowered Committee did not take a decision in the said meeting.
123.    In the 5th Empowered Committee meeting held on 24 December 2020,

  both the issue of the threshold limit for development of intra-state transmission

  projects through TBCB as well as the HVDC Project were once again discussed.
124.    The Empowered Committee laid out the limit of Rs 500 crores as the

  threshold and decided upon the issue of “new/old” projects under Agenda Item 3.

  Further, it once again took into consideration the HVDC Project and decided that

  MSETCL shall proceed with the project in terms of the recommendation in

  Agenda Item 3:
“Agenda Item 4: Appraisal of inclusion of 1000 MW HVDC
                   Kudus-Aarey project in the STU five Year plan
86
PART E

                  (2019-20 – 2024-25) referred to Empowered Committee in
                  last meeting.
The Agenda “1000 MW HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey to
                  be taken under TBCB” was discussed in 4th Empowered
                  Committee meeting on 30th May 2020.”

                  At that time the HVDC project was not part of STU five-year
                  plan.
Hence the agenda item was deferred. Now the Empowered
                  Committee has been apprised about inclusion of 1000 MW
                  HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey in the STU Five-year plan.
                  Post appraisal of inclusion, the Committee informed STU
                  that they should proceed as per the decision given by the
                  Empowered Committee vide Agenda No.3.”
125.       Based on
the above decision
, in its additional submission dated 20

  January 2021 filed before MERC, MSETCL after adverting to the aforementioned

  minutes of meeting of the EC stated that it would proceed in accordance with the

  decision of the EC. Clarifying the same in its written submission dated 08

  February 2021 filed before the MERC, it stated that this implied that the HVDC

  Project being an old project, it would not be required to go through the TBCB

  route:
9. It is submitted that present HVDC Scheme was informed
                  to Empowered Committee Members during 4th Empowered
                  Committee meeting (as also recorded in MoM dated
                  30.05.2020) in line with the Government of Maharashtra GR
                  dt. 04.01.2019. Earlier Nagothane-Aarey HVDC project was
                  submitted by erstwhile Rinfra-T and was included in STU
                  plan 2014-15 to 2018-19. This project was approved by
                  Hon'ble MERC to be implemented by Rinfra-T. Subsequently
                  HVAC Kudus - Aarey scheme was submitted by MSETCL
                  and was included in STU plan of 2015-16 to 2019-20. This
                  project was approved by Hon'ble Commission to be
                  implemented by MSETCL. However this HVAC project was
                  subsequently cancelled. Further, M/s. AEML-T has again
                  submitted VSC based 1000 MW Kudus to Aarey HVDC
                  Scheme to STU on dated 23/11/2018 and the same was
                  included in STU five-year plan of 2018-19 to 2022-23 but
                  later it was deleted as other HVAC schemes viz 400 kV
                  Velgaon, 400 kV Kalwa 11 & 400 kV Kalwa - Padghe M/C
87
PART E

                 line were explored as alternative to HVDC Scheme.
Subsequently after CEA recommendation the scheme was
                 again reinstated as submitted by AEML-T in STU plan of
                 2019-20 to 2024-25. Hence it is seen that the said HVDC
                 project is old project.
10. One of the most critical factors for timely execution of a
                 Transmission scheme is the availability of land for
                 substations. AEML EHV substation land utilization at Aarey
                 can be optimized to house the Inverter Terminal of the
                 HVDC Scheme.
11. It is further submitted that in the 5th Empowered
                 Committee meeting, Empowered Committee decided the
                 threshold to be applied to the new schemes that can be
                 referred to Empowered Committee. HVDC being the scheme
                 perceived since many years; already recommended as
                 submitted by AEML-T and also directed by Hon'ble MERC to
                 STU and AEML to implement the scheme expeditiously.
12. As is seen from above deliberations it is seen that
                 HVDC project is old project. Moreover, the threshold limit
                 as decided by Empowered Committee in its meeting dated
                 24/12/2020 has not yet been approved by Hon'ble
                 Commission. However as per Clause 6 (ii) this HVDC project
                 can be considered as old project and where MERC has
                 initiated substantially the process of inclusion of this project
                 in scope of petitioner.
(emphasis supplied)

  Notably, the EC too did not raise any objections to MSETCL’s interpretation.
126.    Furthermore, it is also important to note that the threshold limit which was

  mentioned by the EC was merely a recommendation in response to the request

  of MERC so it could accordingly notify the limit in line with the NTP 2016. The

  threshold limit has not yet been notified by MERC.
127.     Accordingly, it is clear that the MSETCL’s decision regarding the HVDC

  Project not being referred under the TBCB route was in line with the Empowered

  Committee’s directions which have been set up in terms of the GoM GR and

  which has been granted the power to select projects to be taken up under the

  TBCB route.
88
PART F

  F.      Conclusion
128.      Based on the above discussion, we have reached the following

  conclusions:
(i)
The Electricity Act
2003 provides the States sufficient flexibility to regulate

          the intra-state transmission systems, wherein the Appropriate State

          Commissions possess the power to determine and regulate tariff.
The

          Electricity Act
2003 seeks to distance the State Governments from the

          determination and regulation of tariff, placing such power completely within

          the ambit of the Appropriate Commissions;
(ii) The provisions of the
Electricity Act
2003 do not prescribe one dominant

          method to determine tariff.
Section 63
operates after the bidding process

          has been conducted. Where the tariff has already been determined

          through bidding, the Appropriate Commission has to adopt such tariff that

          has been determined. The Appropriate Commission cannot negate such

          tariff determined through bidding by using its powers under
Section 62
.
The tariff determined through the bidding process may not be adopted by

          the Appropriate Commission only if the bidding process was not

          transparent (undertaking a substantive review) or the procedure prescribed

          by the Central Government guidelines under
Section 63
was not followed

          (undertaking a procedural review);
(iii)
Sections 62
and
63
stipulate the modalities of tariff determination. The

          non-obstante clause in
Section 63
cannot be interpreted to mean that
Section 63
would take precedence over
Section 62
at the stage of

          choosing the modality to determine tariff. The criteria or guidelines for the
89
PART F

    determination of the modality of tariff determination ought to be notified by

    the Appropriate State Commission either through regulations under
Section 181
of the Act or guidelines under
Section 61
of the Act;
(iv) MERC has neither framed regulations nor notified guidelines prescribing

    the criteria or guidelines for choosing the modalities to determine tariff.

    Thus, MERC shall determine the tariff by exercising its general regulatory

    powers under
Section 86(1)(a)
of the Act;
(v) MERC while exercising its general regulatory powers under
Section

    86(1)(a)
shall be guided by the NTP 2016, which shall be a material

    consideration.   Accordingly,   while   NTP     2016   requires     intra-state

    transmission projects above the threshold limit to be allotted through TBCB

    route, this constitutes a material consideration to be taken into account.

    The threshold value in the case of Maharashtra has not yet been notified

    by MERC;
(vi) The threshold limit not having been notified by MERC, it was open to

    MERC to allot the HVDC project either under the RTM or the TBCB route;
(vii) MERC and APTEL have arrived at concurrent findings that the 1000MW

    HVDC Aarey-Kudus project is an ‘existing project’ for the purpose of the

    applicability of the GoM’s GR 2019. This Court deciding a statutory appeal

    under
Section 125
of the Act cannot interfere with the concurrent findings

    on a question of fact. Nonetheless, even on an independent assessment of

    the facts, the HVDC project is an existing project;
(viii) Even if the HVDC Project were to be considered a ‘new project’ in terms of

   the GoM’s GR, the same not having been issued in terms of Section 108 as
90
PART F

          a direction to the State Commission, MERC’s decision cannot be challenged

          for failing to comply with the same as MERC is an independent body with

          statutory powers to determine and regulate tariff; and
(ix) MSETCL has acted in terms of the GoM’s GR as it has referred the HVDC

          project to the Empowered Committee and the decision to not refer the

          HVDC project under the TBCB route was in line with the Empowered

          Committee’s directions. The Empowered Committee has the power to select

          projects to be taken up under the TBCB route under the GoM’s GR.
129.
The Electricity Act
2003 or the policy framework, particularly NTP 2016

  read with the GoM GR dated 4 January 2019, did not make it binding upon

  MERC to allot the HVDC project only through the TBCB route. For the reasons

  mentioned above, the Regulatory Commission’s decision to grant the HVDC

  project under
Section 62
was within a reasonable exercise of its powers.
130.       This case has brought the ad-hoc nature of the functioning of the STU to

  the notice of this Court. MSETCL has been changing its stance on the HVDC

  technology without following any due procedure. The flip-flops by MSETCL have

  led to the loss of time and investment while the demand in the electricity sector

  has been increasing exponentially. We are cognizant of the fact that in matters

  dealing with electricity regulation, the regulatory commissions and the

  transmission utilities are usually bogged down by factors such as technological

  uncertainty, requirement of heavy investment and issues of right of way. The ad-

  hoc functioning of the transmission utilities is also attributable to the lacunae in

  the regulations guiding the exercise of their functions.
The Electricity Act
2003

  was enacted with the objective of providing the States with sufficient flexibility to
91
PART F

  regulate the intra-state electricity system and simultaneously provided the

  regulatory commissions with the power to determine tariffs. Though the

  Government, both at the Centre and in the States, have framed statutory policies

  and guidelines regulating the electricity sector, we have noticed that the

  Regulatory Commissions have not framed the necessary regulations to put into

  effect the principles prescribed under the Act.
131.    We direct all State Regulatory Commissions to frame Regulations under
Section 181
of the Act on the terms and conditions for determination of tariff

  within three months from the date of this judgment. While framing these

  guidelines on determination of tariff, the Appropriate Commission shall be guided

  by the principles prescribed in
Section 61
, which also includes the NEP and NTP.

  Where the Appropriate Commission(s) has already framed regulations, they shall

  be amended to include provisions on the criteria for choosing the modalities to

  determine the tariff, in case they have not been already included. The

  Commissions while being guided by the principles contained in
Section 61
shall

  effectuate a balance that would create a sustainable model of electricity

  regulation in the States. The Regulatory Commission shall curate to the specific

  needs of the State while framing these regulations. Further, the regulations

  framed must be in consonance with the objective of the
Electricity Act
2003,

  which is to enhance the investment of private stakeholders in the electricity

  regulatory sector so as to create a sustainable and effective system of tariff

  determination that is cost efficient so that such benefits percolate to the end

  consumers.
92
PART F
132.   For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
133.   Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.
……....….....…….....………………........CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                          ...….........….....….......………………........J.
                                            [AS Bopanna]




                                          …….........….....….......………………........J.
                                          [J.B. Pardiwala]




  New Delhi;
November 23, 2022
93