[Cites
60
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohd.Arif @ Ashfaq vs State(Nct Of Delhi) on 3 November, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            INHERENT JURISDICTION

                          REVIEW PETITION (CRL.) NOS. 286-287 OF 2012
                                             IN
                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 98-99 OF 2009


          MOHD. ARIF @ ASHFAQ                                                       …..Petitioner(s)

                                                             VERSUS

          STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                                                      .....Respondent(s)



                                                      JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, CJI
1.             These review petitions arise out of the judgment and order

          dated 10.8.20111 passed by this Court in Criminal Appeal Nos. 98-

          99/2009.
2.             According to the prosecution, on the night of 22.12.2000

          some intruders entered the area where the Unit of 7 Rajputana

          Rifles of the Indian Army was stationed inside the Red Fort, New

          Delhi. In the firing that was opened by the intruders, three Army

          jawans lost their lives. The intruders then left by scaling the rear-
Signature Not Verified
side boundary wall of the Red Fort. This led to the lodging of FIR
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2022.11.03
15:56:28 IST
Reason:
1
Mohd. Arif alias
Ashfaq vs. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2011) 13 SCC 621
2
No. 688/2000 registered with Kotwali Police Station, New Delhi in

respect of offences punishable under
Sections 302
,
307
,
186
,
353
,
120-B
,
121
,
121-A
,
216
and
201
of the Indian Penal Code, 18602

read with
Sections 25
,
27
,
54
and
59
of the Arms Act, 1959,
Section 14
of the Foreigners Act, 1946,
Sections 4
and
5
of the

Explosive Substances Act, 1908 and
Sections 420
,
468
,
471
,
474
and
34
, IPC. In the investigation, the involvement of the present

review petitioner was made out.
3.         The review petitioner, who was tried for said offences, was

awarded               death   sentence   vide   judgment   and   order   dated

31.10.2005 passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge,

Delhi in Sessions Case Nos. 1/2005, 2/2005, 5/2005, 7/2005,

8/2005, 9/2005, 10/2005 and 11/2005, which arose out of the

aforestated FIR.              The award of death sentence was subject to

confirmation by the High Court.
4.         The matter was thereafter considered by the High Court in

Death Sentence Reference No. 2/2005 with Criminal Appeal Nos.
891/2005, 892/2005, 907/2005, 927/2005, 944-945/2005,

946/2005, 273/2006 and 504/2006. The view taken by the trial
2
“
IPC
” for short
3
Court was affirmed by the High Court vide its judgment dated

13.9.20073.
5.         The matter then reached this Court in the form of Criminal

Appeal Nos. 98-99/2009 at the instance of the review petitioner.
However, the challenge was negated by this Court and the award

of death sentence to the petitioner was affirmed vide judgment

dated 10.8.2011, which has resulted in filing of the instant review

petitions.
6.         The instant review petitions had initially come up before the

Bench of two Judges and by order dated 28.8.2012, the review

petitions were dismissed.            Curative Petition (Crl.) Nos.99-

100/2013 filed by the review petitioner sought to challenge the

view taken by the Division Bench of this Court in dismissal of the

appeals, as well as, the review petitions. However, the curative

petitions were also dismissed by this Court vide order dated

23.1.2014.
7.         Soon thereafter, Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 77/2014 was

preferred by the review petitioner submitting inter alia, that the

review petitions in matters arising out of award of death sentence

be heard by a Bench of three Judges and in open Court. The
3
(2007) SCC Online Del 1259
4
Constitution Bench of this Court by its judgment dated 2.9.20144

concluded that in all cases in which death sentence was awarded

by the High Court, such matters be listed before a Bench of three

Judges. The relevant observations in paragraph 39 were as under:
“39. Henceforth, in all cases in which death sentence has been
                awarded by the High Court in appeals pending before the
                Supreme Court, only a bench of three Hon'ble Judges will hear
                the same. This is for the reason that at least three judicially
                trained minds need to apply their minds at the final stage of
                the journey of a convict on death row, given the vagaries of the
                sentencing procedure outlined above. At present, we are not
                persuaded to have a minimum of 5 learned Judges hear all
                death sentence cases. Further, we agree with the submission
                of Shri Luthra that a review is ordinarily to be heard only by
                the same bench which originally heard the criminal appeal.
                This is obviously for the reason that in order that a review
                succeeds, errors apparent on the record have to be found. It
                is axiomatic that the same learned Judges alleged to have
                committed the error be called upon now to rectify such error.
                We, therefore, turn down Shri Venugopal's plea that two
                additional Judges be added at the review stage in death
                sentence cases.”
8.         A question still arose: whether in matters where the review

petitions had already stood rejected when the aforementioned

decision was rendered by the Constitution Bench of this Court,

could there be reopening of the matter and the review petition be

reheard?             A subsequent Constitution Bench in its order dated

19.1.20165 observed as under: -
“9.
In the circumstances therefore and especially in view of the
                fact that the petitioner is perhaps the only person that will
4
Mohd. Arif alias
Ashfaq vs. Registrar
, Supreme Court of India & Ors., (2014) 9 SCC 737
5
Mohd. Arif alias
Ashfaq vs. Registrar
, Supreme Court of India & Ors., (2019) 9 SCC 404
5
suffer the denial of the right to an open court hearing, we are
        inclined to modify the judgment on review and direct that the
        petitioner shall also be entitled to seek reopening of the
        dismissal of the review petitions for an open court hearing
        within one month from today. We permit the petitioner to
        raise all such additional grounds in support of the said review
        petition as may be legally permissible to him.”
9.   In this backdrop, the instant review petitions are listed before

us for rehearing.
10. At this stage, we may set out certain circumstances which

were found to have been proved by the High Court and this Court.
In paragraph Nos. 182-191 of the judgment which is presently

under review, it was observed as under: -
“182. The High Court has held proved             the   following
        circumstances against the appellant:
“(a) On the night of 22-12-2000 there was an incident of
           firing inside Lal Quila when some intruders had managed
           to enter that area of Lal Quila where the unit of 7th
           Rajputana Rifles of the Indian Army was stationed.
(b) In that incident of shooting the intruders had fired
           indiscriminately from their AK-56 rifles as a result of which
           three army jawans received firearm injuries and lost their
           lives.
(c) The death of three army jawans was homicidal.
(d) Immediately after the quick reaction team of the army
           fired back upon the intruders as a result of which the
           intruders escaped from the place of occurrence by scaling
           over the rear side boundary wall of Lal Quila towards the
           Ring Road side and when the place of occurrence was
           searched by the army men many assault rifle fired
           cartridge cases were recovered from the place of
           occurrence.
(e) Immediately after the intruders who had resorted to
           firing inside the army camp had escaped from there, calls
           were made by someone on the telephones of two BBC
6
correspondents one of whom was stationed at Srinagar and
the other one was stationed at Delhi office of BBC and the
caller had informed them about the shooting incident
inside Lal Quila and had also claimed the responsibility of
that incident and that that was the job of Lashkar-e-Toiba,
which the prosecution claims to be a banned militant
organization indulging in acts of terrorism in our country.
(f) On the morning of 23-12-2000 one AK-56 rifle was
recovered from a place near Vijay Ghat on the Ring Road
behind Lal Quila.
(g) On 23-12-2000 when the policemen conducted search
around Lal Quila in the hope of getting some clue about
the culprits they found one piece of paper lying outside Lal
Quila near the rear side boundary wall towards Ring Road
side and on that piece of paper one Mobile Phone No.
9811278510 was written.
(h) Mobile Phone No. 9811278510 was used for making
calls to the two BBC correspondents (PWs 39 and 41)
immediately after the shooting incident inside Lal Quila
and the caller had claimed the responsibility for that
incident and had informed them that the incident was the
job of Lashkar-e-Toiba.
(i) The aforesaid mobile phone number found written on a
piece of paper lying behind Lal Quila had led the police up
to Flat No. 308-A, Ghazipur, New Delhi where accused
Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq was found to be living and when
on being suspected of being involved in the shooting
incident he was apprehended on the night of 25-12-
2000/26-12-2000 one pistol and some live cartridges were
recovered from his possession for which he did not have
any licence.
(j) At the time of his arrest in case FIR No. 688 of 2000 one
mobile phone having No. 9811278510 was recovered from
his possession and it was the same mobile number from
which calls had been made to the two BBC correspondents
for informing them about the incident and Lashkar-e-Toiba
being responsible for that incident.
(k) Immediately after his apprehension accused Mohd. Arif
alias Ashfaq admitted his involvement in the shooting
incident inside Lal Quila and also disclosed to the police
about his another hide-out at G-73, Batla House, Muradi
Road, Okhla, New Delhi and pursuant to his disclosure the
police had gone to that hide-out where the occupant of that
house started firing upon the police team and when the
police team returned the firing, that person, who was later
on identified by accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq to be one
7
Abu Shamal alias Faizal, died because of the firing resorted
to by the policemen. From House No. G-73, where the
encounter had taken place, one AK-56 rifle and some live
cartridges and hand grenades were recovered.
(l) Accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq while in police custody
had also disclosed to the police that one assault rifle had
been thrown near Vijay Ghat after the incident. The police
had already recovered one AK-56 rifle from Vijay Ghat on
the morning of 23-12-2000. Accused Mohd. Arif alias
Ashfaq had thus the knowledge about the availability of
that AK-56 rifle at Vijay Ghat.
(m) Accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq had also got recovered
one AK-56 rifle and some ammunition from behind Lal
Quila on 26-12-2000.
(n) Accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq had also got recovered
three hand grenades from some place behind his computer
centre in Okhla on 1-1-2001 pursuant to his another
disclosure statement made by him while in police custody.
(o) When the assault rifle fired cartridge cases which were
recovered from the place of occurrence by the army men
after the intruders had escaped from there were examined
by the ballistic expert along with the AK-56 rifle which was
recovered at the instance of accused Mohd. Arif alias
Ashfaq from behind Lal Quila on 26-12-2000 and the AK-
56 rifle which was recovered from Vijay Ghat on 23-12-
2000 it was found by the ballistic expert (PW 202) that
some of the assault rifle fired cartridge cases had been fired
from the rifle recovered from behind Red Fort and some
had been fired from the other rifle Ih was recovered from
Vijay Ghat.
(p) Appellant-accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq was a
Pakistani national and had entered the Indian territory
illegally.
(q) After making illegal entry into India appellant-accused
Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq had been representing to the
people coming in his contact during his stays at different
places that he was a resident of Jammu and was doing the
business of shawls while, in fact, he had no such business
and he had been collecting money through hawala
channels.
(r) Accused Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq had obtained a forged
ration card, Ext. PW-164/A wherein not only his house
number mentioned was not his correct address but even
the name of his wife shown therein was not Rehmana
Yusuf Farukhi. He had also forged his learner driving
licence, Ext. PW-13/C as well as one document, Ext. PW-
8
13/E purporting to be a photocopy of another ration card
   in his name with his residential address of Ghaziabad
   where he admittedly never resided and he submitted that
   document with the Ghaziabad Transport Authority for
   obtaining permanent driving licence. In the learner driving
   licence also he had shown his residential addresses where
   he had never actually resided. All that he did was to
   conceal his real identity as a militant having entered the
   Indian territory with the object of spreading terror with the
   help of his other associate militants whom unfortunately
   the police could not apprehend and some expired before
   they could be tried.”
183. In addition to these circumstances, there is another
circumstance that a message was intercepted by BSF vide
Exhibit PW-162/A and proved by PW 162 Inspector J.S.
Chauhan dated 26-12-2000 wherein there was a specific
reference to the accused. Still another circumstance would be
that the accused had no ostensible means of livelihood and
yet he deposited Rs 29,50,000 in three accounts, namely,
Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank, Connaught Place
(known as ANZ Grindlays Bank) bearing Account No.
32263962 of M/s Nazir & Sons, Standard Chartered
Grindlays Bank bearing Account No. 28552609 of Bilal
Ahmad Kawa and Standard Chartered Bank bearing Account
No. 32181669 of Farooq Ahmed Qasid and also deposited
some amounts in the account of Rehmana Yusuf Farukhi and
he had no explanation of these huge amounts, their source or
their distribution. Lastly, the appellant gave a fanciful and a
completely false explanation about his entering in India and
his being a member of RAW and thereby, his having interacted
with Nain Singh (PW 20).
184. We are in complete agreement with the findings
regarding the incriminating circumstances as recorded by the
High Court. On the basis of the aforementioned
circumstances, the High Court came to the conclusion that
the appellant was responsible for the incident of shooting
inside Lal Quila (Red Fort) on the night of 22-12-2000, which
resulted in the death of three soldiers of army. It has also been
held by the High Court that this was a result of well-planned
conspiracy between the appellant and some other militants
including deceased Abu Shamal alias Faizal who was killed in
an encounter with the police at House No. G-73, Batla House,
Muradi Road, Okhla, New Delhi. The High Court has also
deduced that it was at the instance of the appellant that the
police could reach that spot.
9
185. The High Court has further come to the conclusion that
it was in a systematic manner that the appellant came to India
illegally and collected highly sophisticated arms and
ammunition meant for mass destruction. The High
Court
further held
that he chose to select Red Fort for an assault
along with his other associates, Red Fort being a place of
national importance for India. The High Court has also
recorded a finding that the chosen attack was on the army
camp which was stationed there to protect this monument of
national importance. The High Court has, therefore, deduced
that it was an act of waging war against the Government of
India. It is further held that the associates, with whom the
appellant had entered into conspiracy, had attacked the army
camp, which suggests that there was a conspiracy to wage war
against the Government of India, particularly, because in that
attack, sophisticated arms like AK-47 and AK-56 rifles and
hand grenades were used.
186. The High Court also took note that this aspect regarding
waging war was not even argued by the learned counsel
appearing for the defence. It is on this basis that the appellant
was held guilty for the offences punishable under
Sections
120-B
,
121-A
,
121
IPC, Section 120-B read with
Section 302
IPC and
Sections 468
/
471
/
474
IPC and also the offences
under
Sections 186
/
353
/
120-B
IPC. He was also held guilty
for the offence under
Section 14
of the Foreigners Act, since it
was proved that the appellant, a foreigner, had entered the
territory of India without obtaining the necessary permissions
and clearance. Similarly, the appellant was also held guilty for
the offences under the
Arms Act
as well as the
Explosive
Substances Act
on account of his being found with a pistol
and live cartridges.
187. The law on the circumstantial evidence is, by now,
settled.
In
Sharad     Birdhichand    Sarda v. State   of
Maharashtra
(1984) 4 SCC 116 this Court drew out the
following test for relying upon the circumstantial evidence:
(SCC p. 185, para 153)
   “153. … (1) the circumstances from which the
   conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
   established.
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only
   with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is
   to say, they should not be explainable on any other
   hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
   (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature
   and tendency,
10
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis
   except the one to be proved, and
   (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as
   not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion
   consistent with the innocence of the accused and must
   show that in all human probability the act must have
   been done by the accused.”
   The principle of this judgment was thereafter followed in a
number of decisions, they being
Tanviben Pankajkumar
Divetia v. State of Gujarat
(
1997) 7 SCC 156, State (NCT of
Delhi) v. Navjot   Sandhu
(2005)    11    SCC     600, Vikram
Singh v. State of Punjab (
2010) 3 SCC 56 and Aftab Ahmad
Anasari v. State of Uttaranchal
(2010) 2 SCC 583, etc.
188. It is to be noted that in the last mentioned decision
of
Aftab Ahmad Anasari v. State of Uttaranchal
(2010) 2 SCC
583, the observation made is to the following effect: (SCC p.
589, paras 13-14)
   “13. In cases where evidence is of a circumstantial nature,
   the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to
   be drawn should, in the first instance, be fully established.
   Each fact must be proved individually and only thereafter
   the court should consider the total cumulative effect of all
   the proved facts, each one of which reinforces the
   conclusion of the guilt. If the combined effect of all the facts
   taken together is conclusive in establishing the guilt of the
   accused, the conviction would be justified even though it
   may be that one or more of these facts, by itself/themselves,
   is/are not decisive. The circumstances proved should be
   such as to exclude every hypothesis except the one sought
   to be proved.
But this does not mean that before the
   prosecution case succeeds in a case of circumstantial
   evidence alone, it must exclude each and every hypothesis
   suggested by the accused, howsoever extravagant and
   fanciful it might be.
14. There must be a chain of evidence so far complete as
   not to leave any reasonable ground for conclusion
   consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must
   be such as to show that within all human probability, the
   act must have been done by the accused. Where the
   various links in a chain are in themselves complete, then
   a false plea or a false defence may be called into aid only
   to lend assurance to the court.”
                                         (emphasis supplied)
189. The Court further went on to hold that in applying this
principle, distinction must be made between the facts called
11
primary or basic, on the one hand, and the inference of facts
to be drawn from them, on the other. The Court further
mentioned that: (
Aftab Ahmad Anasari
case (2010) 2 SCC
583, SCC p. 590, para 15)
   “15.
… In drawing these inferences or presumptions, the
   court must have regard to the common course of natural
   events, and to human conduct and their relations to the
   facts of the particular case.”
   To the similar effect are the observations made in
Vikram
Singh v. State of Punjab
(2010) 3 SCC 56.
190. There can be no dispute that in a case entirely dependent
on the circumstantial evidence, the responsibility of the
prosecution is more as compared to the case where the ocular
testimony or the direct evidence, as the case may be, is
available. The Court, before relying on the circumstantial
evidence and convicting the accused thereby has to satisfy
itself completely that there is no other inference consistent
with the innocence of the accused possible nor is there any
plausible explanation. The Court must, therefore, make up its
mind about the inferences to be drawn from each proved
circumstance and should also consider the cumulative effect
thereof. In doing this, the Court has to satisfy its conscience
that it is not proceeding on the imaginary inferences or its
prejudices and that there could be no other inference possible
excepting the guilt on the part of the accused.
191. We respectfully agree with the principles drawn in the
abovementioned cases and hold that the prosecution was
successful in establishing the abovementioned circumstances
against the appellant, individually, as well as, cumulatively.
There indeed cannot be a universal test applicable commonly
to all the situations for reaching an inference that the accused
is guilty on the basis of the proved circumstances against him
nor could there be any quantitative test made applicable. At
times, there may be only a few circumstances available to
reach a conclusion of the guilt on the part of the accused and
at times, even if there are large numbers of circumstances
proved, they may not be enough to reach the conclusion of
guilt on the part of the accused. It is the quality of each
individual circumstance that is material and that would
essentially depend upon the quality of evidence. Fanciful
imagination in such cases has no place. Clear and irrefutable
logic would be an essential factor in arriving at the verdict of
guilt on the basis of the proved circumstances. In our opinion,
the present case is such, as would pass all the tests so far
devised by this Court in the realm of criminal jurisprudence.”
12
11. Some of the other features of the matter, as noted by this

Court, were: -
“151. The prosecution proved 9 cash deposit slips of Grindlays
        Bank, the total amount being Rs 29,50,000. According to the
        prosecution, these were in appellant’s handwriting while the
        depositors’ names have been mentioned as Aslam, Salim
        Khan, R.K. Traders and Rashid. We have already discussed
        about the fake residential address given by the appellant while
        opening the account with HDFC Bank. The details of this
        account were proved by Sanjeev Srivastava (PW 22). He proved
        Exhibits PW-22/B, C and F. Exhibit PW-22/F is a copy of the
        account statement of Rehmana, the wife of the accused which
        suggests that from 15-9-2000 onwards up to 14-12-2000, on
        various dates, amounts like Rs 10,000, Rs 40,000, Rs 50,000,
        Rs 1,50,000, Rs 2,00,000, etc. were deposited in cash. The
        total amount deposited was Rs 5,53,500. There is absolutely
        no explanation by the appellant about the source from which
        these amounts came.
xxx                xxx                xxx
153. The most important link with the HDFC account as also
        with the deposit slips of Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank
        came to light. Dr. M.A. Ali (PW 216), SSO, CFSL, CBI, New
        Delhi, on the basis of his report, deposed that the account
        opening form of HDFC Bank of the appellant, 9 deposit slips
        of Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank as also deposit slips of
        State Bank of India account of Rehmana Yusuf Farukhi bore
        the handwriting of the appellant. This clinches the issue about
        the account opened in HDFC Bank. It is to be noted that there
        were three accounts in Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank
        in the name of M/s Nazir & Sons, Farooq Ahmed Qasid (A-4)
        and Bilal Ahmad Kawa (A-18) which had Account Nos.
32263962, 28552609 and 32181669 respectively. The
        investigating agency collected the documents from Standard
        Chartered Grindlays Bank including 9 cash deposit receipts
        as also documents regarding the Account Nos. 32263962,
        28552609 and 32181669. 9 cash deposit slips are purportedly
        in the name of Aslam, Salim Khan, R.K. Traders and Rashid
        and all these have been proved to be in the handwriting of the
        appellant.
xxx                xxx                xxx
159. The argument of Ms Jaiswal, learned counsel appearing
        on behalf of the appellant, that Nazir Ahmad Qasid (A-3) and
        Farooq Ahmed Qasid (A-4) have already been acquitted, is of
        no consequence. We may point out that there is absolutely no
13
explanation by the appellant either by way of cross-
                examination of the witnesses or by way of his statement under
Section 313
CrPC as to where all these amounts had come
                from and why did he deposit huge amounts in the three
                accounts mentioned above. Rs 29,50,000 is not an ordinary
                sum. Also, there is no evidence that in his account in HDFC
                Bank, the appellant has Rs 6 lakhs. Further, a very sizeable
                amount is shown to have been paid to Rehmana Yusuf
                Farukhi in her account in State Bank of India. How did the
                appellant receive all these amounts and from where, are
                questions that remain unanswered in the absence of any
                explanation and more particularly because the appellant had
                no ostensible means of livelihood. It would have to be held that
                the appellant was dealing with huge sums of money and he
                has no explanation therefor. This is certainly to be viewed as
                an incriminating circumstance against the appellant. The
                silence on this issue is only telling of his nefarious design.
160. It is obvious that the appellant was a very important
                wheel in the whole machinery which was working against the
                sovereignty of this country. All this was supported by the fact
                that 9 deposit slips, the bank forms for opening the accounts,
                the slip through which the amount was deposited in the
                account of Rehmana Yusuf Farukhi, were all proved to be in
                the handwriting of the appellant. We have absolutely no
                reason to reject the evidence of the handwriting expert. All this
                suggests that the appellant was weaving his web of terrorist
                activities by taking recourse to falsehood one after the other
                including his residential address and also creating false
                documents.”
12. In these review petitions, the challenge is raised principally

on four grounds: -
(a)     The concerned Courts committed error in allowing call

                    records to be admitted in evidence, in the absence of

                    an appropriate certificate under Section 65B of the

                    Indian Evidence Act, 18726.
6
“the
Evidence Act
”, for short.
14
(b)    The disclosure statements of the review petitioner

                   must be taken to be inadmissible on account of ill-
treatment meted out to him during the intervening

                   night between his actual arrest and his formal arrest.
(c)    The recovery of ammunition or the encounter of one

                   Abu Shamal, who was stated to be the accomplice of

                   the petitioner, at Batla House, New Delhi, could not be

                   associated with the disclosure statement of the review

                   petitioner.
(d)    Any possibility of retribution and rehabilitation of the

                   review petitioner, or that he would continue to be a

                   threat to the society, was not considered by the

                   Courts.
13. On the other hand, it is submitted on behalf of the State, that

the scope of a review petition even in matters arising out of award

of death sentence would be extremely limited. Reliance has been

placed on the decisions of this Court in Vikram Singh alias
Vicky

Walia & Anr. vs. State of Punjab & Anr.7
and specially the

following paragraph: -
7
(2017) 8 SCC 518
15
“23. In view of the above, it is clear that scope, ambit and
               parameters of review jurisdiction are well defined. Normally in
               a criminal proceeding, review applications cannot be
               entertained except on the ground of error apparent on the face
               of the record. Further, the power given to this Court under
Article 137
is wider and in an appropriate case can be
               exercised to mitigate a manifest injustice. By review
               application an applicant cannot be allowed to reargue the
               appeal on the grounds which were urged at the time of the
               hearing of the criminal appeal. Even if the applicant succeeds
               in establishing that there may be another view possible on the
               conviction or sentence of the accused that is not a sufficient
               ground for review. This Court shall exercise its jurisdiction to
               review only when a glaring omission or patent mistake has
               crept in the earlier decision due to judicial fallibility. There has
               to be an error apparent on the face of the record leading to
               miscarriage of justice to exercise the review jurisdiction under
Article 137
read with Order 40 Rule 1. There has to be a
               material error manifest on the face of the record with results
               in the miscarriage of justice.”
14. Reliance has further been placed on the decision of this Court

in
Akshay Kumar Singh vs. State (NCT of Delhi
)8, where it was

observed by this Court as under: -
“7.
In this review petition, the petitioner prays for review of the
               judgment dated 5-5-2017 [
Mukesh v. State (NCT of Delhi
),
               (2017) 6 SCC 1]. In the review petition before us, the petitioner
               has again sought to assail the merits of the prosecution case
               and the findings rendered thereon which cannot be permitted.
8. It is no longer res integra that scope of review is limited and
               review cannot be entertained except in cases of error apparent
               on the face of the record.
Article 137
of the Constitution of
               India empowers the Supreme Court to review any judgment
               pronounced or made, subject, of course, to the provisions of
               any law made by Parliament or any rule made under
Article
               145
of the Constitution of India.
9. Order 47 Rule 1 of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 dealing
               with review reads as follows:
“1. The Court may review its judgment or order, but no
                   application for review will be entertained in a civil
8
(2020) 3 SCC 431
16
proceeding except on the ground mentioned in Order 47
                   Rule 1 of the Code, and in a criminal proceeding except on
                   the ground of an error apparent on the face of the record.”
               As per the Supreme Court Rules, review in the criminal
               proceedings is permissible only on the ground of error
               apparent on the face of the record.
xxx             xxx                xxx
11. Review is a not a rehearing of the appeal over again. In a
               review petition, it is not for the Court to reappreciate the
               evidence and reach a different conclusion. The scope of review
               jurisdiction has been elaborately considered by this Court in
               number of cases and the well-settled principles have been
               reiterated time and again……”
15. The basic submission in the instant matter, as advanced by

Mr. Siddharth Agarwal, learned senior counsel on behalf of the

review petitioner is about the admissibility of electronic record

being Call Data Records (CDRs) (Exhibit PW-198/B1-B3), CDRs

(Exhibit PW-198/E) and CDR (Exhibit PW-229/A). It is submitted

that         on         the   strength   of   the    law    declared     by      this

Court in
Anvar P.V. vs. P.K. Basheer & Ors.9
, as affirmed by this

Court in
Arjun Panditrao Khotkar vs. Kailash Kushanrao

Gorantyal & Ors.10
, certification under
Section 65B
of the

Evidence Act would be a pre-requisite for admissibility of an

electronic record such as CDRs; that there being total non-
compliance of this mandatory requirement, the afore-stated CDRs
9
(2014) 10 SCC 473
10
(2020) 7 SCC 1
17
would be inadmissible and must be eschewed from consideration

at every juncture. The extension of the submission is that the

entire fulcrum of the prosecution case rested on these CDRs and

minus this evidence, there is hardly anything which could prove

the identity and involvement of the petitioner in the crime in

question.
16. The submission advanced on behalf of the review petitioner

on the first ground as set out in the Note given by the learned

Senior Counsel is as under: -
“A. Admissibility of electronic records
(i) The central feature of the Prosecution case permeating the
       entire Judgment under Review are circumstances and
       inferences that have been drawn on the strength of anlysis of
       electronic records (CDRs). Specifically, Circumstance H, I and
       J deal with this issue.
(ii) Case involves analysis of Call Detail Records (“CDRs”) of
       9811278510 (“8510”) & 9811242154 (“2154”). Prosecution
       Case is that PW-229 MC Sharma conducted investigation
       pertaining to CDRs of these two numbers.
•   PW-229 (@ 305-308 of Vol. II)
(iii)In respect of 8510, Prosecution produced CDR which is
       Ex.PW-198/ B1-B3 (@ 57-59 of Vol.III) whereas for 2154
       prosecution has produced CDRs Ex.PW-198/E (@67-75 of
       Vol.III) & Ex. PW-229/A (@ 48-52 of Vol.III). None of these
       have any certificate as required under Section 65B in IEA.
(iv) The number 8510 (sim card) was never recovered and the
       handset in which it was used from 26.10.2000 to 14.11.2000
       (IMEI ending with “0240”) was also not recovered. No
       Customer Application Form (CAF) or any other document that
       establishes ownership or possession was produced. Not a
       single person known to the Petitioner was sked to provide his
       mobile number (despite multiple being examined) [See: PW-20
       (@ 12 of Vol.I), PW-31 (@ 4 of Vol.I) PW-37 (@ 50 of Vol.I), PW-
56 (@ 60 of Vol.I), PW-232 (@ 415 of Vol.II)]. Police never
18
accessed the instrument to examine call logs, message etc.
               (PW-148 @ 96 of Vol.I) and the sole link to all inferences is the
               purported CDRs.
(v) CDRs provided by PW-198 Rajiv Pandit in February/
               March 2001 (Ex. PW-198/A @ 63 of Vol.III; Ex.PW-198/D @
               89 of Vol.III) were not and could not have been the basis for
               analysis by PW-229. The Court has acted upon oral testimony
               of PW-229 as to the contents of CDRs of 8510, and Ex.PW-
               229/A (@ 48 of Vol.III) – unauthenticated secondary evidence
               of secondary evidence – with respect to contents of CDRs of
               2154. This is the teeth of S.65B IEA, S.63/65 IEA as well as
               S.59 IEA. Even otherwise, the contents of the CDRs are
               different from the oral testimony of PW-229 whereas the
               Supreme Court has proceeded relying upon the oral testimony
               [@ Para 97 (p.525) of Compilation of Judgments and Orders
               Pertaining to Petitioner]
                    •
Tomaso Bruno & Anr. v. State of UP
, (2015) 7 SCC 178
                         (Paras 20-27)
(vi) Certification under S.65B IEA is a pre-requisite to
               admissibility of an electronic record such as CDRs. There is
               no compliance with this mandatory requirement. As such,
               CDRs are inadmissible and necessarily must be excluded from
               consideration.”
17. On the issue of admissibility of call records without there

being appropriate certificate under
Section 65-B(4)
of the Evidence

Act a bench of two Judges of this Court in
State (NCT of Delhi)

vs. Navjot Sandhu
alias Afsan Guru11, had observed:-
“148. It is contended by Mr Shanti Bhushan, appearing for
               the accused Shaukat that the call records relating to the
               cellular Phone No. 9811573506 said to have been used by
               Shaukat have not been proved as per the requirements of law
               and their genuineness is in doubt. The call records relating to
               the other mobile numbers related to Gilani and Afzal are also
               subjected to the same criticism. It is the contention of the
               learned counsel that in the absence of a certificate issued
               under sub-section (4) of
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act with
               the particulars enumerated in clauses (a) to (c), the
               information contained in the electronic record cannot be
11
(2005) 11 SCC 600
19
adduced in evidence and in any case in the absence of
examination of a competent witness acquainted with the
functioning of the computers during the relevant time and the
manner in which the printouts were taken, even secondary
evidence under Section 63 is not admissible.
149. Two witnesses were examined to prove the printouts of
the computerised record furnished by the cellular service
providers, namely, AirTel (Bharti Cellular Limited) and ESSAR
Cellphone. The call details of Mobile No. 9811573506 (which
was seized from Shaukat's house) are contained in Exhibits
36/1 to 36/2. The covering letters signed by the Nodal Officer
of Sterling Cellular Limited are Exts. P-36/6 and P-36/7
bearing the dates 13th and 18th December respectively. The
call details of Mobile No. 9811489429 attributed to Afzal are
contained in Ext. P-36/3 and the covering letter addressed to
the Inspector (special cell) — PW 66 signed by the Nodal
Officer is Ext. 36/5. The call details of 9810081228 belonging
to the subscriber S.A.R. Gilani are contained in Ext. 35/8. The
above two phones were obtained on cash-card basis. The
covering letter pertaining thereto and certain other mobile
numbers were signed by the Security Manager of Bharti
Cellular Limited. The call details relating to another Cellphone
Number 9810693456 pertaining to Mohammed is Ext. 35/5.
These documents i.e. Ext. 35 series were filed by PW 35 who
is the person that signed the covering letter dated 17th
December bearing Ext. 35/1. PW 35 deposed that “all the call
details are computerised sheets obtained from the computer”.
He clarified that:
“the switch which is maintained in the computer in
     respect of each telephone receives the signal of the
     telephone number, called or received and serves
     them to the server and it is the server which keeps
     the record of the calls made or received. In case
     where the call is made and the receiver does not pick
     up the phone, the server which makes a loop of the
     route would not register it.”
As far as PW 36 is concerned, he identified the signatures of
the General Manager of his Company who signed Ext. P-36
series. He testified to the fact that the call details of the
particular telephone numbers were contained in the relevant
exhibits produced by him. It is significant to note that no
suggestion was put to these two witnesses touching the
authenticity of the call records or the possible tampering with
the entries, although the arguments have proceeded on the
lines that there could have been fabrication. In support of
such argument, the duplication of entries in Exts. 36/2 and
36/3 and that there was some discrepancy relating to the cell
20
ID and IMEI number of the handset at certain places was
pointed out. The factum of presence of duplicate entries was
elicited by the counsel appearing for Afsan Guru from PW 36
when PW 36 was in the witness box. The evidence of DW 10 a
technical expert, was only to the effect that it was possible to
clone a SIM by means of a SIM programmer which to his
knowledge, was not available in Delhi or elsewhere. His
evidence was only of a general nature envisaging a theoretical
possibility and not with reference to specific instances.
150. According to Section 63, secondary evidence means and
includes, among other things, “copies made from the original
by mechanical processes which in themselves insure the
accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies”.
Section 65 enables secondary evidence of the contents of a
document to be adduced if the original is of such a nature as
not to be easily movable. It is not in dispute that the
information contained in the call records is stored in huge
servers which cannot be easily moved and produced in the
court. That is what the High Court has also observed at para
276. Hence, printouts taken from the computers/servers by
mechanical process and certified by a responsible official of
the service-providing company can be led in evidence through
a witness who can identify the signatures of the certifying
officer or otherwise speak of the facts based on his personal
knowledge. Irrespective of the compliance with the
requirements of Section 65-B, which is a provision dealing
with admissibility of electronic records, there is no bar to
adducing secondary evidence under the other provisions of
the
Evidence Act
, namely, Sections 63 and 65. It may be that
the certificate containing the details in sub-section (4) of
Section 65-B is not filed in the instant case, but that does not
mean that secondary evidence cannot be given even if the law
permits such evidence to be given in the circumstances
mentioned in the relevant provisions, namely, Sections 63 and
65.
151. The learned Senior Counsel Mr Shanti Bhushan then
contended that the witnesses examined were not technical
persons acquainted with the functioning of the computers,
nor do they have personal knowledge of the details stored in
the servers of the computers. We do not find substance in this
argument. Both the witnesses were responsible officials of the
companies concerned who deposed to the fact that they were
the printouts obtained from the computer records. In fact the
evidence of PW 35 shows that he is fairly familiar with the
computer system and its output. If there was some
questioning vis-à-vis specific details or specific suggestion of
fabrication of printouts, it would have been obligatory on the
part of the prosecution to call a technical expert directly in the
21
know of things. The following observations of the House of
Lords in the case of R. v. Shephard 1993 AC 380 are quite
apposite : (All ER p. 231b-c)
         “The nature of the evidence to discharge the
     burden of showing that there has been no improper
     use of the computer and that it was operating
     properly will inevitably vary from case to case. The
     evidence must be tailored to suit the needs of the
     case. I suspect that it will very rarely be necessary
     to call an expert and that in the vast majority of
     cases it will be possible to discharge the burden by
     calling a witness who is familiar with the operation
     of the computer in the sense of knowing what the
     computer is required to do and who can say that it
     is doing it properly.”
Such a view was expressed even in the face of a more
stringent provision in
Section 69
of the Police and Criminal
Act, 1984 in the UK casting a positive obligation on the part
of the prosecution to lead evidence in respect of proof of the
computer record. We agree with the submission of Mr Gopal
Subramanium that the burden of prosecution under the
Indian law cannot be said to be higher than what was laid
down in R. v. Shephard 1993 AC 380.
152. Although necessary suggestions were not put forward to
the witnesses so as to discredit the correctness/genuineness
of the call records produced, we would prefer to examine the
points made out by the learned counsel for the accused
independently. As already noted, one such contention was
about the presence of duplicate entries in Exts. 36/2 and
36/3. We feel that an innocuous error in the computer
recording is being magnified to discredit the entire document
containing the details without any warrant. As explained by
the learned counsel for the State, the computer, at the first
instance, instead of recording the IMEI number of the mobile
instrument, had recorded the IMEI and cell ID (location) of
the person calling/called by the subscriber. The computer
rectified this obvious error immediately and modified the
record to show the correct details viz. the IMEI and the cell
ID of the subscriber only. The document is self-explanatory
of the error. A perusal of both the call records with reference
to the call at 11 : 19 : 14 hours exchanged between
9811489429 (Afzal's) and 9811573506 (Shaukat's) shows
that the said call was recorded twice in the call records. The
fact that the same call has been recorded twice in the call
records of the calling and called party simultaneously
demonstrates beyond doubt that the correctness or
genuineness of the call is beyond doubt. Further, on a
22
comparative perusal of the two call records, the details of the
        cell ID and the IMEI of the two numbers are also recorded.
        Thus, as rightly pointed out by the counsel for the State Mr
        Gopal Subramanium, the same call has been recorded two
        times, first with the cell ID and IMEI number of the calling
        number (9811489429). The same explanation holds good for
        the call at 11 : 32 : 40 hours. Far from supporting the
        contention of the defence, the above facts, evident from the
        perusal of the call records, would clearly show that the
        system was working satisfactorily and it promptly checked
        and rectified the mistake that occurred. As already noticed,
        it was not suggested nor could it be suggested that there was
        any manipulation or material deficiency in the computer on
        account of these two errors. Above all, the printouts
        pertaining to the call details exhibited by the prosecution are
        of such regularity and continuity that it would be legitimate
        to draw a presumption that the system was functional and
        the output was produced by the computer in regular use,
        whether this fact was specifically deposed to by the witness
        or not. We are therefore of the view that the call records are
        admissible and reliable and rightly made use of by the
        prosecution.”
18. A bench of three Judges of this Court in Anvar P.V.9 did not

approve the view taken in Navjot Sandhu11 and observed –

        “20. Proof of electronic record is a special provision
        introduced by the
IT Act
amending various provisions under
        the
Evidence Act
. The very caption of
Section 65-A
of the
        Evidence Act, read with
Sections 59
and 65-B is sufficient to
        hold that the special provisions on evidence relating to
        electronic record shall be governed by the procedure
        prescribed under
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act. That is a
        complete code in itself. Being a special law, the general law
        under
Sections 63
and
65
has to yield.
21.
In
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu
, (2005) 11 SCC
        600 a two-Judge Bench of this Court had an occasion to
        consider an issue on production of electronic record as
        evidence. While considering the printouts of the
        computerised records of the calls pertaining to the
        cellphones, it was held at para 150 as follows: (SCC p. 714)

             “150. According to
Section 63
, “secondary evidence”
             means and includes, among other things, ‘copies
             made from the original by mechanical processes
23
which in themselves insure the accuracy of the
     copy, and copies compared with such copies’.
Section 65
enables secondary evidence of the
     contents of a document to be adduced if the original
     is of such a nature as not to be easily movable. It is
     not in dispute that the information contained in the
     call records is stored in huge servers which cannot
     be easily moved and produced in the court. That is
     what the High Court has also observed [Ed.:
Reference is to
State v. Mohd. Afzal
, (2003) 71 DRJ
     178] at para 276. Hence, printouts taken from the
     computers/servers by mechanical process and
     certified by a responsible official of the service-
     providing company can be led in evidence through
     a witness who can identify the signatures of the
     certifying officer or otherwise speak of the facts
     based on his personal knowledge. Irrespective of the
     compliance with the requirements of Section 65-B,
     which is a provision dealing with admissibility of
     electronic records, there is no bar to adducing
     secondary evidence under the other provisions of
     the
Evidence Act
, namely,
Sections 63
and
65
. It
     may be that the certificate containing the details in
     sub-section (4) of Section 65-B is not filed in the
     instant case, but that does not mean that secondary
     evidence cannot be given even if the law permits
     such evidence to be given in the circumstances
     mentioned in the relevant provisions, namely,
Sections 63
and
65
.”
It may be seen that it was a case where a responsible official
had duly certified the document at the time of production
itself. The signatures in the certificate were also identified.
That is apparently in compliance with the procedure
prescribed under
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act. However,
it was held that irrespective of the compliance with the
requirements of Section 65-B, which is a special provision
dealing with admissibility of the electronic record, there is no
bar in adducing secondary evidence, under
Sections 63
and
65
, of an electronic record.
22. The evidence relating to electronic record, as noted
hereinbefore, being a special provision, the general law on
secondary evidence under
Section 63
read with
Section 65
of
the Evidence Act shall yield to the same. Generalia
specialibus non derogant, special law will always prevail over
the general law. It appears, the court omitted to take note of
Sections 59
and 65-A dealing with the admissibility of
electronic record.
Sections 63
and
65
have no application in
the case of secondary evidence by way of electronic record;
24
the same is wholly governed by Sections 65-A and 65-B. To
                that extent, the statement of law on admissibility of
                secondary evidence pertaining to electronic record, as stated
                by this Court in
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu
, (2005)
                11 SCC 600, does not lay down the correct legal position. It
                requires to be overruled and we do so. An electronic record
                by way of secondary evidence shall not be admitted in
                evidence unless the requirements under Section 65-B are
                satisfied. Thus, in the case of CD, VCD, chip, etc., the same
                shall be accompanied by the certificate in terms of Section
                65-B obtained at the time of taking the document, without
                which, the secondary evidence pertaining to that electronic
                record, is inadmissible.”
19.
In
Tomaso Bruno & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh12,

another
bench of three Judges however struck a slightly different

chord and made following observations:
“24. With the advancement of information technology,
                scientific temper in the individual and at the institutional
                level is to pervade the methods of investigation. With the
                increasing impact of technology in everyday life and as a
                result, the production of electronic evidence in cases has
                become relevant to establish the guilt of the accused or the
                liability of the defendant. Electronic documents stricto sensu
                are admitted as material evidence. With the amendment to
                the
Evidence Act
in 2000, Sections 65-A and 65-B were
                introduced into Chapter V relating to documentary evidence.
                Section 65-A provides that contents of electronic records may
                be admitted as evidence if the criteria provided in Section 65-
                B is complied with. The computer generated electronic
                records in evidence are admissible at a trial if proved in the
                manner specified by
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act. Sub-
                section (1) of Section 65-B makes admissible as a document,
                paper printout of electronic records stored in optical or
                magnetic media produced by a computer, subject to the
                fulfilment of the conditions specified in sub-section (2) of
                Section 65-B. Secondary evidence of contents of document
                can also be led under
Section 65
of the Evidence Act. PW 13
                stated that he saw the full video recording of the fateful night
                in the CCTV camera, but he has not recorded the same in the
                case diary as nothing substantial to be adduced as evidence
                was present in it.”
12
(2015) 7 SCC 178.
25
20.
In Sonu alias
Amar v. State of Haryana13
, a bench of two

Judges ruled that an objection that CDRs be not taken into

consideration pertained to the mode or method of proof and if not

taken at the trial, cannot be permitted at the appellate stage. It

was stated: -
“32. It is nobody's case that CDRs which are a form of
                electronic record are not inherently admissible in evidence.
                The objection is that they were marked before the trial court
                without a certificate as required by Section 65-B(4). It is clear
                from the judgments referred to supra that an objection
                relating to the mode or method of proof has to be raised at
                the time of marking of the document as an exhibit and not
                later. The crucial test, as affirmed by this Court, is whether
                the defect could have been cured at the stage of marking the
                document. Applying this test to the present case, if an
                objection was taken to the CDRs being marked without a
                certificate, the Court could have given the prosecution an
                opportunity to rectify the deficiency. It is also clear from the
                above judgments that objections regarding admissibility of
                documents which are per se inadmissible can be taken even
                at the appellate stage. Admissibility of a document which is
                inherently inadmissible is an issue which can be taken up at
                the appellate stage because it is a fundamental issue. The
                mode or method of proof is procedural and objections, if not
                taken at the trial, cannot be permitted at the appellate stage.
                If the objections to the mode of proof are permitted to be
                taken at the appellate stage by a party, the other side does
                not have an opportunity of rectifying the deficiencies. The
                learned Senior Counsel for the State referred to statements
                under
Section 161
CrPC, 1973 as an example of documents
                falling under the said category of inherently inadmissible
                evidence. CDRs do not fall in the said category of documents.
                We are satisfied that an objection that CDRs are unreliable
                due to violation of the procedure prescribed in
Section 65-
B(4) cannot be permitted to be raised at this stage as the
                objection relates to the mode or method of proof.”
13
(2017) 8 SCC 570
26
21. Later, another bench of two Judges of this Court in
Shafi

Mohammed v. State of Himachal Pradesh14
observed as under:
“20. An apprehension was expressed on the question of
                applicability of conditions under
Section 65-B(4)
of the
                Evidence Act to the effect that if a statement was given in
                evidence, a certificate was required in terms of the said
                provision from a person occupying a responsible position in
                relation to operation of the relevant device or the
                management of relevant activities. It was submitted that if
                the electronic evidence was relevant and produced by a
                person who was not in custody of the device from which the
                electronic document was generated, requirement of such
                certificate could not be mandatory. It was submitted that
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act was a procedural provision
                to prove relevant admissible evidence and was intended to
                supplement the law on the point by declaring that any
                information in an electronic record, covered by the said
                provision, was to be deemed to be a document and admissible
                in any proceedings without further proof of the original. This
                provision could not be read in derogation of the existing law
                on admissibility of electronic evidence.
21. We have been taken through certain decisions which may
                be referred to. In
Ram Singh v. Ram Singh
, 1985 Supp SCC
                611, a three-Judge Bench considered the said issue.
English
                judgments in R. v. Maqsud Ali, (1966) 1 QB 688)
                and R. v. Robson, (1972) 1 WLR 651 and American Law as
                noted in American Jurisprudence 2d (Vol. 29) p. 494, were
                cited with approval to the effect that it will be wrong to deny
                to the law of evidence advantages to be gained by new
                techniques and new devices, provided the accuracy of the
                recording can be proved. Such evidence should always be
                regarded with some caution and assessed in the light of all
                the circumstances of each case. Electronic evidence was held
                to be admissible subject to safeguards adopted by the Court
                about the authenticity of the same. In the case of tape-
recording, it was observed that voice of the speaker must be
                duly identified, accuracy of the statement was required to be
                proved by the maker of the record, possibility of tampering
                was required to be ruled out. Reliability of the piece of
                evidence is certainly a matter to be determined in the facts
                and circumstances of a fact situation. However, threshold
14
(2018) 2 SCC 801.
27
admissibility of an electronic evidence cannot be ruled out on
        any technicality if the same was relevant.”
22. The last decision on the point is a three Judge bench decision

of this Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar10 which was rendered

on a reference to a larger bench because of the observations in

Shafi Mohammad14. The bench concluded in Arjun Panditrao10

as under: -
“73. The reference is thus answered by stating that:
73.1.
Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer
, (2014) 10 SCC 473, as
        clarified by us hereinabove, is the law declared by this Court
        on
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act.
The judgment in
Tomaso
        Bruno v. State of U.P.
, (2015) 7 SCC 178, being per incuriam,
        does not lay down the law correctly.
Also, the judgment
        in
Shafhi Mohammad v. State of H.P.
, (2018) 2 SCC 801 and
        the judgment dated 3-4-2018 reported as
Shafhi
        Mohd. v. State of H.P.
, (2018) 5 SCC 311s, do not lay down
        the law correctly and are therefore overruled.
73.2. The clarification
referred to above
is that the required
        certificate under Section 65-B(4) is unnecessary if the
        original document itself is produced. This can be done by the
        owner of a laptop computer, computer tablet or even a mobile
        phone, by stepping into the witness box and proving that the
        device concerned, on which the original information is first
        stored, is owned and/or operated by him. In cases where the
        “computer” happens to be a part of a “computer system” or
        “computer network” and it becomes impossible to physically
        bring such system or network to the court, then the only
        means of providing information contained in such electronic
        record can be in accordance with Section 65-B(1), together
        with the requisite certificate under Section 65-B(4).
The last
        sentence in para 24 in
Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer
, (2014) 10
        SCC 473 which reads as “… if an electronic record as such is
        used as primary evidence under
Section 62
of the Evidence
        Act …” is thus clarified; it is to be read without the words
        “under
Section 62
of the Evidence Act,…”.
With this
        clarification, the law stated in para 24 of
Anvar P.V. v. P.K.
        Basheer
, (2014) 10 SCC 473 does not need to be revisited.
28
73.3. The general directions issued in para 64 (supra) shall
        hereafter be followed by courts that deal with electronic
        evidence, to ensure their preservation, and production of
        certificate at the appropriate stage. These directions shall
        apply in all proceedings, till rules and directions under
Section 67-C
of the Information Technology Act and data
        retention conditions are formulated for compliance by
        telecom and internet service providers.
73.4. Appropriate rules and directions should be framed in
        exercise of the
Information Technology Act
, by exercising
        powers such as in Section 67-C, and also framing suitable
        rules for the retention of data involved in trial of offences,
        their segregation, rules of chain of custody, stamping and
        record maintenance, for the entire duration of trials and
        appeals, and also in regard to preservation of the metadata
        to avoid corruption. Likewise, appropriate rules for
        preservation, retrieval and production of electronic record,
        should be framed as indicated earlier, after considering the
        report of the Committee constituted by the Chief Justices'
        Conference in April 2016.”



     It must now be taken to have been settled that the decision

of this Court in Anvar P.V.9 as clarified in Arjun Panditrao10 is

the law declared on
Section 65B
of the Evidence Act.
23. Navjot Sandhu11 was decided on 4.8.2005 i.e., before the

judgment was rendered by the Trial Court in the instant matter.
The subsequent judgments of the High Court and this Court were

passed on 13.9.2007 and 10.8.2011 respectively affirming the

award of death sentence.       These two judgments were delivered

prior to the decision of this Court in Anvar P.V.9 which was given

on 18.9.2014. The judgments by the trial Court, High Court and

this Court were thus well before the decision in Anvar P.V.9 and
29
were essentially in the backdrop of law
laid down in
Navjot

Sandhu11. If we go by the principle accepted in paragraph 32 of

the decision in Sonu alias Amar13, the matter may stand on a

completely different footing. It is for this reason that reliance has

been placed on certain decisions of this Court to submit that the

matter need not be reopened on issues which were dealt with in

accordance with the law then prevailing.        However, since the

instant matter pertains to award of death sentence, this review

petition must be considered in light of the decisions made by this

Court in Anvar P.V.9 and Arjun Panditrao10.
24. Consequently, we must eschew, for the present purposes, the

electronic evidence in the form of CDRs which was without any

appropriate certificate under
Section 65-B(4)
of the Evidence Act.
25. If we consider the circumstances which were culled out by

this Court in Paragraph 182 of the judgment under review,

circumstances mentioned at Serial Nos. ‘h’ and ‘j’ become

extremely weak as the tracing of calls received by PWs 39 and 41

to Mobile Phone No.9811278510 was possible only through CDRs.
These circumstances must not, therefore, be taken into account.
26. However, the other circumstances stated in said paragraph

182 as well as in subsequent paragraphs remain completely
30
unaffected. As was stated by this Court in paragraphs 151, 153,

159, 169 and finally summed up in paragraphs 183 and 184, the

findings on the issue of the receipt and disbursal of money and the

fact that the police could reach the spot referred to in Paragraph

184, at the instance of the review petitioner are very relevant and

crucial circumstances. One of the important circumstances is also

the feature referred to in circumstance ‘o’ in Paragraph 182 as

stated above. In conclusion, it must therefore be observed that

even after eschewing circumstances ‘h’ and ‘j’ which were directly

attributable to the CDRs relied upon by the prosecution, the other

circumstances on record do clearly spell out and prove beyond any

doubt the involvement of the review petitioner in the crime in

question.
27. We now turn to grounds (b), (c) and (d) raised on behalf of the

review petitioner as stated in para 12 supra. Grounds ‘b’ and ‘c’

are purely factual in nature. The disclosure statement, as a matter

of fact, was held to have been proved by the Courts below and this

Court. In our review jurisdiction, it will not be possible to enter

into   questions   regarding   admissibility   of   such   disclosure

statement on issues of fact.    The disclosure statement led the

police to the hide out at G-73, Batla House, New Delhi and when
31
the police team arrived with the review petitioner, there was firing

upon the police team as stated in circumstance ‘g’ in paragraph
182. After the person concerned named Abu Shamal alias Faisal

died in the encounter, certain fire arms and ammunition were

recovered. The submission that such recovery of ammunition or

the encounter of Abu Shamal could not be associated with the

disclosure statement of the review petitioner is not quite correct.
We therefore reject both the grounds taken in ‘b’ and ‘c’ as referred

to in Para 12 supra.
28. We now turn to the last ground regarding possibility of

retribution and rehabilitation of the review petitioner.                On this

issue, the response of the State in its Written Submissions is as

follows: -
“3. The petitioner, admittedly a Pakistani national, has been
      convicted inter-alia under
Section 121
,
302
,
120B
,
121A
,
181
and
353
of the Indian Penal Code,
Section 25
of the Arms Act,
Section 4
of the Explosive Substances Act,
Section 14
of the
      Foreigners Act, for waging war against the Government of India
      and committing murder in pursuance thereof. This Hon’ble
      Court has taken the view that the cases of such nature,
      involving acts of terror which challenge the unity, integrity and
      sovereignty of India can only be adequately compensated by
      awarding the death sentence. Reference in this regard is drawn
      to the judgment of this Hon’ble Court in
State of NCT of Delhi
      v. Navjot Sandhu
(2005) 11
SCC 600 (The Parliament
      Attack
Case), where it was held:
252. In the instant case, there can be no doubt that the
             most appropriate punishment is death sentence. That is
             what has been awarded by the trial court and the High
             Court. The present case, which has no parallel in the
             history of the Indian Republic, presents us in crystal-
32
clear terms, a spectacle of the rarest of rare cases. The
     very idea of attacking and overpowering a sovereign
     democratic institution by using powerful arms and
     explosives and imperilling the safety of a multitude of
     peoples’ representatives, constitutional functionaries and
     officials of the Government of India and engaging in a
     combat with the security forces is a terrorist act of the
     gravest severity. It is a classic example of rarest of rare
     cases.
253. The gravity of the crime conceived by the
     conspirators with the potential of causing enormous
     casualties and dislocating the functioning of the
     Government as well as disrupting the normal life of the
     people of India is something which cannot be described
     in words. The incident, which resulted in heavy
     casualties, had shaken the entire nation, and the
     collective conscience of the society will only be satisfied
     if capital punishment is awarded to the offender. The
     challenge to the unity, integrity and sovereignty of India
     by these acts of terrorists and conspirators, can only be
     compensated by giving maximum punishment to the
     person who is proved to be the conspirator in this
     treacherous act. The appellant, who is a surrendered
     militant and who was bent upon repeating the acts of
     treason against the nation, is a menace to the society and
     his life should become extinct. Accordingly, we uphold the
     death sentence.
(emphasis supplied)
4. Similarly in
Yakub Abdul Razak Memon v. State of
Maharashtra
, (2013) 13 SCC 1, this Hon’ble Court while
dealing with the award of the death sentence to persons
convicted inter-alia under various
IPC
offences including
Waging of War against the Government of India and the
Prevention of Terrorism Act, discussed the wide ambit of the
term “terrorism” and held that the offence of terrorism itself was
an aggravating circumstance:
“Terrorism”
809. The term “terrorism” is a concept that is commonly and
     widely used in everyday parlance and is derived from the
     Latin word “terror” which means the state of intense fear
     and submission to it. There is no particular form of terror,
     hence, anything intended to create terror in the minds of
     general public in order to endanger the lives of the members
     and damage to public property may be termed as a terrorist
     act and a manifestation of terrorism. Black's Law Dictionary
     defines terrorism as:
33
“Terrorism.— The use or threat of violence to intimidate or
     cause panic, esp. as a means of affecting political conduct."
     (8th Edn., p. 1512.)
810. Terrorism is a global phenomenon in today's world and
     India is one of the worst victims of terrorist acts. Terrorism
     has a long history of being used to achieve political,
     religious and ideological objectives. Acts of terrorism can
     range from threats to actual assassinations, kidnappings,
     airline hijackings bomb scares, car bombs, building
     explosions mailing of dangerous materials, computer based
     attacks and the use of chemical, biological, and nuclear
     weapons-weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
…
     883.4. Crime of terrorism is in itself an aggravating
     circumstance as it carries a "special stigmatisation due to
     the deliberate form of inhuman treatment it represents and
     the severity of the pain and suffering inflicted"
(emphasis supplied)
5.
In
Mohd. Ajmal Amir Kasab v. State of Maharashtra
,
(2012) 9 SCC 1, this Hon'ble Court while convicting the
Appellant therein for the terrorist attack of 26/11 in Mumbai,
stated that facts of the case, the cross-border conspiracy, and
the intention to strike fear into the heart of the victims, that the
death sentence was warranted. While the court recognised that
death should be the exception, this Hon'ble Court noted that as
long as the death penalty remained on the statute books for
crimes such as waging of war, there would be certain cases
where its imposition would be justified. In this regard, attention
is respectfully drawn to the following paragraphs:
573. In short, this is a case of terrorist attack from
     across the border. It has a magnitude of unprecedented
     enormity on all scales. The conspiracy behind the attack
     was as deep and large as it was vicious. The
     preparation and training for the execution was as
     thorough as the execution was ruthless. In terms of loss
     of life and property, and more importantly in its
     traumatising effect, this case stands alone, or it is at
     least the very rarest of rare cases to come before this
     Court since the birth of the Republic. Therefore, it should
     also attract the rarest of rare punishment.
…
577. Putting the matter once again quite simply, in this
     country death as a penalty has been held to be
     constitutionally valid, though it is indeed to be awarded
34
in the "rarest of rare cases when the alternative option
    (of life sentence) is unquestionably foreclosed". Now, as
    long as the death penalty remains on the statute book
    as punishment for certain offences, including "waging
    war" and murder, it logically follows that there must be
    some cases, howsoever rare or one in a million, that
    would call for inflicting that penalty. That being the
    position we fail to see what case would attract the death
    penalty, if not the case of the appellant. To hold back
    the death penalty in this case would amount to
    obdurately declaring that this Court rejects death as
    lawful penalty even though it is on the statute book and
    held valid by the Constitutional Benches of this Court.
34. No ground for review of the Death Sentence is made out as
the three tests stand fully satisfied. All three Courts have
recorded elaborate reasons for why the present case was one
which warranted the death sentence, and have considered the
crime, the criminal and whether the case could be said to be
the rarest of the rare.
1. This Hon'ble Court has recorded elaborate findings
    in the judgment presently under review on sentencing
    as to why the present case satisfies all three tests
    including the "rarest of the rare" test. Firstly, this
    Hon'ble Court found that the nature of the crime, being
    an attack on the Red Fort, was nothing short of an
    attack on Mother India itself, secondly, that so far as
    the nature of the criminal was concerned, no
    mitigating circumstances of any kind had been
    brought on record and thirdly, that the nature of the
    crime, the fact that it was a planned pre-meditated
    attack on a symbol of the seat of power of the
    Government of India warranted nothing short of the
    highest punishment. The Court held:
"213. This was, in our opinion, a unique case
          where Red Fort, a place of paramount
          importance for every Indian heart was
          attacked where three Indian soldiers lost their
          lives. This is a place with glorious history, a
          place of great honour for every Indian, a place
          with which every Indian is attached
          emotionally, and a place from where our first
          Prime Minister delivered his speech on 15-8-
          1947, the day when India broke the shackles
          of foreign rule and became a free country. It
          has since then been a tradition that every
          Hon'ble Prime Minister of this country delivers
35
an address to the nation on every 15th
August to commemorate that great event. This
fort was visualised and constructed by the
Mughal Emperor Shahjahan who is known as
"Shahjahan the builder". It took nine years for
its completion. It was here that Shahjahan
ascended the throne on 18-4-1648 amidst
recitation of sacred aayates of Holy Quran
and mantras from Hindu scriptures. The great
historical monument thereafter saw the rule
of number of Mughal Emperors including
Aurangzeb. It also saw its most unfortunate
capture by Nadir Shah. It was in 1837 that
the last Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar
II took over the throne.
214. It must be remembered that it was
during the empire of Bahadur Shah Zafar II
that the First War of Independence was
fought. Red Fort became the ultimate goal
during that War of Independence which broke
out in the month of May 1857. The Fort
breathed free air for a brief period. But
ultimately in the month of September 1857, it
was captured by the British. Red Fort is not
just one of the several magnificent
monuments that were built by the Mughal
emperors during their reign for nearly three
centuries. It is not just another place which
people from within and outside the country
visit to have a glimpse of the massive walls
on which the Fort stands or the exquisite
workmanship it displays. It is not simply a
tourist destination in the capital that draws
thousands every year to peep and revel into
the glory of the times bygone. Its importance
lies in the fact that it has for centuries
symbolised the seat of power in this country.
It has symbolised the supremacy of the
Mughal and the British empires just as it
symbolises       after    Independence       the
sovereignty of the world's largest democratic
republic. It is a national symbol that evokes
the feelings of nationalism amongst the
countrymen and reminds them of the
sacrifices that the freedom fighters made for
the liberation of this country from foreign rule.
215. No wonder even after the fall of the Fort
to the British forces in the First War of
36
Independence in 1857 and the shifting of the
seat of power from Red Fort to Calcutta and
later to New Delhi, Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru
after his historic "Tryst with Destiny" speech
unfurled the tricolour from the ramparts of
Red Fort on 15-8-1947. That singular event
symbolised the end of the British rule in this
country and the birth of an independent India.
An event that is relived and re-acted every
succeeding year since 1917, when every
incumbent Prime Minister addresses the
nation from atop this great and historic Fort
reminding the countrymen of the importance
of freedom, the need for its preservation and
the values of constitutional democracy that
guarantees      the     freedoms     so   very
fundamental to the preservation of the unity
and integrity of this country.
216. An attack on a symbol that is so deeply
entrenched in the national psyche was,
therefore, nothing but an attack on the very
essence of the hard-earned freedom and
liberty so very dear to the people of this
country. An attack on a symbol like Red Fort
was an assault on the nation's will and
resolve to preserve its integrity and
sovereignty at all costs. It was a challenge not
only to the army battalions stationed inside
the monument but the entire nation. It was a
challenge to the very fabric of a secular
constitutional democracy this country has
adopted and everything that is good and dear
to our countrymen. It was a blatant,
brazenfaced and audacious act aimed to
overawe the Government of India. It was
meant to show that the enemy could with
impunity reach and destroy the very vitals of
an institution so dear to our fellow
countrymen for what it signified for them. It is
not for no reason that whosoever comes to
Delhi has a yearning to visit Red Fort. It is for
these reasons that this place has become a
place of honour for Indians.
217. No one can ever forget the glorious
moments when the Indians irrespective of
their religions fought their First War of
Independence and shed their blood. It was,
therefore, but natural for the foreigner
37
enemies to plan an attack on the army
specially kept to guard this great monument.
This was not only an attack on Red Fort or the
army stationed therein, this was an arrogant
assault on the self-respect of this great nation.
It was a well thought out insult offered to
question the sovereignty of this great nation
by foreign nationals. Therefore, this case
becomes a rarest of the rare case. This was
nothing but an undeclared war by some
foreign mercenaries like the present appellant
and his other partner in conspiracy Abu
Shamal and some others who either got killed
or escaped. In conspiring to bring about such
kind of attack and then carrying out their
nefarious activities in systematic manner to
make an attack possible was nothing but an
attempt to question the sovereignty of India.
Therefore, even without any reference to any
other case law, we hold this case to be the
rarest of the rare case.
…
223. …..During the whole debate the learned
defence counsel did not attempt to bring any
mitigating circumstance. In fact, this is a
unique case where there is one most
aggravating circumstance that it was a direct
attack on the unity, integrity and sovereignty
of India by foreigners. Thus, it was an attack
on Mother India. This is apart from the fact
that as many as three persons had lost their
lives. The conspirators had no place in India.
The appellant was a foreign national and had
entered India without any authorisation or
even justification. This is apart from the fact
that the appellant built up a conspiracy by
practising deceit and committing various
other offences in furtherance of the conspiracy
to wage war against India as also to commit
murders by launching an unprovoked attack
on the soldiers of the Indian Army. We,
therefore, have no doubts that death sentence
was the only sentence in the peculiar
circumstance of this case.”
38
29. The decisions referred to in the Written Submissions show

that when there is challenge to the unity, integrity and sovereignty

of India by acts of terrorism, such acts are taken as the most

aggravating circumstances. It is well accepted that the cumulative

effect of the aggravating factors and the mitigating circumstances

must be taken into account before the death sentence is awarded.
In
Vasanta Sampat Dupare vs. State of Maharashtra15
, while

dealing with a case, where death sentence was awarded in a crime

relating to offences punishable under
Sections 302
,
363
,
367
,
376(2)(f)
and
201
of the IPC, this Court had observed that the

aggravating circumstances had clearly outweighed the mitigating

circumstances. It was stated: -
“20. It is thus well settled, “the court would consider the
                cumulative effect of both the aspects (namely, aggravating
                factors as well as mitigating circumstances) and it may not
                be very appropriate for the Court to decide the most
                significant aspect of sentencing policy with reference to one
                of the classes completely ignoring other classes under other
                heads and it is the primary duty of the Court to balance the
                two”. Further, “it is always preferred not to fetter the judicial
                discretion by attempting to make excessive enumeration, in
                one way or another; and that both aspects, namely,
                aggravating and mitigating circumstances have to be given
                their respective weightage and that the Court has to strike
                the balance between the two and see towards which side the
                scale/balance of justice tilts”. With these principles in mind,
                we now consider the present review petition.
21. The material placed on record shows that after the
                judgment
Vasanta Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra
,
                (2015) 1 SCC 253 under review, the petitioner has completed
                Bachelors Preparatory Programme offered by Indira Gandhi
15
(2017) 6 SCC 631
39
National Open University enabling him to prepare for
        Bachelor level study and that he has also completed the
        Gandhi Vichar Pariksha and had participated in drawing
        competition organised sometime in January 2016. It is
        asserted that the jail record of the petitioner is without any
        blemish.
The matter is not contested as regards Conditions
        (1), (2), (5), (6) and (7) as stated in para 206 of the decision
        in
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab
, (1980) 2 SCC 684, but
        what is now being projected is that there is a possibility of
        the accused being reformed and rehabilitated.
Though these
        attempts on part of the petitioner are after the judgment
Vasanta Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra
, (2015) 1
        SCC 253 under review, we have considered the material in
        that behalf to see if those circumstances warrant a different
        view. We have given anxious consideration to the material on
        record but find that the aggravating circumstances, namely,
        the extreme depravity and the barbaric manner in which the
        crime was committed and the fact that the victim was a
        helpless girl of four years clearly outweigh the mitigating
        circumstances now brought on record. Having taken an
        overall view of the matter, in our considered view, no case is
        made out to take a different view in the matter.
We, therefore,
        affirm the view taken in the judgment
Vasanta Sampat
        Dupare v. State of Maharashtra
, (2015) 1 SCC 253 under
        review and dismiss the present review petitions.”
30. Coming back to the instant case, there is nothing on record

which can be taken to be a mitigating circumstance in favour of

the review petitioner. The suggestion that there is a possibility of

retribution and rehabilitation, is not made out from and supported

by any material on record. On the other hand, the aggravating

circumstances evident from the record and specially the fact that

there was a direct attack on the unity, integrity and sovereignty of

India, completely outweigh the factors which may even remotely be

brought into consideration as mitigating circumstances on record.
40
The submission so advanced under ground (d) does not merit any

acceptance and is, therefore, rejected.
31. Consequently, we do not find any merit in the instant review

petitions, which are accordingly dismissed.
….………………………..CJI
                                              [Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                          ….…………………………..J.
                                              [S. Ravindra Bhat]


                                          ….…………………………..J.
                                               [Bela M. Trivedi ]


New Delhi;
November 3, 2022.