[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Narayana Medical College vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 7 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.               OF 2022
                         (@ Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 2969­2970 of 2021)


          Narayana Medical College                                      ...Appellant(s)

                                                  Versus


          The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.                          …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
Leave granted.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                          judgment and order passed by the High Court of Andhra

                          Pradesh at Amravati in Writ Petition Nos. 33656/2018 and

                          8210/2019 the medical college/institution has preferred

                          the present appeals.
2.              Pursuant to the judgment and order passed by this Court
Signature Not Verified
in the case of P.A. Inamdar and Ors. Vs. State of
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.11.07
17:07:01 IST
Reason:                   Maharashtra and Ors.; (2005) 6 SCC 537, the State of

                          Andhra Pradesh framed Rules called the Andhra Pradesh
1
Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (for Professional

Courses    offered      in     Private   Un­Aided   Professional

Institutions) Rules, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the

Rules, 2006). Rule 4 of the Rules, 2006 is with respect to

the fee fixation. Following the report of the Admission and

Fee Regulatory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the

AFRC),    the   State        Government    issued   G.O.   dated

18.06.2011 fixing and enhancing the fee for the academic

years 2011­12 to 2013­14. However, for the subsequent

years, more particularly, for the block years 2017 to 2020

(period in question) without waiting for the report from the

AFRC and on the representations made by the private

medical colleges, the State Government issued G.O. dated

06.09.2017 and enhanced the tuition fee payable by the

MBBS students. At this stage, it is required to be noted

that under the said G.O. the State Government enhanced

the tuition fee at an exorbitant rate of Rs. 24 lakhs per

annum i.e., almost seven times the tuition fee notified for

the previous block period. The G.O. dated 06.09.2017 was

the subject matter of writ petitions before the High Court.

By the impugned common judgment and order the High
2
Court has set aside the G.O. dated 06.09.2017 by

      observing and holding that considering the provisions of

      the Rules, 2006 the fee cannot be enhanced/fixed without

      the recommendations/report of the AFRC. Therefore, the

      High Court by the impugned common judgment and order

      has held that the recovery of enhanced tuition fee by the

      respective   private   medical   colleges   is   bad   in   law.

      Consequently, the High Court has set aside the G.O. dated

      06.09.2017 to the extent of enhancement of fee. The High

      Court has also directed that if any fee already fixed by the

      Government vide G.O. dated 06.09.2017 dehors the G.O.

      dated 18.06.2011, the same shall be refunded by the

      colleges to the students after adjusting the amounts

      payable under G.O. dated 18.06.2011.
2.1   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      common judgment and order passed by the High Court,

      the respective medical college/institution qua who now is

      required to refund the amount collected pursuant to G.O.

      dated 06.09.2017 has preferred the present appeals.
3.    Having heard Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior

      Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant, Shri Basava
3
Prabhu S. Patil, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the original writ petitioners, learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the State of Andhra Pradesh and

      Shri Krishna Dev Jagarlamudi, learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of A.P. Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee

      and on considering the impugned common judgment and

      order passed by the High Court, we are of the opinion that

      the High Court has not committed any error in quashing

      and setting aside the G.O. dated 06.09.2017 enhancing

      the tuition fee for the block years 2017­2020. Even Shri

      K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the appellant – medical college has fairly

      conceded that the tuition fee could not have been

      enhanced by the State Government unilaterally and

      without report/recommendations by the AFRC under the

      provisions of the Rules, 2006.
3.1   Even otherwise considering the relevant provisions of the

      Rules, 2006 the fixation could have been only on the

      recommendations/report by the AFRC and under Rule 4 of

      the Rules, 2006 a duty is cast upon the AFRC to

      recommend the fee fixation. Under the relevant provisions
4
of the Rules, 2006, the AFRC while fixing the fee is

required to undertake detailed enquiry as provided in Rule

4 of the Rules, 2006. Rule 4 of the Rules, 2006 reads as

under: ­
   “4. Fee Fixation. ­ (i) The AFRC shall call for, from
   each Institution, its proposed fee structure well in
   advance before the date of issue of notification for
   admission for the academic year along with all the
   relevant documents and books of accounts for
   security,
(ii) The AFRC shall decide whether the fees proposed
   by the Institution is justified and does not amount to
   profiteering or charging of capitation fee.
(iii) The AFRC shall be at liberty to approve or alter the
   proposed fee for each course to be charged by the
   Institution. Provided that it shall give the Institution
   an Opportunity of being heard before fixing any fee or
   fees.
(iv) The AFRC shall take into consideration the
   following factors while prescribing the fee: (a) the
   location of the professional institution, (b) the nature
   of the professional course, (c) the cost of available
   infrastructure, (d) the expenditure on administration
   and maintenance, (e) a reasonable surplus required for
   growth and development of the professional
   Institution, (f) the revenue foregone on account of
   waiver of fee, if any, in respect of students belonging to
   the Schedule Caste, Schedule Tribes and wherever
   applicable to the Socially and Educationally Backward
   Classes and other Economically Weaker Sections of
   the society, to such extent as shall be notified by the
   Government from time to time. (g) Any other relevant
   factor. Provided that, no such fees, as may be fixed by
   the AFRC, shall amount to profiteering or
   commercialization of education,
(v) The AFRC shall communicate the fee structure as
   determined by it, to the Government, for notification.
(vi) The fee or scale of fee determined by the AFRC
   shall be valid for a period of three years.
5
(vii) The fee so determined shall be applicable to a
         candidate who is admitted to an institution in that
         academic year and shall not be altered till the
         completion of his course in the Institution in which he
         was originally admitted. No Professional Educational
         Institution shall collect at a time a fee which is more
         than one year's fee from a candidate.”


         Therefore, the G.O. issued by the State Government

     enhancing the tuition fee for the private medical colleges

     on the representations made by the private medical

     colleges was wholly impermissible and most arbitrary and

     only with a view to favour and/or oblige the private

     medical colleges. The same is rightly set aside by the High

     Court. The State could not have issued the G.O. enhancing

     the tuition fee for private medical colleges dehors the

     recommendations of the AFRC. Any enhancement of the

     tuition fee without the recommendations of the AFRC shall

     be contrary to the decision of this Court in the case of P.A.

     Inamdar (supra) and even the relevant provisions of the

     Rules, 2006. Therefore, the High Court has rightly

     quashed and set aside G.O. dated 06.09.2017.
4.   Now so far as the directions issued by the High Court to

     refund the amount collected under G.O. dated 06.09.2017
6
after adjusting the fee fixed by the Government vide G.O.

dated 18.06.2011 by the colleges to the students is

concerned,   Shri   K.V.   Viswanathan,     learned   Senior

Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant – private

medical college has submitted that it is true that the State

Government could not have enhanced the tuition fee

without recommendations/report of the AFRC. It is true

that in the present case the tuition fee was lastly fixed in

the   year   2011    and    thereafter   the   process      for

determination/fixation of tuition fee for the block period

2017 to 2020 was in progress by the AFRC. It is submitted

that between 2011 and 2017 the costs/expenses of the

colleges had increased and the requirement of paying

stipend to students has been introduced in the year 2016

and therefore, the fee fixed in the year 2011 would cause

significant loss to the colleges and the tuition fee is bound

to be increased and therefore, the increase which the

respective college is entitled to recover (enhanced fee).    It

is, therefore, prayed that at this stage the respective

colleges may not be directed to refund the amount i.e.,

tuition fee collected pursuant to G.O. dated 06.09.2017
7
after adjusting the amount of tuition fee to be paid as per

      G.O. dated 18.06.2011. Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned

      Senior Advocate has pointed out that in many cases

      students have adjusted the difference in the subsequent

      fees.
4.1   The prayer on behalf of the medical college not to refund

      the amount at this stage is vehemently opposed by Shri

      Basava Prabhu S. Patil, learned Senior Advocate appearing

      on behalf of the students. It is submitted that with respect

      to the similar G.O. issued by the State of Telangana the

      same has been set aside by the High Court and the High

      Court has directed to refund the amount paid in excess,

      paid pursuant to illegal G.O. issued by the State

      Government. It is vehemently submitted that the private

      medical colleges who are the beneficiaries of illegal G.O.

      which was issued on the representations made by the

      private medical colleges cannot be permitted to retain the

      amount which they have recovered illegally on the basis of

      the illegal G.O.

4.2   It is submitted that under G.O. dated 06.09.2017 there

      was an exorbitant increase of tuition fee of Rs. 24 lakhs
8
i.e., seven times the tuition fixed earlier by the AFRC and

      many students/their parents were required to avail the

      bank loan to pay the exorbitant tuition fee and were

      required to pay the higher rate of interest. Therefore, it is

      prayed not to interfere with the impugned common

      judgment and order passed by the High Court including

      the order of refund passed by the High Court.

4.3   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the AFRC has

      submitted    that     during    the     enquiry/proceedings      to

      determine the tuition fee for the block period 2017­2020,

      the State Government unilaterally and without waiting for

      the report/recommendations by the AFRC increased the

      tuition fee. It is submitted that in fact the AFRC vide

      notification dated 08.12.2016 proposed to review and

      determine   the     fees’   structure   and   call   for   relevant

      materials from the medical colleges and the students and

      the review and determination of fees was pending, the

      association of the colleges addressed a letter to the

      Government seeking revision which the State Government

      granted/permitted in clandestine manner.
9
5.   As observed hereinabove no error has been committed by

     the High Court in quashing and setting aside G.O. dated

     06.09.2017 enhancing the tuition fee for the private

     medical colleges. The Government of Andhra Pradesh on

     the representations made by the private medical colleges

     enhanced the tuition fee for private medical colleges

     though the revision of fees was pending consideration with

     the AFRC. The State Government enhanced the tuition fee

     exorbitantly to Rs. 24 lakhs per annum which was seven

     times the fee fixed earlier. Once the State Government

     enacted the Rules, 2006 which provides determination and

     fixation and the review of the tuition fees by the AFRC, the

     State Government was bound by the Rules, 2006 and

     could not have enhanced the fee during the review pending

     with the AFRC. To enhance the fee unilaterally would be

     contrary to the objects and purpose of
Andhra Pradesh

     Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admissions and

     Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1983
as well as the

     Rules, 2006 and the decision of this Court in the case of

     P.A. Inamdar (supra). To enhance the fee to Rs. 24 lakhs

     per annum i.e., seven times more than the fee fixed earlier
10
was not justifiable at all. The education is not the business

     to earn profit. The tuition fee shall always be affordable.

     Determination of fee/review of fee shall be within the

     parameters of the fixation rules and shall have direct

     nexus on the factors mentioned in Rule 4 of the Rules,

     2006,   namely,    (a)   the   location   of   the   professional

     institution; (b) the nature of the professional course; (c) the

     cost of available infrastructure; (d) the expenditure on

     administration and maintenance; (e) a reasonable surplus

     required for growth and development of the professional

     Institution; (f) the revenue foregone on account of waiver of

     fee, if any, in respect of students belonging to the reserved

     category and other Economically Weaker Sections of the

     society. All the aforesaid factors are required to be

     considered by the AFRC while determining/reviewing the

     tuition fees. Therefore, the High Court is absolutely

     justified in quashing and setting aside G.O. dated

     06.09.2017.
6.   Now so far as the directions issued by the High Court to

     refund the amount of tuition fee collected under G.O.

     dated 06.09.2017 and to refund the balance amount after
11
adjusting   the   fee   paid   pursuant    to   the   earlier

determination as per G.O. dated 18.06.2011 is concerned,

we are of the opinion that the High Court has not

committed any error in issuing such directions. The

management cannot be permitted to retain the amount

recovered/collected pursuant to the illegal G.O. dated

06.09.2017. The medical colleges are the beneficiaries of

the illegal G.O. dated 06.09.2017 which is rightly set aside

by the High Court. The respective medical colleges have

used/utilized the amount recovered under G.O. dated

06.09.2017 for a number years and kept with them for a

number of years on the other hand students paid the

exorbitant tuition fee after obtaining loan from the

financial institutions/banks and paid the higher rate of

interest. If at all the AFRC determines/fixes the tuition fee

which is higher than the tuition fee fixed earlier it will be

always open for the medical colleges to recover the same

from the concerned students, however, the respective

medical colleges cannot be permitted to retain the amount

collected illegally pursuant to G.O. dated 06.09.2017.

Therefore, even the directions issued by the High Court to
12
refund the amount of tuition fee collected pursuant to G.O.

     dated 06.09.2017 after adjusting the amount payable as

     per the earlier determination is not required to be

     interfered with.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above both

     the appeals fail and the same deserve to dismissed and are

     accordingly   dismissed,   however,   with   cost   which   is

     quantified at Rs. 5 lakhs to be equally paid by the

     appellant(s) as well as the State of Andhra Pradesh (i.e.,

     Rs. 2.5 lakh by the appellant(s) and Rs. 2.5 lakh by the

     State of Andhra Pradesh) to be deposited with the Registry

     of this Court within a period of six weeks from today and

     on such deposit the same be transferred to National Legal

     Services Authority (NALSA) and Mediation and Conciliation

     Project Committee, Supreme Court of India (M
CPC
)

     equally.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
NOVEMBER 07, 2022                  [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
13