[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bikram Chatterji vs Union Of India on 7 November, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 940 OF 2017

                      [I.A. Nos. 108696, 108703, 108670 and 108681 of 2020]


          BIKRAM CHATTERJI & ORS.                              ...PETITIONER(S)

                                               VERSUS

          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                …RESPONDENT(S)


                                           JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, CJI.
1.             IA No.108696 of 2020 (Vol.I-147) has been filed by Greater

          Noida Authority seeking recall of the orders dated 10.06.2020,

          19.08.2020 and 25.08.2020 in so far as they related to interest

          charged by the Applicant on all projects other than the Amrapali

          Project.
To similar effect, I.A. No.108670 of 2020 (I-148) has been

          preferred on behalf of the Noida Authority seeking recall of the

          orders dated 10.06.2020, 19.08.2020 and 25.08.2020.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.11.11
14:08:16 IST
Reason:
1
2.   Before we deal with the rival contentions, certain facts

which have led to the filing of the instant applications must be

adverted to.
A. In Writ Petition (C) No.940 of 2017 which raises

       grievances on behalf of the purchasers of flats in projects

       promoted by the Amrapali Group of Companies, this

       Court has been passing various directions including

       appointment of Forensic Auditors. When the matter was

       listed on 22.05.2020, in response to a suggestion made by

       the learned Receiver in his Note, the applicants were

       called upon to obtain instructions with regard to interest

       to be charged and levied on the outstanding premium on

       account of defaults committed by Amrapali Group of

       Companies.    The   matter    was   then    adjourned    to

       27.05.2020.
B. In response, a Note was filed on behalf of applicants

       regarding interest payable by the Amrapali Group of

       Companies.
C. Around this time I.A. No.4139 of 2020 was filed by

       another builder named Ace Group of Companies seeking

       certain reliefs on same lines as were prayed for on behalf
2
of the flat buyers of Amrapali Projects. It was claimed by

  Ace Group of Companies in this application for general

  reduction in the interest rates to be charged by the

  Authority. After having heard the matter on 27.5.2020,

  the matter which was reserved for orders.
D. Before the Order could be passed by this Court,

  considering the problems in cash flow related to Covid-19

  pandemic situation and its aftermath, a general direction

  was issued on 09.06.2020 by the Uttar Pradesh State

  Government reducing the rate of interest charged by the

  Authorities.
E. On 10.06.2020 the order was passed by this Court in the

  matter which was heard on 27.5.2020. Paragraph 31 of

  the order dealt with the report of the learned Receiver

  while paragraph 32 of the order referred to the IA filed by

  the Ace Group of Companies and the facts pertaining to

  said Group were set out in Paragraphs 32 and 33. After

  noticing that the rate of interest had gone down, this

  Court issued directions that interest on the outstanding

  premium “to be realised in all such cases” be at the rate of
3
8% per annum.        The relevant paragraphs of said order

dated 10.06.2020 were as under:
“In Re. I.A. No. 49139 of 2020 (Interest to be realized
on the outstanding dues by Noida and Greater Noida
Authorities)
31. Learned Receiver has pointed out that there is a lack
of     clarity     concerning     dues      of      local
authorities/banks/lenders. It has been submitted that
proper relaxations and concessions are required to be
given concerning such dues.
32. In the interlocutory application filed by Ace Group of
Companies, precarious conditions in the entire Noida and
Greater Noida region faced by the developers have been
pointed out. It is submitted that following economic
recession in the last decade, the entire real estate sector
has gone downwards and facing acute financial crunch
and is fighting for its survival. The projects are
incomplete, there were various litigations which created a
huge financial impact and non-delivery of projects, which
reflects the pathetic condition of the real estate sector.
Multiple issues are pointed out, which are adding to the
woes of the developers. It is averred that the developers
and the home buyers both are adversely affected due to
non-delivery of booked flats in the regions of Noida and
Greater Noida etc.
33. The Ace Group of Companies obtained the plots
between the period 2010 and 2015 from the Authorities in
the aforesaid areas. The Noida Authority is raising
additional demand at the rate of Rs. 600 per square
meter, whereas Greater Noida Authority is raising demand
at the rate of Rs. 1700 per square meter. Due to
recession, developers operating in the region were not able
to receive the requisite amount on time from home
buyers. For one reason or the other, development work of
the projects was halted. The Authorities are levying
excessive interest and penal interest, which continues to
rise exponentially, culminating into huge dues, and in
some cases, the cost of the allotted land has doubled than
what it was originally fixed at the time of allotment over a
period of time and that the premium of the land has
enhanced manifold after adding the interest and penal
interest thereon, and other liabilities are also fastened.
There is also considerable delay in the completion of the
projects as scheduled initially. The cost of completion of
4
the project has thus increased manifold due to delay in
construction and has also resulted in price rise of
important construction components, material, and
labour. The burden of Service Tax and other cess and
statutory charges have also increased manifold. Though
various companies managed to raise the construction,
however, the cost of land originally allotted has doubled.
The real estate sector is facing financial distress due to
the various intervening factors. The rate of interest has
also gone down substantially. Due to delay, in may cases
refund order has also been passed by Consumer Forums,
which is adding financial constraints on the part of
developers. They are on the verge of completely financially
drained out. It is urged that interest rate and the delayed
penalty being charged by the Authorities on the allotted
plots of land is excessively higher than the prevailing
financial market scenario whereas there has been gradual
and consistent fall in the interest rates since 2010 itself.
However, the interest rates of the Authorities have
remained exorbitant contrary to the prevailing economic
situation of the country. The rates of interest charged by
the Authorities are extremely high. Apart from that, penal
interest on delayed payment is also added. The rates have
been increased from 11% to 14% - 15% to 18% - 23% per
annum.
34. It is submitted by SBI MCLR (Marginal Cost of Funds
based Lending Rate) rate of interest for three years is 7%
to 8%, and in the last six months, it has further come
down to 7.85%. If the base rate of SBI MCLR is compared
with the interest rate charged by the Noida and Greater
Noida Authorities, one can easily find out that it has
drastically been reduced over the years and ranges
between 7.5% to 8.15% over the last ten years. The rate
and historical data on the base rate of SBI is filed.
35. It is further averred that over a period of time in the
last five years, the Banks have also reduced the interest
paid on Fixed Deposits and currently, it ranges between
6% to 7% only. However, Noida and Greater Noida
Authorities, despite allotting encumbered and disputed
land coupled with various other issues, failed to take any
step to either reduce the exorbitant rate of interest or
completely waive off the interest and other charges on
account of delay and default in paying the land dues. The
Developers and the applicants and home buyers have
acquired valuable right in the land by paying the hefty
amount. The developers have made numerous efforts by
approaching the concerned authorities for redressal of
5
their grievances. Till date, there has been no resolution.
Neither the Authorities nor the State Government has
taken the issues seriously. The issue of the interest
affects the public at large, particularly the home buyers
and the interest of banks and financial institutions as
well besides that of Authorities. It is not possible to pay
their dues. Presently, in the wake of COVID 19 pandemic
and its outbreak in India, there is a continuous nation-
wide lockdown. There have been absolutely no business
and commercial activities in this sector, and the entire
real estate industry has come to a grinding halt causing
further financial losses and damages to the real estate
sector, which is generally in a precarious condition in the
Delhi/NCR region. Therefore, prayer has been made that
there should be a complete waiver of interest component
in the repayment of land dues of Noida and Greater Noida
Authorities, and payment schedule towards lease rent and
premium may be extended. It is further submitted that
various companies have stopped production of the
construction/building material in the wake of lockdown.
Most of the labourers have gone back to their home States
resulting in shortage of labourers. In short, it is submitted
that the real estate sector is facing a crisis, and due to
various aforesaid reasons, the timeline for completion of
projects may be deferred by one more year. Due to
excessive lease rent, penalty and interest charged and
levied, additional land costs demanded, and charged on
the land allotted, various projects are stalled. Most of the
projects have acquired the status of dormant projects.
36. We are considering prayer Nos. 1 and 2 of the I.A.
with respect to interest to be realized on the outstanding
dues by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities.
37. The rates of SBI MCLR is reduced to 7.45 % in the
year 2020 from 8.95% in the year 2016. It is clear that the
Noida and Greater Noida Authorities, on the outstanding
dues, are realizing the dues from all such projects,
interest at exorbitant rate such as 15% per annum with
half-yearly compounding and in addition are also realizing
penal interest on the amount as fixed from time to time.
38. We have noted in the judgment dated 23.7.2019 the
figure given by the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
that after 2005, 114 plots had been allotted to various
group housing societies. 81 plots were handed over the
possession on payment of 10% of the total premium. 29
projects, out of 81 were completed. Out of the other 33
allotted earlier, 11 were completed, and 7 obtained part-
completion certificates. Thus, it is apparent that more
6
than 60% of projects have not been able to come up so
far. We have also noted that the Noida and Greater Noida
Authorities did not take the step of termination of leases
for various reasons. A large number of home buyers have
been waiting now approximately for the last 8 to 10 years
or more for completion of houses. It is not in dispute that
the real estate sector has suffered a setback at present. It
contributes to the GDP of the country. As a large number
of projects have not come up, at the same time, Noida and
Greater Noida Authorities have not been able to realize
their dues from such projects which are being piled up for
the last several years, at the same time interest of home
buyers has intervened. Even on the plots where the land
was allotted from 2005 onwards, the projects have not
been completed so far, though the buyers have paid their
money. The Noida and Greater Noida Authorities are not
issuing completion certificates to such projects and they
are not able to realize their outstanding dues. For various
reasons, constructions have not been completed,
including due to diversion of funds. There is a failure to
comply with the obligation to the home buyers whose
money has been invested in the partially constructed
structure and partial dues have been paid to the Noida
and Greater Noida Authorities.
39. It cannot be disputed that the rate of interest, on
which agreements were entered into, has gone down by
now. The present lending rate is much below and the RBI
has taken several steps to revive the economy. In such a
scenario, it would never be possible to make payment of
interest at the rate fixed by authorities and also a penal
interest to be realized by concerned authorities. The home
buyers are not able to obtain fruits of the investment and
are deprived of legal title of the flats.
40. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for
Noida and Greater Noida Authorities. Learned senior
counsel also drew our attention to the following
observations made by this Court in the judgment dated
23.7.2019:
“72. In our opinion, if the real estate business
      has to survive in India, it has to be answerable
      to the public and has necessarily to uphold
      the trust reposed in builders/promoters. They
      have been paid huge amounts not only by the
      home buyers but also, they have to pay a huge
      amount for the public land given to them on
      lease by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
      for construction of houses. The land has been
7
given to them by the authorities on a
         concessional basis by making payment of 10%
         amount at the time of allotment. The builders
         have to be accountable to public/home buyers
         as well as the authorities and bankers. It is a
         matter relating to housing needs dealing with
         shelter place, such an activity is of the public
         importance as the real estate sector plays a
         pivotal role in the fulfillment of needs of
         housing infrastructure.”
41. It was also argued by the learned senior counsel that
   even if the builder may have factored the valuation of
   price, including interest on the cost of the land, the lease
   deed and the authorities will remain unaffected. A prayer
   was made that the authorities may be given liberty to
   recover their amount of interest from the builder at the
   contractually agreed rate under the lease deed. It was
   lastly and rightly pointed out that the Court can fix a
   reasonable rate of interest. Considering the present
   scenario, we feel that the aforesaid submission is
   justified.
42. Considering the current state of real estate, the
   projects are standstill, and in order to give impetus to
   such housing projects and mainly considering plight of
   home buyers and as pointed out by Noida and Greater
   Noida Authorities that 114 plots were allotted from 2005
   onwards, most of projects are incomplete; we direct that
   rate of interest on the outstanding premium and other
   dues to be realized in all such cases at the rate of 8% per
   annum and let the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
   do a restructuring of the repayment schedule so that
   amount is paid and Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
   are able to realize the same. As to reasonable time frame,
   we would like to hear the parties. In case of failure to pay,
   the concession granted shall stand withdrawn. However,
   at the same time, the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
   shall also ensure that not only instalments/money are
   deposited, but also all such projects are completed within
   the stipulated time.”



F. An application for clarification was immediately moved on

  behalf of the Authorities on 15.6.2020.               The principal
8
relief claimed in this application was that the order dated

  10.06.2020 be declared to be operative only prospectively.
The matter was heard on 19.08.2020 when following order

  was passed by this Court:
“Vide order dated 10.07.2020, we have ordered the
   payment as per the MCLR Rate. It has been pointed out
   by the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
   NOIDA/Greater NOIDA that MCLR rate is applicable with
   effect from 01.04.2016, and not before that. It has also
   been pointed out that prior to that, SBAR rate was
   applicable from 01.01.2010 to 30.06.2010 and thereafter,
   the rate which was applicable was called the Base Rate
   (w.e.f. 01.07.2010 till 31.03.2016). The details of the
   rates have been given in Annexure I of the Affidavit.
In the circumstances, since MCLR rate is not
   available for the entire period and the intention of our
   order was that the rate chargeable by the Bank has to be
   paid, we modify the order to the effect that the rate from
   01.01.2010 to 30.06.2010 would be SBAR, as specified in
   Paragraph 1 of Annexure I and thereafter, the Base Rate
   as provided in that paragraph would be applicable with
   effect from 01.07.2010 till 31.03.2016 and thereafter,
   MCLR would be applicable with effect from 01.04.2016
   onwards, as ordered by this Court.
The order dated 10.07.2020 is modified/clarified to the
   aforesaid extent.”


G. I.A. No. 80560 of 2020 was then filed by the Authorities

  with the submission that as a consequence of the orders

  passed by this Court the contractual rate stood completely

  overridden and the builders would now require to pay

  interest at the rate of 9.5%.
9
H. The order passed on 25.8.2020 by this Court shows that

       after referring to the aforestated two orders, it was

       observed as under:-
“It is apparent that the order dated 10.06.2020 is not
        to realise ‘penal rent’ as well as it is to charge simple rate
        of interest, not on compounding basis. We have directed
        interest per annum. We clarify the same to be simple rate
        of interest as may be applicable from time to time even
        during year. The order to be complied with by the
        NOIDA/Greater NOIDA accordingly. The demand has to
        be monitored. Let the demand be revised and fresh
        demand be made in the true spirit of the order.
            In view of the above, the application is disposed of.”
3.   In these circumstances, the instant applications have been

preferred on behalf of the Greater Noida Authority and NOIDA

Authority    seeking     recall of     the   orders dated        10.06.2020,

19.08.2020 and 25.08.2020 passed by this Court.                          It is

submitted in I.A. No.108696 of 2020 as under:
“5. It is submitted that in the first instance, the orders
        provide no jurisprudential basis for overriding contractual
        interest and that too only in relation to the Applicant.
        ‘There are multifarious contracts entered into by parties
        in relation to supplies of goods and services. All these
        contracts contain interest provisions. The levy of
        compound interest, on a contractual basis, is not just well
        established    in   India   but    is   well    established
        internationally. The charging of interest under a contract
        is a matter of negotiation between the parties and once a
        contract is entered into, the sanctity of the contract
        cannot be forsaken in this manner without there being
        any supervening illegality being established in relation to
        any term the contract.
10
7. The settled law, reiterated in a number of judgements
of this Hon'ble Court is that when a person bids for a
property or being put on the market by the Government
on terms that are made public, the terms and conditions
on which the property is bid for an acquired cannot be
altered much less challenged after the contract was
entered into.
8. Finally, if any term of a contract is found to be illegal,
then the contract has to be unravelled in a manner so
that there is restitution to both parties. A person who is
acquired property belonging to the Government cannot
renege on one element of the contract and walk away
specially where the element is so important being a part of
the consideration for the acquisition of the property.
9. Even in the matter of “unfairness” and its evaluation,
the orders made by this Hon'ble Court , it is respectfully
submitted, are based on a deeply flawed premise that
institutions such as the Applicant are on par with banks
and should charge interest rates comparable to the base
rates charged by the banks. The rates on which interest
has now been directed to be charged are far below the
rates charged by nationalised banks even in the present
times for giving loans to builders. For example the Bank
of Baroda charges 13.2% interest and in certain
transactions the Canara Bank has charged interest at
16.05 % even in relation to loans granted in 2020.
10.. The Applicant has been charging interest at 11% on
the premium of the land and this is computed on 16 half
yearly instalments. The notion of compound interest is
based on an understanding that, for purposes of interest,
the instalments will be paid in the duration. Thus an
interest rate, which requires compounding quarterly, is
charged on the premise that every quarter the sum in
question could be paid and if it is not paid, it would be
added to the principal for purposes of computing interest
for the next quarter and so on. If the amount in which
interest has been charged during a quarter is paid back
within the quarter, there is no question of compounding.
11. In the case of the Applicant, if the premium is paid
upfront, there is no question of any interest, the
advantage of the long lead time for payment of the
11
premium of the land is on terms of payment of interest at
       11%. Any person bidding for the property would take into
       account the interest chargeable while computing the
       commercial worth and value of the acquisition. It bears
       emphasis that the builders will acquire these lands for
       commercial projects and not for building their own
       homes.
12. A builder who acquires property from the Applicant
       does so on the commercial terms which are made public
       before the bids are awarded. The builder takes the
       commercial risk of the development of the property and
       gets to keep the entire profit made in the project. The
       Applicant has no upside if the builder earns greater
       returns than what were contemplated at the time when
       the property was sold. Equally, the purpose of selling
       these properties to private builders is to de-risk
       government and government agencies and allow the
       development by private capital and one very important
       aspect of that is that the risks of the project are taken by
       private promoters.
13.       The result of the orders made by this Hon’ble
       Court, it is respectfully submitted, has fully passed on the
       downside to the Applicant without even examining the
       facts of individual cases.”
4.   Similar submissions are advanced in IA No.108670 of 2020.
5.   In response to these applications Ace Group of Companies

has submitted:-
“…
3. A perusal of the Order and Judgment dated
       10.6.2020 by this Hon’ble Court establishes that the
       said Order was passed granting one time concession for
       the very survival of the real estate sector owing to the
       precarious condition prevailing in the entire region of
       Noida and Greater Noida area for last almost 12-15
       years.
4. It is a matter of record that the overall dire precarious
       situation in the region was caused due to the fact the
       Government authorities breached rules by acquiring
       Land in violation of the established rules and
12
regulations leading to multifarious and prolonged
litigations at the behest of the farmers.          Various
environmental     issues    cropped     up    during    the
construction period of the projects, leading to prolonged
stay in construction activities. All these factors resulted
in huge delays in completion of the projects within the
scheduled construction period. This also caused huge
monitory loss, loss of crucial development period and
huge blocking of funds of the developers. All these
reasons badly jolted the entire real estate sector in the
region.
Further, despite supporting over 250 other industries,
contributing almost 20% to GDP and being the largest
employment generator after agriculture, the real estate
sector never received any concession by the State
authorities.
6. In this factual background, the Order and judgment
dated 10.06.2020 was passed to serve the twin purposes
i.e. to ensure timely construction of projects and to
ensure that the Authorities also receive their dues in a
timely manner, the Hon’ble Court granted a onetime
concession by reducing the rate of interest of all the
allottees of all types of land w.e.f. 01.01.2010 with the
rider that in case of failure to pay the dues in time to
the authorities, the concession granted shall stand
withdrawn. The aforesaid one time concession has been
granted by this Hon’ble Court uniformly to all types of
allottees and all the leaseholders of the Noida and
Greater Noida Authorities. It has specifically recorded
in para 39 of the said order, that,

     It cannot be disputed that the rate of interest, on
  which agreements were entered into, has gone down
  by now. The present lending rate is much below and
  the RBI has taken several steps to revive the economy.
  In such a scenario, it would never be possible to make
  payment of interest at the rate fixed by authorities and
  also a penal interest to be realized by concerned
  authorities. ……. ”
7. Therefore, the instant application seeking recall of
the orders dated 10.6.2020, 19.08.2020 and 25.08.2020
is ex facie bad in law and devoid of merits. Moreover,
the Order and judgment dated 10.06.2020 passed by
this Hon’ble Court was duly modified/ clarified on an
identical and similar application filed by the Noida and
13
Greater Noida     Authorities    vide   an   Order   dated
         10.07.2020.
6.   The order dated 10.07.2020 which has been referred to, was

to the following effect.
“I.A. Nos. 59415 of 2020 and 59400 of 2020.
Considered the prayer made by Mr. Tushar Mehta,
         learned Solicitor General of India, appearing for Greater
         Noida Authority and Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, learned senior
         counsel, appearing for the Noida Authority.

            It was submitted that the order dated 09.06.2020
         passed with respect to 8% interest be made prospective.
         It was also pointed out that the Government has
         specified the rate at the SBI Lending Rate, to be paid. As
         per that, the dues to be paid comes to 8.5%.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are
         of the opinion that SBI MCLR Rates to be applied
         uniformly to all the lease holders. Their past dues as
         well as arrears to be worked out accordingly. In case
         any adjustment is to be made, let the adjustment be
         made accordingly and the current dues also to be
         worked out at the SBI MCLR Rates. Future dues be also
         worked out at the SBI MCLR Rates, which may be fixed.
         Remaining order is not modified. The only modification
         made is about the rate of interest.
It is clarified that SBI MCLR rate to be applied with
         effect from 1.1.2010 and previous dues to be paid as per
         the rate, as provided in the agreement.
The Noida and Greater Noida Authorities to work out
         the dues within one month. 25% of the amount of the
         dues shall be deposited within 3 months and the
         remaining amount within one year from 31 today, failing
         which concessional rate shall stand withdrawn. The
         applications are accordingly disposed of.”
7.   Similar assertions are made in the response filed on behalf

of the Prateek Buildtech (India) Pvt. Ltd.              According to said
14
company, it was entitled to have the outstanding amounts

adjusted in terms of the orders issued by this Court. The details

of the projects completed by the said company are referred to in

the reply as under:
“m.   That the Applicant Company, through its group
             companies has been allotted the following plots for
             the development of group housing projects as well
             as the progress of the Applicant on the said
             projects:
Sl.   Plot No. &   Allottee           Project Name   Date      of
       No.   Location     Company            & Number of    Allotment &
                                             Flats          Lease Deed
                                             Constructed
1.    E-11         Prateek            Prateek        26.12.2008/
             Sector-      Buildtech          Fedora         31.12.2008
             61, Noida    (India) Pvt.Ltd.   251
2.    GH-04/B      Prateek            Prateek        08.03.2010/
             Sector-      Buildtech          Stylome        31.03.2010
             45,          (India)   Pvt.     545
                          Ltd.
Noida
3.    GH-01        Prateek            Prateek        10.12.2009/
             Sector-      Realtors India     Laurel         07.01.2010
             120,         Pvt. Ltd.          1530
             Noida
4.    GH-01        Prateek            Prateek        31.03.2010/
             Sector-      Realtors India     Wisteria       26.05.2010
             77,          Pvt. Ltd.          1800
             Noida
5.    GH-01/A      Prateek            Prateek        02.02.2012/
             (Beta-II)    Infraprojects      Edifice        15.02.2012
                          India Pvt. Ltd.    423
             Sector-
107,
             Noida
15
Response has also been filed on behalf of Prateek Realtors

(India) Private Limited, a company under the same management,

giving following details with regard to its projects

        “m.   That the Applicant Company, through its group
              companies has been allotted the following plots for
              the development of group housing projects as well
              as the progress of the Applicant on the said
              projects:
Sl.    Plot No. &    Allottee           Project Name   Date       of
       No.    Location      Company            & Number of    Allotment &
                                               Flats          Lease Deed
                                               Constructed
1.     E-11          Prateek            Prateek        26.12.2008/
              Sector-61,    Buildtech          Fedora         31.12.2008
              Noida         (India)Pvt.Ltd.    251
2.     GH-04/B       Prateek            Prateek        08.03.2010/
              Sector-45,    Buildtech          Stylome        31.03.2010
                            (India)Pvt. Ltd.   545
              Noida
3.     GH-01         Prateek            Prateek        10.12.2009/
              Sector-120,   Realtors India     Laurel         07.01.2010
                            Pvt. Ltd.          1530
              Noida
4.     GH-01         Prateek            Prateek        31.03.2010/
              Sector-77,    Realtors India     Wisteria       26.05.2010
                            Pvt. Ltd.          1800
              Noida
5.     GH-01/A       Prateek            Prateek        02.02.2012/
              (Beta-II)     Prateek            Edifice        15.02.2012”
                            Infraprojects      423
              Sector-107,   India Pvt. Ltd.
Noida



     An amount of Rs.23.78 crores being outstanding on behalf

of these two group companies was tendered along with the

representation dated 28.3.2020. However, there was no response

on behalf of the Noida Authority.
16
8.    In rejoinder, it is submitted on behalf of the Noida Authority

as under:-
(A) Prior to the filing of the instant applications, the

         authorities were not able to fathom the extent of the

         financial loss that would accrue to them upon reduction

         of contractual rate of interest. In the plots allotted to the

         Ace Group of Companies by Greater Noida Authority

         alone, the financial loss would be to the tune of Rs.55.41

         crores.
(B) The financial loss to Greater Noida Authority in relation

         to   all   the    Group   Housing    Projects   would    exceed

         Rs.4,279/- crores, while that to the Noida Authority

         would be more than Rs.3,000 crores.
(C) The rate of interest for availing facility of deferred

         payment      on    instalment   by   the   builders     was   in

         consonance with the rate of interest that was been

         charged by the banks. The rate of interest was disclosed

         in the brochure, in the allotment letter and in the

         consequential lease deed. Said rate was acted upon by

         the parties with open eyes.
17
(D) There was no material for reduction in the contractual

          rate of interest except what was stated by Ace Group of

          Companies when the application preferred by it came to

          be allowed by this Court.
(E) It was not disclosed by Ace Group of Companies that

          they were actually levying on their flat buyers interest at

          the rate of 18 %.
9.      This rejoinder reflects the stand on behalf of both the

Authorities.
10. Appearing for Noida and Greater Noida Authorities, Mr.

Harish N. Salve, learned Senior Advocate has submitted inter

alia:
(A) The point of initiation for order dated 10.06.2020 was a note

     of the learned Court Receiver dated 22.5.2020 and by very

     nature it was purely in the context of Amrapali Group of

     Companies and had nothing to do with flat buyers from

     projects undertaken by builders other than Amrapali Group

     of Companies.
(B) On 27.5.2020, an application preferred by Ace Group of

     Companies being IA No.49139 of 2020 was listed before the
18
Court for the first time when this Court was pleased to issue

   notice.    The matter was adjourned to 3.6.2020 when

   following orders was passed by this Court:-
“…We have considered the application (I.A. No.
        49139/2020) with respect to the interest part. We have
        already heard the other matter relating to interest and
        this application is heard and reserved with respect to
        interest part.”


(C) In these circumstances, I.A. No.49139 of 2020 was taken up

   along with the matter pertaining to Amrapali Group of

   Companies. There was hardly any discussion on the point

   nor was any reply submitted on behalf of the Authorities to

   the application preferred by Ace Group of Companies.
(D) An application preferred by Supertech Group of Companies

   being I.A. No.74824 of 2020 praying for similar relief was

   dealt with by this Court in its order dated 13.8.2020 as

   under:-
“I.A. NO. 74824 of 2020
       This application is permitted to be withdrawn with liberty
       to avail appropriate remedy before the appropriate forum
       and not in this petition.
The application not to be entertained in this petition.
       The application is, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn.”
19
(E) On 7.9.2020, Contempt Petition Nos.525, 526, and 527 of

   2020 filed on behalf of one of the builders alleging non-
compliance of the orders passed by this Court with regard to

   reduction of rate of interest were disposed of by this Court as

   under:-
“Contempt Petitions (Civil) Nos. 525/2020, 526/2020
and 527/2020
Heard.
In our view, no contempt is made out as no specific
         directions were issued in the case of the contempt
         petitioners.
The contempt petitions are, therefore, closed giving
         liberty to file appropriate proceedings available in law.”



(F) Subsequently, similar application preferred by some of the

   interested builders were dealt with by this Court its order

   dated 21.9.2020 as under:
“V. In Re: RATE OF INTEREST
          While dealing with the subject concerning rate of
       interest to be realised on outstanding dues by NOIDA and
       Greater NOIDA, this Court in its order dated 10.06.2020
       had observed as under:
“39. It cannot be disputed that the rate of
          interest, on which agreements were entered into,
          has gone down by now. The present lending rate
          is much below and the RBI has taken several
          steps to revive the economy. In such a scenario, it
          would never be possible to make payment of
          interest at the rate fixed by authorities and also a
          penal interest to be realised by concerned
          authorities. The home buyers are not able to
20
obtain fruits of the investment and are deprived of
   legal title of the flats.
xxx
42. Considering the current state of real estate,
   the projects are standstill, and in order to give
   impetus to such housing projects and mainly
   considering plight of home buyers and as
   appointed out by NOIDA and Greater NOIDA
   Authorities that 114 plots were allotted from 2005
   onwards, most of projects are incomplete; we
   direct that rate of interest on the understanding
   premium and other dues to be realized in all such
   cases at the rate of 8% per annum and let the
   NOIDA and Greater NOIDA Authorities do a
   restructuring of the repayment schedule so that
   amount is paid and NOIDA and Greater NOIDA
   Authorities are able to realize the same. As to
   reasonable time frame, we would like to hear the
   parties, in case of failure to pay, the concession
   granted shall stand withdrawn. However, at the
   same time, the NOIDA and Greater NOIDA
   Authorities shall also ensure that not only
   instalments/money are deposited, but also all
   such projects are completed within the stipulated
   time.”
   Later, said order dated 10.06.2020 on the aforesaid
issues was clarified/modified by further orders dated
10.07.2020, 13.08.2020 and 25.08.2020.
It appears that large number of applications are getting
preferred by builders/developers who are not connected
with Amrapali projects, seeking inter alia implementation
or clarification or praying for further benefits. Our
experience on last few occasions has been that these
applications take up considerable length of time, as a
result of which the main matters or the issues touching
upon the completion of Amrapali projects get sidelined.
We, therefore, direct that hereafter the Registry shall not
entertain and list before the Bench dealing with Amrapali
projects, any application on the issue concerning rate of
interest to be charged on the outstanding dues to
NOIDA/Greater NOIDA and any other allied subjects from
the Builders/Developers who are not connected with
Amrapali projects. All the Interlocutory Applications by
the Builders/Developers are therefore disposed of without
any orders but reserving the remedy to the concerned
applicants to take appropriate action as is open in law.”
21
(G) The Rate of interest payable by the concerned builders to the

         Authority was one which had the genesis in the Allotment

         Letters, Lease Deed and was thus to the knowledge of

         everyone. Consequently, amount of interest went into inputs

         forming part of the price payable by the consumers. At no

         stage, any of the builders was aggrieved by the rate of

         interest.
(H) The well-established principle has been not to interfere with

         the terms of a commercial contract, to which there are

         certain exceptions like the case dealt with by this Court in
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited

         and Another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr.1
where the

         concerned Clause in the contract was found to be per se

         arbitrary. However, no such plea that the terms in the

         contract were unconscionable was ever taken by anyone nor

         was there any factual foundation in support of such plea.

(I) The effect of the burden as a result of the relaxation in the

         rate of interest was to the tune of Rs.4,279/- crores for

         Greater Noida Authority and Rs.3,266/- crores for Noida

         Authority. These figures were never in contemplation when
1
(1986) S SCC 156.
22
the    aforesaid    orders    dated    10.6.2020,    19.8.2020   and

    25.8.2020 were passed by this Court.
11. Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. Gaurav

Mitra, Advocate appearing on behalf of Prateek Group of

Companies,     Mr.     Navin     R.   Nath,   learned   Senior   Advocate

appearing for Ace Group of Companies, Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned

Senior Advocate appearing for Paramount Group of Companies

and Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate

appearing for Ajnara Group of Companies have advanced

following submissions in reply:
(A) These applications are nothing but repetition of what was

          argued on behalf of Authorities on 10.7.2020 and the

          prayers having been rejected, the only recourse possible

          was to file a review petition and not recall application.
(B) Paragraph 38 of the order dated 10.6.2020 had noted

          that large number of plots were allotted to various Group

          Housing Societies and large number of these projects

          had not come up as a result of which the Authorities

          were not able to realise their dues from such projects.
23
(C) Paragraph 40 of the said order referred to paragraph 71

    of the order dated 17.1.2019 which was to the following

    effect.
"72. In our opinion, if the real estate business has to
    survive in India, it has to be answerable to the public and
    has necessarily to uphold the trust reposed in 35
    builders/promoters. They have been paid huge amounts
    not only by the home buyers but also, they have to pay a
    huge amount for the public land given to them on lease
    by Noida and Greater Noida Authorities for construction
    of houses. The land has been given to them by the
    authorities on a concessional basis by making payment of
    10% amount at the time of allotment. The builders have
    to be accountable to public/home buyers as well as the
    authorities and bankers. It is a matter relating to housing
    needs dealing with shelter place, such an activity is of the
    public importance as the real estate sector plays a pivotal
    role in the fulfillment of needs of housing infrastructure."
(D) Thereafter the learned counsel had left it to this Court as

    is evident from paragraphs 41 and 42 of the order, which

    were to the following effect:
“41. It was also argued by the learned senior counsel
    that even if the builder may have factored the valuation of
    price, including interest on the cost of the land, the lease
    deed and the authorities will remain unaffected. A prayer
    was made that the authorities may be given liberty to
    recover their amount of interest from the builder at the
    contractually agreed rate under the lease deed. It was
    lastly and rightly pointed out that the Court can fix a
    reasonable rate of interest. Considering the present
    scenario, we feel that the aforesaid submission is
    justified.
42. Considering the current state of real estate, the
    projects are standstill, and in order to give impetus to
    such housing projects and mainly considering plight of
    home buyers and as pointed out by Noida and Greater
24
Noida Authorities that 114 plots were allotted from 2005
    onwards, most of projects are incomplete; we direct that
    rate of interest on the outstanding premium and other
    dues to be realized in all such cases at the rate of 8% per
    annum and let the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
    do a restructuring of the repayment schedule so that
    amount is paid and Noida and Greater Noida Authorities
    are able to realize the same. As to reasonable time frame,
    we would like to hear the parties. In case of failure to pay,
    the concession granted shall stand withdrawn. However,
    at the same time, the Noida and Greater Noida
    Authorities    shall    also   ensure    that     not    only
    instalments/money are deposited, but also all such
    projects are completed within the stipulated time.”



(E) The jurisprudential basis with which all these directions

    were issued, was right of shelter for every such similarly

    situated flat buyer whose interest needed protection.
(F) Soon after the order passed on 10.7.2020, Contempt

    Petition filed on behalf of the Ace Group of Companies

    was dealt with by this Court in its order dated 13.8.2020:
“Contempt Petition (C) Diary No.16757/2020
    Issue notice.
Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned counsel, appears and
    accepts notice on behalf of NOIDA and Greater NOIDA.
    Let calculation mistakes be corrected and the order be
    worked out in pith and substance by the next date of
    hearing.
At the same time, it was pointed out by Mr. Keshav
    Mohan, learned counsel, that the dues have not been
    worked out and neither the correct notices issued. As
    such, the time which was fixed by this Court for payment
    is being consumed by the NOIDA itself.
We direct the NOIDA to implement the order in pith and
    substance and correct all such errors within seven days,
25
otherwise the same will be viewed seriously and the
         concerned officers/officials shall have to face the
         consequence of noncompliance.
Let NOIDA and Greater NOIDA file affidavit of compliance
         as well as the requisite documents, in the meantime.”


   (G) In the subsequent application being Volume R-117 all

         the submissions were advanced on behalf of the

         authorities but no prayer was made for recall of the order

         dated 10.7.2020


   (H) Affidavits in compliance of directions dated 13.8.2020

         being Volume Nos.R-76 and R-77 were filed on behalf of

         the Noida and Greater Noida Authorities on 18.8.2020.
Said affidavit contained details of calculation for a large

         number of projects including the percentage of loss

         caused to the Authorities as well as the fact that in

         certain instances the Authorities would be required to

         make refunds.
(I)   In substance, the Authorities were requesting for recall of

         orders after the matters were gone into by this Court at

         least on three occasions.
12. To a query whether the benefit resulting out of the orders

passed by this Court was passed on to the consumers, some of
26
the learned counsel have submitted that they were ready to pass

on the benefit and undertakings to that effect have been filed in

this Court. Every learned counsel has presented individual facts

as to how much had been paid by the concerned builders all

through and what would be the notional impact as a result of the

orders passed by this Court.
13. We have considered the rival submissions and have also

gone through the written submissions filed on record.
14.   In these proceedings we are principally concerned with the

plight of flat holders of Amrapali Group of Companies. In order

to see that the projects do not remain stalled and the investment

made by all the flat buyers comes out of cloud of uncertainty,

certain measures were adopted by this Court in its order dated

23.07.2019.   Those measures contemplated restriction on the

Noida and Greater Noida Authorities to resume the properties in

question, as well as, cancellation of lease deed granted in favour

of Amrapali Group of Companies and vesting all the rights in

favour of the Court Receiver and NBCC was appointed to

complete various projects. These directions were passed in the

peculiar facts and circumstances in Amrapali Projects. It was in
27
light of these directions that one of the issues which came up for

consideration before the Court related to reduction in rate of

interest. The dues payable to Noida or Greater Noida in respect

of projects of Amrapali Group of Companies would otherwise

have been liable to pay along with interest at certain rates. Since

that would have put additional burden on the entire project, it

was deemed appropriate to consider reduction in rate of interest.
15. At that juncture, an application filed on behalf of ACE group

of companies was listed for the first time on 27.05.2020 by which

time the note prepared by the learned Court Receiver seeking

reduction in rate of interest for Amrapali Group of Companies

was taken up on 25.05.2020 and the order was reserved. The

order dated 27.05.2020, as extracted hereinabove noted the fact

that similar matter was under consideration and therefore

reserved order in that matter. The record indicates, no reply was

filed by the concerned authorities nor were they may aware of the

impact   of   such   application    preferred   by   ACE   Group   of

Companies.
16. The order dated 10.06.2020 did consider the case projected

by ACE group of companies in its application dated 27.05.2020
28
but as indicated earlier, there was no response on behalf of the

concerned authorities. It must be noted that this court in the

present matter was not in any way concerned with the facts and

circumstances pertaining to any of the flat buyers in projects of

ACE Group of Companies. No grievance was raised by anybody

that the individual flat buyers were put to prejudice as a result of

rate of interest charged on the amounts due. What was under
consideration before the court was the peculiar fact situation

pertaining to Amrapali Group of Companies. Neither was there

any general petition on behalf of any or all builders of Noida or

Greater Noida in a manner known to law nor was the scope of the

matter vide enough to consider any such plea advanced on behalf

of ACE Group of Companies.
17. Around this time a decision was taken by the State

Government on 09.06.2020 giving reduction in interest rates

generally to all builders pertaining to all projects. However, this

court was not aware of the order dated 09.06.2020 when the

order was pronounced on 10.06.2020 in the matter reserved

earlier. It is true that though it was completely beyond the scope

of instant matters to consider the cases of other builders, this
29
Court did to consider the case of builders such as ACE group of

companies and the matter was dealt with in its order dated

10.06.2020. However, at that juncture it was not known to this

court that huge amount running into more than Rs. 3000 – 4000

crores for Noida and Greater Noida Authorities, would be in

issue.
18.   As a result of the orders passed by this court the builders

are now asking for adjustment of whatever they had paid earlier

and in certain cases they are even demanding refund of the

amount paid in excess. In every case, the concerned builder had

opted for allocation of plot on the basis of brochure which had

clearly indicated the rate of interest. The allotment letter and

consequential lease deed carried the same intent.    Thus, every

builder was well aware and had entered into transaction with

Noida and Greater Noida Authorities with open eyes. Whatever

was the impact on account of that rate of interest must have

been subsumed in the price which was arrived at and had to be

paid by every flat holder.
19.   In cases where contractual terms were sought to be

invalidated this court has repeatedly refrained from entering into
30
such issues.
In
Jagdish Mandal vs. State of Orissa2
the

conclusions arrived at by this Court were as under:
“22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended
                        to        prevent        arbitrariness,        irrationality,
                        unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is
                        to check whether choice or decision is made “lawfully”
                        and not to check whether choice or decision is “sound”.
                        When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters
                        relating to tenders or award of contracts, certain special
                        features should be borne in mind. A contract is a
                        commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and
                        awarding      contracts    are   essentially    commercial
                        functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay
                        at a distance. If the decision relating to award of
                        contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts
                        will not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere
                        even if a procedural aberration or error in assessment
                        or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power of
                        judicial review will not be permitted to be invoked to
                        protect private interest at the cost of public interest, or
                        to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer or
                        contractor with a grievance can always seek damages in
                        a civil court. Attempts by unsuccessful tenderers with
                        imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business
                        rivalry, to make mountains out of molehills of some
                        technical/procedural violation or some prejudice to self,
                        and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of
                        judicial review, should be resisted. Such interferences,
                        either interim or final, may hold up public works for
                        years, or delay relief and succour to thousands and
                        millions and may increase the project cost manifold.
                        Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or
                        contractual matters in exercise of power of judicial
                        review, should pose to itself the following questions:
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision
                         made by the authority is mala fide or intended to
                         favour someone;
OR
                            Whether the process adopted or decision made
                        is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can say:
“the decision is such that no responsible authority
                        acting reasonably and in accordance with relevant
                        law could have reached”;
2
(2007) 14 SCC 531
31
(ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be
             no interference under
Article 226.
Cases involving
             blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on
             a tenderer/contractor or distribution of State
             largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences,
             dealerships and franchises) stand on a different
             footing as they may require a higher degree of
             fairness in action.”
20.   If even in normal circumstances, the interference with

contractual terms is not easily to be taken resort to, it does not

stand to reason that in a matter with which this court was not

even concerned, the benefit could be extended to the entire body

of builders of Noida and Greater Noida.           Reference made to a

number of stalled projects including some of the projects of the

builders who are presently before us, cannot be taken as an

indication that the benefits which were to be extended to the flat

buyers from Amrapali Group of Companies must also be

extended to the flat buyers to the other projects from Noida or

Greater Noida.
21. Some of the orders, namely the order pertaining to IA

No.74824 of 2020 allowing Supertech Group of Companies to

withdraw their application as well as order dated 07.09.2020 in

Contempt Petition Nos.52525, 52526, 52527 of 2020 stating that

no contempt was made out, are an indication that this court was
32
not concerned that the matter pertaining to projects other than

Amrapali Group of Companies.
22. The objections that the proper jurisdiction to be exercised

would be jurisdiction in review, according to our considered view,

is purely technical.   The matter was dealt with by the Bench

dealing with questions relating to Amrapali Group of Companies.

The circumstances delineated also show that a completely

different matter came to be dealt with by the Bench principally

concerned with matters of Amrapali Group of Company.           No

adequate notice was given to the concerned Authorities and the

exact impact of the decisions was also not made known to the

Court when these orders were passed. We therefore have no

hesitation in rejecting all these technical submissions.
23. In conclusion, we must say that this Court erred in granting

relief to projects other than Amrapali Group of Companies vide

its orders dated 10.06.2020, 19.08.2020 and 25.08.2020.
24. Consequently, the instant applications are allowed and the

orders dated 10.6.2020, 19.8.2020 and 25.8.2020 are recalled,

as prayed. The Noida and Greater Noida Authorities are directed
33
to calculate the amount due in respect of builders other than

Amrapali Group of Companies after taking into consideration the

effect of the order dated 09.06.2020 issued by the State

Government.
……………………………..CJI.
[Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                    ………………………………..J.
                                           [Ajay Rastogi]

New Delhi;
November 07, 2022.
34
1
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                      WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 940 OF 2017

     [I.A. Nos. 8259 of 2019, 74385 of 2020, 90985 of 2020 and
                           90986 of 2020]

BIKRAM CHATTERJI & ORS.                           ...PETITIONER(S)

                                    VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                             …RESPONDENT(S)


                                 JUDGMENT


Uday Umesh Lalit, CJI
I.A. No. 8259 of 2019
1.         This Interlocutory Application has been filed by Mr. Prem

Mishra1, challenging the proceedings/order dated 11.12.2018

passed by the Presiding Officer, Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT)-III,

New Delhi and for issuance of directions to the DRT to proceed

strictly in terms of the order dated 12.9.2018 in respect of 12

lakh square feet offered in the affidavit of Mr. Anil Kumar

Sharma, Chairman and Managing Director, Amrapali Group of

Companies, without involving the area earmarked in ‘yellow’ in
1
“the applicant”
2
terms    of    Memorandum          of     Understanding     (MoU)       and

authorisations in favour of the applicant.
2.   According to the applicant, Mr. Anil Kumar Sharma met the

applicant some times in June, 2006 and a business plan was

proposed for developing a colony on partnership basis as an

Amrapali Group project with its brand name. The applicant was

to invest his time, resources, experience and contacts apart from

providing other services and expertise necessary for undertaking

the development of the land.              Essentially, the work to be

undertaken by the applicant was in the nature of securing land

from local farmers, getting titles searched, getting layout of the

colony   made,    getting   user        changed   from   agricultural    to

residential,   obtaining    requisite      information    including     No

Objection Certificates from the concerned departments, making

necessary advertisement(s) and in the nature of aggregating the

land bank for the purposes of development by Amrapali Group of

Companies. This was done primarily because Amrapali Group of

Companies had no footprint in Indore and it was trying to expand

its business in Indore. According to the applicant, in terms of

agreement dated 18.1.2017, an entitlement of 40% share in

favour of the applicant in the inventory was agreed.
3
3.     According to the applicant, in terms of this understanding,

he was able to aggregate an extent of about 160 acres of land

though actual development in terms of construction was never

undertaken. According to the applicant, in terms of the aforesaid

agreement dated 18.1.2017, the land shown in ‘yellow’ colour

would come to the share of the applicant while the land marked

in orange colour was booked by the customers.           It is asserted

that    after   the   matters   pertaining   to   Amrapali   Group   of

Companies were being considered by this Court in Writ Petitions

(Civil) No. 940 of 2017 and other connected matters, attempts

were made to locate and get the details of the projects

undertaken by the Amrapali Group of Companies throughout the

country. In that light, the applicant was informed by Mr. Anil

Kumar Sharma, Chairman and Managing Director, Amrapali

Group of Companies that his presence was required before the

DRT-III, New Delhi to explain the details with regard to the

project. In pursuance thereof, the applicant appeared before the

DRT-III on 27.10.2018 and he became aware of orders dated

4.9.2018, 6.9.2018 and 12.9.2018 passed by this Court. After

the applicant had presented his view point, the proceedings dated
4
11.12.2018 with regard to which the principal prayer has been

made, took place before the DRT-III, New Delhi.
4.   Said proceedings dated 11.12.2018 indicate as under: -
“Heard. Record has thoroughly been perused. In the
       present matter, Shri Prem Mishra, Objector has relied
       upon the agreement of mutual consent and claiming that
       he has developed approximately 160 acres land which
       was purchased with the consent of the first party and
       entire dues of the Amrapali has been recovered and
       further it is now being consented that in case of profit of
       more than 100 crores then 30% of the profit will be given
       to him and the period of two years granted to Prem
       Mishra      on    14.10.2009.      Already    4-5    years
       have been elapsed, hence it is agreed that the 40% of the
       aforesaid colony project will be given to the second party
       i.e. Prem Mishra and rest of the 60% shall be kept by
       Amrapali builders.
Apparently, the applicant i.e. Prem Mishra herein is
       relying upon the Memorandum of Understanding between
       the parties. It is well settled proposition of the law that
       there is a difference between Memorandum of
       Understanding as well as agreement, as the MOU is a
       written document which describe the terms as an
       agreement and the element of MOU as offer, acceptance
       and intention and consideration. Apparently, the present
       MOU was executed between Prem Mishra and Amrapali
       on 18.01.2017, whereas it is so mentioned that the Prem
       Mishra has been working with the project for the last 4-5
       years and at that moment no such agreement was
       executed between the parties, which clearly indicates that
       the present agreement has been executed just to avoid
       the liability accrued against the Amrapali Homes Project
       Pvt. Ltd. there is nothing on the record exists. The
       agreement to sell placed on record executed by Prem
       Mishra and the private seller of the property, that no such
       services were continuously been provided by Prem Mishra
       in the project. Had there been such mutual
       understanding, he would be entitled to share the 30% of
       the profit then such like agreement has to be executed
       and entered into between the parties at the time of
       launching of the project. Apparently, the project was
       launched way back in year 2006. The past services
       rendered by Prem Mishra are not voluntarily rather he
       was specifically authorized and worked as attorney of
5
Amrapali. Hence, no substantive right, title and interest
stand created in favour of Prem Mishra.
On behalf of Amrapali, it is clearly mentioned that Prem
Mishra was merely authorized to purchase the
agricultural land and make payment for purchase of the
property, buy stamp papers and make negotiation with
prospective sellers for and on behalf of the company.
Further, Prem Mishra was authorized to execute sale
deed for and on behalf of the company, therefore, he was
merely authorized to do these types of work. Though a
promise to compensate, wholly or in part, a person who
has already voluntarily done something for the promisor,
or something which the promisor was legally compellable
to do. No doubt for the thing voluntarily done by a person
for their promisor, he can be compensated, but here in
the present matter this is not a case as Shri Prem Mishra
was merely authorized to do certain things on behalf of
the company i.e. purchasing of land and executing the
sale deed etc. and for the purpose the entire chunk of
land consisting of 40% of 100 acres approx. cannot be
deemed to be transferred in the favour of Prem Mishra.
No doubt, the area which has been disclosed before the
Hon’ble Supreme Court as 12 Lacs sq. mtrs. As shown in
‘Green’ colour in the map, but apart that, the area shown
in ‘Yellow’ colour, which stated to come in the share of
Prem Mishra, on the basis of things done by him in the
previous, cannot be deemed to be transferred and
apparently, there is active connivance between Prem
Mishra as well as Amrapali Builders and this fact has
also been suppressed from the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India. Thus, the objections of the Prem Mishra, merely on
the basis of said MOU are not sustainable and he cannot
be presumed become owner of the said property and no
substantive right, title, and interest, in the said portion is
created in his favour. Therefore, the said area shown in
‘Yellow’ colour i.e. measuring about 5,66,799sq. ft. still
exists in the name of Amrapali.
In this regard, necessary permission has to be sought
from the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India to sell the said
area as well. Accordingly, a request letter be placed
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, for granting
permission to sell the said area. Registry is directed to
issue letters accordingly. Mere MOU does not create any
substantive right in favour of Prem Mishra to be the
owner with respect to the said property shown in ‘Yellow’
colour in the site map.”
6
5.   It is in pursuance of the concluding part of the above

proceedings that the matter is before us.
I.A. No. 74385 of 2020
6.   This Interlocutory Application has been filed by the same

applicant seeking following directions: -
a. “Kindly direct the Ld. Officer of DRT-III, Delhi to make
           necessary changes in the area of green color area
           which wrongly included area received for development
           of colony (i.e. 12.71 bigha of farmer land and 7125
           sq.ft. of additional land)
        b. Provide all rights of ownership of the yellow color area
           i.e. 40% (6,10,649 sq.ft.) in favour of the applicant.
        c. Kindly direct the Ld. DRT-III to provide 40% of the
           profit share to the applicant.”
7.   According to the applicant, he holds 40% of the ‘yellow’ area

in the concerned colony of Indore with all rights of selling,

receiving amounts and right to execute the appropriate deeds of

conveyance.      The applicant adverts to certain transactions

entered into with respect to said project at Indore and then

submits as under: -
“15. That in a case registered against the Amrapali
        Group i.e.
Bikram Chatterji & Ors. vs. Union of India &
        Ors. This
Hon’ble Court vide its order dated 12.09.2018
        had directed the Debts Recovery Tribunal – III, Delhi to
        auction the properties of only Amrapali Groups and had
        marked 12,00,000 sq.ft. approximately belonging to
        Amrapali Homes Projects Pvt. Ltd. at Indore. This
        Hon’ble Court had also forwarded the map provided by
        the Amrapali to this Hon’ble Court to the Officer of DRT-
        III, Delhi wherein the property of Amrapali admeasuring
7
12,00,000 sq.ft. was shown in green color and property of
the applicant admeasuring 6,10,649 sq.ft. area was
shown in yellow color. A true copy of the order dated
12.09.2018 passed by this Hon’ble Court in Writ Petition
(C)No.940/2017 is annexed herewith and marked as
Annexure A/5 (page 33 to 45).
16. That thereafter the applicant moved I.A. No. 4/2018
dated 27.10.2018 before the DRT-III, Delhi to attach only
the green area, measuring 12,00,000 sq.ft (including the
M Red Area in the map measuring 3,34,455 sq.ft.) which
the Amrapali owned as part of 60% profit sharing.
17. That the Officer of DRT-III, Delhi failed to comply
with the directions passed by this Hon’ble Court vide
order dated 12.09.2018 and erroneously included the
property of the applicant admeasuring 6,10,649 sq.ft. for
the purpose of selling out assets of the group.
18. That the tribunal vide its order dated 11.12.2018
dismissed the applicant’s request to attach only the area
in green, which was the property of Amrapali, as per the
direction of this Hon’ble Court.          The applicant’s
submission that the area shown in yellow rightfully
belongs to the applicant as per MOU signed between the
applicant and the Directors of M/s.. Amrapali Homes Pvt.
Ltd. dated 14.10.2009 and 18.01.2017 was disregarded
and the Tribunal on erroneous findings attached both the
yellow area and green area. It is most respectfully
submitted that the Tribunal in doing so clearly went
beyond its jurisdiction adding the yellow area of the
applicant measuring 6,10,649 sq.ft. to the green area
measuring 12,00,000 sq.ft. whereas this Hon’ble Court in
its order dated 12.09.2018 had mentioned only 12,00,000
sq.ft. as per the property of Amrapali Group. A true copy
of the order dated 11.12.2018 made by Presiding Officer,
DRT-III, Delhi is annexed herewith and marked as
Annexure A/6.
19. That being aggrieved with the order dated 11.12.2018
applicant approached this Hon’ble Court and filed I.A. No.
8260/2019 dated 14.01.2019 and the same is still
pending for the kind consideration of this Hon’ble Court.
A true copy of the I.A. No. 8260/2019 dated 14.01.2019
made by the applicant before this Hon’ble Court is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure A/7.
20. That in furtherance after receiving the information or
intimation about the auction of Amrapali part area of
Indore colony by the Ld. DRT Officer some of the
residents/buyers of Indore Colony filed I.A. No.3/2019 to
I.A.No.41/2019 before Ld. DRT Tribunal. In fact, the
8
residents and buyers were having interest and as they
              have purchased their residential units in Amrapali Project
              situated at Indore, they have taken huge sums of money
              in shape of home loan, they were also under dire financial
              stress, therefore, they have prayed before the Tribunal to
              allow the intervention application and further sought the
              relief to appoint a capable developer for completion of the
              entire remaining work of the project.”
8.        The applicant then submits that the DRT officer had put

said property to auction having distress value of Rs.95 crores.

According to the applicant, all rights of ownership in the area

mentioned in ‘yellow’ admeasuring about 6,10,649 square feet

constituting 40% must be provided in favour of the applicant.
9.        Some of the developments which occurred during the

pendency of these applications must now be adverted to.
A. On 23.7.2019, this Court delivered its judgment reported

               in
Bikram Chatterji & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.2

               The
matter pertaining to Indore project was considered

               by this Court at page 248 of SCC report and in

               paragraph 155 it was stated that in view of the findings

               rendered by the forensic auditors, the Enforcement

               Directorate (ED) and other authorities should investigate

               and fix liability on persons responsible for violation.

               Soon    thereafter,     a    supplementary        report     dated
2
(2019) 9 SCC 161
9
10.10.2019 was filed by the forensic auditors which

   summed up that Rs.10.26 crores were recoverable from

   Mr. Prem Mishra with respect to his concern in the

   Amrapali Colony project at Indore.
B. On 15.9.2020, Mr. Prem Mishra raised objections against

   the findings of this Court dated 23.7.2019.

C. Based on the forensic auditors’ report, Mr. M.L. Lahoty,

   learned counsel representing the cause of homebuyers,

   in his note dated 29.10.2020, submitted as under: -
“i. The Supplementary Report-II of the Forensic Audit
        (Pages    2961-2978)       reveals    misdeeds     and
        misappropriation of Crores of Rupees by Prem Mishra
        who even during the pendency of proceedings before
        this Hon’ble Court has continued to sell the Plots and
        received huge payment. According to the Report, the
        Companies were created for diversion of funds from
        NOIDA Projects and therefore the unsold inventory as
        also the Bank accounts need to be attached by this
        Hon’ble Court and necessary recoveries be directed.
        The Projects indicated in the Report are as under:
ii. Amrapali Homes Project Private Limited: The first
        Project namely, Amrapali House Modern City Projects
        in Mhow (District Indore) was launched by Anil
        Kumar Sharma and Shiv Priya in partnership with
        Prem Mishra with Mahendra Singh Dhoni as Brand
        Ambassador. According to the Report, a total area of
        49,500 sq. ft. was allotted to the family members of
        Prem Mishra without receipt of any funds. Further,
        units admeasuring 1,295 sq. ft. units with Registry
        Value of Rs.84.55 Crores (approx.) were sold and 302
        plots were mortgaged to the Government. That apart
        there are unsold units admeasuring total area of
        15,77,870 sq. ft.
iii. Nipunj Infrastructure Private Limited: The Project
        Maa Vindhyawasini Township is situated in Gram
10
Bhaktkedi (District Indore) and was launched as
        Amrapali Group Project with Mahendra Singh Dhoni
        as brand Ambassador. There are total 138 plots out of
        which 97 plots are sold and 41 plots are unsold. This
        company has also mortgaged five residential cum
        commercial plots to the Government.
iv. Vindhyawasini Developers (India) Pvt. Ltd.: The
        Project Maa Vindhyawasini Township at Manawar
        (District Indore) was launched as Amrapali Group
        Project with Mahendra Singh Dhoni as Brand
        Ambassador and out of a total of 266 plots, 131 plots
        were sold and 135 plots are unsold. Further the
        company has also mortgaged 102 plots to the
        Municipal Corporation Manawar.
v. Maa Vindhyawasini Dream City: This Project was
        also launched as Amrapali Group Project with
        Mahendra Singh Dhoni as Brand Ambassador at
        Ratlam. There are a total of 1,192 plots out of which
        263 plots are sold while 929 plots remain unsold.
That apart 265 plots have been mortgaged to the
        Government.
vi. Mishra & Mishra Realty Pvt. Ltd. - As per the
        Report, no details have been made available of this
        Project to the Forensic Auditors, though there are Two
        Directors and Promotor Shareholders having equal
        percentage of shares namely, (i) Prem Mishra, and (ii)
        Mayank Mishra.
vii. So far as Prem Mishra is concerned, this Hon’ble
        Court has already recorded that an amount of Rs.10
        Crores is recoverable from him. (Judgment pages 87
        & 193 as also the Supplementary Forensic Audit
        Report page 2966).”


D. After perusal of the note and considering submissions

   made on behalf of Mr. Prem Mishra, this Court by its

   order dated 2.11.2020, directed the ED to file an

   appropriate response since by that time the investigation

   had commenced against Mr. Prem Mishra. Accordingly,

   status report dated 18.11.2020 was submitted by the ED
11
stating inter alia; that initial investment in the Indore

    project made by Mr. Prem Mishra was to the tune of

    Rs.3.5 crores while Rs.21 crores were invested by

    Amrapali Group of Companies for purchase of lands and

    that total money received from the homebuyers for

    Indore project was in the sum of Rs.18.95 crores.

E. Subsequently, a further status report was filed by the ED

    on 4.1.2021. The learned counsel appearing for Mr.Prem

    Mishra sought time to respond to said status report. In

    the meantime, the matter was adjourned for six weeks to

    enable the ED to complete the investigation with

    following directions vide order dated 11.1.2021 passed by

    this Court: -
“a. The properties of all the aforesaid Corporate
         entities and those of Mr. Indra Bahadur Mishra sand
         Mr. Arvind Mishra and of Mr. prem Mishra, are kept
         under attachment and these Corporate entities as
         well as the individuals names hereinabove are
         restrained from dealing with or disposing of their
         properties, both movable and immovable.
         b. This ad-interim order shall not however preclude
         these Corporate entities and the individuals from
         defraying expenses for normal day to day affairs and
         necessary statutory dues.”


F. On 22.2.2021, a provisional attachment order under
Section 5(1)
of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
12
20023 was passed by the ED holding that Mr. Prem

               Mishra and his brother had siphoned of an amount of

               Rs.4,79,76,180 out of which Rs.79,52,500 pertained to

               his brothers and Mr. Indra Bhushan Mishra and Mr.

               Arvind Mishra while remaining Rs.4,00,23,680 pertained

               to Mr. Prem Mishra. On or about 28.8.2021, cognizance

               was taken by the Special Judge in the matter.
G. In its order dated 13.9.2021, this Court recorded the

               submissions of the learned counsel appearing for Mr.

               Prem Mishra as under: -
“Mr. Vikas Singh, learned Senior Advocate submits
                       inter alia:
a. Provisional Attachment Order No.01/2021 dated
                      22.02.2021 passed by the Enforcement Directorate
                      has quantified the liability of Prem Mishra to the tune
                      of Rs.4,79,76,180/-. This provisional order has now
                      been confirmed by the Prescribed Authority.
Therefore, the attachment effected in terms of the
                      Order dated 11.01.2021 passed by this Court may
                      suitably be modified.
b. Considering the nature of circumstances, the entire
                      exercise be undertaken in this Court rather than
                      relegating Mr. Prem Mishra to the proceedings before
                      the PMLA Authorities.”


                      The Court also directed the forensic auditors to

               submit report on or before 20.9.2021. According to the
3
“
PML Act
”, for short
13
report submitted by the forensic auditors, apart from

        sum of Rs.10.26 crores, a further additional sum of

        Rs.2.31 crores was due on certain counts.
H. The note prepared by forensic auditors was directed to be

        circulated to all parties vide order dated 20.9.2021

        passed by this Court. In its response pursuant to said

        order dated 20.9.2021, it was submitted on behalf of ED

        that permission be granted to the ED to have further

        attachment in respect of an amount of Rs.70,51,063

        lakhs from the properties of Mr. Prem Mishra.         The

        supplementary note was thereafter filed by the ED on

        28.10.2021.    The adjudicating authority passed final

        order   on    28.12.2021   confirming    the   provisional

        attachment order dated 22.2.2021 and observed that the

        extent of funds siphoned of were to the tune of

        Rs.4,79,76,180.
10. In these circumstances, what is presently submitted on

behalf of Mr. Prem Mishra is that his liability stands confirmed

only to the extent of Rs.4.79 crores and as such, there would be

no justification to continue with the attachment of all the assets

of Mr. Prem Mishra and his brothers.
14
11. There are two divergent views which are emanating from the

record.    According to the forensic auditors, the liability of

Mr. Prem Mishra is to the tune of Rs.10.26 crores and also in the

additional sum of Rs.2.31 crores; whereas, according to the ED,

the extent of funds siphoned off by Mr. Prem Mishra were to the

tune of Rs.4,79,76,180 only.      But at the root of the entire

controversy is the question whether Mr. Prem Mishra has any

claim or title with respect to the property which is subject matter

of attachment.     The documents on which reliance has been

placed in I.A. Nos. 8259 of 2019 and 74385 of 2020 are not

registered documents nor have these I.As. been finally disposed

of.   Going by the tenor of I.A. No. 8259 of 2019, it is directed

against the proceedings dated 11.12.2018, where the matter was

not gone into by the DRT-III, New Delhi because of pendency of

proceedings in this Court. There is thus no concrete and final

determination with regard to the rights of Mr. Prem Mishra to the

property which was subject matter of arrangements between the

parties. Even at this stage, going by the prima facie view, at least

Rs.21 crores were invested by Amrapali Group of Companies for

purchase of these lands.       By any standard, even without

expressing any opinion on merits of the matter, the bulk of the
15
investment has come from Amrapali Group of Companies

towards purchase of these properties. Merely because the extent

of money which was siphoned off has been put at the level of

Rs.4.79 crores would not mean that lands beyond this value

ought to be released in favour of Mr. Prem Mishra.           His

entitlement is yet to be pronounced upon.
12. In the circumstances, the prayer made by Mr. Prem Mishra

for releasing attachment of all the assets in question, cannot be

granted at this stage.      In essence, the matter has to be

considered along with I.A. Nos. 8259 of 2019 and 74385 of 2020.

We, therefore, reject the prayer for release of attachment as

mentioned above and direct that these two Interlocutory

Applications be listed and considered at an early date.
……………………………..CJI.
[Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                      ………………………………..J.
                                           [Bela M. Trivedi]

New Delhi;
November 07, 2022.