[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Vgp Marine Kingdom Pvt Ltd vs Kay Ellen Arnold on 4 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6679 OF 2022


          VGP Marine Kingdom Pvt Ltd & Anr.                           …Appellant(s)


                                                Versus


          Kay Ellen Arnold                                          …Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 05.08.2021 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Madras in O.P. No. 304/2019, by

                         which, the High Court has dismissed the said application

                         under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

                         1996 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, 1996) and has
Signature Not Verified   refused to appoint an arbitrator and refer the dispute to
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.11.04
16:23:52 IST
Reason:
the arbitrator, original applicant has preferred the present
1
appeal.
2.   That the appellants herein approached the High Court

     under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996 by way of O.P. No.

     304/2019 to appoint an arbitrator so that the arbitral

     tribunal can be constituted in terms of clause 17.1.2 of the

     Share Subscription and Shareholders Agreement entered

     into between the appellants and the respondent at Chennai

     on 27.04.2016. By the impugned judgment and order the

     High Court has dismissed the said application and refused

     to appoint an arbitrator mainly on the grounds that at the

     time when the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act,

     1996 was filed in the year 2019, the matter was already

     referred to the arbitral tribunal with respect to agreement

     dated 27.04.2016, subsequent amendment agreement

     dated     06.12.2017   and   addendum    agreement    dated

     28.05.2018 and also on the ground that the proceedings

     were pending before the National Company Law Tribunal

     (NCLT) initiated by the respondent for various acts of

     oppression and mismanagement as a minority shareholder.
3.   Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned Senior Advocate appearing

     on behalf of the appellants has submitted that in the
2
present case there is a different Share Subscription and

Shareholders Agreement dated 27.04.2016 which contains

the arbitration clause in case of any dispute between the

parties (clause 17.1.2 of the Share Subscription and

Shareholders Agreement). It is further submitted that in

view of the dispute between the parties the appellants

issued   notice   of    termination   of    the   Second    SHA

(Shareholders Agreement). It is submitted that thereafter

the appellants served a notice upon the respondent

invoking the arbitration clause 17.1.2. However, there was

a failure on the part of the respondent to nominate an

arbitrator   which     compelled   and/or     constrained   the

appellants approaching the High Court for appointment of

an arbitrator under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996. It is

vehemently submitted by Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned

Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants that

the dispute between the parties is with respect to a

separate shareholders agreement and the said dispute was

the subject matter of another arbitral proceedings. It is

submitted that even the appellant was not a party to the

earlier arbitral proceedings.
3
3.1   Now so far as the proceedings pending before the NCLT

      initiated by the respondent with respect to the oppression

      and   mismanagement      as   a   minority   shareholder   is

      concerned, pendency of such proceedings cannot be a

      ground to not to refer the dispute between the parties and

      appoint an arbitrator.
3.2   Making the above submissions and relying upon the

      decision of this Court in the case of
Vidya Drolia and Ors.

      Vs.   Durga   Trading    Corporation
;   (2021)   2   SCC   1

      (paragraphs 147.9, 147.11 and 225), it is prayed to allow

      the present appeal.
4.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent

      relying upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of
Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. Vs. SBI Home Finance Ltd.
,

      (
2011) 5 SCC 532, Chloro Controls India Private

      Limited Vs. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc. and

      Ors.
, (2013) 1
SCC 641 and Vidya Drolia
(supra) and by

      supporting the impugned judgment and order passed by

      the High Court and even relying upon some of the
4
observations made by this Court in the case of
Vidya

      Drolia
(supra) has prayed to dismiss the present appeal.

4.1   It is submitted that all the three agreements are/were

      inter­linked and therefore, in view of earlier award with

      respect to other two agreements the present dispute with

      respect to the third agreement shall not be maintainable.

4.2   Making the above submissions it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
5.    Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties and considering the fact that Share

      Subscription         and   Shareholders    Agreement       dated

      27.04.2016 entered into between the appellants and the

      respondent contains the arbitration clause in case of

      dispute between the parties arising out of the said

      agreement, we are of the opinion that the High Court

      ought to have allowed the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996 and ought to have left the issue on

      arbitrability   of    dispute   between   the   parties   to   the

      arbitrator.
5.1   Clause 17 of the Agreement which contains the dispute

      resolution process/arbitration clause reads as under: ­
5
“17. DISPUTE RESOLUTION

17.1.  Dispute    Resolution,     Jurisdiction     and
Governing Law
17.1.1    The Parties agree that this Agreement
          shall be governed by and construed in
          accordance with the laws of India. If any
          question, dispute, controversy or claim
          shall at any time arise between the Parties
          inter se or between a Party(ies) and the
          Company, with respect to the validity,
          interpretation, implementation or alleged
          material breach of any provision of this
          Agreement or the rights or obligations of
          the Parties and the Company hereunder,
          or regarding any question including the
          question as to whether the termination of
          this Agreement by either Party has been
          legitimate, (collectively, "Dispute") then the
          Parties shall attempt to settle . such
          Dispute amicably between them by
          reference to the management of the
          Parties. In case of KEA, such management
          shall be represented by a Director, and in
          case of VGP, such management shall be
          represented by a Director.
17.l.2    In the event that such management
          representatives have not agreed upon a
          decision within thirty (30) Business Days
          after reference of the matter to them, then
          either Party may within thirty (30)
          Business Days after the first thirty (30)
          Business Days referenced above, give to
          the other Party, a notice of intention to
          submit the Dispute to arbitration under
          this Clause 17.
17.1.3    Upon issuance of such notice, the Dispute
          shall be referred to a board of three (3)
          arbitrators. Each Party shall be entitled to
          appoint one (1) arbitrator and the two (2)
          arbitrators so appointed by the Parties
          shall appoint the third arbitrator. The
          award of the arbitrators shall be final and
          binding on the Parties and the Company.
6
17.1.4     The seat of arbitration shall be Chennai
                    and the language to be used in the arbitral
                    proceedings in all instances shall be
                    English.
17.I.5     The arbitration shall be governed by the
                    provisions of the
Indian Arbitration and
                    Conciliation Act, 1996
(as amended from
                    time to time and any statutory re­
                    enactment governing arbitrations).
17.I.6     The fees of the arbitrators shall be borne
                    equally by the Parties. All other costs and
                    expenses of the arbitration shall be borne
                    by the Parties as the arbitrator may
                    award.
17.l.7     Subject to Clauses 17.1.1 to 17.1.6, each
                    Party submits to the exclusive jurisdiction
                    of the courts of Chennai. Provided that,
                    the Parties agree to submit to the
                    exclusive jurisdiction of the competent
                    courts as may be necessary for the
                    enforcement of an arbitral award obtained
                    in accordance with this Clause 17.
17.1.8     Notwithstanding any other provision of
                    this Agreement, the rights and obligations
                    of the Parties under this Clause shall
                    survive termination of this Agreement.”


5.2   As observed hereinabove and from the impugned judgment

      and order passed by the High Court it appears that the

      High Court has refused to appoint an arbitrator, inter­alia,

      on the ground that at the time when the application was

      filed there were already arbitral proceedings pending

      between the parties and the award was passed and also on

      the ground that the proceedings were pending before the

      NCLT at the instance of the respondent on the allegation of
7
mismanagement and oppression which was filed by the

      respondent as minority shareholder.
5.3   So far as the first ground is concerned, at the outset it is

      required to be noted that according to the appellant,

      appellant was not a party to the said proceedings and the

      present Share Subscription and Shareholders Agreement

      dated 27.04.2016 is an independent agreement and it is

      the case on behalf of the respondent that all the three

      agreements are inter­linked and therefore, in view of the

      above declared award with respect to the other two

      agreements      the   present   application    shall     not   be

      maintainable. As per the decision of this Court in the case

      of
Vidya Drolia
(supra) unless on the facet it is found that

      the   dispute    is   not   arbitrable   and   if   it   requires

      further/deeper consideration, the dispute with respect to

      the arbitrability should be left to the arbitrator.
The

      decision of this Court in the case of
Vidya Drolia
(supra) is

      a three judges’ bench subsequent decision in which the

      entire law on the scope and ambit of the Court at the stage

      of application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996 has

      been dealt with and considered by the Court.
8
5.4   So far as the second ground on which the High Court has

      refused to refer the dispute between the parties and

      appoint an arbitrator, namely that the proceedings at the

      instance of the respondent as minority shareholder for

      oppression and mismanagement is pending before the

      NCLT is concerned, on the pendency of such proceedings

      the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996

      cannot be dismissed. It should be left to the arbitrator to

      consider the entire aspect. The dispute is with respect to

      the Share Subscription and Shareholders Agreement

      which is altogether different from the allegations of

      mismanagement     and   oppression   at   the   instance   of

      minority shareholder initiated by the respondent.
6.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

      High Court has erred in dismissing the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996 and has erred in refusing to

      appoint an arbitrator with respect to the dispute between

      the parties with respect to the Share Subscription and

      Shareholders Agreement dated 27.04.2016. The impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court is set aside
9
and the application submitted by the appellants under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, 1996 is hereby allowed. Shri

     Justice K. Ravichandrabaabu Former Judge, Madras High

     Court is hereby appointed as an Arbitrator to resolve the

     dispute between the parties arising out of the Share

     Subscription    and    Shareholders     Agreement     dated

     27.04.2016. The issue with respect to the arbitrability of

     the dispute is left to be decided by the learned Arbitrator.

     The fees of the Arbitrator shall be decided by the learned

     Arbitrator with the consent of the respective parties as per

     the
Schedule to the Act, 1996
as amended from time to

     time. The present appeal is allowed accordingly.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
NOVEMBER 04, 2022                  [KRISHNA MURARI]
10