[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharashtra Rajya Vadar Samaj Sangh ... vs Union Of India Department Of Mine ... on 24 November, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M. R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                               Writ Petition (Civil) No. 748 of 2016


          Maharashtra Rajya Vadar Samaj Sangh                          .Appellant(S)


                                             Versus

                                                 `
          Union of India & Ors.                                  ..Respondent(S)


                                        JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             By way of this writ petition under
Article 32
of the

                         Constitution of India petitioner has prayed for an

                         appropriate writ direction and/or order to quash and

                         set aside the Government Resolution dated 12.07.2011

                         passed by the Revenue and Forest Department,

                         Government of State of Maharashtra.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2022.11.24
12:53:49 IST
Reason:
1
2.   At the outset it is required to be noted that considering

     the directions issued by this Court in the case of
Jagpal Singh and Ors. Vs. State of Punjab and Ors.
;

     (2011) 11 SCC 396, the State of Maharashtra has

     issued the impugned Government Resolution dated

     12.07.2011 under which a decision is taken that the

     encroachments     or   unauthorized    construction   on

     barren land/grassy land and on the common village

     land may be removed immediately and proceeding may

     be started through local Gram Panchayat, Municipal

     Council, Nagar Parishad etc., by preparing special

     program. It is further resolved that henceforth the

     barren land or land utilized for public only may be

     considered only if non-availability of other lands for

     public utility and public purpose run by the various

     Departments of Central and State Governments and

     that the barren lands/grassy lands or the land under

     utilization of the villagers shall not be approved to any
2
person,    private   institute,   organization      for    any

      motive/purpose.
2.1   In the case of
Jagpal Singh
(supra) this Court issued

      the directions to protect the barren lands/grassy lands

      to be utilized for cattle to be used for public only. This

      Court directed to all the State Governments in the

      country that they should prepare schemes for eviction

      of   illegal/unauthorized     occupants     of    the     Gram

      Sabha/Gram Panchayat/poramboke/ shamlat land

      and these must be restored to the Gram Sabha/Gram

      Panchayat for the common use of villagers of the

      village.   The   Chief   Secretaries   of   all   the     State

      Governments were directed to do the needful. In line

      with the said directions the State of Maharashtra has

      issued the impugned resolution.
3.    It is the case on behalf of the petitioner that the

      petitioner is established for the welfare of “Vadar”

      community within the State of Maharashtra. It is the
3
case on behalf of the petitioner that Vadar community

has been notified as Nomadic Tribe by the State

Government and whose ancestor family profession is

stone crushing, removing stone, etc. That in exercise of

powers conferred under
Section 15
of the Mines and

Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Act,

1957, the State of Maharashtra has framed the Rules

titled as the Maharashtra Land Revenue (Extraction

and   Removal    of   Minor   Minerals)   Rules,   1968

(hereinafter referred to as the Rules, 1968). As per

Rule 4A, family of Vadar community can remove stone

up to 200 brass annually by stone crushing by hand,

without payment of any fee or royalty, however, with

the previous permission and writing of the Collector or

Additional Collector as the case may be, from any

private land or un-assessed Government waste land

not assigned for special purposes under
Section 22
of

the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966.
4
3.1   It is the case on behalf of the petitioner that the family

      of   the      Vadar       communities         were      granted

      lease/permission for mining which were renewed from

      time to time. It is the case on behalf of the petitioner

      that however, on misreading and/or mis-interpretation

      of the decision of this Court in the case of
Jagpal

      Singh
(supra)    and    in     view   of   the    impugned

      Government Resolution dated 12.07.2011, the family

      of Vadar community are not granted any lease and/or

      the lease are not renewed. Therefore, it is the case on

      behalf of the petitioner that the impugned Government

      Resolution takes away the right available to the family

      of the Vadar community conferred under Rule 4A of

      the Rules, 1968.
4.    Having     heard   Shri   Vijay    Kumar,     learned    Senior

      Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri

      Sanjay Kharde, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the respondent – State and having gone through and

      considered the impugned Government Resolution read
5
with Rule 4A of the Rules, 1968, we are of the opinion

that the impugned Government Resolution cannot be

said to be illegal and/or taking away any of the rights

conferred upon the family of the Vadar community

conferred under Rule 4A of the Rules, 1968. The

impugned Government Resolution dated 12.07.2011 is

absolutely in consonance with the directions issued by

this Court in the case of
Jagpal Singh
(supra)

contained in para 23.
Para 23 of the decision in the

case of
Jagpal Singh
(supra) reads as under: -
“23. Before parting with this case we give
   directions to all the State Governments in the
   country that they should prepare schemes for
   eviction of illegal/unauthorised occupants of the
   Gram                                     Sabha/Gram
   Panchayat/poramboke/shamlat land and these
   must be restored to the Gram Sabha/Gram
   Panchayat for the common use of villagers of the
   village. For this purpose the Chief Secretaries of
   all State Governments/Union Territories in India
   are directed to do the needful, taking the help of
   other senior officers of the Governments. The said
   scheme should provide for the speedy eviction of
   such illegal occupant, after giving him a show-
   cause notice and a brief hearing. Long duration of
   such illegal occupation or huge expenditure in
   making constructions thereon or political
   connections must not be treated as a justification
   for condoning this illegal act or for regularising the
   illegal possession. Regularisation should only be
6
permitted in exceptional cases e.g. where lease has
         been granted under some government notification
         to landless labourers or members of the Scheduled
         Castes/Scheduled Tribes, or where there is
         already a school, dispensary or other public utility
         on the land.”


4.1   If the impugned Government Resolution is seen, it is

      specifically with respect to the barren lands/grassy

      lands belonging to the Gram Sabha/Gram Panchayat

      and/or the Government’s barren lands and grassy

      lands to be used for public utilization and to be used

      for public only.
4.2   So far as the reliance placed upon the Rule 4A of the

      Rules, 1968 is concerned, on a fair reading of Rule 4A

      it provides that the family of Vadar community for the

      purpose of its traditional profession of stone crushing

      by hand can remove stone up to 200 brass annually,

      from any private land or un-assessed Government

      waste not assigned for special purposes under
Section

      22
of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966,

      without payment of any fee or royalty, however, with

      the previous permission and writing of the Collector or
7
Additional Collector as the case may be. However, the

same shall not be applicable with respect to the barren

lands or the grassy lands, any village lands owned by

the   Gram    Panchayat/Gram      Sabha    and/or     the

Government or any un-utilized Government land to be

used for public utility or the land under utilization of

the villagers. Rule 4A also does not provide for any

lease of barren/grassy lands belonging to the Gram

Sabha/Gram Panchayat. The object and purpose of

Rule 4A would be permitting the family of Vadar

community to continue their traditional profession of

stone crushing by hand by extracting the stone up to

200 brass annually without payment of any fee or

royalty. The Rule 4A is not meant for the lease for

commercial use. Therefore, we are of the opinion that

the   impugned      Government      Resolution      dated

12.07.2011 cannot be said to be illegal as sought to be

canvassed on behalf of the petitioner. If any lease is

not renewed in individual case and/or any action is
8
taken against individual and if any person is aggrieved,

     he can take recourse to law. By no stretch of

     imagination, the impugned Government Resolution

     which according to us is in consonance with the

     directions issued by this Court in the case of
Jagpal

     Singh
(supra) cannot be said to be illegal.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above

     subject to observations made hereinabove, the present

     writ petition stands dismissed/disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)



                                  …………………………………J.
                                   (M.M. SUNDRESH)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 24, 2022.
9