[Cites
39
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Texco Marketing Pvt. Ltd. vs Tata Aig Generla Insurance Company Ltd on 9 November, 2022
Author:
M. M. Sundresh
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Surya Kant
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8249              OF 2022
                                 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 25457 of 2019]


          M/s Texco Marketing Pvt. Ltd.                                              … Appellant

                                                     Versus

          TATA AIG General Insurance Company Ltd. & Ors.                           ... Respondents


                                               JUDGMENT
M. M. SUNDRESH, J.
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
ON FACTS
1. The appellant secured a Standard Fire & Special Perils policy from the

                 respondent on 28.07.2012. The policy was effective from 28.07.2012 to

                 27.07.2013. It was meant to cover a shop situated in the basement of the

                 building. However, the exclusion clause of the contract specifies that it does not

                 cover the basement. Due inspection of the shop was made which was actually
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.11.09
17:25:03 IST
Reason:
situated on the other side of the road from the office of respondent No. 1. Not

                 only this shop of the appellant, but yet another shop similarly situated, was also
1
insured by respondent No. 1. The appellant continued to pay the premium

   promptly.
2. The appellant put up further construction, for which due notice was given and

   due inspection was also made. The shop met with a fire accident for which the

   appellant raised a claim. The surveyor of respondent No. 1 also made an

   inspection, on the basis of which the appellant was instructed to refurnish its

   shop for the purpose of due evaluation. While arriving at the sum payable, the

   surveyor did notice the fact that the earlier inspections were made and that the

   fact that the shop was in a basement was to the knowledge of the insurer. The

   claim made was repudiated by respondent No. 1, taking umbrage under the

   exclusion clause.
3. The State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to as

   ‘the State Commission’) rejected the contention of respondent No. 1 on the

   premise that there was no adequate disclosure, the mandatory provisions have

   not been followed, as such the insurer was deficient in service and indulged in

   unfair trade practice. The fact that a similarly placed shop was also covered, was

   not in dispute. The amount payable is only after due deduction of the goods

   meant for the third party.
4. The aforesaid decision was overturned by the National Consumer Disputes

   Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to as ‘the National Commission’),
2
despite a finding to the effect that respondent No. 1 was not in compliance of the

   mandate of the law and inspection was indeed done prior to the execution of the

   contract, and even thereafter. Having found a deficiency in service, it placed

   reliance upon the exclusion clause in setting aside the decision of the State

   Commission while granting a sum of Rs.7.5 lakhs. It is this decision of the

   National Commission which is under challenge before us.


   SUBMISSION AT THE BAR
5. Shri. A.K. Ganguli, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submitted

   that the National Commission has not overturned the reasoning of the State

   Commission both on facts and law. When once there is a finding which is not in

   dispute, the consequence would follow.
6. On the contrary, it is submitted by Smt. Shantha Devi R., learned counsel

   appearing for the respondents that the existence of the exclusion clause is not in

   dispute. Admittedly, the shop was situated in the basement, as such, the mere

   fact that the decision of the National Commission was accepted would not

   disentitle the respondents to contend that the finding that there was knowledge

   even at the time of the execution of the contract, is not correct. In any case, it

   cannot be the basis for restoring the decision of the State Commission.
3
GRAVAMEN OF THE CASE
7. “Whether an exclusion clause destroying the very contract knowingly entered,

   can be permitted to be used by a party who introduced it, becomes a beneficiary

   and then to avoid its liability?”

   PRINCIPLES

   Adhesion Contract
8. Black’s Law Dictionary defines “Adhesion Contract” as:
“A standard-form contract prepared by one party, to be signed by the party in a
       weaker position, usually a consumer, who has little choice about the terms. Also
       termed Contract of adhesion; adhesory contract; adhesionary contract; take it or
       leave it contract; leonire contract.”
9. Adhesion contracts are otherwise called Standard-Form Contracts. Contracts of

   Insurance are one such category of contracts. These contracts are prepared by

   the insurer having a standard format upon which a consumer is made to sign.

   He has very little option or choice to negotiate the terms of the contract, except

   to sign on the dotted lines. The insurer who, being the dominant party dictates its

   own terms, leaving it upon the consumer, either to take it or leave it. Such

   contracts are obviously one sided, grossly in favour of the insurer due to the

   weak bargaining power of the consumer.
10.The concept of freedom of contract loses some significance in a contract of

   insurance. Such contracts demand a very high degree of prudence, good faith,

   disclosure and notice on the part of the insurer, being different facets of the
4
doctrine of fairness. Though, a contract of insurance is a voluntary act on the

   part of the consumer, the obvious intendment is to cover any contingency that

   might happen in future. A premium is paid obviously for that purpose, as there is

   a legitimate expectation of reimbursement when an act of God happens.

   Therefore, an insurer is expected to keep that objective in mind, and that too

   from the point of view of the consumer, to cover the risk, as against a plausible

   repudiation.
Exclusion Clause
11.An exclusion clause in a contract of insurance has to be interpreted differently.

   Not only the onus but also the burden lies with the insurer when reliance is made

   on such a clause. This is for the reason that insurance contracts are special

   contracts premised on the notion of good faith. It is not a leverage or a safeguard

   for the insurer, but is meant to be pressed into service on a contingency, being a

   contract of speculation. An insurance contract by its very nature mandates

   disclosure of all material facts by both parties.
12.An exclusion clause has to be understood on the touch-stone of the doctrine of

   reading down in the light of the underlining object and intendment of the

   contract. It can never be understood to mean to be in conflict with the main

   purpose for which the contract is entered. A party, who relies upon it, shall not

   be the one who committed an act of fraud, coercion or mis-representation,
5
particularly when the contract along with the exclusion clause is introduced by

   it. Such a clause has to be understood on the prism of the main contract. The

   main contract once signed would eclipse the offending exclusion clause when it

   would otherwise be impossible to execute it. A clause or a term is a limb, which

   has got no existence outside, as such, it exists and vanishes along with the

   contract, having no independent life of its own. It has got no ability to destroy its

   own creator, i.e. the main contract. When it is destructive to the main contract,

   right at its inception, it has to be severed, being a conscious exclusion, though

   brought either inadvertently or consciously by the party who introduced it. The

   doctrine of waiver, acquiescence, approbate and reprobate, and estoppel would

   certainly come into operation as considered by this court in
N. Murugesan v.

   Union of India
(2022) 2 SCC 25.
13.On the aforesaid principle of law, particularly with respect to the issues qua

   onus, burden and reading down, this Court in
Shivram Chandra Jagarnath

   Cold Storage v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
(2022) 4 SCC 539 has held as

   follows,

              “19. Another instance where exception clauses may be interpreted to the
         benefit of the insured is when the exception clauses are too wide and not
         consistent with the main purpose or object of the insurance policy.
In
B.V.
         Nagaraju v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
(1996) 4 SCC 647, a two-Judge Bench
         of this Court read down an exception clause to serve the main purpose of the
         policy. However, this Court clarified that the breach of the exception clause
         was not so fundamental in nature that would have led to the repudiation of the
         insurance policy. In that case, the terms of the insurance policy allowed an
         insured vehicle to carry six workmen, excluding the driver. When the vehicle
6
met with an accident, it was carrying nine persons apart from the driver. The
insured had moved a claim for repair of the vehicle, which was rejected by the
insurer.
20. Allowing the claim, this Court held thus : (
B.V. Nagaraju
case (1996) 4
SCC 647] , SCC pp. 650-51, para 7)

               “7. It is plain from the terms of the Insurance Policy that the
       insured vehicle was entitled to carry 6 workmen, excluding the driver. If
       those 6 workmen when travelling in the vehicle, are assumed not to
       have increased any risk from the point of view of the Insurance
       Company on occurring of an accident, how could those added persons
       be said to have contributed to the causing of it is the poser, keeping
       apart the load it was carrying. Here, it is nobody's case that the driver
       of the insured vehicle was responsible for the accident. In fact, it was
       not disputed that the oncoming vehicle had collided head-on against
       the insured vehicle, which resulted in the damage. Merely by lifting a
       person or two, or even three, by the driver or the cleaner of the vehicle,
       without the knowledge of the owner, cannot be said to be such a
       fundamental breach that the owner should, in all events, be denied
       indemnification. The misuse of the vehicle was somewhat irregular
       though, but not so fundamental in nature so as to put an end to the
       contract, unless some factors existed which, by themselves, had gone to
       contribute to the causing of the accident. In the instant case, however,
       we find no such contributory factor.
In Skandia case [
Skandia
       Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravadan
, (1987) 2 SCC 654]
       this Court paved the way towards reading down the contractual clause
       by observing as follows : (SCC pp. 665-66, para 14)

               ‘14. … When the option is between opting for a view which will
          relieve the distress and misery of the victims of accidents or their
          dependants on the one hand and the equally plausible view which
          will reduce the profitability of the insurer in regard to the
          occupational hazard undertaken by him by way of business activity,
          there is hardly any choice. The Court cannot but opt for the former
          view. Even if one were to make a strictly doctrinaire approach, the
          very same conclusion would emerge in obeisance to the doctrine of
          “reading down” the exclusion clause in the light of the “main
          purpose” of the provision so that the “exclusion clause” does not
          cross swords with the “main purpose” highlighted earlier. The effort
          must be to harmonise the two instead of allowing the exclusion
          clause to snipe successfully at the main purpose. The theory which
          needs no support is supported by Carter's “Breach of Contract” vide
          para 251. To quote:
7
“Notwithstanding the general ability of contracting parties to
                    agree to exclusion clauses which operate to define obligations
                    there exists a rule, usually referred to as the “main purpose rule”,
                    which may limit the application of wide exclusion clauses
                    defining a promisor's contractual obligations. For example, in
                    Glynn v. Margetson & Co. [1893 AC 351 (HL)] , AC at p. 357,
                    Lord Halsbury, L.C. stated : (AC p. 357)

                                 ‘… It seems to me that in construing this document,
                         which is a contract of carriage between the parties, one must
                         in the first instance look at the whole instrument and not at
                         one part of it only. Looking at the whole instrument, and
                         seeing what one must regard … as its main purpose, one
                         must reject words, indeed whole provisions, if they are
                         inconsistent with what one assumes to be the main purpose of
                         the contract.’

                           Although this rule played a role in the development of the
                    doctrine of fundamental breach, the continued validity of the rule
                    was acknowledged when the doctrine was rejected by the House
                    of Lords in Suisse Atlantique Societe d' Armement Maritime S.A.
                    v. N.V. Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale (1967) 1 AC 361 : (1966) 2
                    WLR 944 (HL)] . Accordingly, wide exclusion clauses will be
                    read down to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the
                    main purpose, or object of the contract.”
                                                 (emphasis in original and supplied)”


Duty of Disclosure, Good Faith and Notice
14.The principles governing disclosure, good faith and notice are founded on the

   common law principle of fairness. These principles are meant to be applied with

   more rigour in standard form contracts such as insurance contracts. Such an

   application is warranted much more when we deal with an exclusion clause. A

   very high standard of good faith, disclosure and due compliance of notice is

   required on the part of the insurer, keeping in view the unique nature of an

   insurance contract.
8
15.An act of good faith on the part of the insurer starts from the time of its intention

   to execute the contract. A disclosure should be a norm and what constitutes a

   material fact requires a liberal interpretation. It is only when an insurer is not

   intending to act on an exclusion clause, the aforesaid principles may not require

   a strict compliance. The three elements which we have discussed are

   interconnected and overlapping. It is the foremost duty of the insurer to give

   effect to a due disclosure and notice in its true letter and spirit. When an

   exclusion clause is introduced making the contract unenforceable on the date on

   which it is executed, much to the knowledge of the insurer, non-disclosure and a

   failure to furnish a copy of the said contract by following the procedure required

   by statute, would make the said clause redundant and non-existent.
16. Lord Denning succinctly describes the fallacy in making an inadequate

   disclosure in George Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd. (1983)

   Law Reports Q.B. 284),

               "None of you nowadays will remember the trouble we had - when I
          was called to the Bar - with exemption clauses. They were printed in
          small print on the back of tickets and order forms and invoices. They
          were contained in catalogues or timetables. They were held to be binding
          on any person who took them without objection. No one ever did object.
He never read them or knew what was in them. No matter how
          unreasonable they were, he was bound. All this was done in the name of
          "freedom of contract." But the freedom was all on the side of the big
          concern which had the use of the printing press. No freedom for the little
          man who took the ticket or order form or invoice. The big concern said,
          "Take it or leave it." The little man had no option but to take it. The big
          concern could and did exempt itself from liability in its own interest
          without regard to the little man. It got away with it time after time. When
9
the courts said to the big concern, "You must put it in clear words," the
        big concern had no hesitation in doing so. It knew well that the little man
        would never read the exemption clauses or understand them.
It was a bleak winter for our law of contract……"
17.In a recent judgment, this Court in
Manmohan Nanda v. United Insurance
(2022) 4 SCC 582, summarises the duty of an insurer and an insured to disclose

  any material facts,

      “Uberrimae fidei
31. It is observed that insurance contracts are special contracts based
      on the general principles of full disclosure inasmuch as a person seeking
      insurance is bound to disclose all material facts relating to the risk involved.
Law demands a higher standard of good faith in matters of insurance
      contracts which is expressed in the legal maxim uberrimae fidei.
32. MacGillivray on insurance law 13th Ed. has summarised the duty of an
      insured to disclose as under:
“...the assured must disclose to the insurer all facts material
           to an insurer's appraisal of the risk which are known or deemed
           to be known by the assured but neither known nor deemed to be
           known by the insurer. Breach of this duty by the assured entitles
           the insurer to avoid the contract of insurance so long as he can
           show that the non-disclosure induced the making of the contract
           on the relevant terms.
33 . Lord Mansfield in Carter v. Boehm (1766) 3 Burr 1905 has summarised
      the principles necessitating disclosure by the assured in the following words:
(E.R. p.1164)

                 “Insurance is a contract of speculation.
The special facts upon which the contingent chance is to be
           computed lie most commonly in the knowledge of the assured
           only; the underwriter trusts to his representation, and proceeds
           upon confidence that he does not keep back any circumstance in
           his knowledge to mislead the underwriter into a belief that the
           circumstance does not exist,….
10
The keeping back such circumstance is a fraud, and
            therefore the policy is void. Although the suppression should
            happen through mistake, without any fraudulent intention, yet
            still the under-writer is deceived and the policy is void; because
            the risk run is really different from the risk understood and
            intended to be run at the time of the agreement.
The policy would be equally void against the under-writer if
            he concealed;...
Good faith forbids either party, by concealing what he
            privately knows, to draw the other into a bargain from his
            ignorance of the fact, and his believing the contrary”.
The aforesaid principles would apply having regard to the nature of policy
       under consideration, as what is necessary to be disclosed are "material facts"
which phrase is not definable as such, as the same would depend upon the
       nature and extent of coverage of risk under a particular type of policy. In
       simple terms, it could be understood that any fact which has a bearing on the
       very foundation of the contract of insurance and the risk to be covered under
       the policy would be a "material fact”.
xxx                                 xxx                                  xxx
35. Just as the insured has a duty to disclose all material facts, the insurer
       must also inform the insured about the terms and conditions of the policy
       that is going to be issued to him and must strictly conform to the statements
       in the proposal form or prospectus, or those made through his agents. Thus,
       the principle of utmost good faith imposes meaningful reciprocal duties
       owed by the insured to the insurer and vice versa. This inherent duty of
       disclosure was a common law duty of good faith originally founded in
       equity but has later been statutorily recognised as noted above. It is also
       open to the parties entering into a contract to extend the duty or restrict it by
       the terms of the contract.”
18. On the principle of acting in good faith, it is held by this Court in
United India

   Insurance Co. Ltd. v. M.K.J. Corporation
(1996) 6 SCC 428, that it is the primary

   duty of the parties to a contract to do so,
11
“(6) It is a fundamental principle of Insurance law that utmost good
      faith must be observed by the contracting parties. Good faith forbids either
      party from concealing (non-disclosure) what he privately knows, to draw the
      other into a bargain, from his ignorance of that fact and his believing the
      contrary. Just as the insured has a duty to disclose, “similarly, it is the duty
      of the insurers and their agents to disclose all material facts within their
      knowledge, since obligation of good faith applies to them equally with the
      assured.”

            (7) The duty of good faith is of a continuing nature. After the
      completion of the contract, no material alteration can be made in its terms
      except by mutual consent. The materiality of a fact is judged by the
      circumstances existing at the time when the contract is concluded…..”
19.A similar view is taken in Modern Insulators Ltd. v. Oriental Insurance Co.
Ltd. (2000) 2 SCC 734,

             “(8) It is the fundamental principle of insurance law that utmost
      good faith must be observed by the contracting parties and good faith
      forbids either party from non-disclosure of the facts which the parties know.
      The insured has a duty to disclose and similarly it is the duty of the
      insurance company and its agents to disclose all material facts in their
      knowledge since the obligation of good faith applies to both equally.”
20.We have already quoted with profit the classical passage of Lord Denning in

  George Mitchell (supra) on the degree of notice.
Such a degree of notice

  mandates a party relying upon the exclusion clause to bring it to the knowledge

  of the other side, any failure to do so would non-suit the said party from placing

  reliance upon it, as held in
Bharat Watch Company v. National Insurance Co.

  Ltd.
2019 (6) SCC 212,

             "7. The basic issue which has been canvassed on behalf of the
      appellant before this Court is that the conditions of exclusion under the
      policy document were not handed over to the appellant by the insurer and in
12
the absence of the appellant being made aware of the terms of the exclusion,
      it is not open to the insurer to rely upon the exclusionary clauses.
Hence, it
      was urged that the decision in
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Harchand
      Rai Chandan Lal
, (2004) 8 SCC 644, will have no application since there
      was no dispute
in that case
that the policy document was issued to the
      insured.
8. This submission is sought to be answered by the learned counsel
      appearing on behalf of the insurer by adverting to the fact that SCDRC
      construed the terms of the exclusion. SCDRC, however, did not notice the
      decision of this Court, and hence, NCDRC was (it was urged) justified in
      correcting the error having regard to the law
laid down by
this Court. The
      learned counsel urged that the appellant has been insuring its goods for
      nearly ten years and it is improbable that the appellant was not aware of the
      exclusion.
9. We find from the judgment of the District Forum that it was the
      specific contention of the appellant that the exclusionary conditions in the
      policy document had not been communicated by the insurer as a result of
      which the terms and conditions of the exclusion were never communicated.
      The fact that there was a contract of insurance is not in dispute and has never
      been in dispute. The only issue is whether the exclusionary conditions were
      communicated to the appellant. The District Forum came to a specific
      finding of fact that the insurer did not furnish the terms and conditions of the
      exclusion and special conditions to the appellant and hence, they were not
      binding. When the case travelled to SCDRC, there was a finding of fact
      again that the conditions of exclusion were not supplied to the complainant.
10. Having held this, SCDRC also came to the conclusion that the
      exclusion would in any event not be attracted. The finding of SCDRC in
      regard to the interpretation of such an exclusionary clause is evidently
      contrary to the law
laid down by
this Court in
Harchand Rai
(supra)
      However, the relevance of that interpretation would have arisen provided the
      conditions of exclusion were provided to the insured. NCDRC missed the
      concurrent findings of both the District Forum and SCDRC that the terms of
      exclusion were not made known to the insured. If those conditions were not
      made known to the insured, as is the concurrent finding, there was no
      occasion for NCDRC to render a decision on the effect of such an
      exclusion.”
21.On a discussion of the aforesaid principle, we would conclude that there is an

   onerous responsibility on the part of the insurer while dealing with an exclusion
13
clause. We may only add that the insurer is statutorily mandated as per Clause

   3(ii) of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Protection of

   Policy Holder’s Interests, Regulation 2002) Act dated 16.10.2002 (hereinafter

   referred to as IRDA Regulation, 2002) to the effect that the insurer and his agent

   are duty bound to provide all material information in respect of a policy to the

   insured to enable him to decide on the best cover that would be in his interest.

   Further, sub-clause (iv) of Clause 3 mandates that if proposal form is not filled

   by the insured, a certificate has to be incorporated at the end of the said form

   that all the contents of the form and documents have been fully explained to the

   insured and made him to understand. Similarly, Clause 4 enjoins a duty upon the

   insurer to furnish a copy of the proposal form within thirty days of the

   acceptance, free of charge. Any non-compliance, obviously would lead to the

   irresistible conclusion that the offending clause, be it an exclusion clause, cannot

   be pressed into service by the insurer against the insured as he may not be in

   knowhow of the same.
Doctrine of Blue Pencil
22.In such a situation, the doctrine of “blue pencil” which strikes off the offending

   clause being void ab initio, has to be pressed into service. The said clause being

   repugnant to the main contract, and thus destroying it without even a need for

   adjudication, certainly has to be eschewed by the Court. The very existence of
14
such a clause having found to be totally illegal and detrimental to the execution

of the main contract along with its objective, requires an effacement in the form

of declaration of its non-existence, warranting a decision by the Court

accordingly. The aforesaid principle evolved by the English and American

Courts has been duly taken note of by this Court in
Beed District Central Coop.

Bank Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra
, (2006) 8 SCC 514,

           “10. The “doctrine of blue pencil” was evolved by the English and
      American courts. In Halsbury's Laws of England, (4th Edn., Vol. 9), p. 297,
      para 430, it is stated:
“430. Severance of illegal and void provisions.—A contract will rarely be
        totally illegal or void and certain parts of it may be entirely lawful in
        themselves. The question therefore arises whether the illegal or void parts
        may be separated or ‘severed’ from the contract and the rest of the contract
        enforced without them. Nearly all the cases arise in the context of restraint
        of trade, but the following principles are applicable to contracts in general.”
11. In P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd Edn. 2005, Vol. 1,
      pp. 553-54, it is stated:
“Blue pencil doctrine (test).—A judicial standard for deciding
          whether to invalidate the whole contract or only the offending words.
          Under this standard, only the offending words are invalidated if it
          would be possible to delete them simply by running a blue pencil
          through them, as opposed to changing, adding, or rearranging words.
          (Black, 7th Edn., 1999)
              This doctrine holds that if courts can render an unreasonable
          restraint reasonable by scratching out the offensive portions of the
          covenant, they should do so and then enforce the remainder.
          Traditionally, the doctrine is applicable only if the covenant in
          question is applicable, so that the unreasonable portions may be
          separated. E.P.I. of Cleveland, Inc. v. Basler [12 Ohio App 2d 16 :
          230 NE 2d 552, 556].
Blue pencil rule/test.—Legal theory that permits a judge to limit
          unreasonable aspects of a covenant not to compete.
Severance of contract; ‘severance can be effected when the part
          severed can be removed by running a blue pencil through it without
          affording the remaining part’. Attwood v. Lamont [(1920) 3 KB 571 :
1920 All ER Rep 55 (CA)] . (Banking)
15
A rule in contracts a court may strike parts of a covenant not to
          compete in order to make the covenant reasonable. (Merriam
          Webster)
              Phrase referring to severance (q.v.) of contract. ‘Severance can be
          effected when the part severed can be removed by running a blue
          pencil    through      it’  without      affording     the   remaining
          part. Attwood v. Lamont [(1920) 3 KB 571 : 1920 All ER Rep 55
          (CA)] . (Banking)”
12. The matter has recently been considered by a learned Judge of this Court
       while exercising his jurisdiction under sub-section (6) of
Section 11
of the
       Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in
Shin Satellite Public Co. Ltd. v. Jain
       Studios Ltd.
[(2006) 2 SCC 628]”
The Indian Contract Act, 1872
“2.Interpretation-clause.- In this Act the following words and
          expressions are used in the following senses, unless a contrary
          intention appears from the context:-
xxx                    xxx                           xxx
(i) An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option of
                    one or more of the parties thereto, but not at the option of
                    the other or others, is a voidable contract;
xxx                    xxx                           xxx
10.What agreements are contracts.- All agreements are
          contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to
          contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are
          not hereby expressly declared to be void.
Nothing herein contained shall affect any law in force in India,
          and not hereby expressly repealed, by which any contract is required
          to be made in writing or in the presence of witnesses, or any law
          relating to the registration of documents.
xxx                    xxx                           xxx
17.‘Fraud’ defined.- ‘Fraud’ means and includes any of the
          following acts committed by a party to a contract, or with his
          connivance, or by his agent, with intent to deceive another party
          thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter into the contract:-
16
(1)      the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one
         who does not believe it to be true;
(2)      the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge
         belief of the fact:
(3)      a promise made without any intention of performing it;
(4)      any other act fitted to deceive;
(5)      any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be
         fraudulent.
Explanation.-Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the
willingness of a person to enter into a contract is not fraud, unless the
circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them, it is
the duty of the person keeping silence to speak, or unless his silence,
is, in itself, equivalent to speech.
xxx                    xxx                             xxx
18.“Misrepresentation” defined.- “Misrepresentation” means
and includes-
(1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the
          information of the person making it, of that which is not
          true, though he believes it to be true’
     (2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to deceive,
          gains an advantage of the person committing it, or any one
          claiming under him, by misleading another to his prejudice,
          or to the prejudice of any one claiming under him;
     (3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement, to
          make a mistake as to the substance of the thing which is the
          subject of the agreement.
xxx                     xxx                            xxx
19.Voidability of agreements without free consent.- When
consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, [***] fraud or
misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of
the party whose consent was so caused.
A party to contract, whose consent was caused by fraud or
misrepresentation, may, if he thinks fit, insist that the contract shall be
performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which he would
have been if the representations made had been true.
Exception.- If such consent was caused by misrepresentation or
by silence, fraudulent within the meaning of
section 17
, the contract,
nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party whose consent was so caused
had the means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence.
17
Explanation.- A fraud or misrepresentation which did not cause
            the consent to a contract of the party on whom such fraud was
            practised, or to whom such misrepresentation was made, does not
            render a contract voidable.
Illustrations
                   xxx                   xxx                           xxx
(c) A fraudulently informs B that A’s estate is free from incumbrance.
            B thereupon buys the estate. The estate is subject to mortgage. B may
            either avoid the contract, or may insist on its being carried out and
            mortgage-debt redeemed,”
23.
Section 2(i)
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Contract Act
”) defines a voidable contract. This definition clause extends the

   option to one side of the parties to the contract to declare it as voidable.
24.Under
Section 10
of the Contract Act, an agreement would partake the character

   of a contract when consideration is lawful and so also the objective. A void

   agreement cannot be enforced, not being a contract in the eyes of law. The words

   “fraud” and “mis-representation” are defined under
Sections 17
and
18
of the

   Contract Act. These two provisions on a simple reading give a clear indication

   that they are of very wide import. No restrictive meaning can be given to them,

   as both the words “means” and “includes” are consciously mentioned. The

   categories given are merely illustrative in nature. What constitutes an act of

   “fraud” or “mis-representation” is a question of fact.
25.Once an act of fraud, coercion or misrepresentation is proved, the agreement

   being a contract becomes voidable at the option of the party against whom it was

   done. Option under
Section 19
of the Contract Act not only facilitates such a
18
party, but also curtails the other who is responsible, from seeking to declare the

   contract as voidable. Thus, the door is shut for the said party who benefits from

   such an act in seeking to declare the contract as voidable.
26.The second part of
Section 19
of the Contract Act extends a further benefit to the

   aggrieved party to seek the performance of the contract, notwithstanding, the

   fraud or misrepresentation against him. Therefore, an aggrieved party has the

   option to either declare the contract as voidable or insist upon its due

   performance. The provision has got a laudable objective behind it which is to

   provide adequate relief to the party, who is aggrieved at the hands of the one

   who committed fraud, coercion or misrepresentation. The aforesaid position is

   made clear from illustration (c) to
Section 19
of the Contract Act, which

   provides for the B party either to avoid the contract or insist upon it being

   carried out. It also debars the violator from deriving benefit from his wrong

   doing.
27.When a court of law is satisfied that a fraud, or misrepresentation resulted in the

   execution of the contract through the suppression of the existence of a mutually

   destructive clause facilitating a window for the insurer to escape from the

   liability while drawing benefit from the consumer, the resultant relief will have

   to be granted.
19
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
:
“2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
xxx            xxx           xxx
            (g)    “deficiency” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or
inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance which is
            required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in
            force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in
            pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service;
xxx            xxx           xxx
            (r)    “unfair trade practice” means a trade practice which, for the
purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the
            provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or
            deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely:
—
                   (1) the practice of making any statement, whether orally or in
                        writing or by visible representation which,—
                                        xxx           xxx            xxx
(iv) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship,
                           approval, performance, characteristics, accessories,
                           uses or benefits which such goods or services do not
                           have.
xxx           xxx            xxx
(vi) makes a false or misleading representation concerning
                           the need for, or the usefulness of, any goods or
                           services.”
                                        xxx           xxx            xxx
3. Act not in derogation of any other law.— The provisions of this
     Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any
     other law for the time being in force.
xxx         xxx           xxx
14. Finding of the District Forum.—(1) If, after the proceeding
     conducted under section 13, the District Forum is satisfied that the goods
     complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint
     or that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about the services
     are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to do
     one or more of the following things, namely:—
                                         xxx          xxx           xxx
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation
                  to the consumer for any loss or injury suffered by the consumer
                  due to the negligence of the opposite party:
20
Provided that the District Forum shall have the power to
                   grant punitive damages in such circumstances as it deems fit;
xxx         xxx           xxx
(f)   to discontinue the unfair trade practice or the restrictive trade
                   practice or not to repeat them;
28.The consumer under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
(hereinafter referred to

   as “the 1986 Act”) is at an elevated place than the plaintiff in a suit. A dispute

   before the Consumer Commission is to be seen primarily from the point of view

   of the consumer as against the civil suit. It is only to avoid any possible

   bottleneck in granting the relief. The jurisdiction of the Commission has been

   clearly demarcated, being in addition to any other laws in force as stipulated

   under
Section 3
of the 1986 Act.
The Act
being a self-contained one, requires to

   be strengthened by the procedural laws, as the intention now is to facilitate a

   relief and not to curtail it. The aforesaid view of ours is fortified by
Regulation

   26
of the Consumer Protection Regulations, 2005 which cautions the

   Commission to avoid the cumbersome procedure contemplated under
the Code

   of Civil Procedure
. Clearly, the object is to make the Commission as consumer

   friendly as possible.
29.Having noted the provision governing unfair trade practice, it is rather crystal

   clear that it takes in its sweep all forms of unfair trade practice. One cannot give

   a restrictive or narrow interpretation to this provision which starts from an

   invitation, preceded by an offer, followed by an acceptance, conduct, and
21
execution of the contract. Court’s finding against one of the parties qua the

  existence of unfair trade practice has to be transformed into an adequate relief in

  favour of the other, particularly in light of
Section 14
of the 1986 Act. One has

  to keep in mind the legislative intendment behind the Act. Once again, we

  reiterate the definition clause which gives adequate ammunition to the Court to

  declare any form of unfair trade practice as illegal while granting the appropriate

  relief.
Consumer Protection Act, 2019
:
“2. Definitions. – In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
xxx            xxx           xxx
                                  xxx            xxx           xxx
(46) "unfair contract" means a contract between a manufacturer or
             trader or service provider on one hand, and a consumer on the other,
             having such terms which cause significant change in the rights of
             such consumer, including the following, namely:--
(i)   requiring manifestly excessive security deposits to
                          be given by a consumer for the performance of
                          contractual obligations; or
(ii)   imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the
                          breach of contract thereof which is wholly
                          disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such
                          breach to the other party to the contract; or
(iii) refusing to accept early repayment of debts on
                          payment of applicable penalty; or
(iv) entitling a party to the contract to terminate such
                          contract unilaterally, without reasonable cause; or
(v) permitting or has the effect of permitting one party
                          to assign the contract to the detriment of the other
                          party who is a consumer, without his consent; or
22
(vi) imposing on the consumer any unreasonable charge,
                           obligation or condition which puts such consumer
                           to disadvantage;”

            (47) "unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the
            purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the
            provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or
            deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely:--
(i)    making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by
                      visible representation including by means of electronic
                      record, which--
(a) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular
                           standard, quality, quantity, grade, composition, style
                           or model;
(b) falsely represents that the services are of a particular
                           standard, quality or grade;
(c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand,
                           renovated, reconditioned or old goods as new goods;
(d) represents that the goods or services have
                            sponsorship, approval, performance, characteristics,
                            accessories, uses or benefits which such goods or
                            services do not have;
(e) represents that the seller or the supplier has a
                           sponsorship or approval or affiliation which such
                           seller or supplier does not have;
(f)     makes a false or misleading representation
                            concerning the need for, or the usefulness of, any
                            goods or services;
(g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee of the
                           performance, efficacy or length of life of a product
                           or of any goods that is not based on an adequate or
                           proper test thereof:”
30.The definition clause under sub-section (46) of
Section 2
of the Consumer

  Protection Act, 2019 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2019 Act”) gives a very

  broad meaning of unfair contract. As in the other provisions, it does not restrict

  itself to the few illustrative circumstances mentioned under sub-clause (i) to (vi).
23
Ultimately, it is for the State Commission or the National Commission to declare

  a contract as unfair contract.
31.Though, these two provisions are merely defining the terms, they actually

  empower the Commission to go into the issue qua the unfair nature of the terms

  of a contract and also the trade practice. Once, the State Commission or the

  National Commission, as the case may be, comes to the conclusion that the term

  of a contract is unfair, particularly by adopting an unfair trade practice, the

  aggrieved party has to be extended the resultant relief. The above said view is

  further strengthened by
Sections 47
and
49
of the 2019 Act.
Section 47
and
49
“(47) Jurisdiction of State Commission.- (1) Subject to the other
            provisions of this Act, the State Commission shall have jurisdiction--
(a) to entertain--
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
                    consideration, exceeds rupees one crore, but does not exceed
                    rupees ten crore:
Provided that where the Central Government deems it
                    necessary so to do, it may prescribe such other value, as it deems
                    fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or
                     services paid as consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the
                     State; and…
                                   xxx           xxx            xxx
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission.- (1) The
            provisions relating to complaints under
sections 35
,
36
,
37
,
38
and
39
shall, with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the
            disposal of complaints by the State Commission.
24
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the State
             Commission may also declare any terms of contract, which is unfair to any
             consumer, to be null and void.
xxx             xxx            xxx
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission
             (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission
             shall have jurisdiction—
(a) to entertain—
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as
                    consideration exceeds rupees ten crore: Provided that where the
                    Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe
                    such other value, as it deems fit;
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods
                    or services paid as consideration exceeds ten crore rupees;
(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission;
(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority; and……”
                                   xxx             xxx            xxx
59. Procedure applicable to National Commission.- (1) The provisions
             relating to complaints under
sections 35
,
36
,
37
,
38
and
39
shall, with such
             modifications as may be considered necessary, be applicable to the
             disposal of complaints by the National Commission.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the National Commission
             may also declare any terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer to
             be null and void.”
32.
Section 47
and
58
of the 2019 Act have been introduced to facilitate the State

   Commission and the National Commission to exercise jurisdiction over a

   contract which is unfair. As stated, the power is not only with respect to

   identifying a contract as unfair or not, but also to grant the consequential relief.
25
33.Under sub-section (2) of
Section 49
and
59
of the 2019 Act, the State

   Commission and the National Commission, respectively, may declare any terms

   of the contract being unfair to any consumer to be null and void. The principle

   governing the doctrine of civil remedy of a contract is well enshrined in this

   provision.
34.In these provisions, there exists ample power to declare any terms of the contract

   as unfair by the State Commission and the National Commission. The words

   “any terms of the contract” would empower the State Commission and the

   National Commission to exercise unrestricted jurisdiction over any particular

   term of a contract, if in its opinion, its introduction by the insurer has certain

   elements of unfairness. The consequence of the declaration of that term as

   unfair, would make the contract active and executable to the benefit of the

   consumer. Therefore, this provision takes care of a possible mischief by the

   insurer as against the consumer.
35.We are conscious of the fact that the aforesaid provisions have been introduced

   under the new 2019 Act. However, the intendment of these provisions could be

   seen as implied even under the prior Act, i.e. the
Consumer Protection Act,

   1986
. This Court has traced the jurisdiction of the Commission under
Section 14
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 Act in
IREO Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v.

   Abhishek Khanna
, (2021) 3 SCC 241,
26
“33.
Section 14
of the 1986 Act empowers the Consumer Fora to
      redress the deficiency of service by issuing directions to the Builder, and
      compensate the consumer for the loss or injury caused by the opposite party,
      or discontinue the unfair or restrictive trade practices.
34. We are of the view that the incorporation of such one-sided and
      unreasonable clauses in the apartment buyer's Agreement constitutes an
      unfair trade practice under
Section 2(1)(r)
of the Consumer Protection Act.
      Even under the 1986 Act, the powers of the consumer fora were in no
      manner constrained to declare a contractual term as unfair or one-sided as an
      incident of the power to discontinue unfair or restrictive trade practices. An
      “unfair contract” has been defined under the 2019 Act, and powers have
      been conferred on the State Consumer Fora and the National Commission to
      declare contractual terms which are unfair, as null and void. This is a
      statutory recognition of a power which was implicit under the 1986 Act.”


ANALYSIS
36.Both the forums have held concurrently that respondent No. 1 was conscious of

   the fact that the contract was entered into for insuring a shop situated in the

   basement. The aforesaid position is not only a factual one but also accepted by

   the respondents as no challenge has been laid against the impugned order.

   Similarly, there was no specific denial on the non-compliance of adequate

   notice. The National Commission has not given any finding on this aspect,

   though it was dealt with in extenso by the State Commission. On a reading of
Section 21(A)
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, it is clear that it is not akin

   to
Section 96
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Even otherwise, the

   impugned order has not considered all the relevant materials which were duly

   taken note of by the State Commission.
27
37.Once it is proved that there is a deficiency in service and that respondent No. 1

   knowingly entered into a contract, notwithstanding the exclusion clause, the

   consequence would flow out of it. We have already discussed the scope and

   ambit of the provisions under the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
. Even as per the

   common law principle of acquiescence and estoppel, respondent No. 1 cannot be

   allowed to take advantage of its own wrong, if any. It is a conscious waiver of

   the exclusion clause by respondent No. 1.
38.Under the impugned order, we have already taken note of and discussed, the

   findings of the State Commission, which are indeed approved by the National

   Commission. These findings are sufficient enough to come to the conclusion that

   the terms of the contract are unfair, particularly the exclusion clause, and that

   respondent No. 1 has indulged in unfair trade practice. In such view of the

   matter, the decision of the National Commission cannot be sustained as the

   appellant cannot be non-suited only on the ground of mere deficiency in service

   without taking note of the fact that it is the duty of the Forum to grant the

   consequential relief by exercising the power under
Section 14(d)
and
14(f)
of the

   Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which mandates the payment of adequate

   compensation by way of an award. The said provision makes it consequential in

   granting adequate compensation once it finds deficiency, the existence of unfair
28
terms in the contract and unfair trade practice on the part of the other party. In

   other words, a party is entitled for the relief which the law provides.
39.Non-compliance of Clauses (3) and (4) of the IRDA Regulation, 2002 preceded

   by unilateral inclusion, and thereafter followed by the execution of the contract,

   receiving benefits, and repudiation after knowing that it was entered into for a

   basement, would certainly be an act of unfair trade practice. This view is

   fortified by the finding that the exclusion clause is an unfair term, going against

   the very object of the contract, making it otherwise un-executable from its

   inception.
40.Therefore, we have no hesitation in setting aside the order passed by the

   National Commission. However, we are in agreement with the submission made

   by the counsel appearing for the respondents that the State Commission without

   any basis granted a sum of Rs.2.5 lakhs towards harassment and mental agony.

   We are of the view that no case for awarding amount under that head has been

   made out as the respondents merely took a legal stand.
41.In light of the aforesaid, the order impugned passed by the National Commission

   in F.A. No. 275 of 2016 stands set aside except to the extent of declining a sum

   of Rs.2.5 lakhs towards harassment and mental agony. The appeal stands

   allowed in part.
29
42.Before we part with this case, we would like to extend a word of caution to all

   the insurance companies on the mandatory compliance of Clause (3) and (4) of

   the IRDA Regulation, 2002. Any non-compliance on the part of the insurance

   companies would take away their right to plead repudiation of contract by

   placing reliance upon any of the terms and conditions included thereunder.
……………………………J.
                                                           (SURYA KANT)


                                                      ……………………………J.
                                                         (M.M. SUNDRESH)


New Delhi,
November 09, 2022
30