[Cites
12
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Meenakshi Solar Power Pvt. Ltd. vs M/S Abhyudaya Green Economic Zones Pvt. ... on 23 November, 2022
Author:
B.V. Nagarathna
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
B.R. Gavai
1



                                                                               REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8818 OF 2022
                              (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 11570 of 2021)

               M/s. Meenakshi Solar Power Pvt. Ltd.                       … APPELLANT


                                                     Vs.


               M/s. Abhyudaya Green Economic
               Zones Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.                                  ... RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.        This Civil Appeal has been filed by assailing the impugned

               judgment and order dated 12.02.2021 passed by the High Court of

               Judicature for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in Arbitration

               Application No. 55 of 2020 whereby the High Court dismissed the

               application      filed   under   Section    11(6)   of   the   Arbitration   and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Conciliation Act, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Act of 1996’, for the
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2022.11.23
16:26:50 IST
Reason:
sake of convenience) filed by the appellant herein.
2
3.    The appellant herein­ M/s. Meenakshi Solar Power Pvt. Ltd. is

engaged in the business of producing power through running and

operating thermal/solar/hydro power plants. The respondent No.1 –

M/s. Abhyudaya Green Economic Zones Pvt. Ltd. is the owner of

4.128 MW Solar PV Power Project located in 20 acres at Kummera

Village,   Chevella      Mandal,        Ranga      Reddy       District,   Telangana.

Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are promoters and 100% shareholders of

respondent No.1 Company. Respondent No. 4­ M/s. Meenakshi Power

Pvt. Ltd. is an affiliate of the appellant herein and is a proforma

respondent in the present case while the other three respondents are

the contesting respondents.
4.    Succinctly stated, the facts of the case are that the power

project of respondent No.1 herein is generating power and has a

twenty­year   Power       Purchase       Agreement        with     Telangana      State

Southern Power Distribution Company Limited. The power project

was partly financed by Corporation Bank, Film Nagar Branch,

Hyderabad     in   the    form     of    a       Term   Loan     vide   Account    No.

560821000017646 and partly financed by M/s. IFCI Venture Capital

Funds Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘IFCI Venture Capital’) in the

form of 14,68,000 Optionally Convertible Debentures of Rs.100/­

each at par aggregating to Rs.14,68,00,000/­ (Rupees Fourteen Crore

Sixty­Eight Lakhs Only) under a Venture Capital Fund for Schedule
3
Castes. Since it was difficult for respondent No.1 to service the debt

availed from the financial institutions, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 its

promoters, decided to sell the said power project. The appellant

herein showed interest in buying the said power project and therefore

entered into a Share Purchase Agreement dated 24.09.2018 with

respondent Nos.1 to 3 wherein respondent Nos. 2 and 3 agreed to sell

100% ownership of respondent No.1 Company comprising all of its

assets including land, buildings, plant, equipment along with

continuity of the Power Purchase Agreement signed with Telangana

State Southern Power Distribution Company Limited as a going

business entity, for an irrevocably frozen Purchase Price of Rs. 29

Crores (Rupees Twenty­Nine Crores). The appellant herein agreed to

purchase 100% Equity Shares and 100% Preference Shares of

respondent No.1 Company by way of taking over the loans of

respondent No.1 Company and paying the balance amount to the

sellers i.e., respondent Nos. 2 and 3 towards net equity value.
5.   Subsequently, a Tripartite Agreement was entered into by the

appellant herein through its affiliate i.e., respondent No.4 (party of

the third part) with respondent Nos. 2 and 3 (party of the second part)

and IFCI Venture Capital (party of the first part) on 03.04.2019

recording the execution of the Share Purchase Agreement dated

24.09.2018 and payment of Rs. 50 lakhs (Rupees Fifty Lakhs) to
4
respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in terms of the said Share Purchase

Agreement.
6.   Thereafter, an addendum to the Share Purchase Agreement was

signed on 10.04.2019 between respondent Nos.1 to 3 and respondent

No.4 wherein the latter agreed to remit an amount of Rs. 1.65 Crores

to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to regularize the loan with the Corporation

Bank and facilitate the transfer of the project company.
7.   Disputes arose between the appellant and the respondents and

the appellant herein filed an application before the Commercial Court,

City Civil Court, Hyderabad vide COP No.27 of 2020 under
Section 9
of the Act of 1996, seeking to restrain the respondents from alienating

their shares in the Company. The Commercial Court was pleased to

grant an ad­interim injunction restraining the respondents from

alienating their shares vide order dated 19.06.2020.
8.   The appellant herein sent a letter dated 22.06.2020 invoking the

arbitration clause as a means of dispute resolution in terms of Clause

10 of the Share Purchase Agreement and called upon respondent Nos.

1 to 3 to settle the disputes through arbitration. The appellant herein

appointed one Dr. P.V. Amarnadha Prasad, Engineer and Techno

Legal Consultant, Hyderabad as its arbitrator and vide such letter

requested respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to appoint their nominee arbitrator

and to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal of three members to adjudicate
5
upon the dispute between the parties. On receiving no response to the

aforesaid notice, the aggrieved appellant herein filed an application

under
Section 11(6)
of the Act of 1996 which came to be dismissed

vide impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court.
9.     Aggrieved by the dismissal of the aforesaid application, the

appellant has approached this Court by way of the present appeal.
10.    We have heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Counsel

duly instructed by her instructing counsel, appearing for the

appellant herein and Sri D. Narendra Naik, learned counsel for the

respondent Nos.1 to 3 and perused the material on record.
11.    Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant stated that the High

Court has grossly erred in dismissing the application under
Section

11(6)
of the Act of 1996 and that the judgment and order passed by

the High Court needs consideration by this Court. The submissions of

learned Senior Counsel for the appellant are summarised as under:
11.1   That   the    High    Court     erred   in   giving    a    finding   of

       implied/deemed novation while adjudicating on an application

       under
Section 11
of the Act of 1996 and failed to comprehend

       the nature of limited judicial intervention under the said

       provision.
11.2   That the High Court erred in venturing to examine complicated

       questions    of   facts   and   documents     and     has   essentially
6
performed the function of an Arbitral Tribunal before whom

       novation ought to have been pleaded and proved as a

       preliminary issue in case the same arose.
11.3   That the High Court has failed to examine the ingredients for

       novation and has given an erroneous finding in that regard by

       superficially dealing with the said issue. The High Court failed

       to comprehend that the Tripartite Agreement was entered into

       with the sole purpose and intent to act as a recovery

       mechanism for IFCI Venture Capital and cannot by any stretch

       of imagination be called as an act to substitute and novate the

       Share Purchase Agreement dated 24.09.2018.

11.4   That the High Court failed to consider that the Tripartite

       Agreement   and   the   Addendum     to   the   Share   Purchase

       Agreement was for a limited purpose of satisfying IFCI Venture

       Capital as regards the dues payable and the same cannot be

       said to have substituted the Share Purchase Agreement. Both

       the Tripartite Agreement and the Addendum make no mention

       to novate or substitute the Share Purchase Agreement dated

       24.09.2018. There are clauses being substituted or subsequent

       modification of clauses between the Share Purchase Agreement

       when viewed alongside with the Tripartite Agreement.
7
11.5   It is reiterated that the Tripartite Agreement with the IFCI

       Venture Capital was meant only to protect the interests of the

       financier so that it does not act coercively against respondent

       No.1. The Tripartite Agreement had no clauses in it to deal

       with the inter­se rights and obligations of appellant herein and

       its affiliate respondent No.4 and respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and

       was therefore incapable of substituting the Share Purchase

       Agreement dated 24.09.2018.
11.6   That the High Court erred in not attempting to appreciate the

       composite intention of both the parties, the nature and

       purpose of the commercial transaction, the documents and

       material on record, the conduct and correspondence of the

       parties.
12.    Per contra, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos.1 to 3

supported the judgment and order passed by the High Court and

contended that no interference of this Court is required. The

submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent No.1 to 3 are

epitomized as under:
12.1   That the appellant herein failed miserably in making complete

       payment of the purchase of shares from respondent Nos. 2 and

       3 and in fulfilling its obligation before the expiry of the Share

       Purchase Agreement i.e., as on 10.11.2018, when the Share
8
Purchase Agreement lapsed and stood terminated by operation

       of Clause 8 of the Share Purchase Agreement.
12.2   That a fresh Tripartite Agreement was entered into, after four

       months from the date when the Share Purchase Agreement

       stood terminated, with an intention to help the appellant to

       recover an amount of Rs.50 lakhs paid by it to the

       respondents.   Pursuant    to   the   Tripartite   Agreement,   an

       Addendum was entered into between the parties wherein it was

       agreed that the consideration for sale of the power project shall

       be remitted within timelines stipulated under the terms and

       conditions of the Tripartite Agreement. The Addendum makes

       no mention of the compliance with any term of the Share

       Purchase Agreement dated 24.09.2018 and rightly so since the

       Tripartite Agreement executed on 03.04.2019 had novated the

       same.
12.3   That the Share Purchase Agreement and the Tripartite

       Agreement are two distinct and independent agreements

       executed between completely different parties with different

       terms and conditions, however the subject matter i.e., the sale

       consideration and the number of shares being transferred are

       the same in both the agreements. The Tripartite Agreement has

       superseded the Share Purchase Agreement. The substantial
9
shift from terms, conditions and timelines in the Share

       Purchase Agreement show that the parties departed from the

       same to the Tripartite Agreement and the Share Purchase

       Agreement stood novated.
12.4   That   the   High    Court   has    acted   completely    within    its

       jurisdiction under
Section 11
of the Act of 1996 and has not

       stepped into the role of an Arbitral Tribunal.
Reference to

       Vidya Drolia vs. Durga Trading Corporation
(2021) 2 SCC

       1 was made in this regard.
The respondents further relied on
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. vs. NCC Ltd.
2022 SCC OnLine

       SC 896 to hold that there is no bar under the Act of 1996 for a

       Court to look beyond the bare existence of the arbitration

       clause to cut the deadwood. The High Court in the present

       case was well within its jurisdiction in examining the existence

       of the Arbitration agreement and by arriving at a conclusion

       that   the   Share   Purchase      Agreement   was   novated       and

       superseded by the Tripartite Agreement.
12.5   That the arbitration clause being a part/component of Share

       Purchase Agreement falls within it and perishes along with it

       and the Tripartite Agreement provides for no provision for

       arbitration. The High Court was right in holding that owing to
10
novation, the invocation of arbitration under Share Purchase

       Agreement was untenable. This Court has clearly set out the

       principle   that   an   agreement   will   be   novated   with   the

       introduction of new parties by mutual agreement. The

       respondents relied on the case of
Union of India vs.

       Kishorilal Gupta and Bros
.
(
1960) 1 SCR 493, Young

       Achievers vs. IMS Learning Resources Pvt. Ltd.
(
2013) 10

       SCC 535 and M.B.S Impex Pvt. Ltd. vs. Minerals and

       Metals Trading Corporation
(2020) 5 ALD 185.
12.6   That the High Court has rightly comprehended the intention

       behind the two agreements and the contention of the appellant

       that the Tripartite Agreement was a recovery mechanism is

       untrue and thus unsustainable. Moreover, the Tripartite

       Agreement governing the transaction makes no mention of the

       lapsed Share Purchase Agreement intentionally. The appellant

       was replaced by respondent No.4 in the Tripartite Agreement

       and IFCI Capital Venture was added as a party and was also

       given a right to invoke the agreement. Thus, the Tripartite

       Agreement is a completely different and new agreement

       between different parties containing different terms and

       conditions and does not have an arbitration clause.
11
13.         Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective

parties, the following points would arise for our consideration:
(a)     Whether the judgment and order of the High Court calls for

              any interference or modification by this Court?
(b) What order?
14.    The plea taken by the respondent herein is that owing to

novation of share purchase agreement, the arbitration clause no

longer existed so as to resolve the dispute between the parties

through arbitration. On the other hand, the plea of the appellant is

that there was no such novation of the share purchase agreement

and the arbitration clause was very much available and hence, the

High Court ought to have referred the matter to arbitration. In this

regard, it would be useful to refer to the following dicta of this Court:
a)    In
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Boghara Polyfab Pvt
.
Ltd. (2009) 1 SCC 267, a Bench of this Court elucidating on

      SBP & Co. vs. Patel Engineering Ltd. (2005) 8 SCC 618

      has identified and segregated the issues that could be considered

      in an application filed under
Section 11(6)
of the Act of 1996 into

      three categories. They are enumerated as under:
(i)     issues which the Chief Justice or his designate is bound to

              decide;
12
(ii) issues which he can also decide, that is, issues which he

        may choose to decide or leave it to the Arbitral Tribunal to

        decide; and
(iii)    issues which would be left to the Arbitral Tribunal to

        decide, and thereafter had enumerated them as under:
“22.1. The issues (first category) which the
            Chief Justice/his designate will have to
            decide are:
(a)   Whether     the   party   making   the
                  application    has    approached   the
                  appropriate High Court.
(b) Whether there is an arbitration
                agreement and whether the party who
                has applied under
Section 11
of the
                Act, is a party to such an agreement.

            22.2. The issues (second category) which
            the Chief Justice/his designate may choose
            to decide (or leave them to the decision of
            the Arbitral Tribunal) are:
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long­
                barred) claim or a live claim.
(b)    Whether the parties have concluded
                  the contract/transaction by recording
                  satisfaction of their mutual rights and
                  obligation or by receiving the final
                  payment without objection.
22.3. The issues (third category) which the
            Chief Justice/his designate should leave
            exclusively to the Arbitral Tribunal are:
13
(i)    Whether a claim made falls within the
                     arbitration clause (as for example, a
                     matter which is reserved for final
                     decision of a departmental authority
                     and excepted or excluded from
                     arbitration).
(ii)   Merits or any claim involved in the
                     arbitration.”
15.   As far as the issues in the first category are concerned, the

Chief Justice or his designate is bound to decide. With regard to the

issues falling under the second category, when they are raised in an

application under
Section 11
of the Arbitration Act, the Chief Justice

or his designate may decide them or may leave it open with a

direction to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the same. But if the Chief

Justice or his designate chooses to examine the issue and decides it,

the Arbitral Tribunal cannot re­examine the same issue. As far as the

issues which arise in the third category are concerned, they have to

be dealt with exclusively by the Arbitral Tribunal such as excepted or

excluded matters. It would also include merits of any claim involved

in arbitration.
16.
In
Vidya Drolia
(supra), it has been further observed in

relation to the aforesaid three categories in Boghara Polyfab Pvt.
Ltd.
(supra). The first category of issues, namely, whether the party

has approached the appropriate High Court, whether there is an
14
arbitration agreement and whether the party who has applied for

reference is party to such agreement would be subject to a more

thorough examination in comparison to the second and third

categories/issues which are presumptively, save in exceptional cases,

for the arbitrator to decide. In the first category, the question or

issues are relating to whether the cause of action relates to action in

personam or rem; whether the subject­matter of the dispute affects

third­party   rights,   have erga   omnes effect,   requires   centralised

adjudication; whether the subject­matter relates to inalienable

sovereign and public interest functions or by necessary implication

non­arbitrable as per mandatory statutes. On the other hand, issues

relating to contract formation, existence, validity and non­arbitrability

would be connected and intertwined with the issues underlying the

merits of the respective disputes/claims. They would be factual and

disputed and for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
17.   Further, this Court observed that the court at the referral stage

can interfere only when it is manifest that the claims are ex facie

time­barred and dead, or there is no subsisting dispute. In the

context of issue of limitation period, it should be referred to the

Arbitral Tribunal for decision on merits. Similar would be the position

in case of disputed “no­claim certificate” or defence on the plea of

novation and “accord and satisfaction”.
15
18.    It would be also useful to refer to another decision of this Court

in
Damodar Valley Corporation vs. K.K. Kar
(1974) 1 SCC 141

wherein it has been observed as under:
(1) an arbitration clause is a collateral term of a contract as

      distinguished from its substantive terms; but nonetheless it is

      an integral part of it;
(2) however comprehensive the terms of an arbitration clause may

      be, the existence of the contract is a necessary condition for its

      operation; it perishes with the contract;
(3) the contract may be non est in the sense that it never came

      legally into existence or it was void ab initio;


(4) though the contract was validly executed, the parties may put

      an end to it as if it had never existed and substitute a new

      contract for it solely governing their rights and liabilities

      thereunder;
(5) in the former case, if the original contract has no legal existence,

      the arbitration clause also cannot operate, for along with the

      original contract, it is also void; in the latter case, as the original

      contract is extinguished by the substituted one, the arbitration

      clause of the original contract perishes with it; and
16
(6) between the two falls many categories “of disputes in connection

      with a contract, such as the question of repudiation, frustration,

      breach, etc. In those cases, it is the performance of the contract

      that has come to an end, but the contract is still in existence for

      certain purposes in respect of disputes arising under it or in

      connection with it. As the contract subsists for certain purposes,

      the arbitration clause operates in respect of these purposes.
Even if the performance of the contract has come to an end, the

contract can still be in existence for certain purposes in respect of

disputes arising under it or in connection with it.
19.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find that High Court was

not right in dismissing the petition under
Section 11(6)
of the Act of

1996 filed by the appellant herein by giving a finding on novation of

the Share Purchase Agreement between the parties as the said aspect

would have a bearing on the merits of the controversy between the

parties. Therefore, it must be left to the Arbitrator to decide on the

said issue also. Hence, the impugned judgment and order passed by

the High Court has to be set­aside.
20.    In the result, the appeal filed by the appellant is allowed and the

impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby

quashed and set aside.
17
21.   As requested before this Court for appointment of a sole

Arbitrator, Hon. Sri Justice R. Subhash Reddy, Former Judge,

Supreme Court of India, [email id –
[email protected]
]

is appointed as the sole Arbitrator to arbitrate the dispute between

the parties. The Registry is directed to send a copy of this order to

the learned sole Arbitrator.
22.   All contentions of both sides are left open to be raised by the

respective parties before the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with law.
23.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in the

above terms.
..………….……………J.
                                                     (B.R. GAVAI)


                                               ..………….……………J.
                                               (B.V. NAGARATHNA)

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 23, 2022.