[Cites
0
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
V.S. Ramakrishnan vs P.M. Muhammed Ali on 9 November, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8050­8051 OF 2022


          V.S. Ramakrishnan                                            …Appellant(s)
                                                Versus
          P.M. Muhammed Ali                                         …Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         common judgment and order dated 21.02.2022 passed by

                         the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Regular First

                         Appeal Nos. 686/2010 and 766/2010, by which, the High

                         Court has dismissed RFA No. 766/2010 preferred by the

                         appellant herein – original plaintiff and has partly allowed

                         RFA No. 686/2010 preferred by the original defendant with

                         respect to the proportionate cost, the original plaintiff has
Signature Not Verified
preferred the present appeals.
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.11.09
17:25:05 IST
Reason:
1
2.   That the respondent herein – original defendant entered

     into an agreement to sell with the appellant – original

     plaintiff on 13.07.2005 for a consideration of Rs. 52,500/­

     per cent with respect to the property ad­measuring 9 acres

     47.41 cents in Re­Survey No. 35/2/1 of Karukutty Village.

     Under the said agreement to sell a sum of Rs. 1 crore was

     paid by the appellant to the defendant towards earnest

     money of which Rs. 65 lakhs were paid in cash and Rs. 35

     lakhs were in the form of post­dated cheque dated

     25.08.2005. As per the terms of the agreement to sell the

     last   date   fixed   for   payment   of   the   balance   sale

     consideration was 12.01.2006. The post­dated cheque of

     Rs. 35 lakhs deposited by the defendant came to be

     dishonoured/returned for the reasons “payment stopped

     by attachment order”. At this stage, it is required to be

     noted that there was a raid conducted by the Income Tax

     Department and the bank account of which the post­dated

     cheque of Rs. 35 lakhs, was drawn came to be attached by

     the IT Department. The cheque was returned by the bank

     vide return memo dated 31.08.2005. The defendant

     through his advocate served a notice upon the plaintiff
2
drawing the attention of the plaintiff with respect to the

return/dishonour of the post­dated cheque vide notice

dated 02.09.2005. According to the plaintiff immediately

the same was replied on 20.09.2005 and offered to pay the

amount of Rs. 35 lakhs in cash which according to the

plaintiff the defendant refused to accept the same. The

defendant was also called upon to accept Rs. 35 lakhs in

cash and the plaintiff was prepared to handover cash. That

thereafter vide notice dated 23.09.2005 the defendant

terminated the agreement to sell/contract and forfeited Rs.

10 lakhs and called upon the plaintiff to take back an

amount of Rs. 55 lakhs. That thereafter vide notice dated

18.10.2005 the plaintiff replied to the termination notice

dated 23.09.2005 and called upon the defendant to accept

the balance sale consideration within the agreed period

i.e., on or before 12.01.2006. That thereafter the plaintiff

served a legal notice dated 03.01.2006 and called upon the

defendant to execute the sale deed after accepting balance

sale consideration. The defendant was called upon to

inform the plaintiff the date on which he has to pay the

balance sale consideration and to execute the sale deed. As
3
the defendant failed to act as per the legal notice dated

      03.01.2006. The appellant – original plaintiff instituted a

      suit before the learned Trial Court for specific performance

      of agreement to sell dated 13.07.2005. The defendant filed

      the written statement repudiating the contract. The

      learned Trial Court framed the following issues: ­
          “1.    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of
                 specific performance as sought for?
2.     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to return of
                 advance paid and if so its quantum?
3.     Reliefs and costs.”



2.1   It was the case on behalf of the defendant that as there

      was a default on the part of the plaintiff, not acting as per

      the terms and conditions of the agreement to sell as the

      balance amount of Rs. 35 lakhs was not paid as the post­

      dated     cheque    dated   25.08.2005       was   returned     and

      therefore, the defendant was justified in terminating the

      contract. The defendant also denied receipt of the reply to

      the notice dated 23.09.2005. Both, plaintiff as well as the

      defendant led the evidence both, documentary as well as

      oral. The plaintiff also produced on record the income tax

      returns    for   the   relevant   periods.   The    plaintiff   also

      produced on record the statements of bank accounts (A­
4
12) of himself as well as of related persons. That thereafter

      the learned Trial Court dismissed the suit qua the relief

      sought for specific performance of agreement to sell dated

      13.07.2005 by observing that the plaintiff was never in

      possession of the balance consideration of about Rs. 3

      crores and 9 lakhs and therefore, it can be said that there

      was no readiness and willingness on the part of the

      plaintiff. However, the learned Trial Court granted a partial

      decree of return of the advance i.e., Rs. 65 lakhs with

      interest of 6% per annum from 13.07.2005 till realization

      and also his proportionate cost of the suit.

2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

      order passed by the learned Trial Court refusing to pass

      the decree of specific performance of the agreement to sell

      dated   13.07.2005,    the   plaintiff   preferred   RFA   No.

      766/2010 before the High Court. The defendant also filed

      RFA No. 686/2010 challenging the order of cost imposed

      by the learned Trial Court. By the impugned common

      judgment and order the High Court has dismissed the

      appeal preferred by the appellant – original plaintiff and

      has allowed the appeal preferred by the defendant by
5
observing that as the post­dated cheque of Rs. 35 lakhs

      which was paid towards part sale consideration was

      returned   therefore   full   payment   towards   part   sale

      consideration was not made and therefore there was no

      concluded contract between the parties for sale of the suit

      property. By observing so, thereafter the High Court has

      observed once there was no concluded contract between

      the parties for sale of the suit property, the question

      whether there was readiness and willingness on the part of

      the plaintiff to pay the balance sale consideration does not

      arise for consideration.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      common judgment and order passed by the High Court the

      plaintiff has preferred the present appeals.
3.    We have heard Shri V. Chitambaresh learned Senior

      Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri

      Joseph Kodianthara learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the defendant. We have also gone through and

      considered the findings recorded by the learned Trial Court

      as well as the High Court.
6
4.   The High Court has non­suited the appellant – original

     plaintiff on the ground that as the post­dated cheque of

     Rs. 35 lakhs was returned which was towards part sale

     consideration and tendering the worthless post­dated

     cheque cannot be said to be tendering the payment and

     therefore, there was no concluded contract between the

     parties. By observing so, the High Court has refused to go

     into the aspect of the readiness and willingness on the part

     of the plaintiff. However, it is required to be noted that at

     the time when the post­dated cheque of Rs. 35 lakhs was

     tendered the same cannot be said to be worthless cheque.

     The post­dated cheque of Rs. 35 lakhs returned by the

     bank was with an endorsement i.e., “payment stopped by

     attachment order” as there was a raid conducted by the IT

     Department and the bank account was attached and

     therefore, the post­dated cheque was returned. At this

     stage, it is required to be noted that the cheque was not

     returned for the reasons of insufficient funds in the bank

     account. Therefore, the observation made by the High

     Court that the post­dated cheque was worthless cheque

     and tendering such worthless cheque cannot be said to be
7
a payment towards part sale consideration cannot be

      accepted. We do not approve such observations/reasoning

      given by the High Court.
4.1   Now the findings and the reasoning given by the learned

      Trial   Court   refusing   to   pass   a   decree   for   specific

      performance is concerned it appears that though there was

      no specific issue framed by the learned Trial Court on

      readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff, the

      Trial Court has given the findings on the same and has

      non­suited the plaintiff by observing that the plaintiff was

      not having sufficient funds to make the full balance

      consideration on or before 12.01.2006. Such a finding

      could not have been given by the learned Trial Court

      without putting the plaintiff to notice and without framing

      a specific issue on the readiness and willingness on the

      part of the plaintiff. There must be a specific issue framed

      on readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff in

      a suit for specific performance and before giving any

      specific finding, the parties must be put to notice. The

      object and purpose of framing the issue is so that the

      parties to the suit can lead the specific evidence on the
8
same. On the aforesaid ground the judgment and order

     passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the suit and

     refusing to pass the decree for specific performance of the

     agreement to sell confirmed by the High Court deserves to

     be quashed and set aside and the matter is to be

     remanded to the learned Trial Court to frame the specific

     issue with respect to the readiness and willingness on the

     part of the plaintiff. On remand the parties be permitted to

     lead the evidence on the readiness and willingness on the

     part of the plaintiff to perform his part of the contract,

     more particularly, whether the plaintiff was ready and

     willing to pay the full consideration and whether the

     plaintiff was having sufficient funds and/or could have

     managed the balance sale consideration.
5.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     present appeals succeed in part. The impugned common

     judgment and order passed by the High Court and the

     judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court

     dismissing the suit preferred by the plaintiff for specific

     performance of the agreement to sell are hereby quashed

     and set aside. The matter is remitted back to the learned
9
Trial Court to decide and dispose of the suit afresh in

     accordance with law and on merits. The learned Trial

     Court is directed to frame the specific issue on the

     readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff to

     perform his part of the contract and thereafter, the parties

     may be permitted to lead the evidence on readiness and

     willingness on the part of the plaintiff to perform his part

     of the contract and thereafter, the learned Trial Court to

     decide and dispose of the suit on merits and on the basis

     of the evidence that may be led. The aforesaid exercise be

     completed by the learned Trial Court on remand within a

     period of twelve months from the date of receipt of the

     present order. Both, these appeals are accordingly allowed

     to the aforesaid extent. In the facts and circumstance of

     the case there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                    [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                          ………………………………….J.
NOVEMBER 09, 2022                   [M.M. SUNDRESH]
10