[Cites
32
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagyoday Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs Ravindra Balkrishna Patel Deceased. ... on 16 November, 2022
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K. M. Joseph
1

                                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS.8531-8532 OF 2022
                           (ARISING FROM SLP (CIVIL) NO.21943-21944 OF 2018)


     BHAGYODAY COOPERATIVE BANK LTD.                                                        APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS


     RAVINDRA BALKRISHNA PATEL DECEASED.
     THROUGH HIS LRS. & ORS.                                                                RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
Leave granted.
2.                     The   woes    of   a   decree       holder   begin    after      obtaining     a

     decree. It is in execution that a decree holder is confronted with

     an               unimaginably   large     number   of       obstacles.      With       the   facts   as

     unfolded in the course of the judgment, we are reinforced in our

     belief that there is substance in this complaint.
3.                     The appellant-Bank granted a financial facility to a firm

     (M/s. Vimal Traders, Partnership Firm). There were three partners,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jagdish Kumar
Date: 2022.12.12
namely, Ravindra Balkrushna Patel and Nikhil Balkrushna Patel who
16:40:51 IST
Reason:
are brothers and the third person was Shri Gautam Vishnuprasad

     Tripathi.               Since       the   amount   was        not    repaid,       a     Lavad   Suit
2
No.2265/1984 came to be filed by the appellant-bank before the

Board of Nominees under
The Gujarat Co-operative Societies Act,

1961
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'). The adjudicatory body

passed an order on 23.09.1988. The operative portion of the order

reads as follows: -
"The      defendants       to      make          payment      of
         Rs.2,61,314.34ps. with 20.5% interest p.a. from
         the date of suit till realisation and cost of the
         suit to the plaintiff latest by 31.03.1989. The
         garnish order passed below Exh.6 is made absolute
         and the plaintiff is at liberty to execute the
         award against the G.S.I.C. for the said amount of
         Rs.1,50,000/-     taking   due    process    of     law    after
         31.03.1989. Lavad fee of Rs.510/- deposited by the
         plaintiff    to   be   credited   to   the   Government      as
         fees.
Award accordingly
         Given     and     pronounced      in      open     Court     on
         23.09.1988."
4.       We may notice at this juncture itself
Section 103
of the

Act. It reads as follows: -
"103. Money how recovered.- Every order
          passed   by   the  Registrar  or   a  person
          authorised by him under
Section 93
, or by
          the Registrar, his nominee or board of
          nominees under
Section 100
or 101, every
          order passed in appeal under
Section 102
,
          every order passed by a Liquidator under
Section 110
, every order passed by the State
          Government in appeal against orders passed
          under
Section 110
and every order passed in
          revision under
Section 155
, shall if not
          carried out,-
(a) on a certificate signed by the
3
Registrar or a Liquidator, be
                  deemed to be a decree of a Civil
                  Court, as defined in clause (2) of
                  Section 2 of the Code of Civil
                  Procedure, 1908 and shall, be
                  executed in the same manner as a
                  decree of such Court, or
(b) be executed according to the
                  provisions of the Land Revenue
                  Code and the rules thereunder for
                  the time being in force for the
                  recovery   of   arrears  of   land
                  revenue:
Provided that, any application for the
        recovery in such manner of any such sum shall be
        made to the Collector, and shall be accompanied
        by a certificate signed by the Registrar, or by
        any Assistant Registrar to whom the said power
        has been delegated by the Registrar. Such
        application shall be made within twelve years
        from the date fixed in the order and if no such
        date is fixed, from the date of the order."
5.         On the application apparently made by the appellant-Bank,

the certificate contemplated under
Section 103 (a)
of the Act came

to be issued on 17.09.1995. In view of the provisions of
Section

103
of the Act, since the order passed under
Section 103
of the Act

in this case is to be executed in the same manner as a decree of a

Civil Court as defined in clause (2) of
Section 2
of the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908 (For short '
CPC
'), the appellant initially

filed   Execution   Application   No.777/1995       before     the    City   Civil

Court, Ahmedabad.       It would appear that the notice was not served

in    the   Execution    Application       No.777/1995   and    the    appellant

according to it tried to serve the notice but it failed. Thereupon,

the Execution Court passed the following order on 22.10.1997, which
4
reads as under:-
"When matter called out, neither darkhastdar
           nor his L.A. is present. From the record, it
           appears that the darkhastdar has not taken any
           effective steps since long. However, in the
           interest of justice, darkhastdar is granted,
           time till 27.11.1997. If no effective step is
           taken till than the darkhastdar- petition will
           stand automatically dismissed on 27.11.1997."
6.          Still further, the appellant on 27.11.1997 gave a new

address and filed an application. It is the further case of the

appellant that the Court was not working and there was a strike and

the case stood posted to 10.12.1997. During the pendency of the

Execution Application No.777 of 1995, a Jangam Warrant was issued

against the respondents for recovery of Rs.8,74,033.49/- by order

dated     15.07.1998.      On   02.02.2005,          the   appellant-Bank      filed   an

application seeking withdrawal of the Execution Application with

liberty    to     file    the   petition        before     the   Court    of   competent

jurisdiction. This was occasioned according to the appellant-Bank

by shifting of the residence of the respondents. According to the

appellant-Bank, the said application was allowed and the Execution

Application       was     permitted    to       be    withdrawn     by    order    dated

02.02.2005.       On     19.01.2006,   the       appellant       filed    an   execution

petition before the 4th Additional Senior Civil Judge (Ahmedabad

Rural).
7.          At this juncture, we must notice another aspect. It would

appear that the appellant-Bank had obtained a decree against M/S.

Virat     Paper    Processors     (a   partnership          firm)    in    which   again
5
Ravindra Balkrushan Patel and              Nikhil Balkrushna Patel (hereinafter

for    brevity     'Patel     brothers')        were    partners    along       with   Hemant

Balkrushna Patel (not a party herein). It must be noticed that all

the three were brothers though the firm was a different firm. The

deemed      decree    obtained      against     the    said   parties      in    Lavad      Suit

No.576/1988 again under the Act, was put to execution. It is here

we must note another person whose role will become clear i.e.,

Savitaben      Balkrushna      Patel      (Deceased)-the         mother    of    the     Patel

brothers,      who    stood   as    guarantor        for   the   loan     granted      in    the

transaction which led to Lavad Suit No.576/1998. Her property was

finally put to sale in the Court auction. A sum of Rs.39,25,000/-

was fetched and it was lying in deposit. The mother of the Patel

brothers expired on 18.06.2005.
8.            Resuming the narrative with reference to the developments

in    the   suit     with   which    we   are       concerned,   after     filing      of    the

execution petition as it were by the appellant in the new Execution

Court apparently based on the developments in the other suit namely

the holding of the Court auction in connection with the enforcement

of the liability of the mother as guarantor, an application came to

be filed on 24.01.2007. The purport of the application appears to

be to obtain satisfaction of the deemed decree with reference to

the amount which was realized in the Court auction. We may only

notice the prayer as we find from Annexure-P7 of the SLP paper

book, which is as follows: -
"A. In connection with the Special Darkhast no.
                   80/99, the property of the opponents was sold
6
by    initiating     legal       procedure        and         amount
             thereof to the tune of Rs. 39,25,000/- rupees
             thirty Nine lacs twenty five thousand only is
             deposited before the Court in Special Darkhast
             no. 80/99 and after deducting the outstanding
             amount    in    special       Darkhast     no.        80/99    with
             interest and cost, remaining amount is likely
             to be credited and that amount is to be given
             to the opponents no. 2 and 3 thus, your honour
             may be pleased to pass order of garnishi and
             direct    the   registrar/Nazir           of    the     Court    of
             learned Civil Judge (S.D.) Saheb to deposited
             the     remaining   credited       amount        in     the    said
             execution.
B. Your honour may be pleased to pass such
             other and further relief as may be deemed fit.
C. Your honour may be pleased to pass order to
             send one copy of the order of this Garnishi
             application to keep it in Special Darkhast no.
80/99    pending    before      the   Court       of     Shri    BB
             Pathak     sahib,    Civil       Judge         S.D.     Ahmedabad
             Rural."
9.       The Patel brothers who are judgment debtors in the instant

case filed their objections. After considering their objections,

the Execution Court passed the following order.
"Objection application Ex. 28 filed by
             the   opponents     no.   2     and   3    is    hereby
             dismissed.
Under the provisions of order 21
Rule
             46A of the CPC
, the Registrar and Nazir
             of the Court of Principal Senior Civil
             Judge Saheb, Ahmedabad (rural) is hereby
7
ordered to deposit the actual remaining
               amount     in    this     Darkhast          after    making
               payment     of    the    Darkhast,          interest      and
               cost     come     on    the        share    of     opponent
               Ravindra        Balkrishna          Patel    and     Nikhil
               Balkrishna       Patel        out    of     the    credited
               amount in Special Darkhast No.80-99.
This     order    has    been       declared      today    on
               this 10.04.2013 in the open Court."
It is this order which came to be challenged before the High

Court by the Patel brothers. The High Court by the impugned order

has set aside the order passed by the Execution Court. It is being

aggrieved thereby that the appellant-Bank is before us.
10.         We heard Mr. Preetesh Kapur, learned senior counsel for

the   appellant   and    also    Mr.    Aniruddha          Deshmukh,      learned   counsel

appearing    on   behalf        of     the        Patel    brothers,       including   the

partnership firm.
THE FINDINGS IN THE IMPUGNED ORDER
11.         The High Court finds that the earlier execution petition

filed in the first Execution Court, namely, Execution Application

No.777/1995, having been dismissed, the application which is filed

subsequently in the year 2006 before the Second Execution Court, if

we may describe it as such was not maintainable. It is found that

the first application having been dismissed for default, the proper

course would have been to approach the said Court within the period
8
of    limitation.     It    is    found    that    the    said   order    dismissing       the

execution application should have been set aside within a period of

30 days since
Section 5
of the The Limitation Act, 1963 is not

available      in    execution       proceedings,          the   subsequent     execution

petition is barred.
12.         Next, it is found that in view of
Section 38
of CPC a

decree could be executed either by the Court which passed it or the

Court to which the decree was transferred.
Section 39
of the CPC

provides for the exclusive mechanism by which the decree could be

ordered to be transferred.             In the facts of this case, it was found

there was no approach made by the appellant-Bank to the Court in

which    the   execution         petition    was       originally     filed   to     get   it

transferred to the second Court in which without an order under
Section 39
, the appellant-Bank filed the second application in the

year 2006. Therefore, the very petition filed before the Execution

Court on the second occasion was not maintainable.
13.         Further, the Court elaborated on the flaw involved in the

application maintained under
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
and, more

importantly,        the    actual    order    that       was   passed    thereunder.       The

reasoning of the High Court is as follows: - Before an order is

passed    under
Order    21     Rule   46A    of     the   CPC
,   there   must    be   an

attachment of the debt. There was no attachment of the debt within

the meaning of
Order 21 Rule 46 of CPC
. It is found that
Order 21

Rule 46 of CPC
insisting on an order of attachment as is clear from

a perusal of
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
serves a salutary purpose. It
9
affords     an     opportunity       to   the     person        aggrieved    that       is     the

garnishee to raise his objection to the attachment. Valuable rights

are vouchsafed to the garnishee and the right is to be enforced

through     the    mechanism    of    Order       21    Rule    46C.    Order     21    Rule    58

provides for objection to attachment. A person aggrieved by an

order under
Order 21 Rule 58 of CPC
has further rights in the form

of the appeals as provided in law. In this case, it was found that

without observing the mandatory requirement of attachment it is

that the Execution Court had allowed the prayer under Order 21 Rule

46A.    It must be noticed that though the argument relating to the

execution        petition     being       barred        by     limitation        was    pursued

vigorously before the Execution Court, it was not pressed before

the High Court by the respondents.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
14.          Mr.    Preetesh     Kapur,       learned          senior   counsel        for     the

appellant would with reference to the facts as we have noticed make

the following submissions. He would point out that the mere fact

that the earlier execution petition was dismissed would not stand

in    the   way    of   the    processing         and    considering        of    the    second

execution petition. The execution petition was dismissed only if at

all on account of default. In fact, it was withdrawn with liberty.
But even if it is dismissed on default, in view of the law laid

down by judgment of this Court in 1969 (1) SCC 718, Shivashankar

Prasad Shah and Others Versus Baikunth Nath Singh and Others, the

second petition was maintainable. It was held as follows in the
10
said decision: -
"6.     The    courts        in    India          have     generally
           taken the view that an execution petition
           which has been dismissed for the default of
           the decree-holder though by the time that
           petition        came         to        be      dismissed,          the
           judgment-debtor had resisted the execution
           on one or more grounds, does not bar the
           further        execution               of     the        decree     in
           pursuance        of     fresh           execution          petitions
           filed in accordance with law-see
Lakshmibai
           Anant    Kondkar        v.    Rayji           Bhikaji       Kondkar,
           (XXXI,    BLR
400).
Even          the     dismissal     for
           default of objections raised under Section
           47, Civil Procedure Code does not operate
           as res judicata when the same objections
           are     raised       again        in    the       course     of    the
           execution-see Bahir Das Pal and Another v.
Girish        Chandra    Pal,           AIR       1923     Cal    287;
Bhagwati Prasad Sah v. Radha Kishun Sah and
           Others
,        AIR    1950        Pat       354;
Jethmal       and
           Others v. Mst
. Sakina, AIR 1961 Raj 59;
Bishwannath Kundu v. Smt. Subala Dassi
, AIR
           1962    Cal     272.
We        do    not       think    that    the
           decision in Ramnarain v. Basudeo, ILR XXV
           Pat 595 on which the learned counsel for
           the appellant placed great deal of reliance
           is correctly decided. Hence we agree with
           the     High     Court       that           the     plea    of     res
           judicata        advanced          by        the     appellant       is
           unsustainable."
15.      The dismissal of the earlier execution petition on the

ground of default will not bar the filing of a fresh execution as
11
long   as   the     second   petition     is    filed    within     the    period    of

limitation. In this case, limitation would begin to run only on

obtaining the certificate contemplated under
Section 103
of the

Act. The certificate was obtained in the year 1995. Therefore, the

second execution petition filed in the year 2006 was well within

the period of 12 years and therefore the execution petition is not

barred.     As far as the findings of the High Court that
Sections 38
and
39
of the CPC governed the facts of the case, it is contended

that the Court has erred in not bearing in mind the following a

vital feature present in this case. This is not a case where a

decree has been passed by a Civil Court. What has happened is in

terms of the Act on a claim by the appellant-Bank which is a

creditor the matter was adjudicated in the form of an arbitration

proceeding. At the end of the adjudication, the plaintiff being

successful,    an    award   was   passed.     After    the   award   is   passed,   a

certificate has to be applied for. The certificate is granted under
Section 103
of the Act. The certificate granted under
Section 103
of the Act only results in the order passed becoming executable as

a decree. He further points out that even after the certificate is

passed it is not as if the order was a decree as such. All that the

law provides is that it is enforceable as a decree. He would submit

that   similar      provisions     are   contained      in    the
Arbitration     and

Conciliation Act, 1996
.
16.         He drew our attention in this regard to the judgment of

this Court reported in
Sundaram Finance Limited versus Abdul Samad

and Another
, (2018) 3 SCC 622. Therein this Court was considering
12
the question which was similar to the question which arises in the

facts of this case, namely, whether the filing of the execution

petition is governed by the regime provided under
Sections 38
and
39
of the CPC. We notice the following, inter alia, discussion: -
"14. We would now like to refer to the provisions of
         the said Act, more specifically
Section 36(1)
, which
         deals with the enforcement of the award:
“36. Enforcement. — (1) Where the time
               for making an application to set aside
               the arbitral award under
Section 34
has
               expired, then, subject to the provisions
               of sub-section (2), such award shall be
               enforced         in     accordance      with        the
               provisions
of     the     Code       of     Civil
               Procedure
, 1908 (5 to 1908), in the same
               manner as if it were a decree of the
               court.”
         The aforesaid provision would show that an award is
         to be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
         the said Code in the same manner as if it were a
         decree.     It   is,   thus,     the   enforcement       mechanism,
         which is akin to the enforcement of a decree but the
         award itself is not a decree of the civil court as
         no decree whatsoever is passed by the civil court.
         It is the Arbitral Tribunal, which renders an award
         and   the    tribunal        does    not   have    the    power   of
         execution of a decree. For the purposes of execution
         of a decree the award is to be enforced in the same
         manner as if it was a decree under the said Code.
20. We are, thus, unhesitatingly of the view that
         the enforcement of an award through its execution
13
can be filed anywhere in the country where such
          decree can be executed and there is no requirement
          for obtaining a transfer of the decree from the
          court,     which   would    have   jurisdiction   over    the
          arbitral proceedings."
17.       He would therefore submit that once second application was

not barred by limitation, a fresh execution petition could be filed

in the Court which would have jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the

second Court would have to be determined with reference to the

element   of   the   residence   of   the    judgment   debtors    within   the

jurisdiction of that Court or the existence of property as the case

may be within the limits of the Courts jurisdiction. As far as the

finding that
Order 21 Rule 46 of CPC
was observed in its breach

before the Court passed the
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
, he would

submit that the garnishee in the case is not the mother of the

Patel brothers. In fact, the mother as noticed had passed away in

the year 2005 and the application itself was filed only in the year

2007. The case of the appellant is that after the auction was held

in execution of the decree in the other suit filed by the appellant

after satisfying the decree debt in the said case, there was an

excess sum. It belonged to the mother and it was lying in deposit

and as the mother passed away, therefore, it became payable by the

Court's Nazir to the judgment debtors in the said case two of whom

are the judgment debtors being the Patel brothers involved in this

case also. Therefore, the argument is that it is the Court Nazir

who is the garnishee as he was under an obligation or debt to make

payment of the said amount to the judgment debtors which included

Patel brothers involved in this case. He would further submit that
14
with reference to the wide powers available to the Execution Court

under
Section 51
of CPC that at any rate it would be highly unjust

to deny the decree holder the fruits of its decree and to proscribe

the Court from getting at assets of the judgment debtors which were

lying in a deposit in the same Court. In other words, the proceeds

of    the   Court   auction    after    satisfying    the    decree   debt    of   the

appellant in the other case and payable to the judgment debtors

after death of the guarantor (mother) was lying in deposit of the

second Execution Court. On the strength of the powers available

under
Section 51
as also inherent power under
Section 151
of CPC,

the Court must be ceded the power to make available the said amount

for appropriation by the decree holder.
18.          Per-contra,      learned   counsel     for     the   respondents,     Mr.

Aniruddha Deshmukh stoutly opposes the contentions. He would point

that as far as the interpretation placed under
Sections 38
and
39
of CPC by the High Court is concerned it is unexceptionable. When

confronted with the judgment of this Court, in
Sundaram Finance

Limited
(supra)   relied     upon    by   the    learned      counsel    for   the

appellant, he would make an attempt at distinguishing
the said

judgment
. This attempt is bolstered with reference to the words

'decree as defined in clause (2) of
Section 2
of CPC' as found in
Section 103
of the Act. He would submit that this distinguishable

text of the Act with which this Court is concerned may render the

principle
laid down by
the judgment of this Court not applicable.

He would further point out that the High Court was entirely right

in its interpretation of Order 21 Rule 46 and Order 21 Rule 46A.
He
15
supported his contention in this regard to three judgments of the

High   Courts     which      are   as   follows:    -    Nuthalapati      Kotaiah      vs.

Executive Officer TTD Office at Guntur, (1985) 3 AP LJ 103, The

Madurai     City          Municipal     Corporation,       represented          by     its
Commissioner, Madurai vs. N. Baskara Pandian & another
, 1998
SCC

Online    Mad   75    and    Executive       Engineer,    T.    C.   Division,       K.S.E.

Boards, Palghat versus J. H. Sharma and another
, AIR 1988 Ker. 285.

He would submit that Order 21 Rule 46 read with
Order 21 Rule 46A

of CPC
and the provisions which succeed these provisions enact a

scheme    which      is     intended    to    safeguard        the   interest    of    the

garnishee. Any deviation from the mandatory regime will reach grave

injustice to the garnishee as found by the High Court and also

echoed in the judgments relied upon by him. He would further point

out that
Order 21 Rule 52 of CPC
provides for the procedure to be

followed in a case like the present.
Order 21 Rule 52 of CPC
, reads

as follows: -
ORDER 21 RULE 52:-
52. Attachment of property in custody of
                  Court   or   public   officer.—Where   the
                  property to be attached is in the custody
                  of any Court or public officer, the
                  attachment shall be made by a notice to
                  such Court or officer, requesting that
                  such property, and any interest or
                  dividend becoming payable thereon, may be
                  held subject to the further orders of the
                  Court from which the notice is issued:
Provided that, where such property is in
                  the custody of a Court, any question of
                  title or priority arising between the
                  decree-holder and any other person, not
                  being the judgment-debtor, claiming to be
                  interested in such property by virtue of
                  any assignment, attachment or otherwise,
                  shall be determined by such Court.
16
19.        He would submit that since the appellant is not pursuing a

case based on the mother (deceased) being a garnishee and if the

further case based on the Court Officer being a garnishee falls to

the ground, the only express provision which must be understood as

giving effect to the residuary clause found in both
Section 51
of

CPC and Order 21 Rule 11 must be followed.
Section 51
of the CPC,

inter alia, provides as follows: -
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution.—Subject
      to   such     conditions      and        limitations        as    may   be
      prescribed, the Court may, on the application of the
      decree-holder, order execution of the decree—
(a)         by   delivery         of    any         property
                  specifically decreed;
(b) by attachment and sale or by the sale
                  without attachment of any property;
(c)by arrest and detention in prison [for
                  such    period    not   exceeding        the     period
                  specified in
Section 58
, where arrest and
                  detention    is     permissible      under           that
                  section];
(d) by appointing a receiver; or
(e) in such other manner as the nature of
                  the relief granted may require:
20.        In similar vein, we find that when an execution petition

is filed, the applicant is obliged to specify the nature of the

relief which he seeks. Not unnaturally there is replication of the

words 'such other manner as may be needed'. He would still further
17
point out that
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
was not available to the

appellant for another formidable reason. Order 21 Rule 46 expressly

is inapplicable in regard to movable property not in the possession

of the judgment debtor where the property is deposited in or in the

custody of the Court. Therefore, it is contended that if money

fetched in a Court auction can be described as property and it is

deposited in the Court then in view of the express provision of

Order 21 Rule 46, it is not applicable. The scheme of Order 21 Rule

46 followed by Order 21 Rule 46A may not be available and this may

have to be dealt with under Order 21 Rule 52. He would finally

conclude by contending that on the facts there is another obstacle

for   the   appellant       to   realise   the    fruits    of     the    decree.   It    is

submitted that a perusal of the award by the authority under the

Act would reveal that the judgment debtors have obtained an award

against     a    third   party.    It   was     ordered    in     the    award   that    the

appellant would be entitled to execute the said award in realizing

the amount which was awarded in favour of the appellant in this

case. This has not been accounted for. It is pointed out that the

said process would necessarily have to be undertaken even if this

Court is inclined to grant any relief to the appellant.



FINDINGS
21.             The first question we have to consider is whether the

dismissal        of   the   execution      petition       filed    by     the    appellant

apparently on the ground of default or withdrawal of the first

execution petition will result in a bar for the filing or the

prosecuting of the Second execution petition. In this regard, in
18
fact, we must notice that the learned counsel for the respondent

does not seek to raise any objection as such to the contentions of

the   appellant     that        the    second    execution        application       would     be

maintainable provided it is within the period of limitation. We

also find merit in the contentions of the appellant that the mere

dismissal of the first application on the ground of default may not

result in the decree holder being precluded from filing a fresh

execution petition provided it is within time.
22.         This brings us to the aspect of limitation. The plea of

limitation       though    pressed       before        the   Execution     Court    was      not

pursued by the respondents before the High Court. No doubt, a pure

question    of    law     may    be    permitted        to   be   raised    in     an    appeal

generated by the grant of special leave under
Section 136
of the

Constitution of India. We may only observe that what
Section 103
of

the   Act    contemplates         is    grant     of     certificate       signed       by   the

Registrar    or    the     Liquidator.          This    is   to   be   preceded         by   the

requirement of words 'shall if not carried out'. In other words,

what
Section 103
of the Act appears to contemplate is that after

the adjudication by the Authorities which would include any appeal

carried therefrom, the order passed, inter alia, is to be certified

by the Registrar or the Liquidator. This would give birth to what

is by way of a deeming provision a decree of a Civil Court. In this

case, we may only notice that an award was passed in the year 1988

and the certificate was issued in the year 1995. As to when the

application was made by the appellant seeking the certificate and

what was the time taken by the Authority to issue a certificate are
19
all matters shrouded in mystery. There is a case for the appellant,

no doubt, that the apprehension of the learned counsel for the

respondents that if the creditor sleeps over the matter even for a

period beyond time provided for executing a decree and makes an

application with great delay then it would result in a completely

inequitable situation may not rise as the facts speak otherwise. We

do not intend to however in this case go to this question in

greater detail, particularly in view of the fact that it was not

pursued.
23.        The   next   question   which   arises   is   the   effect   of   the

interplay of
Sections 38
and
39
of CPC. They are as follows: -
38. Court by which decree may be executed.—A decree
       may be executed either by the Court which passed it,
       or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.
39. Transfer of decree.—(1) The Court which passed a
       decree may, on the application of the decree-holder,
       send it for execution to another Court [of competent
       jurisdiction], —
(a) if the person against whom the decree is
              passed actually and voluntarily resides or
              carries on business, or personally works
              for gain, within the local limits of the
              jurisdiction of such other Court, or
(b) if such person has no property within the
              local limits of the jurisdiction of the
              Court which passed the decree sufficient to
              satisfy such decree and has property within
              the local limits of the jurisdiction of
              such other Court, or
(c) if the decree directs the sale or
              delivery of immovable property situate
              outside  the  local   limits  of   the
20
jurisdiction of the Court which passed it,
                 or
(d) if the Court which passed the decree
                 considers for any other reason, which it
                 shall record in writing, that the decree
                 should be executed by such other Court.
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own
         motion send it for execution to any subordinate court
         of competent jurisdiction.
[(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court
         shall be deemed to be a court of competent
         jurisdiction   if,  at   the   time of making  the
         application for the transfer of decree to it, such
         Court would have jurisdiction to try the suit in
         which such decree was passed.]
           [(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
         authorise the Court which passed a decree to execute
         such decree against any person or property outside
         the local limits of its jurisdiction.]


       It is clear that under the scheme
of the CPC
, if a decree is

passed by a Civil Court, then either the Court which passed the

decree   can    execute      it   or   the    Court   to   which   the   decree    is

transferred can execute the decree.
Section 39
of the CPC speaks of

the powers of the transferor court. It also provides for the decree

holder applying to the Court which passed the decree. The question,

however, is whether this regime is applicable in the facts of this

case. We have noticed the judgment of this Court rendered no doubt

in the context of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
. The

only   point    which   is    raised    before   us   to   distinguish
the     said

judgment
by the learned counsel for the respondents is that in view

of the use of words 'decree as defined in clause (2) of
Section 2
of CPC', in
Section 103
of the Act, the principle may not be

available.
21
24.       We    are   of   the    view   that    the    respondents    may   not   be

justified in seeking to distinguish the judgment of this Court
Sundaram Finance Limited
(supra). It cannot be in the region of

doubt that when the Authority passed the award under the Act, it

was a Civil Court. It is not a Court within the meaning of
Section

38
of CPC. If there is no Court, which can be said to have passed

the award in this case, then it is inconceivable as to how it could

be maintained in the same breath that it is indispensable to the

maintaining of the execution proceedings in another Court that the

Court   which    passed     the     decree    must     necessarily    transfer     the

proceedings     to   the   latter    Court.    For   the   effective    working    of
Section 39
of CPC, in other words, there must be a Court which has

passed a decree. In the context
of the CPC
, we are of the view that

there is no such Court within the meaning of
Section 38
in these

cases. Instead, we have what is essentially arbitration proceedings

and what is passed by the said authority is clothed only with the

effect of a decree and it is enforceable as a decree. No doubt on

the certificate being granted it resulted in a deemed decree. In

such circumstances, we are of the view that there is no merit in

the contention of the respondents. The attempt to distinguish the

judgment based on the presence of the words 'decree as defined in

clause (2) of
Section 2
of CPC' is equally misplaced. This is for

the reason that we would think that the words 'decree as defined in

clause (2) of
Section 2
of CPC' as used in
Section 103
of the Act

is to reinforce in the concept of a decree with greater clarity and

by way of abundant caution.
The mere presence of these words by

itself cannot support the attempt at distinguishing the principle
22
which   has    been
laid     down    in
the       decision    of
Sundaram       Finance

Limited
(supra) which is that in view of the fact that
Sections 38
and
39
of the CPC are not as such applicable, the decree holder may

seek    to   execute    the     decree       in    any      Court   which       otherwise     has

jurisdiction. This would mean that the finding by the High Court in

this regard is flawed and is liable to be overturned.
25.           This brings us to the last of the substantive contentions

which have been debated before this Court. Undoubtedly,
Order 21

Rule 46A of CPC
is part of the scheme of the provisions relating to

executions and it must be understood with reference to the reliefs

which can be claimed by the decree holder as provided in both
Section 51
and
Order 21 Rule 11 of CPC
. We have already noticed
Section 51
and we have also noticed Order 21 Rule 11. The lawgiver

has elaborated the manner in which each of these sub heads under

which   a    decree    holder    may    execute         a    decree.     For    instance,     the

aspect of attachment of various kinds of properties are found to be

separately dealt with in
Order 21 of CPC
, and the procedure to be

followed has been detailed thereunder. Order 21 Rule 46 apparently

deals with attachment of debt, share and other property but an

important distinguishing feature is that the debt, share and other

property must not be in the possession of the judgment debtor to

attract Order 21 Rule 46. The exception is in regard to ‘such other

property’      which   though     not    in       the       possession    of     the    judgment

debtor, is property deposited or is in the custody of any Court. In

other   words,    in    regard    to     such      property      Order     21    Rule    46   and

therefore Order 21 Rule 46A will not apply. Order 21 Rule 46A of
23
CPC
was in fact, inserted by Act 104 of 1976 with effect from

01.02.1997. So are the rest of the provisions which include Order

21 Rule 46B to
Order 21 Rule 46I of CPC
.                   The scheme would appear

to be as follows. In the case of debt, share and other property

which is covered by Order 21 Rule 46 the procedure begins with an

attachment.    It    is   to    be    made   by   a   written     order.     The   order

prohibits the creditor recovering the debt and the debtor from

making payment until further orders of the Court.                     The copy of the

order so prohibiting the parties is to be affixed on a conspicuous

part of the Court house and another copy is to be sent to the

debtor.      The    debtor     of    the   judgment   debtor    is    prohibited    from

making the payment. He may pay the amount of debt into the Court

and such payment will be a discharge for him as if he has made the

payment to his immediate creditor.
26.
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
, then deals with the notice to be

given to the garnishee. A garnishee is obviously a person who owes

a debt to the judgment debtor. It can be illustrated by an example

i.e. 'A' owes a debt to 'B', 'B' in turns owes a debt to 'C', 'C'

can obtain an order of garnishee against 'A'. 'A' would then be

prohibited    from     making        the   payment    to   'B'.      'B'   would   stand

prohibited from receiving the debt from 'A'.
27.       It is clear from Order 21 Rule 46A that in the case of

debt which must be understood as a debt spoken of in
Order 21 Rule

46 of CPC
subject to what we will say immediately hereinafter, it

is insisted upon by the lawgiver that the debt must have been
24
attached under Order 21 Rule 46. There is a further qualification

as regards debt. Order 21 Rule 46A excepts, debt secured by a

mortgage or a charge. Once these conditions are fulfilled, then

upon an application being made by the ‘attaching creditor’ a notice

may be issued to the garnishee who in the example we have given, is

'A' calling upon him either to pay the debt or so much of it as

would be sufficient to satisfy the decree and the cost of execution

or show cause as to why he should not do so. Under Order 21 Rule

46B, if the garnishee does not pay the amount forthwith or he does

not appear in the case of a show cause, the Court is empowered to

order the garnishee to comply with the terms of the notice. The

Court is empowered to proceed as if there is a decree against the

garnishee. Order 21 Rule 46C reads as follows: -
46-C.   Trial    of    disputed      questions.—Where         the
         garnishee     disputes       liability,       the   Court     may
         order that any issue or question necessary for
         the determination of liability shall be tried
         as if it were an issue in a suit, and upon the
         determination     of    such    issue     shall      make    such
         order or orders as it deems fit:
Provided     that    if    the    debt     in    respect   of
         which the application under Rule 46-A is made
         is in respect of a sum of money beyond the
         pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court, the Court
         shall send the execution case to the Court of
         the District Judge to which the said Court is
         subordinate,     and    thereupon       the    Court    of    the
         District Judge or any other competent Court to
         which it may be transferred by the District
         Judge shall deal with it in the same manner as
25
if the case had been originally instituted in
         that Court.
Therefore, it is clear that the lawgiver has contemplated to

confer invaluable rights on the garnishee in the form of empowering

him to challenge the attachment which is necessarily involved in

the order of garnishee under
Order 21 Rule 46A of CPC
. If the

attachment is made under
Order 21 Rule 46 of CPC
, it would be open

to him to question it under Order 21 Rule 58. If it is followed by

an order under Order 21 Rule 46A, it is open to him to dispute his

liability under Order 21 Rule 46C.
In this regard, we may notice

the judgment of High Court of Kerala, in
Executive Engineer, T. C.

Division, K.S.E. Board, Palghat versus J. H. Sharma and another
reported in AIR 1988 Ker 285, rendered by a Division Bench and

speaking through U. L. Bhat, J. The High Court, inter alia, held as

follows: -
"5.        Attachment of debt in execution of a
             decree     is   dealt         with    in    R.    46   of   O.    XXI.
Attachment      is       to    be    made    by    written       order
             prohibiting        the    creditor         from   recovering       the
debt and the debtor from making payment thereof
             until further orders of the court. Sub-r. (3)
             of R. 46 states that the debtor so prohibited
             may pay the amount of debt into Court. This is
             only an enabling provision. There is nothing in
             R.    46   which     compels         the    debtor     to   pay   the
             amount of debt into court.
6A.        It has to be noticed that R. 46 does
26
not     contain        any     provision             enabling        the
garnishee       to    raise    any       objection          though    it
gives opportunity to the garnishee to subject
himself to the order by making payment into
Court. The next step is provided by R. 46A. He
has to be given notice either to pay the amount
into court or to show cause why he should not
do so. According to R. 46B, where he fails to
pay    the   amount     in     Court       and       also    fails   to
appear and show cause in answer to the notice,
the    court    may    order    him       to     comply      with    the
terms of the notice and on such order execution
may issue as though such order were a decree
against him. This is the consequence of his
failure to respond in terms of the notice under
R.    46B.     Where   he     appears          and    disputes       his
liability R. 46C requires that the court should
decide the question as if it were an issue in a
suit and upon the determination of such issue
the court should pass such order as it deems
fit. The Court may uphold the contention raised
by the garnishee or reject his contention and
pass    appropriate          orders.       Such       an    order     is
appealable under R. 46H. Thus the scheme of the
rules contemplates a specific opportunity being
given to the garnishee to show cause why he
should not pay the amount into Court. If he
raises an objection the court has a duty to
consider       the    objection          and   pass        appropriate
orders. The rules do not require him to raise
an objection suo motu before receiving a show
cause notice under R. 46A. The fact that he did
not    suo     motu    file         an    objection         when     the
attachment      was    effected          before      judgment       does
not take away his right under the above rules
27
to raise an objection.
Equally,    we    may       notice       the       judgment      of    the    High   Court   of

Andhra Pradesh reported in (1985) 3 AP LJ 103, Nuthalapati Kotaiah

vs. Executive Officer TTD Office at Guntur, wherein the High Court

held as follows: -
6.     For the service of notice or summons,
Order
       5 C.P.C
. provides an elaborate procedure providing
       adequate       safeguards            in    effecting          notice      on    the
       defendant or the respondent, as the case may be.
       Order 21 Rule 46-A gives power to the Court to
       issue    notice          to    the     garnishee         but       couched      the
       language as ‘may’. When a statute create a duty,
       one      of     the           first        questions          for      judicial
       consideration,           is     what       is    the     sanction      for      its
       breach or the mode for compelling the performance
       of the duty. This question usually resolves itself
       into an enquiry whether the provision is mandatory
       or      directory             viz.,         whether           absolute          or,
       discretionary. If it is directory, the Court cannot
       interfere to compel performance or the act does not
       entail        with       invalidity.             But     if    the        act    is
       mandatory, disobedience entails legal consequences
       which may take the shape of a public or private
       remedy obtainable in accordance with law. It is,
       however, a well recognised canon of construction
       that where power is given to a Court or a public
       officer       for    the       purpose          of   being     used    for      the
       benefit       of     persons          to        be     affected       upon      the
       performance of which they are entitled to call for
       its exercise, the power ought to be exercised to
       effectuate         the    purpose          for       which    it    was    given.
       Though the word ‘may’ appears to be an enabling
       word, when the object of the power is to affect a
28
legal right, it must be construed to be mandatory
          and has its substitute as ‘shall’.
The    learned     single    Judge    of     the   Madras    High    Court    in   The

Madurai      City        Municipal        Corporation,        represented          by    its
Commissioner, Madurai Vs. N. Baskara Panian & Another
, 1998 SCC

Online Mad 75, no doubt, while dealing with the question whether a

fresh attachment is required under
Order 21 Rule 46 of CPC
when

there   is   an   attachment       before    judgment       took   the    view    that   the

earlier attachment would suffice.
28.          In this case, there is no attachment of the debt in the

form of the money lying in deposit. The order which is passed is

expressly made under Order 21 Rule 46A. Certainly, this is not the

manner in which an order could have been passed within the meaning

of Order 21 Rule 46A. There is a definite scheme as already noticed

which is clear from the perusal of Order 21 Rule 46 and by the

subsequent additions to the law by the amendment of the year 1976

which is contained in Order 21 Rule 46A to Order 21 Rule 46I. It

would     unerringly       point     to     the     provisions      being        mandatory.
Therefore, the High Court appears to be right in its finding that

the Execution Court should have first attached the debt under Order

21 Rule 46 before proceeding to pass the order under
Order 21 Rule

46A of CPC
.
29.          In   this    case,    we   must      further   bear   in     mind    that   the

guarantor (the mother of the Patel Brothers) is not the garnishee
29
even according to the appellant. In fact, we are unable to think of

as to how the mother of the Patel brothers could be said to owe any

money to her sons. At least nothing has been pressed before us to

indicate how the mother could be the garnishee.
30.         The contention, however, raised by the appellant is that

it is not the mother and in fact the appellant was also aware that

the mother was not alive as of the date of the making of the

application    and    therefore         there       could    not    have      been   any    order

against the mother. The argument is that after the auction, the

amount in excess of the judgment debt in the other suit come in, to

the account of the Court and the Officer of the Court therefore

became the debtor or it is the Officer would be the garnishee. We

have our reservations about accepting this line of argument. Order

21 Rule 46 contemplates, inter alia, a debt.                             It is difficult to

put the Nazir in the position of a debtor. We cannot understand the

relationship    between      the     Nazir      in    the        facts   of   this   case     and

judgment debtors in the other case is one of debtor and creditor

respectively. Therefore, we would think that the very application

as such may have been flawed.
31.         However, in the facts of this case there remains another

aspect.    It would appear that the amount for which the property of

the   guarantor      (mother       of    the        Patel    brothers)         was   sold     was

Rs.39,25,000/-.      There      is   order      dated       03.02.2007        passed    by    the

Execution Court. The said order directed the distribution of the

amount    fetched    in   the    Court     auction          in    the    following     manner:-
30
Rs.18,56, 750/- was to be paid to the appellant on account of the

deemed decree in Lavad Suit No.576/1988 and Rs. 6,89,416/- each was

to be paid to the two Patel brothers in the present case. Further

Rs.6,89,416/- was also to be paid to another brother of the Patel

brothers who was a partner in the firm which was the defendant in

the other suit. The position therefore, which we have before us is

the amount representing the share of the excess amount lies in the

Court deposit i.e. the aggregate of Rs.6,89,416/- due to Nikhil

Balkrushna Patel and Rs.6,89,416/- to Ravindra Balkrushna Patel.
We    are   not   certain    as   to   what      has   happened     to    the   amount   of

Rs.6,89,416/-        which   is   earmarked      as    share   of   Hemant      Balkrushna

Patel.      Hemant   Balkrushna     Patel     is   not    a    party     to   the   present

litigation.
32.           Even proceeding on the basis of the flaw which existed in

the application filed under Order 21 Rule 46A and furthermore the

procedure followed by the Court first in not attaching the fund

under Order 21 Rule 46, the question would arise as to whether the

complaint with which we began in the judgment namely the woes of

the decree holder must receive some redress.                      The award is passed

as we notice in the year 1988 nearly 34 years ago. The amount in

deposit upon the death of the mother of the Patel brothers would

naturally belong to her legal heirs. We posed the question to the

learned counsel for the respondents as to whether apart from the

three Patel brothers whether there is any other legal heir. The

learned counsel for the respondents would submit that there is no

other legal heir available. We asked the learned counsel for the
31
respondents whether he has a case that the mother has left behind a

Will. It is pointed out to us that there is no Will left behind by

the mother. This will bring the case to
Section 15
of the Hindu

Succession Act, 1956, which deals with succession to a Hindu female

who died intestate. The Patel brothers would indeed be the Class-I

heirs being the sons. We must notice in this regard that there is

no case for the respondents that the order dated 03.02.2007, which

is passed with them on the party array has been called in question

by the Patel brothers. We, therefore, take it to be a case where

the amount was lying in deposit and it was by the subsequent order

dated    03.02.2007        to     be   appropriated     to     the   two   Patel   brothers

involved in this case before us and to the other brother. At this

juncture, we may notice Order 21 Rule 52 again. It is in fact

relied       upon    by    none    other       than   the    learned   counsel     for   the

respondents. We would think that in the facts of this case, it

would be appropriate and proper to proceed on the basis that the

procedure under Order 21 Rule 52 ought to have been followed. In

the facts, we would, therefore, feel that it is appropriate and

just    to    hold    as    follows:       -    The   second    execution    petition     is

maintainable. The filing of the second execution petition was not

illegal for the reason that there was no order under
Section 39
of

CPC. The filing of the application under Order 21 Rule 46A and the

order passed as such by the Execution Court may be flawed.
In the facts of this case, the more appropriate order would

have been one under
Order 21 Rule 52 of CPC
.                         The amount is lying

in deposit with the same Court in which the appellant has moved the

second application for execution. We therefore, direct that the
32
order passed by the Execution Court must be treated as an order by

which the attachment has been made under
Order 21 Rule 52 of CPC
.
By order dated 08.08.2022, this Court had permitted the respondents

to withdraw the amount lying in deposit in excess of Rs.12 lakhs.
It would thus be open to the appellant to proceed against the said

amount, to the extent of Rs.12 lakhs. The order will be treated as

an order of attachment. We must bear in mind also the fact that

this Court was persuaded to pass an order under which the amount

lying   in   deposit    in     excess    of    Rs.12    lakhs   was    allowed       to    be

withdrawn by the respondents. No doubt, this is on the basis that

even accepting the liability of respondents the amount lying in

excess of Rs. 12 Lakhs should be made available to the respondents.
The   Execution   Court,       namely,   4th    Additional      Senior       Civil    Judge

(Ahmedabad     Rural)    will     therefore      proceed      with    the     matter       in

accordance     with     law.     However,      we      make   it     clear     that       the

respondents-Patel brothers had an opportunity to raise objections

before the Execution Court and the right which is given under Order

21 Rule 46C is for the benefit of the garnishee. It is nobody's

case that the respondents-Patel brothers are the garnishees.
33.          The Execution Court will however look into the complaint

of the respondents that the appellant has not properly accounted

with reference to the directions given by the Arbitrator regarding

the adjustment to be done of the amount which would be due to the

respondents under an award obtained by them. We leave it open to

the Execution Court to undertake the said exercise and it is for

the Execution Court to finally decide the exact amount which is to
33
be made available to the appellant.
The appeals are allowed in the above fashion and the impugned

order will stand set aside.
Parties will bear their respective costs.
Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J.
                                           [K. M. JOSEPH]




                                           …………………………………………J.
                                           [HRISHIKESH ROY]
New Delhi
16th November, 2022