[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramani vs The Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board on 24 November, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M. R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 9120-9121 of 2015


          Mrs. Ramani                                                 .Appellant(S)

                                                Versus

          The Tamil Nadu Slum-Clearance Board & Ors.                ..Respondent(S)


                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 06.09.2006 in Writ Appeal (WA)

                         No. 1785/1999 and subsequent order dated 22.12.2014 in

                         Review Petition No. 145/2006 in WA No. 1785/1999

                         passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras, the

                         original allottee of the land in question has preferred the

                         present Special Leave Petitions.
2.             As the petitioner herein was allotted a plot bearing No. 25

                         in Thirumoolar Colony Scheme area by the Tamil Nadu
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2022.11.24
12:53:49 IST
Slum Clearance Board. The petitioner paid all the amounts
Reason:
1
payable in pursuance of the said allotment. She was also

issued with a No Objection Certificate for obtaining water

connection and drainage connection. However, before

putting up any construction, she was required to obtain

the permission from Chennai Municipal Corporation to put

up construction. The petitioner applied for approval of the

building plan on 15.03.1996. But without waiting for the

approval to be granted to the building plan, she proceeded

with the construction. It appears that the plot in question

was earmarked as “public convenience.” A civil suit bearing

OS No. 326/1996 was filed against the Board so as to

restrain the Board in making allotment to the individual.

Hence, the plot allotted to the petitioner was required for

the “public purpose.” At this stage, it is required to be

noted   that   the   Chennai   Metropolitan   Development

Authority (CMDA) originally granted approval to the layout

in the scheme “town planning scheme” which showed the

land in question to be earmarked for “public convenience.”

However, since the plot allotted to the petitioner was

required for the public purpose, the CMDA did not approve

the proposal for making the allotment. That thereafter, the
2
Slum Clearance Board cancelled the allotment of the plot

      in question by proceedings dated 03.06.1996. It appears

      that despite the order of cancellation vide proceedings

      dated 03.06.1996, the petitioner continued with the un-

      authorized construction and even without the building

      plan   getting   sanctioned/approved.      According     to   writ

      appellant before the Division Bench of the High Court, the

      petitioner along with 50 persons stormed into the colony

      and began demolishing the public lavatory. Therefore, writ

      petition came to be filed before the High Court being Writ

      Petition No. 11868/1996 and W.M.P. No. 16016/1996,

      directing the Slum Clearance Board to remove illegal

      construction by submitting that there are above 400

      families residing in the said colony therefore, the Slum

      Clearance     Board     has       constructed   public    toilets,

      bathrooms, etc., in plot No. 25 to cater the needs of the

      residents of the locality.
2.1   The petitioner herein filed the writ petition before the

      learned Single Judge being Writ Petition No. 10441/1996

      challenging order 03.06.1996 cancelling the allotment, the
3
learned Single Judge allowed the said writ petition setting

      aside the cancellation of the allotment by observing that

      there was no jurisdiction with the Slum Clearance Board

      to cancel the allotment.
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by

      the learned Single Judge, respondent No. 2 herein –

      Thirumoolar Colony has preferred the present writ appeal

      before the Division Bench of the High Court. The Division

      Bench of the High Court by a detailed judgment and order

      has set aside the order passed by the learned Single Judge

      by observing that as the plot was intended for a public

      purpose under the layout for the scheme approved by the

      Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority and the

      same was intended for a public purpose, the same could

      not have been allotted in favour of an individual and also

      by observing that construction put up by the petitioner

      herein   was    absolutely     illegal   and   un-authorized

      construction even without getting the building plan

      sanctioned by the Chennai Municipal Corporation.
4
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the

      High Court the original allottee has preferred the present

      Special Leave Petitions.
3.    Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate has appeared

      on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Amit Anand Tiwari,

      learned AAG has appeared on behalf of the respondent –

      State.
3.1   Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the petitioner has assailed the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court on the

      following grounds and submitted as under: -
(i)    That respondent No. 2 herein – writ appellant had no

             locus to file the writ appeal as the writ appellant

             cannot be said to be an aggrieved person;
(ii)   That the Slum Clearance Board whose order of

             cancellation of the allotment was set aside has

             accepted the judgment and order passed by the

             learned Single Judge;
5
(iii)   That in the area/locality in question full development

              has taken place and therefore, the land is not need

              for any public utility;
(iv)    That the petitioner has put up the construction after

              getting the plans sanctioned may be subsequently.
3.2   On the other hand learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the respondent – State/Board has vehemently submitted

      that as the plot in question was reserved for public

      utility/public convenience for the locality under the

      sanctioned       scheme     by    the   Chennai     Metropolitan

      Development Authority and when despite the above the

      land was allotted in favour of individual dehors the scheme

      sanctioned by the Chennai Metropolitan Development

      Authority      and    the   families    residing   in   the   said

      colony/locality were deprived of the facility of the public

      toilets/bathrooms, etc., it cannot be said that original writ

      appellant had no locus and they cannot be said to be an

      aggrieved person. Reliance is placed upon the decision of

      this Court in the case of
Bangalore Medical Trust Vs.

      B.S. Muddappa and Ors.
; (1991) 4 SCC 54 (para 29). It is
6
submitted that it is observed and held by this Court in the

      aforesaid decision that the residents of the locality are the

      persons intimately, vitally, and adversely affected by any

      action of the Development Authority which deprived them

      of facilities given for their enjoyment.


3.3   On merits it is vehemently submitted that the petitioner

      put up the un-authorized and illegal construction without

      getting the building plan sanctioned from the competent

      authority/municipal corporation and by using force and

      even the allotment in favour of the petitioner was

      absolutely illegal, as the plot allotted to the petitioner was

      reserved for public convenience, reserved under the

      scheme sanctioned/approved by the Chennai Metropolitan

      Development       Authority      under     town     planning

      scheme/master plan, the same could not have been

      allotted to any individual. It is submitted that immediately

      within few months even before any construction was put

      up the allotment in favour of the petitioner came to be

      cancelled. It is submitted that thereafter the Division

      Bench of the High Court has not committed any error in
7
quashing and setting aside the judgment and order passed

     by the learned Single Judge. It is submitted as such the

     true, correct, and full facts were not brought to the notice

     of the learned Single Judge which have been considered by

     the Hon’ble Division Bench of the High Court while

     passing the impugned judgment and order.
4.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties at length.
5.   At the outset it is required to be noted that as such the

     plot in question was originally reserved/earmarked for

     “public convenience” pursuant to the approved layout

     under the scheme sanctioned by the Chennai Metropolitan

     Development Authority. The plot in question was therefore

     required to be used for “public utility” only. It appears that

     in fact the public toilets and the bathrooms were

     constructed which were being used by the family members

     of the colony. However, immediately on getting the

     allotment in her (petitioner) favour the public toilets,

     bathrooms     came    to   be   demolished/damaged        and

     immediately the writ appellant filed the original suit as well
8
as the subsequent writ petition before the High Court.

Within a few months the allotment in favour of the

petitioner came to be cancelled by proceedings/order dated

03.06.1996. Though the petitioner applied for approval of

the building plan on 15.03.1996, without waiting for the

approval to be granted to the building plan by the Chennai

Municipal Corporation, the petitioner proceeded with the

construction. Not only that at the time when the petitioner

put up the construction, the petitioner was aware of the

litigation(s) and despite the same she put up the

construction. Therefore, thereafter when the allotment has

been cancelled having found it to be illegal and contrary to

the sanctioned layout in the scheme by the Chennai

Metropolitan Development Authority and thereafter, when

the construction put up is found to be unauthorized, the

petitioner cannot claim any equity. The petitioner put up

the construction despite the restrain order. From the order

passed by the learned Single Judge, it appears that the

true, correct, and full facts were not placed before the

learned Single Judge. Therefore, the Division Bench of the

High Court has rightly interfered with the judgment and
9
order passed by the learned Single Judge quashing and

     setting aside the cancellation of the allotment in favour of

     the petitioner.
6.   Now so far as the submissions made on behalf of the

     petitioner that the writ appellant cannot be said to be an

     aggrieved person and had no locus to file the appeal, more

     particularly, when the Slum Clearance Board did not

     challenge the order passed by the learned Single Judge is

     concerned, the aforesaid has no substance. It is required to

     be noted that under the sanctioned layout scheme by the

     Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, the plot in

     question was earmarked for public convenience and the

     same was required to be used and in fact was being used

     by the family members of the colony for public toilets,

     bathrooms, etc. As observed and held by this Court in the

     case of
Bangalore Medical Trust
(supra) the development

     scheme is meant for reasonable accomplishment of the

     statutory   object   which     is   to   promote   the   orderly

     development of the city. It is further observed and held

     that the residents of the locality are the persons intimately,
10
vitally, and adversely affected of any action of the

     development authority and the Government which is

     destructive of the Government and which deprives them of

     facilities reserved for the enjoyment and protection of the

     health of the public at large. Therefore, when the land

     earmarked for public convenience was taken away and was

     allotted in favour of the private individual, the residents

     and locals were deprived of the right to use the plot for

     public convenience and therefore, the writ appellant can be

     said to be an aggrieved person with the order passed by

     the learned Single Judge.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and

     having   found    that         the      plot     in   question     was

     reserved/earmarked       for        public     convenience   for   the

     residents of the locality/colony which could not have been

     allotted in favour of individual and that the construction

     put up by the petitioner was absolutely illegal and un-

     authorised, no error has been committed by the Division

     Bench of the High Court quashing and setting aside the

     judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge
11
setting aside the cancellation of the allotment. We are in

     complete agreement with the view taken by the High

     Court.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above there

     is no substance in the present Special Leave Petitions and

     the same deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly

     dismissed.
…………………………………J.
                                   (M. R. SHAH)



                                   …………………………………J.
                                   (M.M. SUNDRESH)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 24, 2022.
12