[Cites
5
, Cited by
37
]
Supreme Court of India
Chowdarapu Raghunandan vs State Of Tamil Nadu And Others on 15 March, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 1460, 2002 (3) SCC 754, 2002 AIR SCW 1322, 2002 (4) SRJ 365, 2002 CRILR(SC&MP) 330, (2002) 3 JT 110 (SC), 2002 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 330, 2002 SCC(CRI) 714, 2002 (2) SCALE 638, 2002 ALL MR(CRI) 1183, 2002 (2) SLT 548, (2002) 143 ELT 26, (2002) 102 ECR 1, (2002) 2 EFR 405, (2002) 2 RAJ CRI C 493, (2002) 2 RECCRIR 241, (2002) 2 SCJ 469, (2002) 2 CURCRIR 6, (2002) 2 SUPREME 573, (2002) 2 ALLCRIR 1060, (2002) 2 SCALE 638, (2002) 44 ALLCRIC 954, (2002) 2 ALLCRILR 460, (2002) 2 CRIMES 47, 2002 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 289 SC
Author:
M.B. Shah
Bench:
M.B. Shah
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (crl.) 218  of  2001



PETITIONER:
CHOWDARAPU RAGHUNANDAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF TAMIL NADU AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	15/03/2002

BENCH:
M.B. Shah




JUDGMENT:
Shah, J.
Petitioner has challenged the detention order dated 28th May,
2001 passed under
Section 3(1)(i)
of the Conservation of Foreign
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974
(hereinafter referred to as "COFEPOSA") with a view to prevent him
from smuggling goods in future.	 The allegations against the petitioner
in the grounds of detention are that he was holding an Indian Passport
dated 26th October, 1994 and he arrived from Singapore on 30th
March, 2001 at Chennai Airport.	 After completing migration
formalities, he collected his baggages and was proceeding to exit gate
where he was intercepted by Customs Intelligence Officer on
suspicion that he might be carrying any dutiable goods.	 From his
possession, Panasonic GD 92 Cellphones with accessories 100 Nos.,
Nokia 3310 Cellphones with accessories 50 Nos., Siemens C35
Cellphones with accessories 50 Nos., Nokia cellphone adapter 100
Nos., Nokia 5110 cellphone batteries 100 Nos. were recovered.
According to the grounds of detention, the value of the seized goods
was Rs.13,90,000/-.  His Boarding Pass and Customs Declaration
Card were also seized.	It is alleged that in his voluntary statement he
admitted that he had visited Singapore twice earlier as a 'tourist'; he
had gone to Singapore on 29th March, 2001 and that his friend helped
him in procuring cellphones to market them in India for monetary
consideration.
Petitioner was arrested on 31st March, 2001 and his bail
application was rejected by the trial court.  Thereafter, he sent a
representation dated 24th April, 2001 to the Commissioner of
Customs, Chennai through the Superintendent, Central Prison,
Chennai, stating that the seized goods did not belong to him.
Thereafter, on 28th May, 2001, the impugned detention order was
passed.
At the time of hearing of the matter, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that there was total non-application of mind by
the detaining authority before passing the impugned order; relevant
record was not placed before the detaining authority and that there
was delay in considering the representations.  For the first ground, it
has been contended that the petitioner was not involved in any
smuggling activities and for the time being presuming that goods
seized were of the petitioner it would hardly be a ground for detaining
him under the COFEPOSA.	 The detaining authority has not
considered the fact that it was the contention of the petitioner all
throughout that he had not brought the said cellphones.	 For that
purpose, he submitted that the boarding card was his but the baggages
having no tags were not belonging to him.  In any set of circumstances
for the alleged incident, criminal prosecution was pending against him
and his bail applications were rejected, therefore, there was no
necessity of detaining the petitioner.
As against this, learned counsel for the respondents submitted
that even though it is a solitary incident, goods worth Rs.13 lakhs and
above were found from the possession of the petitioner and that it has
been admitted by him that previously also he had gone twice to
Singapore, therefore, subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority
cannot be said to be, in any way, arbitrary.
Before deciding the contention raised by the petitioner, it is to
be reiterated that the Preventive Detention is not a punitive Act and it
is not alternative to criminal trial under the law.  It does not empower
the authority to punish a person without trial.	 Its purpose is to prevent
a person from indulging in activities, such as smuggling and/or such
other anti social activities as provided under the Preventive Detention
Law.
In Mohd. Subrati alias
Mohd. Karim v. State of West Bengal
[(1973) 3 SCC 250, 256] this Court observed thus:
"It must be remembered that the personal liberty of
an individual has been given an honoured place in the
fundamental rights which our Constitution has jealously
protected against illegal and arbitrary deprivation, and
that this Court has been entrusted with a duty and
invested with a power to enforce that fundamental right."
Dealing with solitary act in a preventive detention matter,
Krishna Iyer J. in
Anil Dey v. State of West Bengal
[(1974) 4 SCC
514] observed as under: -
"A swallow cannot make a summer ordinarily, and
a solitary fugitive act of criminality may not normally
form the foundation for subjective satisfaction about the
futuristic judgment that the delinquent was likely to
repeat his offence and thereby prejudicially affect the
maintenance of supplies and services essential to
community."
The Court finally dismissed the matter after considering grounds of
detention but observed thus:-
"But to jail a man on subjective satisfaction of
possible prejudicial activity and to forget about him after
the statutory formalities have been performed is not fair
to the constitutional guarantees.  It is appropriate for a
democratic government not merely to confine preventive
detention to serious cases but also to review periodically
the need for the continuance of incarceration."
It appears that the aforesaid aspect to review periodically the
need for the continuance of incarceration is forgotten.
Similarly, in
Debu Mahato v. State of West Bengal
[(1974) 4
SCC 135 at page 138] this Court observed as under: -
"We fail to see how one solitary isolated act of
wagon breaking committed by the petitioner could
possibly persuade any reasonable person to reach the
satisfaction that unless the petitioner was detained he
would in all probability indulge in further acts of wagon
breaking.  No criminal propensities for wagon breaking
could reasonably be inferred from a single solitary act of
wagon breaking committed by the petitioner in the
circumstances of the present case.  We must of course
make it clear that it is not our view that in no case can a
single solitary act attributed to a person form the basis for
reaching a satisfaction that he might repeat such acts in
future and in order to prevent him from doing so, it is
necessary to detain him.  The nature of the act and the
attendant circumstances may in a given case be such as to
reasonably justify an inference that the person concerned,
if not detained, would be likely to indulge in commission
of such acts in future.	 The order of detention is
essentially a precautionary measure and it is based on a
reasonable prognosis of the future behaviour of a person
based on his past conduct judged in the light of the
surrounding circumstances.  Such past conduct may
consist of one single act or of a series of acts. But
whatever it be, it must be of such a nature that an
inference can reasonably be drawn from it that the person
concerned would be likely to repeat such acts so as to
warrant his detention.	It may be easier to draw such an
inference where there is a series of acts evincing a course
of conduct but even if there is a single act, such an
inference may justifiably be drawn in a given case.  Here,
however, that is not possible.	We do not think that one
single act of wagon breaking attributed to the petitioner
was of such a character that any reasonable man could be
satisfied, merely on the basis of the commission of such a
solitary isolated act, that the petitioner would be likely to
indulge in further acts of wagon breaking in future and in
order to prevent him from doing so, he must be
detained."
The aforesaid judgment was considered by the Constitution
Bench in Attorney General for
India and others v. Amratlal
Prajivandas and others
[(1994) 5 SCC 54] and it was held thus:
"Though ordinarily one act may not be held
sufficient to sustain an order of detention, one act may
sustain an order of detention if the act is of such a nature
as to indicate that it is an organised act or a manifestation
of organised activity.	The gravity and nature of the act is
also relevant.	The test is whether the act is such that it
gives rise to an inference that the person would continue
to indulge in similar prejudicial activity."
The Court further observed (in para 53) thus:
"In matters touching liberty, greater care is called
for on the part of the authorities exercising powers of
detention."
Recently, this Court in V.C. Mohan v. Union of India & Ors.
[JT 2002 (2) SC 365] held as under:
"The accepted methodology of governmental
working should always be in tune with the concept of
fairness and not de hors the same  a person is being
placed under detention without trial and there is neither
any scope for overzealous nor acting in a manner without
due and proper application of mind  in either of the
situation law Courts should be able to protect the
individual from the administrative ipse dixit.	The
draconian concept of law has had its departure quite
some time back and rule of law is the order of the day.	 It
is this rule of law which should prompt the law Courts to
act in a manner fair and reasonable having due regard to
the nature of the offences and vis--vis the liberty of the
citizens."
The Court further observed thus:-
"Preventive detention admittedly is an 'invasion of
personal liberty' and it is a duty cast on the law Courts to
satisfy itself in regard to the circumstances under which
such a preventive detention has been orderedin the
event, however, the same does not conform to the
requirements of the concept of justice as is available in
the justice delivery system of the country, the law Courts
would not shirk of its responsibility to provide relief to
the person concerned.  The guardian-angel of the
Constitution stands poised with a responsibility to
zealously act as a watchdog so that injustice does not
occur : Let us not be understood to mean however that
there ought to be any over zealousness since the same
may lend assistance to a situation which is otherwise not
compatible with social good and benefit."
In the present case, it has been pointed out that the petitioner
specifically made representation on 24.4.2001 to the Commissioner of
Customs that the baggages without tags were not belonging to him.
Same thing was contended in the bail applications which were
rejected.  It was submitted that other passenger travelling with the
petitioner who arrived in the same flight and whose baggages were
mixed up with that of the petitioner, was served with the summons by
the authorities but thereafter nothing is known about him. In
representation to the Commissioner, it was pointed out that he was
Managing Director of Padmaja Infotech limited, a public limited
company, having office at Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh and that he
had gone to Singapore regarding his company's business.	 He only
purchased some toys and clothes for his children.  As he was not
having any dutiable item, he decided to go by green channel.  To the
officer who checked him, he informed that baggages were not
belonging to him but the officer told him that he was pushing the
trolley and, therefore, he without listening him opened the baggages
without tags.  It was also pointed out that the officer arrested him for
no fault and locked him with unclaimed baggages without tags under
some mistake.  Hence, it is submitted that the State Government
without applying its mind to the aforesaid facts and alleged solitary
incident erroneously arrived at the conclusion that there was
likelihood of petitioner indulging in such prejudicial activities again
while on bail, even though the bail application of the petitioner was
rejected.
It is true that in appropriate case, an inference could
legitimately be drawn even from a single incident of smuggling that
the person may indulge in smuggling activity but for that purpose
antecedents and nature of the activities carried out by a person are
required  to be taken into consideration for reaching justifiable
satisfaction that the person was engaged in smuggling and that with a
view to prevent, it was necessary to detain him.	It is also settled
law that an order of preventive detention is founded on a reasonable
prognosis of the future behaviour of a person based on his past
conduct judged in the light of the surrounding circumstances.  Such
past conduct may consist of one single act or of a series of acts.  It
must be of such a nature that an inference can reasonably be drawn
from it that the person concerned would be likely to repeat such acts
so as to warrant his detention.	 If there is non-application of mind by
the authority on this aspect, then the Court is required and is bound to
protect the citizen's personal liberty which is guaranteed under the
Constitution.  Subjective satisfaction of the authority under the law is
not absolute and should not be unreasonable.  The question, therefore,
would befrom the past conduct of the petitioner as set out in the
grounds of detention or other circumstances, whether reasonable
inference could be drawn that he is likely to repeat such acts in the
future.	 In the present case, past conduct of the petitioner is that he is
Engineering graduate and at the relevant time he was managing
director of a public limited company.  There is no other allegation that
he was involved in any other anti-social activities.  Only allegation is
that he visited Singapore twice as a 'tourist'.	 Admittedly, the
petitioner has filed bail application in a criminal prosecution for the
alleged offence narrating the fact that his so-called statement was not
voluntary and was recorded under coercion.  The baggages were not
belonging to him and there were no tags on the same so as to connect
him with the said baggages and the crime.  At the time of hearing of
this matter also, it is admitted that the baggages were without any
tags.  It is also an admitted fact that there is nothing on record to hold
that the petitioner was involved in any smuggling activity.  However,
the learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that in the
statement recorded by the Customs Department petitioner had
admitted that previously he had visited Singapore twice as a 'tourist',
and, therefore, it can be inferred that the petitioner might have
indulged and was likely to indulge in such activities.	This submission
is far fetched and without any foundation.  From the fact that a person
had visited Singapore twice earlier as a 'tourist', inference cannot be
drawn that he was involved in smuggling activities or is likely to
indulge in such activities in future.  Hence, from the facts stated above
it is totally unreasonable to arrive at a prognosis that the petitioner is
likely to indulge in any such prejudicial activities.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.  The impugned
detention order is quashed and set aside.  The petitioner be released
forthwith if not required in any other case.
.J.
					      (M.B. SHAH)

March 15, 2002.