[Cites
2
, Cited by
34
]
Supreme Court of India
Baldev Singh vs Surinder Mohan Sharma & Ors on 1 November, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 225, 2003 (1) SCC 34, 2002 AIR SCW 4674, 2003 (1) ALL CJ 566, (2003) 1 JCR 58 (SC), (2003) 94 REVDEC 195, (2003) 1 MARRILJ 1, (2003) 2 CGLJ 3, 2002 (8) SCALE 296, 2002 (10) SRJ 417, (2002) 5 ALL WC 4239, (2002) 9 JT 235 (SC), (2003) 2 ALLINDCAS 225 (SC), 2003 ALL CJ 1 564, 2002 (6) SLT 287, 2003 (1) UJ (SC) 61, 2003 (1) MARR LJ 1, (2003) 2 CIVILCOURTC 16, (2003) 1 MAD LW 304, (2003) 1 PAT LJR 249, (2002) 2 RENTLR 698, (2002) 7 SUPREME 615, (2002) 4 RECCIVR 781, (2003) 1 ICC 85, (2002) 8 SCALE 296, (2003) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 398, (2003) 1 UC 170, (2003) 1 JLJR 286, (2003) 2 INDLD 409, (2002) 49 ALL LR 650, (2003) 2 ANDH LT 40, (2003) 1 CAL HN 178
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
V.N. Khare
,
Arijit Pasayat
,
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  7162-7163 of 2002

PETITIONER:
Baldev Singh

RESPONDENT:
Surinder Mohan Sharma & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 01/11/2002

BENCH:
V.N. Khare, Arijit Pasayat & S.B. Sinha.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

S.B. SINHA,  J:
Leave granted.
One Ajay Kumar, said to be a brother of a property dealer,
instituted a suit for permanent injunction against the First Respondent	 herein
in respect of a House No. HM-14, Phase II, Mohali.  The said suit was
dismissed as withdrawn on 14th December, 1991.	Allegedly, in relation to
the said property, the First  Respondent entered into an agreement to sell
dated 23rd June, 1990 with the father of the appellant (since deceased). He
expired on 5th January, 1991. The First	 Respondent herein thereafter filed a
suit for possession against the aforementioned Ajay Kumar treating him as
his tenant and the appellant as the sub-tenant.	 He also allegedly refused to
honour the agreement to sell earlier executed by him in favour of father of the
appellant.  While deposing in the second suit, the appellant herein made the
following statements in cross-examination :-
"My first wife is Sarbjit Kaur and my
second wife is Paramjit Kaur   whenever I have
been posted at Chandigarh I have been staying
with my wife Paramjit Kaur.  She is in service in
Director Cultural Affairs, Punjab, Sector-38,
Chandigarh as Librarian.  I have two children
from Paramjit  Kaur."
Relying on or on the basis thereof, the First Respondent herein
made complaints to the employers of the appellant and his wife Paramjit
Kaur on the ground that they have contracted a second marriage during the
life time of the first wife of the appellant;  whereupon departmental
proceedings were initiated both against the appellant as also his wife,
Paramjit  Kaur.
A suit, however,  was filed by the  aforementioned Sarbjit Kaur
in the Court of the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Ludhiana, marked as Civil
Suit No.696 of 1999, inter alia, on the ground that the appellant had divorced
her in the year 1982 by	 reason of a memorandum of customary dissolution of
marriage.  The said suit was decreed declaring the said marriage to have been
dissolved with effect from 27th January, 1982.	Relevant portion of the said
judgment and decree dated 21st July, 2000 reads as under :-
"Therefore in view of the decision of the
Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana in
case title as Smt. Sudarshan Kaur vs. Major
Manmohan Singh Dhatt in 1978 PLR 598 the case
of the plaintiff is decreed and it is declared that
marriage between the parties was solemnised on
26.10.1976 stands dissolved w.e.f. 27.1.1982 by
virtue of a memorandum of customary dissolution
by the parties and defendant is further restrained
from interfering with the personal affairs of the
plaintiff,  parties are left to bear their own cost.
Decree sheet be prepared."
Questioning the said judgment and decree, the First
Respondent herein  filed an application before the High Court of Punjab and
Haryana at Chandigarh purported to be under
Article 227
of the Constitution
of India, which was marked as Civil Revision No.3918 of 2000, contending
that as he was not a party in the said suit, he cannot prefer an appeal
thereagainst.	In the said revision application, the First Respondent as
regards hsi  locus standi to maintain the said application alleged :
"That the petitioner has the locus standi to
maintain the present petition inasmuch as he been
harassed and troubled a lot by Respondent No.3,
who has illegally grabbed the house of the
petitioner in connivance with one person Ajay
Sharma	Petitioner's earlier tenant.  The
petitioner has not been paid any rent for the house
for the last over 10 years.  Respondent No.3 has
forged and fabricated some documents in
connivance with several persons including a stamp
vendor of Ludhiana.  Though the said matter is
already	 a subject matter of the civil suit.  But the
fact remains that the entire life of the petitioner
has been ruined by Respondent no.3 petitioner's
wife is bed-ridden for last two years due to the
shock arising from the illegal grabbing of house
by Respondent No.3, and the total family life and
mental peace of the petitioner has been shattered.
Petitioner has been facing spate of malicious and
motivated and ill found petitions at the behest of
Respondent no.3 and even his Advocate has not
been spared by him in launching malicious
prosecution by Respondent No.3.	 Whosoever
witness appeared to depose against Respondent
No.3, almost of all of those witnesses were
tormented, tortured intimidated and troubled by
Respondent No.3, almost of all of those witnesses
were tormented, tortured intimidated and troubled
by him and false cases were filed against them by
Respondent No.3. So much so, Respondent no.3
spelt venom against the Ld. Presiding Judge,
dealing with the case, due to which even the case
was transferred from the said court and later
contempt notices have already been issued to him
by this Hon'ble Court.	All these atrocities and
illegalities committed by Respondent No.3, have
compelled the petitioner to seek the indulgence of
this Hon'ble Court in the matter of launching
appropriate departmental proceedings against him
by the respondents.  Therefore, since the petitioner
has a direct cause of action in the matter
involving Respondent no.3, who has grabbed his
house illegally, hence, petitioner is aggrieved of
the illegal acts of Respondent no.3.  Since the
authorities were trying to act in accordance with
the law in deciding representations moved by the
petitioner and now these are being scuttled by him
in connivance with the other non-official
respondent, hence, the petitioner is filing the
present petition in this Hon'ble Court requesting
the Hon'ble Court  to set aside the impugned
judgment and decree as the same is illegal and
arbitrary and an abuse of process of the court.".
A learned Single Judge of the High Court by reason of the
impugned  judgment  disposed  of   the	 said	application directing	:-
"After hearing the counsel for the
petitioner, the present revision stands disposed of
with the observations that let the petitioner S.M.
Sharma may file an appeal in the competent court
of jurisdiction within 30 days from today
challenging the judgment and decree dated 21st
July, 2000, irrespective of the fact that he was not
a party to the suit.  Prima facie, S.M. Sharma is
aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 21st
July, 2000 because his case is that this decree has
been obtained by Sarbjit Kaur, first wife of Baldev
Singh, in order to circumvent the action which is
likely to be taken by the department against
Baldev Singh and his second wife Paramjit Kaur."
It is not in dispute that pursuant to or in furtherance of the said
observations, Respondent No.1 preferred an appeal in the Court of the
District Judge, Ludhiana.  The parties thereafter filed review applications in
the High Court.	 The review application filed by the appellant was also
dismissed by order dated 15th January, 2001.
The only question which arises for consideration in these
appeals against the aforementioned order is as to whether Respondent No.1
had any locus standi to question the said judgment and decree dated 21st July,
2000 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Ludhiana.
	The statements made in his revision application, in our
considered opinion, do not disclose any cause of action so as to confer on him
'locus standi' to maintain the same.
There is no dispute that as against a decree, an appeal would be
maintainable in terms of
Section 96
of the Code of Civil Procedure.  Such an
appeal, however, would be maintainable only at the instance of a person
aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree.  As noticed
hereinbefore, the dispute between the parties was in relation to a property.
The First Respondent herein, save and except, inter alia, making complaints
against the appellant and his wife to their respective	employers purported to
be relying on or on the basis of the statements made by the appellant herein
during cross-examination in the aforementioned suit, had nothing to do with
the status of Sarbjit  Kaur and the appellant herein as spouses or otherwise.
		'Locus' of a person to prefer an appeal in a matter of this
nature is vital as the right of privacy of two spouses would be interfered
thereby.  The court cannot enlarge the scope of 'locus' in a case of this nature
where the parties are fighting litigations.  Allegations made by the First
Respondent in his revision application does not disclose any cause of action
for maintaining the said application nor does it state as to how and in what
manner he would be prejudiced if the impugned judgment is allowed to stand.
In the aforementioned premise bona fide of the First Respondent	 was also
required to be determined by the High Court.   Having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the application filed by
the First  Respondent before the High Court was not a bona fide one but was
filed in furtherance of the pending disputes between the parties.
		In the instant case, it is not necessary for us to determine the
question as to whether the judgment in question is a judgment in personam or
a judgment in rem.  Herein, the status of the parties is not in question and
such judgments ordinarily cannot be said to be judgments in rem.  Even if the
said judgment is a judgment in rem, the respondent herein could not have
questioned the same as he cannot be said to be aggrieved thereby.   In that
view of the matter, the question as to whether in the instant case, the Civil
Court, Ludhiana, had any jurisdiction to pass the decree in question, takes a
back seat.
It is now a well-settled principle of law that an ex parte decree
is as good as a contesting decree unless it is set aside.  An ex parte decree can
be set aside by the court passing it or by an appellate court only at the
instance of a person aggrieved thereby.
It may be true that a decree obtained by fraud is a nullity.  But
the question as to whether a decree has been obtained by fraud or not is again
a question which must be raised by a person who is interested in the subject-
matter thereof and not at the instance of a person who is a busy body.	The
appellant and the aforementioned Sarbjit Kaur have a right of privacy.	Such
a right of privacy extends not only to the matrimonial home but also to the
matter of dissolution of a marriage.  A third party who has nothing to do with
relationship of the appellant and the said Sarbjit Kaur cannot be permitted to
intrude into their privacy by preferring an appeal only on one or more of the
grounds, as stated by the First Respondent in his application before the High
Court and as quoted supra.  None of the said grounds, in our considered view,
confers locus on the First Respondent to prefer an appeal against the decree
passed by the learned Civil Judge.
The First Respondent in relation to his disputes with the
appellant herein has been pursuing his remedies in appropriate proceedings.
What would be the effect of the said judgment and decree in a departmental
proceeding is required to be determined by the appropriate authorities. Only
because a departmental proceeding was initiated against the appellant on the
complaint of Respondent No.1, he, only thereby, cannot be said to have any
locus to prefer an appeal as has been contended by Mr. Srivastava.  A person
aggrieved to file an appeal must be one whose right is affected by reason of
the judgment and decree sought to be impugned.	It is not the contention of
Respondent No.1 that in the event the said judgment and decree is allowed to
stand, the same will cause any personal injury to him or shall affect his
interest otherwise.  Dissolution of marriage of the appellant and his first wife
would also have no repercussion on the property in suit. As noticed
hereinbefore, the effect of the aforementioned statements made by the
appellant in the second suit shall have to be considered by the courts and the
departments concerned on their own merits.
We are, therefore, of	the opinion that Respondent No.1
herein cannot be said to have any  locus standi to prefer  an appeal against the
judgment and decree passed by the learned Civil Judge, Ludhiana .  As a
logical	 corollary of  the said	 finding, it must necessarily  be  held	  that	 the
learned Single Judge of the High Court was not correct in disposing the civil
revision petition by making an observation which affected the  interest of the
appellant and that too without giving an opportunity of hearing to him.
		It is not correct to contend that the appellant herein has no
locus standi to prefer these appeals as an order adverse to his interest has
been passed by the High Court.	It is also not correct to contend that the
appellant can raise his contentions in appeal insofar as he cannot be permitted
to fight out a matter which, in our opinion, is not maintainable at the instance
of  Respondent No.1.
Admittedly several other proceedings are pending between the
parties, but it is not necessary to refer thereto having regard to the short
question involved in the matter.
For the reasons mentioned hereinabove, the impugned orders
cannot be sustained which are set aside.  The appeals are disposed of
accordingly. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant herein is
also entitled to costs quantified as Rs.5,000/-.