[Cites
3
, Cited by
69
]
Supreme Court of India
Joseph vs State Of Karala on 3 December, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 507, 2002 AIR SCW 4933, 2003 (1) SCC 465, 2003 CALCRILR 319, 2003 SCC(CRI) 356, 2002 (7) SLT 183, 2003 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 670, (2003) 1 KHCACJ 115 (SC), 2003 (1) SRJ 514, 2002 (9) SCALE 9, (2003) SC CR R 193, (2003) 2 EASTCRIC 188, (2003) 24 OCR 479, (2002) 4 CURCRIR 363, (2002) 8 SUPREME 589, (2002) 9 SCALE 9, (2003) 1 INDLD 353, (2003) 1 BLJ 492, (2002) 3 CHANDCRIC 235, (2003) 1 ALLCRILR 649, (2003) 1 CRIMES 206, 2003 (1) ALD(CRL) 30
Bench:
S. Rajendra Babu
,
Arun Kumar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  620 of 1995

PETITIONER:
Joseph

RESPONDENT:
State of Karala

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/12/2002

BENCH:
S. RAJENDRA BABU & ARUN KUMAR.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


RAJENDRA BABU, J. :
The appellant and two others were prosecuted for offences under
Sections 341, 307 and 302 read with
Section 34
IPC on the allegation that on
9.7.1989 near the bunk shop of one Kolasseri Pappachan at Konipadu junction,
they restrained from moving on the road, murdered Simon and caused hurt to
Benny [PW.1] and ran away.  The Trial Court found that the charges against the
appellant and the other accused were not established and acquitted them.  The
State preferred an appeal in the High Court.  A Division Bench of the High Court
set aside the order of acquittal and recorded the conviction against the appellant
but did not disturb the order of acquittal made by the Trial Court with respect to
the other two accused.
The prosecution case as unfolded in the Trial Court is that the injured
witness, Benny [PW.1] and the deceased Simon were proceeding to their houses
from west to east along Konipadu-Moonnilavu Road after purchasing beedi from
the shop of one Mathachan at Konipadu junction.	 All the three accused who
were moving ahead from Konipadu junction wrongfully restrained the deceased
and Benny [PW.1] from proceeding on the road by asking them as to "why they
were pretending to be big".  It appears that the deceased asked the accused as
to whether they would not permit others to walk along the road peacefully.
Thereupon A-2 exhorted "Do away with him".  On hearing this, A-1 took out a
knife and stabbed the deceased on the right part of his chest.	Having sustained
this injury, he ran towards the west.  Then A-3 is stated to have asked A-1 to do
away with Benny [PW.1] also.  So the appellant stabbed Benny [PW.1] on his left
palm with the same knife and he again stabbed him on the left side of his neck.
Benny [PW.1], however, could ward off and ran towards west and reached
Konipadu junction.  On the way he found deceased, Simon to have fallen down.
He then narrated the incident to PWs 2 to 4, who rushed to the scene of
occurrence.  Benny [PW.1] and the deceased, Simon were taken to the
Government Hospital, Palai in a jeep owned and driven by PW.5.	However
Simon succumbed to the injuries at 7.45 p.m. on way to the hospital.
The Trial Court observed that on the basis of the material on record
through the evidence of the doctors supported by Exhibits P-7 and P-8 that the
deceased Simon and Benny [PW.1] had sustained injuries on 9.7.1989 and
Simon died as a result of the injuries sustained by him in the said incident.  This
part of the case is not in serious dispute.
The case of the prosecution rested solely on the evidence of Benny
[PW.1], the injured witness.  In the course of his evidence, Benny [PW.1]
disclosed the facts to which we have already adverted to and he also stated that
he rushed to Konipadu junction at once and informed of the incident to PWs 2 to
4 who were present there and then returned to the place where Simon had fallen.
Thereafter PWs 2 to 4 also reached there.  He stated that they reached the
hospital within one hour and Doctor PW.11 examined the deceased and declared
him dead.  Benny [PW.1] was admitted there and treated as an in-patient.  He
stated that at about 5 a.m. on 10.7.1989 the police came to the hospital and
recorded his statement.	 Ex. P-1 is his first information statement recorded by the
police in the case and he also claimed to have identified MO-1 as the weapon of
offence when shown to him by the police.
Before the Trial Court, four contentions were advanced on behalf of the
defence:
1.	Ex.P-1 first information statement is a spurious document created by
the prosecution,
2.	The uncorroborated testimony of PW.1 is unworthy of credence being
tainted with falsehood,
3.	The medical evidence is inconsistent with the prosecution version, and
4.	There is no valid recovery as contemplated under
Section 27
of the
Evidence Act of the weapon of offence used in the case.
Inasmuch as both the Trial Court and the High Court have not relied upon the
recoveries effected, it is not necessary to advert to the last contention raised
before the Trial Court.
The evidence adduced before the court disclosed that the deceased,
Simon and Benny [PW.1] were brought to the Government Hospital, Palai by
about 8 p.m. on 9.7.1989.  Doctor PW.11, after examining the deceased, Simon
declared him dead.  He admitted Benny [PW.1] in the hospital and sent two
intimations to the police.  PW.15 is the Head Constable attached to the Palai
Police Station and Ex.C-1 is the Police Intimation Book maintained in the
hospital.  PW.15 had admittedly put his initials on Exbs.C-1(a) and C-1(b) and he
also admitted that he had received intimation at about 10 PM on 9.7.1989.  The
place of occurrence is within the jurisdiction of Melukavu Police Station.  PW.15
states that he had tried several times to contact Melukavu Police Station on
telephone but could not get connection.	 According to him at about 4 a.m. he got
the connection and came to know that the ASI of Police [PW.13] had already
gone to the hospital to record the first information statement of PW.1.	 PW.13
states that at about 4 a.m. on 10.7.1989, he received a telephonic information
from one Jojo that there had been a stab incident at Konipadu.	According to him
it was on the basis of this information that he rushed to the hospital and recorded
Ex.P.1 statement and registered the case.  PWs. 3 and 5, who had been
examined before the court, suggested another version of the matter.  PW. 5, who
is stated to be the owner-cum-driver of the jeep in which the deceased Simon
and injured Benny were taken to the Government Hospital, Palai.	 He has
admitted that he had taken them to the hospital in his jeep.  PW.3 had also
accompanied them to the hospital.  They reached the hospital at about 8 PM on
9.7.1989.  PW.5 further stated that after taking them to the hospital he had taken
PW.2 Jose and one or two others to Palai Police Station after 8.10 PM to give
information about the incident.	 The fact that the police came to the hospital after
some time is spoken to by PW.3.	 This witness categorically stated that they
reached the hospital at about 9.30 PM when they saw the police questioned the
injured Benny [PW.1] and recorded his statement which was read over to the
injured and he subscribed his signature to the same.  PWs.3 and 5 were not
declared hostile by the prosecution.  Based on this evidence, the Trial Court drew
an inference that one of the officers of the Palai Police Station got information
about the incident, proceeded to the Government Hospital, Palai, recorded the
first information statement of PW.1 and registered the case and that version was
probable.  The Trial Court therefore, observed that it is clear that the prosecution
had two first information statements, one recorded at 9.30 p.m. on 9.7.1989 and
the other recorded at 5 a.m. on 10.7.1989.  The first one is suppressed and the
other is produced. The Trial Court, therefore, did not find it safe to rely upon the
subsequent statement.  The Trial Court also had reservations as to the evidence
tendered by PW.15 inasmuch as he after receipt of the information as per
Exs.C.1(a) and C.1(b) did not proceed to the hospital and record the first
information statement of PW.1 and, therefore, concluded that no reliance could
be placed on his evidence, particularly in a case of this nature.  The Trial Court
found it difficult to rely upon the first information statement said to have been
recorded at 5 a.m. on 10.7.1989 by Melukavu Police Station.  Therefore, in view
of the two versions put forth before the court grave suspicion would arise as to
what had happened in the matter.  Further the Trial Court noticed that there is
dissimilarity in the signature of PW.1 on Ex.P.1  PW.1 admitted to have signed
Ex.P.1 but the Trial Court observed that a bare perusal of the signatures in the
above document would clearly show that there is no similarity between the
signature on that document and the signature of PW.1. On summons in
acknowledgement of having received it PW.1 had also admitted that there are
marked dissimilarities between his signature on Ex.P.1 and Ex.D.1.  The
explanation offered was that he had pain all over the body while signing and
therefore, he might not have signed properly.  The Trial Court, therefore, held
that in this background Ex.P.1 is not a reliable document.
The evidence of PW.14, the Circle Inspector of Police supported by Ex.P.4
scene mahazar would show that there was a pool of blood at the scene of
occurrence. PW.1 stated that the deceased, Simon after having sustained the
injuries ran towards west from the scene of occurrence covering the injuries with
hand and his categorical statement in the cross-examination that deceased,
Simon had not fallen down on the spot on sustaining the injuries.  PW.1, who
sustained injuries on his left palm and left side of the neck also, ran towards
Konipadu junction from the scene of occurrence.	 The presence of pool of blood
in the circumstances would indicate that the occurrence might not have taken
place in the manner alleged by the prosecution.	 On this basis, the Trial Court
found that the evidence of PW.1 to be highly suspicious.  Further the Trial Court
analysed his evidence with reference to the fact that the incident to had taken
place at about 7 p.m. on a cloudy day and when sunset would take place in the
place of occurrence between 6.45 p.m. and 6.47 p.m. and that again threw a lot
of suspicion on the evidence tendered by him.
The trial court also took into account whether the injuries sustained by the
appellant could have been caused in the manner deposed to by PW.1.  He stated
that the 1st accused stabbed him with MO1 knife and injury No. 1 in Exhibit 7,
which is the Wound Certificate, is a cut  injury on the left palm.  The evidence of
the doctor indicated that if the said injury was caused due to a stab, there must
have been tailing at one end of the injury; that, in the present case,	there was no
tailing for  that injury; that would clearly indicate that he had not sustained any
stab injury.  On his neck there is a linear horizontal abrasion 4 cms x 2mm in
size.  According to the witness, he was profusely bleeding from the said injury.
However,  the medical expert said that this injury was not a bleeding injury  and
that injury could be caused by contact with human nail during the course of a
scuffle.    PW.1 further stated that at the time of stabbing, the 1st accused and the
deceased were standing face to face, whereas PW.12 who conducted the
autopsy had noted an incised penetrating wound on the front side of the chest
and stated during the cross examination that if the assailant and the victim are
standing face to face it is unlikely to cause the above injury.	 The trial court was
of the view that the medical evidence did not support the prosecution case and
did not believe the recovery of MO1 knife and further held that no motive was
established.  In these circumstances, the trial court acquitted the accused
because the evidence adduced by the prosecution did not bring about the truth
and the matter was shrouded in mystery.
On appeal by the State, the Division Bench of the High Court re-examined
the matter  and analysed the evidence from various angles.  Firstly, it noticed that
PW.13 had recorded the statement of PW.1 at 5 a.m. on 10.9.1989 on
information having been received from the hospital over telephone that there was
a stabbing incident at Monnlpadbhagom in which two persons sustained injuries
and who had been removed to the Palai Government Hospital; that the informant
did not have any details of information and thus without wasting any time he
rushed to the hospital; that he located PW.1 who was undergoing treatment and
his statement was recorded and his signature obtained on the same; that
inasmuch as Simon had succumbed to the injuries sustained by him, question of
recording his signature could not arise.   On the same day, the FIR was
registered at 10.30 a.m. In Exhibit P 1 the essential details of the incident and the
names of the accused had been given.  In evidence tendered before the Court by
PW.1, he corroborated his version in Exhibit P 1 in all materials aspects. He
stated that there was sufficient light probably twilight to identify the accused.
Though	he has not specifically stated in Exhibit P 1 that after the incident he met
PWs 2 to 4 at Konnipad junction, told them as to what had happened and they
rushed to the scene.  PWs 2 to 4 reached the place of incident a little after the
incident.  The statement of PW 5 not containing the details as to who had caused
the injuries to the deceased and PW.1 was not significant.   The High Court also
rejected the theory of two FIRs had come into existence and noticed that PW.1
admitted the difference in his signature in Exhibit P.1 and Exhibit D.2, which he
had done on the acknowledgement of the summons having received by him; that
when PW.1 himself had no case about the forgery and had owned not merely the
authorship of the complaint but his signature as well, the trial court need not to
embark upon a comparison of the signature in Exhibit P.1 and Exhibit D.2.
Though agreeing that PW. 15 had not discharged his duties properly as GD
charge of the Police Station after receiving intimation as per Exts. Cl(a) and (b)
from the Government Hospital, Palai,  the High Court brushed aside the same as
being unfortunate.  The High Court discarded the theory that some police officers
had recorded the statement of PW.1 on the night of the incident and on that
basis, held that there was no case at all made out in that regard and  PWs 3 and
5 denied having given any complaint prior to Exhibit P 1.  The High Court also did
not place any reliance upon the recoveries effected.  On the discrepancies
between the medical evidence and the oral evidence adduced before the Court,
the High Court stated that the learned Sessions Judge had strained to stress
minor discrepancies and had made a sweeping statement in regard to the effect
of a discrepancy between the medical opinion and oral testimony.  The High
Court did not also attach importance to the spot Mahazar, Exhibit  P 3	which had
noticed that there was blood at the scene of the incident.   Therefore, the High
Court held that the evidence is clear and convincing that the appellant stabbed
the deceased to death and proceeded to reverse the judgment of the trial court
and convicted the appellant.
This is a case in which there is a solitary eye witness who has given
evidence before the court.  His evidence is attacked on various grounds: that the
Exhibit P 1 (FIR) is not correct;  that Exhibit	 P 5 is an intimation that had been
sent by the police station; that his statement had been recorded at 9.30 p.m. in
the night by the police; that no motive was set out in the evidence tendered
before the Court though there was an attempt to do so in Exhibit P 1; that no
statement of going to junction is forthcoming in the evidence of PWs 2 to 4  which
is contradictory to the statement made by PW.1 and Doctor's (PW.11) evidence
which is clearly to the effect that the injury on the neck of PW.1 could not have
been caused by any weapon and was not a bleeding injury; that the appellant's
clothes stated to be blood stained but the same had not been seized; that neither
in the Wound Certificate nor in any other place the names of the accused had
been mentioned; that when the Trial Court had disbelieved the evidence
tendered by PW.1, the High Court could not have given a contrary finding, when
the former view is possible.
The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, urged that the
High Court has properly analysed the evidence on record and has correctly come
to the conclusion and thus calls for no interference.
In a case of this nature when there is a sole witness to the incident his
evidence has to be accepted with an amount of caution and after testing it on the
touchstone of the evidence tendered by other witnesses or evidence as
recorded.  What is urged before the Court is that FIR - Exhibit P 1 contained
signature of a doubtful character which PW.1 himself admitted as having been
different from the one given by him on the acknowledgement of having received
the summons.  How far reliance can be placed upon his evidence when PW.1
stated that he had rushed to the junction to inform PWs 2 to 4 and thereafter
rushed back to the place of the incident, while the deceased also run on the
western side of the place of incident though he was profusely bleeding and he
got hold of his wound by his hand and ran.   If that is so,  there would have been
blood all over the place and not at one particular point.  The abrasion on the neck
of PW.1 could have been caused by a nail scratch and not by a weapon and was
not a bleeding injury will clearly believe the statement made by him that he was
profusely bleeding.   If really the witness (PW.1) was wearing blood stained
clothes the same would have been certainly seized by the police for appropriate
investigation of the same.   Particularly,  when the trial court had given cogent
reasons to acquit the accused, the High Court ought not to have interfered with
the same merely because another opinion is possible and not that the finding
concluded by the trial court was impossible.
To our mind, it appears that the High Court did not follow the aforesaid
standard but went on to analyse evidence as if the material before them was
given for the first time and not in appeal.
Section 134
of the Indian Evidence Act
provides that no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for
the proof of any fact and, therefore,  it is permissible for a court to record and
sustain a conviction on the evidence of a solitary eye witness.	 But, at the same
time, such a course can be adopted only if the evidence tendered by such
witness is cogent, reliable and in tune with probabilities and inspires implicit
confidence.  By this standard, when prosecution case rests mainly on the sole
testimony of an eye-witness, it should be wholly reliable.  Even though such
witness is an injured witness and his presence may not be seriously doubted,
when his evidence is in conflict with other evidence, the view taken by the trial
court that it would be unsafe to convict the accused on his sole testimony cannot
be stated to be unreasonable.
In that view of the matter, we allow this appeal, set aside the order of
conviction passed by the High Court and restore the order of acquittal passed by
the learned Sessions Judge.  The appeal is allowed accordingly.