[Cites
10
, Cited by
49
]
Supreme Court of India
Waryam Singh vs Baldev Singh on 31 October, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2002 SC 366, (2002) 2 REN CJ 207, (2003) 1 LAND LR 370, 2003 HRR 1, (2003) 1 PUN LR 154, (2002) 2 REN CR 594, (2003) 1 ANDH LT 57, (2002) 2 RENT LR 694, (2002) 49 ALL LR 707, (2002) 4 CUR CC 130, 2003 (1) SCC 59, (2003) 1 CIVIL COURT CASE 61, (2002) 8 SCALE 270, (2002) 9 JT 189, 2003 SCFBRC 10, (2002) 7 SUPREME 593, (2003) 1 CIVILCOURTC 61, 2003 ALL CJ 1 577, (2002) 9 JT 189 (SC), 2002 UJ(SC) 2 1515, (2003) 1 WLC (SC)CIVIL 393, 2002 UJ(SC) 1515
Author:
S.N. Variava
Bench:
S.N. Variava
,
Arun Kumar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6942 of 2000

PETITIONER:
WARYAM SINGH

RESPONDENT:
BALDEV SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 31/10/2002

BENCH:
S.N. VARIAVA & ARUN KUMAR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2002 Supp(4) SCR 9

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

S.N. VARIAVA, J. This Appeal is against a Judgment dated 14th March, 2000.
Briefly stated the facts are as follows:
The Appellant, who is a landlord of the concerned premises, filed Eviction
Petition on two grounds, namely, arrears of rent and secondly that there
was material alteration in the shop without the written consent of the
landlord. The Appellant claimed that the shop had thus been materially
impaired in value and utility. The Respondent immediately deposited the
rent in Court and, therefore, the first ground did not survive. The
Petition was contested only on the ground of material alteration.
On 9th November, 1987 the Rent Controller rejected the ejectment Petition
holding that the Appellant had not been able to prove that the Respondent
had made any additions/alterations. The Rent Controller also held that the
alterations were not of such a nature that they had impaired the value and
utility of the shop.
The Appellant filed an Appeal which was allowed by an Order dated 26th May,
1989. The Appellate Court held that the additions/alterations had been made
by the Respondent-tenant and that they materially impaired the value and
utility of the shop. The Respondent then filed a Civil Revision before the
High Court which has been allowed by the impugned Judgment. The High Court
has not disturbed the finding of fact that the alteration was made by the
Respondent. The High Court has, however, concluded that the alteration was
such that it had not materially impaired the value and utility of the shop.
Hence this Appeal.
Before we consider the submissions, the necessary provisions need to be set
out.
Sections 13(2)(iii)
of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act,
1949 reads as follows:
"13. Eviction of tenants.-
XXX   XXX   XXX XXX   XXX   XXX

(2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to the Controller
for a direction in this behalf. If the Controller after giving the tenant a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the application, is
satisfied:
xxx  xxx  xxx

XXX   XXX   XXX
(iii) that the tenant has committed such acts as are likely to impair
materially the value or utility of the building or rented land,

xxx  xxx  xxx xxx  xxx  xxx"
Thus it is to be seen that the act of the tenant must be one which is
likely to impair, materially, the value of utility of the building or the
rented land.
In this case what was let out was a shop with a verandah. The alteration is
that the verandah has been covered up by construction of walls on the two
sides and a rolling shutter in the front. The original door has also been
removed. The question would be whether enclosing the verandah would amount
to impairing materially the value or utility of the shop. A number of
authorities have been cited. We therefore need to consider those
authorities.
Mr. Sudhir Walia first relied upon the case of
Dewan Chand v. Babu Ram
,
reported in 1980 (2) RCJ 615. In this case the tenant had removed rafters
of the shop from the wall and placed a lintel thereon. The tenant had also
constructed two walls on two sides of the verandah and fixed a door on the
outer wall of the two sides. It was found, as a matter of fact, that the
changes had caused cracks on the walls of the first floor. Because of this
the Court held that the changes had impaired materially the value and
utility of the shop. This case therefore would be of no assistance to the
Appellant as, admittedly, in the present case, it has not been shows that
as a result of the changes the shop is damaged in any manner.
Mr. Walia next relied upon the case of
Vipin Kumar v. Roshal Lal Anand
,
reported in [1993] 2 SCC 614. In this case, the tenant had constructed a
wall on the verandah and put up a door. The tenant had also removed certain
fixtures. This Court held as follows:
"Clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of
Section 13
provides that" if the tenant
has committed such acts as are likely to impair materially the value of
utility of the building or rented land", the Rent Controller may make an
order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the
building or rented land. If the Controller is not so satisfied, he shall
make an order rejecting the application. It is, therefore, clear that if
the tenant had committed such acts as are likely to impair materially the
value of utility of the building, he is liable to ejectment. The finding
recorded by the Controller is that on account of the construction of the
wall and putting up a door the flow of light and air had been stopped. He
removed the fixtures. So the value of the demised shop has been impaired
and utility of the building also is impaired. The impairment of the value
or utility of the building is from the point of the landlord and not of the
tenant. The first limb of Clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of
Section 13
is
impairment of the building due to acts committed by the tenant and the
second limb is of the utility or value of the building has (sic having)
been materially impaired. The acts of the tenant must be such that by
erecting the wall he had materially impaired the value or utility of the
demised premises. It is contended by Mr. Prem Malhotra that the landlord
should prove as to how it is materially affected and that there is no
evidence adduced by the landlord. We find no force in the contention. By
constructing the wall, whether the value or utility of the building has
materially been impaired is an inferential facts to be deduced from proved
facts. The proved facts are that the appellant without the consent of the
landlord had constructed the wall and put up a door therein as found by the
Rent Controller, the flow of air and light has been stopped. He removed the
fixtures."
Thus, it is to be seen that it was proved that fixtures had been removed
and that by constructing the wall and putting up of a wall flow of air and
light had been stopped. In the present case, there is absolutely no proof
that any fixtures has been removed and/or that the flow of air and light
has been stopped. To be noted that all that has been put up in the front is
a rolling shutter. The rolling shutter would be locked only in the night.
During the day the shutter would be kept open. Therefore, there would in
fact be more light and air in the shop. This case also therefore does not
assist the Appellant.
Mr. Walia then relied upon the case of
Gurbachan Singh v. Shivalak Rubber
Industries
, reported in [1996] 2 SCC 626. In that case a number of shops
had been let out to the tenants. Along with the shops there were some open
spaces also. The tenants removed the roofs of the shops, the partition
walls and the doors. They then laid a new roof merging the verandah with
the shops, closing the doors and opening new doors and windows. They also
enclosed the open spaces. Result of all the alterations was that the
premises was converted altogether into a new and different shape. On these
facts it was held that the tenant had committed acts which impaired
materially the value or utility of the premises. It was held that
impairment of value or utility must be judged from the point of view of the
landlord and no one else. It was held that the question whether the
additions amount to material impairment in value or utility depends upon
the facts which have to be proved. In other words merely because some
additions/alterations have been made would not itself amount to impairment
in the value or utility of the premises, much less material impairment.
Mr. Walia next relied upon the case of Kartar Singh v. Kesar Singh and
Anr., reported in (1980) 2 RCJ 1. In this case the alteration was that a
partition wall between two rooms had been demolished turning the two shops
into one. The tenant had also made an opening in the partition walls of the
rooms behind the front room. The tenant had removed the "Chutkhats" and
"Takhtas" of four doors and had included the verandah in the front room and
fixed a shutter on one of the doors in verandah and a tin door on the
other. It was held that this amounted to additions and alterations which
impaired materially the value and utility of the building. To be noted that
here also the additions and alterations were of a substantial nature and
the finding is given on the facts of the case. The finding is based on the
fact that the substantial changes had resulted in the premises being
totally different from that which had been rented out. On facts it was held
that the alterations were of far-reaching nature and the utility had been
diminished from the point of view of the landlord.
Mr Walia next relied upon the case of
Narain Singh v. Bakson Laboratories
,
reported in 1981 CLJ (Civil) 414, In that case, the tenant had enclosed the
verandah on the front and back side of the building and had opened a door
by breaking the wall of the room. It was held that this diminished the
value of the premises. With great respect to the learned Judges concerned,
we find ourselves unable to accept this proposition . As stated above it is
not every addition or alteration which could be said to materially impair
value or utility. It has to be proved that the value or utility has been
materially impaired. Merely because some additions or alterations are made
it cannot be presumed or inferred that the value or utility of the building
has been impaired. This authority cannot be said to be laying down the
correct proposition of law.
We find support for our point of view from the case of
Om Prakash v. Amar
Singh
reported in [1987] 1 SCC 458. In that case, a temporary partition
wall of 6 feet height was put up in a big hall. This partition was made
without digging any foundation on the floor and the partition did not touch
the selling. The tenant had also extended the pre-existing tin shed on the
open land by constructing a wall of mud and enclosing that wall with bamboo
tatters. It was held that before a landlord could get a decree it must be
established (1) that the tenant had made the construction, (2) that such
construction was without the consent of the landlord and (3) that such
construction had materially affected the premises. It was held that these
three conditions were cumulative in nature and each one of them was
necessary to be established before a decree of eviction could be passed. It
was held that the construction which had been carried out did not
materially alter the premises and that therefore no ground for eviction had
been made out.
In the case of
Brijendra Nath Bhargava v. Harsh Wardhan
reported in [1988]
I SCC 454, the tenant put up a "dochatti" for storing the goods on the roof
of the cabin with a wooden staircase from inside the cabin to go to the
balcony. The question was whether this materially impaired the value or
utility of the building. It was held that in order to attract
Section 13(2)
(iii) the construction must not only impair the value or utility of the
building but must also be of a material nature, i.e. the changes must be of
substantial or significant nature. It was held that the burden of proving
such material impairment was on the landlord. It was held that the
constructions put up were of a temporary nature and that therefore they did
not materially affect the value or utility of the premises.
In the case of
Om Pal v. Anand Swamp
, reported in [1988] 4 SCC 545, the
tenant had put up a wooden balcony in the showroom. It was held that the
answer to the question whether there was a material alteration or not
depended upon the facts and circumstances of each case. It was held that
the constructions must be substantial and permanent in nature. In this case
it was held that constructions did not materially alter the premises.
Thus an Order for eviction can be passed only if the landlord proves (a)
that the tenant had carried out the construction, (b) that the same was
without the consent of the landlord and (c) that the value or utility had
been materially impaired. In the present case, the First Appellate Court,
on facts, concluded that the Respondent had carried out alteration by
enclosing the verandah. On facts it has been held that this has been done
without the consent of the Appellant. The Revisional Court has correctly
not interfered with the findings of fact. We also see no reason to take a
different view on a question of fact.
However, the question still arises whether merely because a verandah is
enclosed it can be inferred, without any further evidence or proof, that
the value and utility is affected. On the question of material impairment
of value or utility the Appellant has lead no evidence at all. The
submission has been that no evidence was required to be lead as it has to
be inferred that the value or utility had been diminished. We are unable to
accept such a submission. In the case of a shop, particularly in a business
locality, the area of the shop gets increased by the verandah getting
enclosed. This would increase the value and utility of the shop.
In this
case there is no proof, like in
Vipin Kumar
's case (supra), that free flow
of light and air has been stopped. On the contrary, by putting up a rolling
shutter in the front the flow of light and air is increased. In the absence
of any proof of material impairment in value or utility, the High, Court
was right in concluding that no decree for eviction could be passed. We,
therefore, see no reason to interfere with the Judgment of the High Court.
Accordingly the Appeal stands dismissed. Therewill be no order as to costs.