[Cites
8
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
M.C. Mehta vs Union Of India And Ors on 5 April, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 1696, 2002 AIR SCW 1633, 2002 (2) LRI 1, 2002 (3) SCALE 321, 2002 (4) SCC 356, (2002) 3 JT 527 (SC), 2002 (3) SLT 70, 2002 (5) SRJ 150, (2002) 2 EFR 19, (2002) 3 SCJ 11, (2002) 3 SUPREME 114, (2002) 2 RECCIVR 550, (2002) 3 SCALE 321, (2002) 3 CIVLJ 92
Bench:
B.N. Kirpal
,
V.N. Khare
,
Ashok Bhan
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  13029 of 1985

PETITIONER:
M.C. MEHTA

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/04/2002

BENCH:
B.N. KIRPAL & V.N. KHARE & ASHOK BHAN

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2002 (2) SCR 963


The following Order of the Court was delivered
Article 39 (e)
, 47
and
48A
by themselves and collectively cast a duty on
the State to secure the health of the people, improve public health and
protect and improve the environment. It was by reason of the lack of effort
on the part of the enforcement agencies, not withstanding adequate laws
being in place, that this Court has been concerned with the state of air
pollution in the capital of this country. Lack of concern or effort on the
part of various governmental agencies had resulted in spiralling pollution
levels. The quality of air was steadily decreasing and no effective steps
were being taken by the administration in this behalf.
It was by reason of the failure to discharge its constitutional
obligations, and with a view to protect the health of the present and
future generations, that this Court, for the first time, on 23rd September,
1986, directed the Delhi Administration to file an affidavit specifying
steps taken by it is for controlling pollution emission of smoke, noise,
etc. from vehicles plying in Delhi.
The concern of this Court in passing various orders since 1986 has only
been one, namely, to protect the health of the people of Delhi. It is only
with this objective in mind that directions had been issued in an effort to
persuade the governmental authorities to take such steps as would reduce
the air pollution. It is as a result of intervention by this Court that the
following measures were taken in controlling pollution to some extent.
(a)    lowering of sulphur content in diesel, first to 0.50% and then to
0.05%;
(b)    ensuring supply of only lead free petrol;

(c)    requiring the fitting of catalytic converters;

(d)    directing the supply of pre-mix 2T oil for lubrication of engines of
two-wheelers and three-wheelers;

(e)    directing the phasing out of grossly polluting old vehicles;

(f)     directing the lowering of the benzene content in petrol; and
(g)   ensuring that new vehicles, petrol and diesel, meet Euro-II standards
by September, 2000.
It was during the course of these proceedings that the Bhure Lal Committee
was established under
Section 3
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
The Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority is a statutory
authority constituted under
Section 3
of the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986, and its directions are final and binding on all persons and
organisations concerned. This position has been reiterated by this Court in
Sector 14 Residents W elf are
Association and Ors. v. State of Delhi and
Ors.
, [1999] l SCC 161. It is the authority which had directed the phasing
out of non-CNG buses. It is the Bhure Lal Committee which had also
recommended the conversion to CNG mode and issued directions that the non-
CNG buses should be phased out.
It is the report of the Bhure Lal Committee which was accepted, and orders
were passed by this Court on 28th July, 1998, fixing the time limit within
which the switch-over to CNG was to take place. It may be mentioned here
that the need for finding an alternative fuel to diesel had been drawing
the attention of this Court for quite some time. This is evident from the
order dated 21 st October, 1994, in which it was observed as follows:-
"On an earlier occasion when these matters came up before this Court it was
suggested that to begin with of Government vehicles and public undertaking
vehicles including public transport vehicles could be equipped with CNG
cylinders with necessary modification in the vehicles to avoid pollution
which is hazardous to the health of the people living in highly polluted
cities like Delhi and the other metros in the country."
Again, in the order dated 28th March, 1995, and 9th February, 1996, long
before the receipt of the Bhure Lal Committee report, there is a reference
to conversion of government vehicles to CNG, as well as to the installation
of CNG stations and kits. It is unfortunate that the efforts of the
governmental authorities have not kept pace with the orders passed by this
Court. For more than one year, under one pretext or the other, first the
NCT of Delhi and then the Union of India have been seeking extension of
time for conversion of commercial vehicles to CNG. While the anxiety of the
Delhi Government to give it the benefit of doubt, was to see that bus
services in this city were not disrupted which was the reason that it had
sought extensions of the time limit, the response of the Union of India in
this regard is baffling, to say the least.
With a view that the disruption in bus services does not take place and
unnecessary hardship is not caused, this Court has been extending the time
with regard to the conversion of commercial vehicles. Time was first
extended to 30th September, 2001, and then to 31 st January, 2002. It is
during the period January, 2001, to February, 2002, that action has been
taken by the Union of India, which leaves us with no doubt that its
intention, clearly, is to frustrate the orders passed by this Court with
regard to conversion of commercial vehicles to CNG. The manner in which it
has sought to achieve this object is to try and dis-credit CNG as the
proper fuel and, secondly, to represent to this Court that CNG is in short
supply and, thirdly, delay the setting up of adequate dispensing stations.
In 2001, the Union of India hurriedly set up a Committee headed by Mr. R.A.
Mashelkar to give a report with regard to vehicular pollution. It was
surprising that since 1986, the Union of India had not thought of setting
up such a Committee until after 31 st January, 2001, when an order was
passed in which the apathy on the part of the Government in carrying out
the orders of this court was taken note of, and the authorities were
required to comply with the orders passed. The composition of the Mashelkar
Committee was such that none of its members was either a doctor or an
expert in public health. The said Committee submitted its report, which
does not show any serious concern in protecting the health of the people.
The Committee recommended that emission norms should be laid down, and that
the choice of the fuel should be left to the users. The Committee seemed to
have overlooked the fact that such norms had been in place for a long time
with hardly any compliance thereof. For instance, the emission norms with
regard to the quality of air and water have been statutorily provided for
but despite this, prior to 1996, Delhi was the third most polluted city in
the world. It will not be out of place to mention that there are various
emission and other norms and regulations which are in place, but are
invariably breached. The existence of building regulations have not been
able to control rampant unauthorised and illegal construction, just as the
existence of norms relating to effluents have not prevented pollution.
Yamuna is no more a holy river, it has been relegated to a sewage drain.
Norms regarding quality of water and the various orders passed by this
Court in another case have not been successful in adding any oxygen in the
water, the BOD level being zero. Therefore, it is naive of the Mashelkar
Committee to expect that merely laying down fresh emission norms will be
effective or sufficient to check or control vehicular pollution. One of the
principles underlying environmental law is that of sustainable development.
This principle requires such development to take place which is
ecologically sustainable. The two essential features of sustainable
development are
(a)    the precautionary principle and
(b)    the polluter pays principle.
The "precautionary principle" was elucidated thus by this court in
Vellore
Citizens'Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors.
, [1996] 5 SCC 647, inter
alia as follows:
(1)    the State Government and the statutory authorities must anticipate,
prevent and attack the causes of environmental degradation.
(2)    Where there are threats of serious and irreversible damage, lack of
scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures
to prevent environmental degradation.
(3)    The "onus of proof" is on the actor or the developer to show that
his action is environmentally benign.
(4)    It cannot be gainsaid that permission to use automobiles has
environmental implications, and thus any "auto policy" framed by the
Government must, therefore, of necessity conform to the Constitutional
principles as well as overriding statutory duties cast upon the Government
under the EPA.
(5)    The "auto policy" must, therefore,
(a)   focus upon measures to "...Anticipate, prevent and attack..." the
cause of environmental degradation in this field.
(b)  In the absence of adequate information, lean in favour of
environmental protection by refusing rather than permitting activities
likely to be detrimental.
(c)   Adopt the " precautionary principle" and thereby ensure that unless
an activity is proved to be environmentally benign in real and practical
terms. It is to be presumed to be environmentally harmful.
(d)   Make informed recommendations which balance the needs of
tansportation with the need to protect the environment and reverse the
large scale degradation that has .resulted over the years, priority being
given to the environment over economic issues.
Norms for emission and norms for the fuel have existed for over the last
two decades-and the state of the environment is dismal despite the
existence of these norms. The emission norms stipulated by the Government
have failed to check air pollution, which has grown to dangerous levels
across the country. Therefore, to recommend that the role of the Government
be limited to specifying norms is a clear abdication of the constitutional
and statutory duty cast upon the Government to protect and preserve the
environment, and is in the teeth of the "precautionary principle".
The recommendations made by the Bhure Lal Committee and the directions
issued in 1998 have not been challenged by the Union of India. The
directions issued by the Bhure Lal Committee are statutory and continue to
be in force. It is not, therefore, open to the Union of India to seek
variation of the same without any justifiable reason. Prior to the filling
of its affidavit of 26th April, 2001, the Union of India never opposed
change over to CNG. Its application being I.A. No. 116 for variation was
dismissed on 27th April, 2001. In the order dated 17th September, 2001,
this court observed, while dealing with another application being I.A. No.
142 in which prayer (d) was that the bus operators should have an option of
using either CNG or diesel with 0.05 sulphur content, that "we do not see
any justification to grant prayer (d) at this stage". Mr. Rohtagi, Addl.
Solicitor General submitted that the use of the expression "at this stage"
meant that such a request could be met or made at a subsequent point of
time and that is why the present application filed on 5th February, 2002
for modification had been filed by the Union of India. The said plea of Mr.
Rohtagi cannot be accepted and is not in accordance with the orders passed
by this Court. As already noticed, a prayer to this effect was first made
by the Union of India in I.A. No. 116. In the order of 27th April, 2001, it
was observed that the Court did not think that any modification of its
order dated 26th March, 2001 was required. The application was disposed of
and the request for modification was not accepted. While disposing of the
application LA. No. 142 it was first observed in the order as follows:-
"Our order dated 28.7.1998 with regard to conversion of entire city bus
fleet (DTC and private) to single fuel mode of CNG (direction 'G') does not
require any modification or change. That direction stands." When in this
order, it was observed that there was no justification to grant prayer (d)
"at the stage" it only meant that the question of considering such a
request did not arise specially when similar plea for modification had been
rejected earlier. The expression "at the stage" only meant at this late
stage. The use of the expression "at the stage" cannot be interpreted as
permitting the Union of India to once again ask for modification of the
Court's order with regard to conversion of the city bus fleet to CNG mode.
The plea of the Government that CNG is in short supply, and that it is
unable to supply adequate quantity is incorrect, and this is clearly a
deliberate attempt to frustrate the orders passed by this Court.
Particulars filed in Court show that as of today no CNG is being imported.
The indigenous produce is far in excess of what is supplied to the
transport sector. It is only a small fraction of the CNG produced in India
which is earmarked for non-industrial use. Overwhelming quantity is
allocated to industries, including the power sector.
That there is no shortage of CNG is also evident from the fact that even
during the pendency of these proceedings, while on the one hand it was
being represented to this Court and the Mashelkar Committee that CNG was in
short supply, there was an increase in the allocation of the CNG to
industries. Even when CNG was not being supplied to the Pragati Power
Station in Delhi, as the same has not been commissioned, the CNG earmarked
for the power unit instead of being allocated to the transport sector, was
diverted to the industries in the neighbourhood of Delhi.
If there is a short supply of an essential commodity, then the priority
must be of public health, as opposed to the health of the balance sheet of
a private company. To enable industries to cut their losses, or make more
profit at the cost of public health, is not a sign of good governance, and
this is contrary to the constitutional mandate of
Article 39(e)
, 47
and
48A.
While the industries get natural gas at the rate of about Rs. 3.55 per KG,
a commercial vehicle owner in Delhi has to pay about Rs. 13.11 per KG which
is four times more than what the industry pays. It was contended by Mr.
Rohtagi that natural gas is supplied to the IGL at the same price at which
it is supplied to the industries. This argument conveniently overlooks the
fact that IGL is a government company and, therefore, the sale price which
the Government and its company gets on sale of CNG in the transport sector
is at least four times more than what it gets from the industries. It is
indeed surprising that, ostensibly, with a view to provide more CNG to the
transport sector in Delhi, the allotment of CNG to Maruti Udyog Limited
(MUL) has been sought to be cancelled. Normally, it would have been
surprising that if there is shortage of an essential commodity, then the
supply or the sale to the public sector undertaking would be cut, but here,
not only is the supply to the PSU being cut, but also at the same time,
supply to at least two big business houses has been increased.
It would, under the circumstances, not be incorrect to presume that the
proposal to cut supply of CNG to MUL was for some oblique purpose. Why
should the Government, which is proposing to dis-invest its share in MUL,
take the action of cutting supply of CNG, which would result in increasing
its expenses and decreasing its value? It is not as if there has been a
prorata cut of all the industrial units in and around Delhi, including MUL,
with a view to increase supply to the transport sector. The proposed cut
appears to be nothing more than an attempt to punish MUL because its
Managing Director is a member of the Bhure Lai Committee, which had
recommended CNG and, therefore, the Managing Director and this company must
suffer. It is clear that there is a desire to benefit private industries at
the cost of public health and the public exchequer. A major portion of the
CNG goes to industries, and the government and its undertakings get less
than what it would realise from supplying CNG to the transport sector. Such
economics is baffling, to say the least.
Not only is there no shortage of CNG as far as the transport sector is
concerned, but even if there be such a shortage, if crude oil can be
imported and supplied to the refineries for manufacture of petrol and
diesel, there is no reason why CNG, if need be, cannot imported as it
ensures less pollution.
During the course of arguments, literature was filed in Court giving data
from cities all over the world which co-relates increased air pollution
with increase in cardiovascular and respiratory diseases and also shows the
carcinogenic nature of Respirable Particulate Matter (RSPM)-PM10 (i.e.
matter less than 10 microns in size). The scientific studies indicate that
air pollution leads to considerable levels of mortality and morbidity. Fine
particulate matter, or respirable particulate matter (RSPM)-PM10 (i.e.
matter less than 10 microns in size)-is particularly dangerous. The Journal
of American Medical Association (JAMA) has published in its recent issue
the findings of a study involving over 500,000 people, conducted over 16
years, in different cities of the US. The researchers find that fine
particle related pollution leads to lung cancer and cardiopulmonary
mortality. Their research indicates that with an increase of every 10
microgramme per cum (ug/cum) of fine particles, the risk of lung cancer
increases by 8 per cent.
The USEPA has mandated that annual average levels of PM 2.5 particles in
the air should not exceed 15 ug/cum. The Indian annual national average
standard for PM 10 is 60 ug/cum, but most cities, including Delhi register
PM 10 levels above 150-200 ug/cum on an annual basis.
A study conducted with regard to children in Bangalore show that the
incident of asthma in percentage of children rose from 9% in 1979 to 29.5%
in 1999, thereby corresponding increase in vehicles from 1.46 lacs in 1979
to 12.23 lacs in 1999. Similarly, a study by the Chittaranjan Cancer
Institute and Environmental Biology Laboratory of the Department of Zoology
of Kolkata University done between November, 1997 and May 1999, found that
about 43% of the children in Kolkata are suffering from respiratory
disorders compared to 14% among the rural children. Alarmingly 94-96% of
the children were found producing sputum which would usually be reflective
of habitual smokers though only 5.5% of the children were found to be
smoking and that too occasional. As per the study reflected in the Indian
Journal of Medical Research July, 2000, the culprit for the aforesaid was
pollution in the ambient air.
According to an estimate by the World Bank study using 1992 data, the
annual health cost to India was up to about Rs. 5,550 crores due to ambient
air pollution. Out of this, the health cost of air pollution in Delhi alone
was found to be about Rs. 1000 crores.
The increase in respiratory diseases specially amongst the children should
normally be a cause of concern for any responsible government. The
precautionary principle enshrined in the concept of sustainable development
would have expected the government and the health authorities to take
appropriate action and arrest the air pollution. However, children do not
agitate or hold rallies and, therefore, their sound is not heard and the
only concern of the Government now appears to be is to protect the
financial health of the polluters, including the oil companies who by
present international desirable standards produce low quality petrol and
diesel at the cost of public health.
The statistics show that the continuing air pollution is having a more
devastating effect on the people, than what was caused by the Bhopal gas
tragedy. In that case, the nation, including the Union of India, was
rightly agitated and sought action and compensation from the multinational
company, who was held to be responsible for the same. Here, in the case of
CNG, the shoe is on the other foot because the government is not
facilitating measures for clean air and water including the supply to CNG
or any other clean unadulterated fuel. It is due to the lack of proper
concern on the part of the governmental authorities that people are
suffering from respiratory and other diseases. The Bhopal gas tragedy was a
one time event which, hopefully, will not be repeated, but here, with not
enough concern or action being undertaken by the Union of India, far
greater tragedies in the form of degradation of public health are taking
place every day.
Under these circumstances, it becomes the duty of this Court to direct such
steps being taken are necessary for cleaning the air so that the future
generations do not suffer from ill-health.
As in the past, it is imperative, while reiterating the order of 28th July,
1998, to issue further directions in an attempt to improve public health by
decreasing air pollution. We are conscious of the fact that vehicular
pollution is only one of the causes of air pollution, but statistics show
that, at least in the metropolitan towns, this is the major source of
pollution. In the September, 2001 issue of 'Parivesh' a magazine published
by the Central Pollution Control Board relating to air pollution and human
health, dealing with diesel exhaust particles and its health effects, it
was stated at page 34 of the said issue as follows:
"The popularity of the diesel engine in heavy duty application in trucking,
rail road, marine transport. DG sets and construction industry is due to
both its fuel efficiency and long service relative to the gasoline engine.
Compared with gasoline engine, diesel emissions are lower in carbon
monoxide (CO), hydrocarbon (HC) and carbon dioxide (CO2), but higher in
oxides of nitrogen (NOX) and particulate matter (PM). Diesel exhaust is a
complex mixture of both particulate and gaseous phase. Diesel exhaust has
particulate with mass median diameter of 0.05 to 1.00 micrometer, a size
rendering them easily respirable and capable of depositing in the airways
and alveoli. The particles consist of a carbonanecous core with a large
surface area to which various hydrocarbons are absorbed, including
carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHS) and Nitro-PAHs that
have elicited the most concern with respect to human health. The gaseous
phase contains various products of combustion and hydrocarbons including
some of the PAHS present in the particle phase. Once emitted components of
diesel exhaust undergo atmospheric transformation in ways that may be
relevant to human health. For example, nitro-PAHS, created by the reaction
of directly emitted PAHs with hydroxyl radicals in the atmosphere can be
more potent mutagens and carcinogens and more bio-available than their
precursors. A study undertaken by a Swedish Consultancy, Ecotraffic (Peter
Anlvik and Ake Branberg, 1999) shows that the cancer potency of diesel
vehicles is more than two times than that of petrol vehicles in India. But
if only the most harmful of the exhaust emissions, that is particulate
emission is considered the carcinogenic effect of one new diesel car is
equivalent to 24 petrol cars and 84 new CNG cars on the road."
In the same issue, particulars are given with regard to major air pollution
related diseases in India which are as follows:-
"(1) Acute Respiratory disease:
12% of Deaths; 13% of NBD. Largest fraction in the world Indian ARI in
children alone under 5 is responsible for more than 2% of entire GBD.
(2)    Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD): l.5% of Deaths; 0.9%
of NBD

(3)    Lung Cancer

0.4% of Deaths; 0.1% NBD

(4)    Asthma:

0.2% of Deaths; 0.5% of NBD

(5)    Tuberculosis;

8% of Deaths; 5% of NBD; Largest in the world

(6)    Perinatal:

6% of Deaths; 7.5% of NBD; Largest in the world
(7)   Cardio Vascular Disease: 17% of Deaths; 5% of NBD

(8)   Blindness:
0% of Deaths; 1% of NBD; Largest in the world NBD/GBD: National/Global
Burden of Disease"
From the aforesaid extracts from the publication of the Central Pollution
Control Board, it is evident that there was need to control air pollution,
and one of the measures was to reduce the use of diesel. It was with this
object in view that the Bhure Lal Committee recommended the use of CNG
which was accepted by all the parties including the Union of India when
orders were passed to that effect in July, 1998.
It was submitted on behalf of the Union of India that diesel and CNG are
not materially different in the matter of air pollution and instead of 100%
switchover to CNG if there was a mix of CNG and diesel buses of equal
proportion the difference would only be of 2% in the pollution levels.
We do not find any valid basis for the aforesaid submission. Data from the
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune shows that the pollution
potential of emissions from CNG is far less than even the Euro-IV
standards. This is evident from the following table compiled on the basis
of the said data.
Comparison of CNG certified test data from Automotive Research Association
of India (ARAI) with emissions norms for buses.
Sulphur level in diesel	Hydro-carbon	Carbon monoxide	Nitrogen oxide
Particulate matter

1992 standards1		3.5.	14.4	18	No standard

1996 standards1		2.4.	11.2	14.4	No standard

Bharat Stage I, April 2000'		1.23	49	9	0.40

Bharat Stage II (Euro 2 standards October 200 12	500 ppm (0.05 per
cent)	1.1	4.0	7	0.15

Euro 3 Standards3	350 ppm (0.035 per cent)	0.66	2.1	5
0.10

Euro 4 Standards 3	50-10 ppm (0.005-0-001 per cent)	0.46	1.5
3.5	0.02

Ashok Leyland CNG bus4	Nil	0.04*	2.92	2.91	0.01**

Telco CNG bus5	Nil	0.25*	1.68	3.42	0.03

Note: *Non-Methane Hydrocarbon are a small fraction of total hydrocarbon in
CNG vehicles.
**Certificate from ARAI says particulates negligible. References:
1.
CPC
B 2000, Environmental Standards for Ambient Air Automobiles Fuels
and Noise, July PCLS/4/2000-2001, p20, p29, p37, New Delhi.
2.      Ministry of Road Transport and High ways. The Gazette of India
Notification, April 24, 2001, GSR 286 (E), New Delhi, mimeo.
3.     JS McArragher et al 1999, Fuel quality, vehicle technology and their
interactions, CONCAWE, Brussels, p7.
4.     Ashok Leyland 2001, Emissions certification data of ARAI, mimeo.
(Annexure 1)
5.     TELCO 2001, Emissions certification data of ARAI, mimeo.
With the emissions from the CNG vehicles being more than comparable with
the EURO-IV standards, the contention of the Union of India that a mix of
diesel buses and CNG buses would make a difference of only 2% in the
pollution levels is patently untenable. In the case of particulates,
current CNG vehicles are 15 times better than Euro-II diesel vehicles (with
500 ppm sulphur) and only Euro IV diesel vehicles are comparable to CNG
vehicles. In fact, the certificate issued by the Automotive Research
Association of India (ARAI) to the bus manufactures says that particulate
emissions were negligible and could not be measured. The aforesaid analysis
emphasize the need for change to non-liquid fuel like CNG or LPG so as to
improve the air quality in this country and not merely of Delhi. Such
change over may perhaps obviate the need to manufacture vehicles meeting
Euro III or Euro IV standards.
It was as a result of the various orders passed by this Court that the air
pollution level in the city has been stabilised. In 2000, the levels of
annual average levels of RSPM declined to 186 fg/cum from 222 ug/cum. This
is no small achievement as the city continues to add over 2,00,000 vehicles
each year and its total vehicular fleet is larger than that of Kolkata,
Mumbai and Chennai put together. But even with these efforts, its RSPM
pollution remains roughly 3 times above the national standard for annual
average concentration of RSPM mandated under the Air Act, 1981. It was
repeatedly contended on behalf of the Union of India that no other city in
the world had introduced CNG buses at the scale directed by this Court:
Both the State Government and the Union of India had urged that the CNG
technology was still evolving and experimental. It is no doubt true that
most of the cities of the industrialised world do not have large numbers of
CNG buses, but the share of natural gas buses, needed to meet the stringent
norms in the future, are growing. The data filed indicates that in the
United States CNG buses account for 18 per cent of the current bus orders
and 28 per cent of the potential orders. Under pressure to clean up the air
because of the approaching Olympic Games in 2004, Beijing has resorted to
an alternative fuel strategy. Latest figures from Beijing indicates that
there will be 18,000 buses fuelled by CNG, LPG and electricity in that
city. By 1999, Beijing had 1300 CNG buses and the numbers are growing
rapidly to meet the Olympic deadline. Similarly, the Ministry of
Environment in South Korea-partly to meet the targets in time for 2002
World Cup Soccer aims to induct 20,000 natural gas buses in its fleet and
already 3000 such buses are plying. [Source Moon- soo Ahn 2000, Korean CNG
bus programme. The Environmental Benefits, Ministry of Environment, Korea,
Automotive Pollution Control Division, Mimeo.]



From the aforesaid, it is clear that the alternative fuel of CNG, LPG and
electricity is a preferred technology which critically polluted cities like
Delhi need as a leapfrogging technological option.
This court has shown concern about the reports relating to adulteration of
petroleum products in Delhi. A report was called for from the Bhure Lai
Committee. The said report confirms that adulteration is taking place. The
sample failure rate in the study which has been carried out was 26 per
cent. The report also indicates that the existing fuel specification
standards and the tests specified are inadequate for detecting
adulteration. Two dummy samples- one with 10 per cent and the other with 20
per cent Kerosene were sent to the Fuel Testing Laboratory, Noida. The
result of the test report of the test laboratory showed that the product
met the specification of HSD. However, a third sample with 15 per cent
contamination was declared as not meeting the HSD specification. This shows
that reliance cannot be placed on such laboratories which puts in great
doubt the entire mechanism for detection of adulteration. Considering the
quantity of Kerosene which is supplied to Delhi it is not improbable that
this is one of the ingredients used, along with naphtha etc. for
adulterating the fuel supplied to the customer. Under the circumstances,
merely lowering the sulphur, and the benzene content in diesel and petrol
respectively will have a little effect unless and until the oil companies
can guaranty that the fuel which was sold from the dispensing stations is
pure and unadulterated. In fact, there is one public sector undertaking
which advertises its petroleum products as "pure for sure". It guarantees
that the fuel which can be obtained from its dispensing stations is
unadulterated. This by itself clearly indicates acknowledgement by the
petroleum industry that adulteration in not a small measure is taking place
and, therefore, the need to advertise the purity of the products sold by
the Bharat Petroleum. It has been alleged, and there is strong basis for
this, that as a result of adulteration, large amounts of illegal gains and
profits are being made. There are various players in this racket. It is not
surprising, therefore, that there is stiff resistance to the implementation
of the orders of this Court for switch-over to gas which cannot be
adultered and will undoubtedly cause financial loss to the members of the
unholy alliance of adulterators.
As per the available information there seems to be no apparent shortage of
gas. The supply of gas from the South Bassein gas fields has increased over
the past some years, from 38 mmscmd to 41 mmscmd. Major investment has
already been sanctioned for expansion of infrastructure to supply natural
gas as well as regassified LNG to northern India.
The Union of India has argued that breakdown in the pipeline would lead to
disruption in supply to the city and could paralyse the transport system
which would be solely dependent on CNG. However, available information
suggests that the possibility of the pipeline breaking down is remote.
Furthermore, the pipeline itself stores up to 3 months of gas supply needed
for Delhi.
The Union Government has to allocate more gas to Delhi to implement the
order of this Court. In January, 2002, the Union Government has roughly
doubled its earlier allocation to Delhi's vehicular fleet. But even this
increased allocation-by diverting gas from a single user, Maruti Udyog
Limited-will be inadequate for implementing the Court's order.
To meet the needs of current and projected vehicles in the city-the city
requires a mere 4.8 per cent of the current supply of gas by the HBJ
pipeline. The production of gas in the South Bassein gas fields has also
increased over the last 2-3 years. But the increased production has been
allocated to industries, instead of meeting the needs of vehicles arising
out of this Court's orders.
According to available information:
Reliance Industries got an additional 0.7 mmscmd;
Essar got an additional 0.4 mmscmd;

       Gujarat State Fertillzer Corporation got an additional 0.4 mmscmd;

       GIPCL (power generating company in Baroda) got 0.5 mmscmd (this gas
is being reported by supplied without any allocation by the government and
as a "matter of favour")
IPC
L-Dahej got an additional 0.85 mmscmd.
As per the latest figures available, there are 3,727 CNG buses on the road.
The additional number of buses, which have to be phased out are 6, 338.
Once this is done, the total number of CNG buses on the road will be
10,065.
In the I.A. filed on behalf of the bus manufacturers, it is stated that
1500 chassis which had been ordered are ready for delivery but the persons
who placed orders have not taken the delivery. Therefore, at least 1500
buses can be replaced immediately. As per the affidavit filed by the
manufacturers, between Ashok Leyland and TELCO, they have an installed
capacity of 1,100 buses per month. Assuming production of around 70 per
cent of the installed capacity, it would be safe to proceed on the footing
that between the two of them they can provide 800 buses a month. If all the
buses operators chose to buy new buses then @ 800 buses per month, the
entire fleet of remaining 4838 buses, in addition to the 1500 chassis ready
for delivery, can be phased out in not more than 7 or 8 months.
The request of the government for phasing out 200 buses a month appears to
be based on some imaginary shortage in the availability of gas. There is no
credible material placed before the Court to show that the distribution of
gas is consistent with the principle of sustainable development. Conferring
economic advantage upon industry by making available cheap gas in
preference to the need for supplying gas for environmental reason is
inconsistent with the settled Constitutional position.
Even though the time for phasing out diesel buses had expired but in view
of the situation created by the Government of not cooperating or complying
with the Courts order, a different formula has to be worked out so as to
cause as little inconvenience to the travelling public as possible, while
at the same time punishing the wrong doer. Directions are, therefore, to be
issued regarding the lifting of 1500 buses plus phasing out of 800 buses
per month. The permits to be given are to be time bound and the continued
operation of the diesel buses till they are replaced would require them to
pay Rs. 500 per bus per day for 30 days of operation and thereafter Rs.
1,000 per day and the same is to be deposited with the Director of
Transport, Delhi.
Before concluding on this aspect, we may notice that on a query raised by
the Court, the Union of India has informed the LPG has also been permitted
to be used as fuel by the transport sector. This can and should be an
alternate fuel to CNG available to the users as LPG is, at present,
environmentally acceptable. It is for the Government to take steps so as to
increase it's supply. We may here note that there are, as per
CPC
B data, at
least nine other polluted cities in India where the air quality is
critical. These cities are Agra, Lucknow, Jharia, Kanpur, Varanasi,
Faridabad, Patna, Jodhpur and Pune. But there appears to be no effective
action plan to address the problem of these cities and the Mashelkar Report
ensures their suffering for quite some time. If no immediate action is
taken then it may become necessary for some orders being passed so as to
bring relief to the residents of those cities.
Lack of adequate supply of CNG has been a cause of concern and has been
referred to in the various orders passed by this Court from time to time.
In the absence of proper response from the governmental authorities, there
is no alternative but to issue the following directions:
1.      The Union of India will give priority to transport sector including
private vehicles all over India with regard to the allocation of CNG. This
means that first the transport sector in Delhi, and in the other air
polluted cities of India, CNG will be allocated and made available and it
is only thereafter if any CNG is available, that the same can be allocated
to the industries, preference being shown to public sector undertakings and
power projects.
2.      I.A. of the Union of India for extension of time to run diesel
buses is dismissed with costs of Rs. 20, 000 (Twenty Thousand only). It is
made clear, and it is obvious in our constitutional setup, that orders and
directions of this Court cannot be nullified or modified or in any way
altered by any administrative decision of the Central or the State
Governments. The administrative decision to continue to ply diesel buses
is, therefore, clearly in violation of this Court's orders.
3.      Those persons who have placed orders with the bus manufactures, and
have not taken delivery of the same shall do so within two weeks from
today, failing which their permits shall stand automatically cancelled.
4.      As owners of diesel buses have continued to ply diesel buses beyond
31 st January, 2002, contrary to this Court's orders, for the disobedience
of the said orders, the Director of Transport, Delhi, will collect from
them costs at the rate of Rs 500 per bus per day increasing to Rs. l, 000
per day after 30 days of operation of the diesel buses with effect from
tomorrow and the same shall be deposited in this Court by the Director of
Transport by the 10th day of every month.
5.      The NCT of Delhi shall phase out 800 diesel buses per month
starting from 1st May, 2002. Till all the diesel buses are replaced the bus
owners who continue to ply the diesel buses shall pay as per direction No.
4 hereinabove.
6.      For implementing these directions, the Union of India and all
governmental authorities, including IGL shall:-
(a) Allocate and make available 16.1 lakh Kg per day (2 mmscmd) of CNG in
the NCT of Delhi by 30th June, 2002 for use by the transport sector,
(b)  Increase the above supply of CNG whenever the need arises
(c)  Prepare a scheme containing a time schedule for supply of CNG to the
other polluted cities of India and furnish the same to this Court by 9th
May, 2002 for it's consideration;
(d) It will be open to the Union of India to supply LPG in addition to CNG
as an alternate fuel or to supply any other clean non-adulterable fuel as
the Bhure Lal Committee may recommend.
7.      The NCT of Delhi had announced a scheme for financing CNG vans, to
be run as taxis, for SC/ST. We direct a similar financing scheme be framed
by the Union of India jointly with the NCT of Delhi whereby those of the
permits of owners of diesel buses are cancelled due to non-conversion to
CNG the same should, in the first instance, be allotted to SC/ST and to the
other weaker sections of the society. Such a scheme should be prepared and
implemented and a compliance report be filed within four weeks. The costs
deposited under direction (4) above can be utilised in implementing the
proposed scheme.
To come up on 9th May, 2002 for further orders by which date the Union of
India and the N.C.T. of Delhi will file a further report.
Matter is pending.oo Ahn 2000,

Matter is pending.