[Cites
12
, Cited by
65
]
Supreme Court of India
Kaiser-I- Hind Pvt. Ltd. & Another Etc., ... vs National Textile Corporation Ltd., & ... on 25 September, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 3404, 2002 AIR SCW 3971, 2002 (5) SLT 555, 2002 (9) SRJ 448, 2002 (4) LRI 246, 2002 (7) SCALE 95, 2002 (8) SCC 182, 2002 SCFBRC 626, (2002) 7 JT 339 (SC), (2003) 1 ALLMR 314 (SC), (2002) 6 ANDH LT 8, (2002) 5 ANDHLD 229, (2003) 1 MAD LJ 129, (2002) 4 SCJ 421, (2002) 6 SUPREME 608, (2002) 4 RECCIVR 445, (2002) 7 SCALE 95, (2003) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 1, (2003) 3 BOM CR 392
Author:
D. Raju
Bench:
Doraiswamy Raju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2555 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  1320 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  1351 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  2218 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  2623 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  3047 of 1991
Appeal (civil)  3053 of 1991

PETITIONER:
Kaiser-I- Hind Pvt. Ltd. & Another Etc., Etc.

RESPONDENT:
National Textile Corporation Ltd., & Others Etc., Etc.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/09/2002

BENCH:
Doraiswamy Raju.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

D. RAJU, J.
I have carefully gone through the judgment prepared by learned brother
Justice M.B. Shah, dismissing the appeals and other connected writ and allied
petitions and I am in respectful agreement with the same.  Yet, having regard to
the nature of issues involved and the likelihood of recurrence of such question, in
the light of similar and frequent recourse often made to
Article 254(2)
of the
Constitution, I wish to place on record some of my views also in the matter.
The factual background, the details relating to the decision arrived at by
the Bombay High Court and the contentions raised on behalf of the
appellants/petitioners before us have been adverted to in detail in the judgment
of Shah, J. and I do not want to refer to them and further burden this judgment.
Article 254(1)
declares that, if any provision of a law including an 'existing law'
made by the legislature of a State is 'repugnant' to any provision of a law enacted
by the Parliament, which it is competent to enact, or to any provision of an
existing law, with respect to 'one of the matters' enumerated in the concurrent
list, subject to the exception provided in Clause (2) of
Article 254
, the law made
by the Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the State
Legislature concerned or the existing law, as the case may be, shall prevail and
to that extent of repugnancy, the State law shall be void.  The exception
engrafted in Clause (2) to enable the State law to prevail in that State, the
Legislature of which has enacted it, notwithstanding its repugnancy, as above, as
long as both the laws deal with a concurrent subject, will enure to its benefit, `if it
has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his
assent', under the said provision of the Constitution of India.	 Thus, the sweep of
mandate and serious nature of the result flowing from the assent renders, in my
view, the very exercise of power by the President and the attendant formalities
whereof, as of great significance and vitally important, and not a mere routine or
mechanical exercise.   Despite, such assent having been obtained, power of the
Parliament to enact, at any time, any law with respect to the same matter
including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the
Legislature of the State, with the assent envisaged under Clause (2) of
Article
254
has also been conserved and preserved in the proviso to the said clause.  In
substance, the Parliament has undisputed power to undo the effect or
consequences flowing from the presidential assent obtained under Clause (2), by
enacting a subsequent law creating once more a 'repugnancy' and thereby
override or repeal impliedly, to the extent of such repugnancy, the State law.
The assent of the President envisaged under
Article 254 (2)
is neither an
idle or empty formality, nor an automatic event, necessitated or to be given for
the mere asking, in whatever form or manner and whether specific, vague,
general or indefinite  in the terms sought for to claim that once sought and
obtained as well as published, a curtain or veil is drawn, to preclude any probe or
contention for consideration that what was sought and obtained was not really
what should and ought to have been, to claim the protection envisaged under
Clause (2) in respect of a particular State law vis--vis or with reference to any
particular or specified law on the same subject made by the Parliament or an
existing law, in force.	 The repugnancy envisaged under Clause (1) or enabled
under Clause (2) to get excepted from under the protective coverage of the
assent obtained from the President, is such that there is a legislation or
legislative provision(s), covering and operating on the same field or identical
subject matter made by both the Union and the State, both of them being
competent to enact in respect of the same subject matter or the legislative field,
but the legislation by the Parliament has come to occupy the entire field.
Necessarily, in the quasi-federal structure adopted for the nation, predominance
is given to the law made by the Parliament and in such circumstances only the
State law which secured the assent of the President under Clause (2) of
Article
254
comes to be protected, subject of course to the powers of Parliament under
the Proviso to the said clause.	 Therefore, the President has to be apprised of the
reasons at least as to why his assent is being sought, the need or necessity and
the justification or otherwise for claiming predominance for the State law
concerned.  This itself would postulate an obligation, inherent in the scheme
underlying as well as the very purpose and object of seeking the assent under
clause (2) of
Article 254
, to enumerate or specify and illustrate the particular
Central law or provision with reference to which the predominance is desired.
The absence of any standardized or stipulated form in which it is to be sought for,
should not detract the State concerned, to disown its obligation to be precise and
specific in the extent of protection sought having regard to the serious
consequences which thereby inevitably follows,	i.e., the substitution of the Union
law in force by the State law, in the territorial limits of the State concerned, with
drastic alteration or change in the rights of citizen, which it may, thereby bring
about.
The mere forwarding of a copy of the bill may obviate, if at all, only the
need to refer to each one of the provisions therein in detail in the requisition sent
or the letter forwarding it, but not obliterate the necessity to point out specifically
the particular Central law or provisions with reference to which, the
predominance is claimed or purported to be claimed.  The deliberate use of the
word 'consideration' in clause (2) of
Article 254
, in my view, not only connote that
there should be an active application of mind, but also postulate a deliberate and
careful thought process before taking a decision to accord or not to accord the
assent sought for.  If the object of referring the State law for consideration is to
have the repugnancy resolved by securing predominance to the State law, the
President has to necessarily consider the nature and extent of repugnancy, the
feasibility, practicalities and desirabilities involved therein, though may not be
obliged to write a judgment in the same manner, the courts of law does, before
arriving at a conclusion to grant or refuse to grant or even grant partially, if the
repugnancy is with reference to more than one law in force made by the
Parliament.   Protection cannot be claimed for the State law, when questioned
before courts, taking cover under the assent, merely asserting that it was in
general form, irrespective of the actual fact whether the State claimed for such
protection against a specific law or the attention of the President was invited to at
least an apprehended repugnancy vis--vis the particular Central law.   In the
teeth of innumerable Central laws enacted and in force on concurrent subjects
enumerated in List III of the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution, and the hoard of
provisions contained therein, artificial assumptions based on some supposed
knowledge of all those provisions and the presumed regularity of official acts,
cannot be blown out of proportion, to do away with an essential exercise, to
make the 'assent' meaningful, as if they are empty formalities, except at the risk
of rendering
Article 254
itself a dead letter or mere otiose.  The significant and
serious alteration in or modification of the rights of parties, both individuals or
institutions resulting from the 'assent' cannot be overlooked or lightly brushed
aside as of no significance, whatsoever.  In a Federal structure, peculiar to the
one adopted by our Constitution it would become necessary for the President to
be apprised of the reason as to why and for what special reason or object and
purpose, predominance for the State law over the Central law is sought,
deviating from the law in force made by the Parliament for the entire country,
including that part of the State.  When this Court observed in
Gram Panchayat
of Village Jamalpur vs. Malwinder Singh & Others
[(1985) 3 SCC 661], that
when the assent of President is sought for a specific purpose the efficacy of the
assent would be limited to that purpose and cannot be extended beyond it, and
that if the assent is sought and given in general terms so as to be effective for all
purposes different considerations may legitimately arise, it cannot legitimately be
contended that this court had also declared that reservation of the State law can
also be by mere reference to
Article 254 (2)
alone with no further disclosures to
be made or that the mere forwarding of the bill, no other information or detail was
either a permissible or legalized and approved course to be adopted or that such
course was held to be sufficient, by this Court, to serve the purpose of the said
Article.  The observation 'general terms' need to be understood, in my view, a
reference to a particular law as a whole in contrast to any one particular or
individual in the said law and not that, it can be even without any reference
whatsoever.  The further observation therein, "not only was the President not
apprised in the instant case that his assent was sought because of the
repugnancy between the State Act and the pre-existing Central Act on the
vesting of evacuee properties but his assent was sought for a different, specific
purpose altogether", would belie any such claim.   Per contra, it would only
reinforce the principle that the consideration as well as the decision to accord
consent should be a conscious one, after due application of mind, relevant and
necessary for the purpose. Though, submission of a thesis on the various
aspects of repugnancy involved may not be the requirement, the reservation for
'consideration' would necessarily obligate an invitation of the attention of the
President as to which of the pre-existing central enactments or which provisions
of those enactments are considered or apprehended to be repugnant, with
reference to which the assent envisaged in
Article 254 (2)
is sought for.  This
becomes all the more necessary also for the reason that the repugnancy in
respect of which predominance is sought to be secured must be shown to exist
or apprehended, on the date of the State law and not in vacuum to cure any and
every possible repugnancy in respect of all laws  irrespective of whether it was
in the contemplation or not of the seeker of the assent or of the President at the
time of 'consideration' for according assent.
This Court has, no doubt, held that the assent accorded by the President
is not justifiable, and courts cannot spell out any infirmity in the decision arrived
at, to give the assent.	 Similarly, when the President was found to have accorded
assent and the same was duly published, it cannot be contended that the assent
was not really that of the President, as claimed.  It is also not given to anyone to
challenge the decision of the President according assent, on merits and as to its
legality, propriety or desirability.  But that is not the same thing as approving an
attempt to draw a blanket or veil so as to preclude an examination by this court or
the High Court as to the justifiability and sufficiency or otherwise of the protection
or predominance claimed for the State law over the law made by the Parliament
or the existing law, based upon the assent accorded, resulting at times in
substantial alteration, change or modification in the rights and obligations of
citizen, including the Fundamental Rights.  When the Constitution extends a form
of protection to a repugnant State law, permitting predominance and also to hold
the field in the place of the law made by the Centre, conditioned upon the
reservation of the State law for consideration of the President and obtaining his
assent, it is to be necessarily viewed as an essential prerequisite to be effectively
and meticulously fulfilled before ever availing of the protection and the same
cannot be viewed merely as a ceremonial ritual.	 If such a vitally essential
procedure and safeguard is to be merely viewed as a routine formality which can
be observed in whatever manner desired by those concerned and that it would
be merely enough, if the assent has been secured howsoever obtained, it would
amount to belittling its very importance in the context of distribution of legislative
powers and the absolute necessity to preserve the supremacy of the Parliament
to enact a law on a concurrent topic in List III, for the entire country.  It would also
amount to acceptance of even a farce of compliance to be actual or real
compliance.  Such a course could not be adopted by Courts, except by doing
violence to the language, as well as the scheme, and very object underlying
Article 254 (2).
Different provisions of the Constitution envisage the grant of assent by the
President as well the Governor of a State.
Article 111
provides for the assent of
the President to a Bill passed by the Houses of Parliament, in the same manner
in which
Article 200
empowers the Governor of a State in respect of a Bill passed
by the Legislative Assembly or by the Houses of the Legislature where there is a
Legislative Council in addition to the Assembly.  The Parliament for the Union
consists of the President and two Houses as the Legislature of States consist of
the Governor and the House or Houses, as the case may be (vide
Articles 79
and
168
).  The policy making executive power of the Union also vest with the
President, as the executive power of the State vest with the Governor, and those
powers have to be exercised with the aid and advice of the council of ministers,
for the Union headed by the Prime Minister and for the State to be headed by the
Chief Minister.	 The President or the Governor, as the case may be, as and when
a Bill after having been passed is presented, may accord assent or as soon as
possible thereafter return the Bill to the Houses with a message requesting to
reconsider the Bill or any provisions thereof, including the introduction of any
amendment as recommended in his message and if thereafter the Houses on
reconsideration of the Bill, pass the Bill again with or without amendment and
present the same for the assent, the President/Governor, as the case may be,
shall not withhold his assent.	Being an exercise pertaining to expression of
political will, apparently, the will of the people expressed through the legislation
passed by their elected representatives is given prominence by specifically
providing for a compulsory consent or assent.  The same could not be said with
reference to the 'assent' of the President envisaged under
Articles 31A
, 31C
, 254
(2)
and
304 (b)
of the Constitution.  In my view, the 'assent' envisaged in these
Articles by the very nature and character of the powers conferred constitute a
distinct class and category of their own, different from the normal 'assent'
envisaged under
Articles 111
of the President or 200 of the Governor.
Article
201
also would indicate that even when for the second time the Houses of the
State Legislature passes the Bill and presented for 'consideration', there is no
compulsion for the President to accord assent.	Therefore, the reservation of any
Bill/Act for the `consideration' of the President for according his assent, keeping
in view, also the avowed object envisaged under
Article 254 (2)
, renders it
qualitatively different from the ordinary assent to be given by the President to a
Bill passed by the Parliament or that of the Governor to a Bill passed by the
Legislature(s) of the State concerned.
The assent of the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is
considered to be part of the legislative process only for the limited purpose that
the legislative process is incomplete without them for enacting a law and in the
absence of the assent the Bill passed could not be considered to be an Act or a
piece of legislation, effective and enforceable and not to extend the immunity in
respect of procedural formalities to be observed inside the respective houses and
certification by the presiding officer concerned of their due compliance, to areas
or acts outside and besides those formalities . The powers actually exercised by
the President, at any rate, under
Articles 31A
, 31C
, 254 (2)
and
304 (b)
is a
special constituent power vested with the Head of the Union, as the protector and
defender of the Constitution and safety valve to safeguard the Fundamental
Rights of citizens and Federal structure of the country's polity as adopted in the
Constitution.  A genuine, real and effective consideration would depend upon
specific and sufficient information being provided to him inviting, at any rate, his
attention to the Central law with which the State law is considered or
apprehended to be repugnant, and in the absence of any effort or exercise
shown to have been undertaken, when questioned before courts, the State law
cannot be permitted or allowed to have predominance or overriding effect over
that Central enactment of the Parliament to which no specific reference of the
President at all has been invited to.  This, in my view, is a must and an essential
requirement to be satisfied; in the absence of which the 'consideration' claimed
would be one in vacuum and really oblivious to the hoard of Legislations falling
under the Concurrent List in force in the country and enacted by the Parliament.
To uphold as valid the claim for any such blanket assent or all round
predominance over any and every such law  whether brought to the notice of
the President or not, would amount to legitimization of what was not even in the
contemplation or consideration on the basis of some assumed 'consideration'.  In
order to find out the real state of affairs as to whether the 'Assent' in a given case
was after a due and proper application of mind and effective 'consideration' as
envisaged by the Constitution, this court as well as the High Court exercising
powers of judicial review are entitled to call for the relevant records and look into
the same.  This the courts have been doing, as and when considered necessary,
all along.  No exception therefore could be taken to the High Court in this case
adopting such a procedure, in discharge of its obligations and exercise of
jurisdiction under the Constitution of India.