[Cites
14
, Cited by
291
]
Supreme Court of India
Savitri Pandey vs Prem Chandra Pandey on 8 January, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 591, 2002 (2) SCC 73, 2002 AIR SCW 182, 2002 ALL. L. J. 355, 2002 ALL CJ 1 122, 2002 (2) SRJ 553, 2002 (1) SLT 103, (2002) 1 ALL WC 472, (2002) 1 JCR 377 (SC), 2002 (1) LRI 28, (2002) 1 JT 25 (SC), 2002 (1) UJ (SC) 273, (2002) 1 MARRILJ 277, 2002 (1) ALL CJ 22, 2002 (1) JT 25, 2002 UJ(SC) 1 273, 2002 (1) BLJR 378, (2002) 3 CIVILCOURTC 318, (2002) 1 RECCIVR 719, (2002) 6 BOM CR 511, (2002) 1 HINDULR 338, (2002) 2 MAHLR 263, (2002) 2 PAT LJR 256, (2002) 2 JLJR 135, (2002) 2 GUJ LR 1369, (2002) 1 KER LJ 193, (2002) WLC(SC)CVL 116, (2002) 1 SCALE 33, (2002) 1 RAJ LW 183, (2002) 3 GUJ LH 470, (2002) 1 DMC 177, (2002) 1 ANDH LT 55, (2002) 1 CURCC 7, (2002) 22 OCR 280, (2002) 1 UC 299, (2002) 1 SCJ 6, (2002) 46 ALL LR 465, (2002) 2 CAL HN 50, (2002) 2 BLJ 177, (2002) 1 SUPREME 90, (2002) MATLR 224, 2002 (1) MARR LJ 277, (2002) 4 CURCRIR 254, (2002) 1 CAL HN 124, (2002) 1 ALLCRILR 658, (2002) 1 CALLT 32
Author:
R.P. Sethi
Bench:
R.P. Sethi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 20-21  of  1999



PETITIONER:
SAVITRI PANDEY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PREM CHANDRA PANDEY

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	08/01/2002

BENCH:
R.P. Sethi & Y.K. Sabharwal




JUDGMENT:
SETHI,J.
Alleging cruelty and desertion against the husband, the appellant-
wife approached the Matrimonial Court under
Section 13
of the Hindu
Marriage Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") praying for
dissolution of her marriage with the respondent by a decree of divorce.
She also prayed for direction to the respondent to return her ornaments
given to him at the time of marriage.  The Family Judge allowed the
petition and dissolved the marriage of the parties on the ground of
desertion by the husband.  The appellant was also granted a decree of
Rs.12,000/- towards the price of the scooter, allegedly given at the
time of the marriage and payment of Rs.500/- per month as permanent
alimony.  Both the husband and the wife preferred appeals against the
order of the Family Court as the wife was not satisfied with the part of
the order refusing to grant a decree in her favour in respect of
properties claimed by her and the husband was aggrieved by the order of
dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce.  Both the appeals
were disposed of by the impugned order holding that the appellant-wife
herself was a defaulting party and neither the allegations of cruelty
nor of desertion were proved.  The order passed under
Section 27
of the
Hindu Marriage Act and for permanent alimony was also set aside.  The
grievance of the appellant-wife is that the High Court was not justified
in setting aside the findings of fact arrived at by the Family Court and
that she had proved the existence of cruelty and desertion against the
respondent.  It is contended that as the appellant-wife was proved to
have been living separately, it was to be presumed that the respondent
had deserted her.
The facts of the case giving rise to the filing of the present
appeals are that marriage between the parties was solemnised on
6.5.1987.  The appellant-wife lived with the respondent-husband till 21st
June, 1987 and according to her	 the marriage between the parties was
never consummated.  After 21st June, 1987 the parties started living
separately.  The appellant alleged that her parents spent more than
Rs.80,000/- with respect to the ceremonies of the marriage and also gave
several articles in the form of ornaments, valuables, cash and kind as
per demand of the respondent.  The respondent and his family members
allegedly  made further demands of Colour TV, Refrigerator and some
other ornaments besides hard cash of Rs.10,000/-. The father of the
appellant obliged the respondent by giving him Rs.10,000/- in the first
week of June, 1987 but could not fulfil the other demands of his
parents.  The respondent and his family members were alleged to have
started torturing the appellants on false pretexts.  Aggrieved by the
attitude of the respondent and his family members, the appellant states
to have filed a petition under
Section 13
of the Act seeking dissolution
of marriage by a decree of divorce along with prayer for the return of
the property and grant of permanent alimony.  The respondent also filed
a petition seeking divorce and grant of other reliefs.	However, on
14.5.1996 the respondent filed an application for withdrawal of his
matrimonial case which was allowed on 19.5.1996.  The appellant had
alleged that the respondent was having illicit relations with a lady
residing in Gaya at Bihar with whom he was stated to have solemnised the
marriage.  The allegations made in the petition were denied by the
respondent and it was stated that in fact the appellant-wife was taking
advantage of her own wrongs.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the following issues
were framed:
"1.	Whether the defendant has treated the petitioner with
cruelty? If so, its effect?
2.	Whether the petitioner is entitled to relief under
Sec.27
of the Hindu Marriage Act?  If so, its effect?
3.	Whether the defendant is entitled to any relief? If
so, its effect?
4.	To what relief, parties are entitled?"
It may be noticed that no issue with regard to alleged desertion
was insisted to be framed.  With respect to the issue of cruelty, the
Family Court concluded that no evidence had been led to prove the
allegations.  The Court, however, held: "but it is proved that the
respondent had deserted the petitioner, hence the petitioner will get or
is entitled to for a decree of divorce".  On appreciation of evidence
led in the case, the Division Bench of the High Court held:
"We also do not find any evidence that the wife has been
treated with cruelty by the husband.  We are also of the
view that there is no evidence that petitioner is deserted."
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record.
Treating the petitioner with cruelty is a ground for divorce under
Section 13(1)(ia)
of the Act.  Cruelty has not been defined under the
Act but in relation to matrimonial matters it is contemplated as a
conduct of such type which endangers the living of the petitioner with
the respondent.	 Cruelty consists of acts which are dangerous to life,
limb or health.	 Cruelty for the purpose of the Act means where one
spouse has so treated the other and manifested such feelings towards her
or him as to have inflicted bodily injury, or to have caused reasonable
apprehension of bodily injury, suffering or to have injured health.
Cruelty may be physical or mental.  Mental cruelty is the conduct of
other spouse which causes mental suffering or fear to the matrimonial
life of the other.  "Cruelty", therefore, postulates a treatment of the
petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in
his or her mind that it would be harmful or injurious for the petitioner
to live with the other party.  Cruelty, however, has to be distinguished
from the ordinary wear and tear of family life.	 It cannot be decided on
the basis of the sensitivity of the petitioner and has to be adjudged on
the basis of the course of conduct which would, in general, be dangerous
for a spouse to live with the other.  In the instant case both the trial
court as well as the High Court have found on facts that the wife had
failed to prove the allegations of cruelty attributed to the respondent.
Concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the courts cannot be disturbed
by this Court in exercise of powers under
Article 136
of the
Constitution of India.	Otherwise also the averments made in the
petition and the evidence led in support thereof clearly shows that the
allegations, even if held to have been proved, would only show the
sensitivity of the appellant with respect to the conduct of the
respondent which cannot be termed more than ordinary wear and tear of
the family life.
No decree of divorce could be granted on the ground of desertion
in the absence of pleading and proof.  Learned counsel for the appellant
submitted that even in the absence of specific issue, the parties had
led evidence and there was sufficient material for the Family Court to
return a verdict of desertion having been proved.  In the light of the
submissions made by the learned counsel, we have opted to examine this
aspect of the matter despite the fact that there was no specific issue
framed or insisted to be framed.
"Desertion", for the purpose of seeking divorce under the Act,
means the intentional permanent forsaking and abandonment of one spouse
by the other without that other's consent and without reasonable cause.
In other words it is a total repudiation of the obligations of marriage.
Desertion is not the withdrawal from a place but from a state of things.
Desertion, therefore, means withdrawing from the matrimonial
obligations, i.e., not permitting or allowing and facilitating the
cohabitation between the parties.  The proof of desertion has to be
considered by taking into consideration the concept of marriage which in
law legalises the sexual relationship between man and woman in the
society for the perpetuation of race, permitting lawful indulgence in
passion to prevent licentiousness and for procreation of children.
Desertion is not a single act complete in itself, it is a continuous
course of conduct to be determined under the facts and circumstances of
each case.  After referring to host of authorities and the views of
various authors, this Court in Bipinchandra Jaisinghbhai Shah v.
Prabhavati [AIR 1957 SC 176] held that if a spouse abandons the other in
a state of temporary passions, for example, anger or disgust without
intending permanently to cease cohabitation, it will not amount to
desertion.  It further held:
"For the office of desertion, so far as the deserting spouse
is concerned, two essential conditions must be there, namely
(1) the factum of separation, and (2) the intention to bring
cohabitation permanently to an end (animus deserendi).
Similarly two elements are essential so far as the deserted
spouse is concerned: (1) the absence of consent, and (2)
absence of conduct giving reasonable cause to the spouse
leaving the matrimonial home to form the necessary intention
aforesaid.  The petitioner for divorce bears the burden of
proving those elements in the two spouses respectively.
Here a different between the English law and the law as
enacted by the Bombay Legislature may be pointed out.
Whereas under the English law those essential conditions
must continue throughout the course of the three years
immediately preceding the institution of the suit for
divorce, under the Act, the period is four years without
specifying that it should immediately precede the
commencement of proceedings for divorce.  Whether the
omission of the last clause has any practical result need
not detain us, as it does not call for decision in the
present case.  Desertion is a matter of inference to be
drawn from the facts and circumstances of each case.  The
inference may be drawn from certain facts which may not in
another case be capable of leading to the same inference;
that is to say, the facts have to be viewed as to the
purpose which is revealed by those acts or by conduct and
expression of intention, both anterior and subsequent to the
actual acts of separation.  If, in fact, there has been a
separation, the essential question always is whether that
act could be attributable to an animus deserendi.  The
offence of desertion commences when the fact of separation
and the animus deserendi co-exist.  But it is not necessary
that they should commence at the same time.  The de facto
separation may have commenced without the necessary animus
ort it may be that the separation and the animus deserendi
coincide in point of time; for example, when the separating
spouse abandons the marital home with the intention, express
or implied, of bringing cohabitation permanently to a close.
The law in England has prescribed a three years period and
the
Bombay Act
prescribed a period of four years as a
continuous period during which the two elements must
subsist.  Hence, if a deserting spouse takes advantage of
the locus poenitentiae thus provided by law and decide to
come back to the deserted spouse by a bona fide offer of
resuming the matrimonial home with all the implications of
marital life, before the statutory period is out or even
after the lapse of that period, unless proceedings for
divorce have been commenced, desertion comes to an end and
if the deserted spouse unreasonably refuses to offer, the
latter may be in desertion and not the former.	Hence it is
necessary that during all the period that there has been a
desertion, the deserted spouse must affirm the marriage and
be ready and willing to resume married life on such
conditions as may be reasonable.  It is also well settled
that in proceedings for divorce the plaintiff must prove the
offence of desertion, like and other matrimonial offence,
beyond all reasonable doubt.  Hence, though corroboration is
not required as an absolute rule of law the courts insist
upon corroborative evidence, unless its absence is accounted
for to the satisfaction of the court."
Following the decision in Bipinchandra's case (supra) this Court
again reiterated the legal position in
Lachman Utamchand Kirpalani v.
Meena
alias Mota [AIR 1964 SC 40] by holding that in its essence
desertion means the intentional permanent forsaking and abandonment of
one spouse by the other without that other's consent, and without
reasonable cause.  For the offence of desertion so far as deserting
spouse is concerned, two essential conditions must be there (1) the
factum of separation and (2) the intention to bring cohabitation
permanently to an end (animus deserendi).  Similarly two elements are
essential so far as the deserted spouse is concerned: (1) the absence of
consent, and (2) absence of conduct giving reasonable cause to the
spouse leaving the matrimonial home to form the necessary intention
aforesaid.  For holding desertion proved the inference may be drawn from
certain facts which may not in another case be capable of leading to the
same inference; that is to say the facts have to be viewed as to the
purpose which is revealed by those acts or by conduct and expression of
intention, both anterior and subsequent to the actual acts of
separation.
To prove desertion in matrimonial matter it is not always
necessary that one of the spouse should have left the company of the
other as desertion could be proved while living under the same roof.
Desertion cannot be equated with separate living by the parties to the
marriage.  Desertion may also be constructive  which can be inferred
from the attending circumstances.  It has always to be kept in mind that
the question of desertion is a matter of inference to be drawn from the
facts and circumstances of each case.
There is another aspect of the matter which disentitles the
appellant from seeking the relief of divorce on the ground of desertion
in this case.  As desertion in matrimonial cases means the withdrawal of
one party from a state of things, i.e., a marital status of the party,
no party to the marriage can be permitted to allege desertion unless he
or she admits that after the formal ceremonies of the marriage, the
parties had recognised and discharged the common obligation of the
married life which essentially requires the cohabitation between the
parties for the purpose of consummating the marriage.  Cohabitation by
the parties is an essential of a valid marriage as the object of the
marriage is to further the perpetuation of the race by permitting lawful
indulgence in passions for procreation of children.  In other words,
there can be no desertion without previous cohabitation by the parties.
The basis for this theory is built upon the recognised position of law
in matrimonial matters that no-one can desert who does not actively or
wilfully bring to an end the existing state of cohabitation.  However,
such a rule is subject to just exceptions which may be found in a case
on the ground of mental or physical incapacity or other peculiar
circumstances of the case.  However, the party seeking divorce on the
ground of desertion is required to show that he or she was not taking
the advantage of his or her own wrong.
In the instant case the appellant herself pleaded that there had
not been cohabitation between the parties after the marriage.  She
neither assigned any reason nor attributed the non-resumption of
cohabitation to the respondent.	 From the pleadings and evidence led in
the case, it is apparent that the appellant did not permit the
respondent to have cohabitation for consummating the marriage.	In the
absence of cohabitation between the parties, a particular state of
matrimonial position was never permitted by the appellant to come into
existence.  In the present case, in the absence of cohabitation and
consummation of marriage, the appellant was disentitled to claim divorce
on the ground of desertion.
No evidence was led by the appellant to show that she was forced
to leave the company of the respondent or that she was thrown away from
the matrimonial home or that she was forced to live separately and that
the respondent had intended animus deserendi.  There is nothing on
record to hold that the respondent had ever declared to bring the
marriage to an end or refuses to have cohabitation with the appellant.
As a mater of fact the appellant is proved to have abandoned the
matrimonial home and declined to cohabit with the respondent thus
forbearing to perform the matrimonial obligation.
In any proceedings under the Act whether defended or not the court
would decline to grant relief to the petitioner if it is found that the
petitioner was taking advantage of his or her own wrong or disability
for the purposes of the reliefs contemplated under
Section 23(1)
of the
Act.  No party can be permitted to carve out the ground for destroying
the family which is the basic unit of the society.  The foundation of
the family rests on the institution of a legal and valid marriage.
Approach of the court should be to preserve the matrimonial home and be
reluctant to dissolve the marriage on the asking of one of the parties.
For upholding the judgment and decree of the Family Court, Shri
Dinesh Kumar Garg, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant
submitted that as after the decree of divorce the appellant had
remarried with one Sudhakar Pandey and out of the second marriage a
child is also stated to have been born,	 it would be in the interest of
justice and the parties that the marriage between them is dissolved by a
decree of divorce.
In support of his contention he has relied upon
judgments of this Court in Anita Sabharwal v. Anil Sabharwal [1997 (
11)
SCC 490], Shashi Garg (Smt.) v. Arun Garg
[1997 (
7) SCC 565], Ashok Hurra
v. Rupa Bipin Zaveri
[1997 (
4) SCC 226] and Madhuri Mehta v. Meet Verma
[1997 (11) SCC 81].
To appreciate such a submission some facts have to be noticed and
the interests of public and society  to be borne in mind.  It appears
that the marriage between the parties was dissolved by a decree of
divorce vide the judgment and decree of the Family Court dated 8.7.1996.
The respondent-husband filed appeal against the judgment and decree on
19.1.1997.  As no stay was granted, the appellant solemnised the second
marriage on 29.5.1997, admittedly, during the pendency of the appeal
before the High Court.	There is no denial of the fact that right of at
least one appeal is a recognised right under all systems of civilised
legal jurisprudence.  If despite the pendency of the appeal, the
appellant chose to solemnise the second marriage, the adventure is
deemed to have been undertaken at her own risk and the ultimate
consequences arising of the judgment in the appeal pending in the High
Court.	No person can be permitted to flout the course of justice by his
or her overt and covert acts.  The facts of the cases relied upon by the
learned counsel for the appellant are distinct having no proximity with
the facts of the present case. In all the cases relied upon by the
appellant and referred to hereinabove, the marriage between the parties
was dissolved by a decree of divorce by mutual consent in terms of
application under
Section 13B
of the Act.  This Court while allowing the
applications filed under
Section 13B
took into consideration the
circumstances of each case and granted the relief on the basis of
compromise.  Almost in all cases the other side was duly compensated by
the grant of lumpsum amount and permanent provision regarding
maintenance.
This Court in
Ms.Jorden Diengdeh v. S.S. Chopra
[AIR 1985 SC 935]
suggested for a complete reform of law of marriage and to make	a
uniform law applicable to all people irrespective of religion or caste.
The Court observed:
"It appears to be necessary to introduce irretrievable
breakdown of marriage and mutual consent as grounds of
divorce in all cases. .... There is no point or purpose to
be served by the continuance of a marriage which has so
completely and signally broken down.  We suggest that the
time has come for the intervention of legislature in these
matters to provide for a uniform code of marriage and
divorce and to provide by law for a way out of the unhappy
situation in which couples like the present have found
themselves.
Marriage between the parties cannot be dissolved only on the
averments made by one of the parties that as the marriage between them
has broken down, no useful purpose would be served to keep it alive.
The legislature, in its wisdom, despite observation of this Court has
not thought it proper to provide for dissolution of the marriage on such
averments.  There may be cases where, on facts, it is found that as the
marriage has become dead on account of contributory acts of commission
and omission of the parties, no useful purpose would be served by
keeping such marriage alive.  The sanctity of marriage cannot be left at
the whims of one of the annoying spouses.  This Court in V. Bhagat v.
Mrs.D.Bhagat [AIR 1994 SC 710] held that irretrievable breakdown of the
marriage is not a ground by itself to dissolve it.
As already held, the appellant herself is trying to take advantage
of her own wrong and in the circumstances of the case, the marriage
between the parties cannot be held to have become dead for invoking the
jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution for
dissolving the marriage.
At this stage we would like to observe that the period of
limitation prescribed for filing the appeal under
Section 28(4)
is
apparently inadequate which facilitates the frustration of the marriages
by the unscrupulous litigant spouses.  In a vast country like ours, the
powers under the Act are generally exercisable by the District Court and
the first appeal has to be filed in the High Court.  The distance, the
geographical conditions, the financial position of the parties and the
time required for filing a regular appeal, if kept in mind, would
certainly show that the period of 30 days prescribed for filing the
appeal is insufficient and inadequate.	In the absence of appeal, the
other party can solemnise the marriage and attempt to frustrate the
appeal right of the other side as appears to have been done in the
instant case.  We are of the opinion that a minimum period of 90 days
may be prescribed for filing the appeal against any judgment and decree
under the Act and any marriage solemnised during the aforesaid period be
deemed to be void.  Appropriate legislation is required to be made in
this regard.  We direct the Registry that the copy of this judgment  may
be forwarded to the Ministry of Law & Justice for such action as it may
deem fit to take in this behalf.
There is no merit in these appeals which are dismissed with costs
throughout.
.......................J.
							(R.P. SETHI)


						.......................J.
							(Y.K. SABHARWAL)
January 8, 2002