[Cites
17
, Cited by
689
]
Supreme Court of India
Krishna Mochi & Ors vs State Of Bihar on 15 April, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 1965, 2002 (6) SCC 81, 2002 AIR SCW 1909, 2002 AIR - JHAR. H. C. R. 570, (2002) 3 SUPREME 369, (2002) 2 MADLW(CRI) 858, (2002) 2 RECCRIR 567, (2002) 2 JLJR 161, (2002) 3 SCJ 163, (2002) 2 ALLCRILR 741, (2002) 2 EASTCRIC 156, (2002) 2 PAT LJR 305, (2002) SC CR R 537, (2002) 2 CURCRIR 104, (2002) 3 SCALE 602, 2002 ALLMR(CRI) 1993, (2002) 45 ALLCRIC 1, (2002) 3 CALLT 9, (2002) 2 CHANDCRIC 58, (2002) 2 CRIMES 236, 2002 SCC (CRI) 1220, (2002) 4 JT 186 (SC)
Author:
B.N.Agrawal
Bench:
B.N. Agrawal
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 761  of  2001



PETITIONER:
KRISHNA MOCHI & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF BIHAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	15/04/2002

BENCH:
B.N. Agrawal




JUDGMENT:
WITHDEATH REFERENCE NO. 1 OF 2001

J U D G M E N T

B.N.AGRAWAL, J.
This is an unfortunate case of a gruesome carnage on the holy land
of Buddha, within the district of Gaya in the State of Bihar, where he got
enlightenment, wherein 35 persons of a community, which was the most powerful
one in the State at one point of time and ruled Bihar for decades, have been
massacred with the unholy alliance of members of another community leading to
more or less an outburst of caste war between haves and have nots.
This appeal has been directed against judgment rendered by
Sessions Judge, Gaya-cum-Designated Court under Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the 'TADA Act')
whereby thirteen accused persons including the appellants were tried, out of
whom, four of them namely, Nanhe Yadav (Accused No.1), Nanhak Teli
(Accused No. 10), Naresh Chamar (Accused No. 11) and Ramashish Mahto
(Accused No. 12) have been acquitted whereas the four appellants, viz., Krishna
Mochi- appellant No. 1(Accused No. 8), Dharmendra Singh @ Dharu Singh-
appellant No.2 (Accused No. 9), Nanhe Lal Mochi-appellant No.3(Accused no.
13) and Bir Kuer Paswan @ Beer Kuer Dusadh-appellant No. 4(Accused No. 5)
have been convicted under
Sections 302
/
149
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in
short 'Penal Code') and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
They have been further convicted under
Section 3(1)
of the TADA Act and
awarded death sentence and the proceedings have been submitted to this Court
for confirmation.   Bihari Manjhi (Accused No.2), Ramautar Dusadh @ Lakhan
Dusadh (Accused No. 4), Rajendra Paswan (Accused No. 6) and Wakil Yadav
(Accused No.7) have been convicted under Section 302/149 of the Penal Code
and
Section 3(1)
of the TADA Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for life on each count.  However, sentences have been ordered to
run concurrently.  Out of these four accused persons, accused Nos. 2, 4 and 7
have filed separate appeal before this Court bearing Criminal Appeal No. 752 of
2001 whereas accused No.6 has filed Criminal Appeal No. 765 of 2001 which
though, have been heard together but are being disposed of by a separate
judgment.  Ravindra Singh (Accused No.3) has been convicted under
Section
3(4)
of the TADA Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten
years but he has not preferred any appeal.
In this case, there was gruesome carnage in which 35 members of
one particular community in the State of Bihar lost their lives and the prosecution
case, as disclosed in the fard beyan of one Satendra Kumar Sharma recorded in
the wee hour of 13th February, 1992, is that in the same night about 9.30 p.m., he
was about to go to bed, all of a sudden upon hearing sound of indiscriminate
firing and explosion of bombs, he became terrorised and found the village
ablaze.	 In the meantime, a mob consisting of 10 to 15 unknown persons arrived
at his house and started knocking at the door violently.  One of such persons
stated that they had come to apprehend Dayanand and Haridwar Singh as
according to their information, both of them were in one of houses of that village.
Upon this, the informant opened the door out of fear and those unknown persons
took him near the temple situated on the north eastern flank of the village where
he found his father, two uncles and four brothers amongst others.   All these
persons were kept with their hands tied on the back.  Some 50 to 60 unknown
persons being variously armed were guarding the villagers.  Hands of the
informant were also tied and he was also made to sit there.  The unknown
terrorists formed several groups each consisting of 15 to 20 persons.  Each
group used to go to village and bring the villagers.  In presence of the informant,
Lalesh Singh @ Nawlesh Singh, Lal Singh, Bhulas Singh, Srikant Singh and
Ramakant Singh were also brought from village.	One of the terrorists was stating
that no male member should be left alive in the village.  In the meantime, female
folk including wife of Parishan Singh, Ramesh Singh, Nagina Singh and Lakhan
Singh arrived there weeping.  At that time, Sumiran Singh, Mithilesh Singh, Ekbal
Singh, Upendra Singh and Awadhesh Singh were also brought and their hands
were also tied.	 At that time, 5 to 6 terrorists including Mahendra Ravidas, Jugal
Mochi, Bugal Mochi arrived there and stated that their leader Kirani had directed
to take all the villagers near the bridge on the canal.	 One terrorist who was being
addressed as Manesajee asked the female folk to go to their houses.  Thereafter,
the villagers were taken near the canal where they  were kept confined with their
hands and legs tied.  In the meantime, the informant heard sound of firing coming
from western side of the village and in the light of the fire, he identified several
accused persons including the appellants naming all of them.  The terrorists
slittered the villagers by cutting their neck with the help of pasuli which is a sharp
cutting weapon.	  In the mean time, the terrorists having guessed arrival of the
police, started fleeing away whereby anyhow the informant could save his life.
The police with informant went to the place of occurrence and found 35 persons
named in the fard beyan dead and some persons having serious injuries who
were immediately sent to hospital for treatment.  It has been alleged in the fard-
beyan that the terrorists were armed with police rifles and some of them were in
police uniform.	 The terrorists were about five hundred in number, out of which
about two to three hundred persons were armed.	When they made their retreat
they shouted slogan of Maoist Community Center (hereinafter referred to as
"M.C.C.")  Zindabad.  The terrorists were talking among themselves that they had
come to annihilate persons belonging to one particular community which was
object of the unlawful assembly and they wanted to strike terror in that
community.
On the basis of the said fard beyan, police instituted a case under
Sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 307, 326, 436, 452, 341 and 342 of the Penal Code
and Section 17 of Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act besides
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of TADA Act.  During investigation the police arrested many persons and
confessional statement of accused Bihari Manjhi was recorded by the
Superintendent of Police, Gaya making self inculpatory statement implicating
himself and several other accused persons, including appellants of the other two
appeals in the crime.  Upon completion of investigation, the police submitted
charge sheet against 119 persons showing them as absconders besides 13
accused persons whose cases were separated and they were put on trial.
Defence of the accused persons was that they were innocent and
had  no complicity with the crime, but have been falsely implicated in the case on
hand.
During trial, the prosecution examined 34 witnesses and upon
conclusion of the same, by the impugned order, four accused persons named
above have been acquitted whereas the remaining,  including the appellants,
have been convicted as stated above.  Hence, the present appeal.
In order to prove the massacre of 35 persons, the prosecution has
examined four doctors, namely, Dr. Kapildeo Prasad (PW 1), Dr. Arvind Kumar
(PW 13), Dr. Arjun Singh (PW 14) and Dr. Mukti Nath Singh (PW 15) who held
postmortem examinations on the dead bodies of different persons and found
incised injuries in front of the neck caused by pasuli which is a sharp cutting
weapon.	 The doctors also found that some of the deceased died due to fire arm
injuries.  The postmortem examination was conducted within a few hours of the
occurrence and the time which elapsed between the time of death and post
mortem examination, as found by doctors, was consistent with the time of
occurrence and supports the prosecution case.  In order to prove its case that the
accused persons belonged to M.C.C., their intention was to create terror in the
minds of persons belonging to a particular community in Bihar and to achieve
that end, they used bombs, dynamites, fire arms, lethal weapons besides sharp
cutting weapon pasuli and massacred 35 members of a particular community and
injured several persons after surrounding them, prosecution examined
Maneshwar Devi (PW 3), Lal Badan Devi (PW 4), Belmati Devi (PW 5), Birendra
Singh (PW 6), Lavlesh Singh (PW 7), Yogendra Singh (PW 8), Brajesh Kumar
(PW 11), Gopal Singh (PW 12), Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Budhan Singh (PW
18), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19), Bunde Singh (PW 20), Ram Sumiran Sharma
(PW 21), Krishna Devi (PW 22), Rajmani Devi (PW 23) and Usha Devi (PW 30)
as witnesses and upon consideration thereof,  the trial court came to the
conclusion that there was a gruesome carnage which conclusion could be neither
assailed by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants nor I find any
infirmity in the well reasoned judgment by the Designated Court on this count.
Shri U.R.Lalit, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants in support of the appeal submitted that the prosecution has failed to
prove the participation of the appellants in the crime by credible evidence.
Learned counsel further submitted that it is a fit case in which benefit of doubt
should be given to the appellants as informant was not examined, as such the
first information report cannot be used as substantive evidence.  It has been also
submitted that names of none of the appellants find place in the confessional
statement said to have been made by co-accused Bihari Manjhi before the
Superintendent of Police, Gaya, the investigating officer Ram Japit Kumar has
not been examined, no incriminating articles could be recovered from the
appellants, identification of the appellants was not possible in the dead of night
and the appellants were not the assailants, but mere sight seers.  Learned
counsel,  in the alternative, submitted that in any view of the matter, it was not a
fit case for awarding the extreme penalty of death.
On the other hand, Shri H.L.Agrawal, learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the State,  submitted that the prosecution has succeeded
in proving its case and complicity of the appellants with the crime by
unimpeachable evidence and there was no infirmity in their convictions and
sentence of death awarded against the appellants was in accordance with law as
the present case falls in the category of  "rarest of the rare".
Thus, this Court is called upon to examine in this appeal evidence
showing complicity of the appellants with the crime and consider their cases
individually.	All the appellants who were accused Nos. 5, 8, 9 and 13 in the
present trial were named in the first information report.  Krishna Mochi-appellant
No.1 (Accused No. 8) is said to have been identified by prosecution witnesses,
namely, Belmati Devi (PW 5), Birendra Singh (PW 6), Yogendra Singh (PW 8),
Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19), Bunde Singh (PW 20)
and Lalita Devi (PW 29).  Belmati Devi (PW 5) stated in her very examination-in-
chief that she could not identify any of the accused persons which obviously
means this accused as well, though, she stated that she disclosed name of this
appellant before the police as one of the accused who participated in the
occurrence but in her cross-examination, this witness resiled from the statement
aforesaid made in the examination-in-chief, as she admitted that she did not
disclose name of the appellant before the police.  Birendra Singh (PW 6) claims
in Court for the first time after seven years from the date of the alleged
occurrence that he identified this appellant as one of the persons who
participated in the alleged occurrence, he having not identified this appellant
before the police as would appear from the statement of investigating officer
Suresh Chander Sharma (PW 17),	inasmuch as the occurrence is said to have
taken place on 12th February, 1992 and the witness was examined on 17th April,
1999.  Thus, the evidence of Belmati Devi (PW 5) and Birendra Singh (PW 6) on
the question of participation of this appellant cannot be of any avail to the
prosecution.
Yogendra Singh (PW 8) who was an injured witness and resident of
the village of occurrence claims to have witnessed the entire occurrence as
during night when he was inside the house, the accused persons entered the
house after breaking open the door, tied hands of this witness as well as his
family members and they were taken near the canal where he found other
villagers were already surrounded by accused persons and some more being
brought with their hands tied. The accused persons thereafter got some other
villagers from the temple and they tied their legs as well as of  this witness and
his family members inasmuch as started slitting their throats.	 Immediately after
the occurrence, when the police arrived at the village, it found this witness lying
on the ground with bleeding injuries.  This witness together with other injured
persons and the dead bodies was shifted to the hospital.   This witness had to
remain in the hospital for 24 days where the police recorded his statement.   He
identified this accused as one of the persons who participated in the occurrence.
It has been submitted that no reliance should be placed on the evidence of this
witness as he was examined by the police after 24 days.	 But I do not find any
material in support of this submission as neither this witness nor anybody else
has anywhere stated that police recorded his statement after 24 days rather, on
the other hand, from the evidence of this witness, it appears that he was
examined by the police in the hospital itself.	It would appear that he was a
natural witness as he was resident of the same village, the accused persons
broke open the door of his house, took him and his family members away from
the house after tying their hands and the family members along with others were
slittered to death before arrival of police which found this witness lying on the
ground with bleeding injuries whereafter he was shifted to the hospital and there
the police recorded his statement.  This would go to show that the witness was
examined by the police in the hospital immediately after he was shifted there.
This being the position,  I do not find any ground to disbelieve this witness.
Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16) who was also resident of village of
occurrence stated that at the time of the alleged occurrence, when he was at his
house, upon hearing sound of firing and heavy explosion from the western side
of the village, he opened the door, came out of his house along with his family
members and found about hundred people standing at some distance from his
house and seeing this witness, one of the accused persons shouted at him
whereupon he ran to the house of Hari Singh and climbed on the roof from where
he had seen that the accused persons were passing through the streets after
setting fire to houses in the entire village.  Accused persons were armed with
rifles and guns and amongst them, he identified this appellant as well in the light
of the fire which was set in the village by the accused persons. He has
consistently supported the prosecution case that all the accused persons
including this appellant as well as appellant No. 3 Nanhe Lal Mochi entered the
village with fire arms and set the entire village on fire, but nothing could be
pointed out on behalf of the defence to disbelieve his evidence.
Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) who was another injured person and
resident of the village of occurrence stated that on 12th February, 1992, when he
was sleeping in his house with his brothers, in the night,  at about 9.00 O'clock ,
sounds of explosion of bombs from all sides of village were heard and
immediately thereafter his brother Vidya Bhushan Singh went out from the house
for hiding himself in the house of a villager but before this witness could take
shelter in the house of another villager, a bomb was thrown on the house making
pace for the accused persons to enter the same and thereafter they did enter the
house with deadly weapons.  The hands of this witness and his three brothers
were tied and thereafter, they were taken to the temple where some people had
already been brought from the eastern side of the village whose hands had also
been tied and these persons were also made to sit there.  Thereafter, all those
persons including this witness and his family members whose hands were tied
were taken to a bridge upon the canal where many other villagers were made to
sit and there the accused persons started slitting their throats with pasuli as a
result of which, left ear and throat of this witness were slittered and he became
unconscious as a result of the injuries inflicted.  After he regained consciousness
on the next day, he was examined by the police immediately and before whom,
he disclosed names of the accused persons, including this appellant, as persons
who have participated in the present occurrence on the fateful night.  He has
categorically stated that he knew this accused from much before the date of the
alleged occurrence.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused
persons could not point out any infirmity in the evidence of this witness so as to
reject his sworn testimony.
Bunde Singh (PW 20)  is also resident of the village of occurrence
and he stated that on the fateful night, when he was sleeping in his house with
brothers, he heard sounds of firing and bomb explosion immediately where after
the accused persons, including this appellant, as well as appellant No. 3, whom
he identified, after breaking open the door of his house, entered the same and
took them, after tying their hands, to the canal where their legs were also tied
and there the accused persons started slitting the throats of the helpless persons
whose hands and legs were tied.	 Thereafter some people were shot dead on the
southern side of the canal.  He has also stated that the accused persons were
shouting the slogans 'Long Live MCC' and 'whoever would come in their way,
would be done to death.'  This witness was examined by the police two days
after the occurrence and it cannot be said that there was inordinate delay in
recording his statement in the facts and circumstances of this case as it was a
case of caste war wherein 35 persons of one community having been massacred
and several injured, there was great commotion and several villagers had to be
examined.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused persons could
not point out any infirmity in the evidence of this witness.
Last  witness on the question of participation of this appellant is
Lalita Devi (PW 29).  This witness, though, stated that she could identify this
appellant but could not identify him in Court due to very weak eye sight.  Thus,
the evidence of this witness on the participation of this appellant can be of no
avail to the prosecution.  This being the position, I have no difficulty in holding
that the participation of this appellant in the crime has been proved by credible
evidence of Yogendra Singh (PW 8), Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Dhananjay
Singh (PW 19) and Bunde Singh (PW 20) though it is not possible to place
reliance upon the evidence of Belmati Devi (PW 5), Birendra Singh (PW 6) and
Lalita Devi (PW 29).
Turning now to the participation of appellant No. 2-Dharmendra
Singh @ Dharu Singh (Accused No. 9), it may be stated that he is said to have
been identified by Brajesh Kumar (PW 11), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) and Ram
Sumiran Sharma (PW 21).	 So far as Brajesh Kumar (PW 11) is concerned, this
witness has named him for the first time in Session Court after seven and a half
years from the date of alleged occurrence as according to the evidence of
Investigating Officer Suresh Chander Sharma (PW 17), the witness did not
disclose the name of the appellant in his statement made before the police
inasmuch as no explanation could be furnished by the prosecution for such a non
disclosure.  This being the position, it is not safe to place reliance upon the
evidence of this witness in relation to participation of this appellant.
Dhananjay Kumar (PW 19) though claimed that he identified this
appellant but when he was asked to identify the appellant in Court, he wrongly
identified this appellant as accused Dina Yadav @ Nanhe Yadav and not
Dharmendra Singh @ Dharu Singh.	 Thus, the evidence of this witness in relation
to participation of this appellant in the crime cannot be acted upon.
Last witness on the participation of this appellant in the crime is
Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21).  This witness was a resident of village of
occurrence and on the date of occurrence when he was at his house with his
family members, he heard sounds of bomb explosion and firing of bullets in the
village and immediately, thereafter his house was attacked and this witness and
his family members went to the adjoining house belonging to one Pardeep Singh
for hiding themselves where three persons had already taken shelter.  The
accused persons went to said house and shouted that if the doors were not
opened, the same would be blasted by bombs and saying so, they started
throwing the bombs whereupon the female inmates had no option but to open the
doors. The accused persons thereafter entered the house and took away the
male members, after tying their hands, near the temple where 50 to 60 persons
were already made to sit from before from where this witness and his family
members and others were taken near the canal.  There other accused persons
had already assembled from before.  This witness claimed to have identified this
appellant and appellant No. 4-Bir Kuer Paswan.	There the accused persons
started slitting the throat of the helpless persons including this witness.  There
was a stampede and some of the persons who were brought there for slitting
tried to flee away resulting into firing by the accused persons causing death of
three persons.	Thereupon, accused persons declared that from amongst the
persons brought there, those who were members of communities other than the
targeted one, were set free and upon this, the witness also intentionally declared
himself to be of member of another community and thereby could rescue himself.
The other persons who belonged to one community including father, uncle and
brothers of this witness were slittered to death by causing injuries by pasuli.	 The
accused persons were shouting slogans 'Long Live MCC' and 'anybody who
comes in their way, would be destroyed.'  This witness was examined by the
police in the hospital, where he had gone to receive the dead bodies of his family
members, on the next morning of the occurrence.	 The witness identified this
appellant as well as accused Nanhe Lal Mochi-appellant No. 3(accused No. 13)
and Bir Kuer Paswan @ Beer Kuer Dusadh-appellant No. 4 (accused No. 5).	 So
far as this appellant is concerned, the witness in his cross-examination pretended
that he was not known to him from before the incident, although, it was admitted
by him that this appellant had agriculture land in the village of occurrence which
is at a distance of one and a half kilometers away  from his land.  As suggestion
was given to this witness that there was animosity between them, on account of
the land dispute as a result of which this appellant was falsely implicated, which
clearly shows that the witness was very well known to  this appellant from much
before the date of the alleged occurrence.  In my view, this witness has stood the
tests of cross-examination and there is nothing to discredit his testimony as he
was quite natural witness and consistently supported the participation of this
appellant in the crime with all material particulars.	Thus, so far appellant No. 2 is
concerned, out of the three witnesses, it is not possible to place reliance on the
evidence of Brajesh Kumar (PW 11) and Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) but the
evidence of Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21) is unimpeachable and he can be
treated to be a sterling witness for the prosecution.
Now, I proceed to consider the case of Nanhe Lal Mochi-appellant
No. 3(accused No. 13) who is said to have been identified by Yogendra Singh
(PW 8), Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Budhan Singh (PW 18), Dhananjay Singh
(PW 19), Bunde Singh (PW 20), Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21), Krishna Devi
(PW 22) and Lalita Devi (PW 29).  Out of the aforesaid witnesses, Yogendra
Singh (PW 8) has duly identified this appellant and I do not find any ground to
disbelieve his evidence in relation to participation of this appellant as well in the
crime for the reasons enumerated while considering his evidence in relation to
appellant No. 1-Krishna Mochi.
Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16) claimed to have identified this accused
from the roof top and I have considered the evidence of this witness in detail and
found the same credible while appreciating the case of appellant No. 1-Krishna
Mochi.	In my view, evidence of this witness in relation to participation of this
appellant as well is free from any doubt.
Budhan Singh (PW 18) was a resident of the village of occurrence.
At the time of incident, when he was in the cattle shed, he heard sound of bomb
explosion and simultaneously, accused persons who were in police uniforms
came there and told him that they had gone there to arrest this witness.  The
three sons of this witness who were also there succeeded in fleeing away but the
accused persons tied the hands of this witness on the back and took him near
the temple.  He claimed to have identified the accused persons including this
appellant in the light of the fire which was lit in the stack of harvested crop kept
there and from there, this witness along with others was taken to the canal where
his legs were also tied.  In the mean time, somebody blew the whistle and said
that the police had arrived.  The witness stated that in the mean time, two of his
sons were slittered to death and seeing this, he got perplexed and remained
standing there as a silent spectator.  He was examined by the police on the third
day of the incident as would appear from his evidence.	In this connection,
reference is made to the statement of one Vijay Pratap Singh (PW 33) who, at
the relevant time, was police inspector and posted as Station Incharge of Tekari
Police Station within which the village of occurrence falls.  During the course of
cross-examination, this witness has stated the reasons why on the date of
occurrence and on the next day, the statements of many witnesses could not be
recorded as they were not in a position to give their statements in view of the fact
that they were busy in performing the last rites of their family members who were
slittered to death and relatives of the persons who died were not in a mental
condition to make  statement.  Further, the witness stated that there were visits of
various political leaders in the locality as a result of which law and order condition
had become complicated.	 According to the witness, the statement of other
witnesses could not be recorded due to the aforesaid reasons which were
beyond the control of the police.  So far as Budhan Singh (PW 18) is concerned,
two of his sons were slittered to death in the present occurrence and in view of
the aforesaid facts, if his statement could not be recorded by the police on the
date of occurrence as well as on the next day but on the third day, it cannot be
said that there was inordinate delay in recording the statement of this witness.
This being the position, I do not find any infirmity in the evidence of this witness
in relation to participation of this appellant in the crime.
Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) also claimed to have identified this
appellant but in Court, he wrongly identified this appellant as Rajinder Paswan.
Similarly, Bunde Singh (PW 20) has wrongly identified accused Nand Lal Mochi
as this appellant.  Thus, the evidence of Dhananjay Singh(PW 19) and Bunde
Singh (PW 20) can be of no avail to the prosecution to show participation of this
appellant in the crime.
Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21) identified this appellant and there is
no reason to discard his evidence on the question of participation of this
appellant in the crime for the reasons detailed hereinabove while considering the
evidence of this witness in relation to appellant No.2-Dharmendra Singh @
Dharu Singh (Accused No. 9).
Krishna Devi (PW 22) who is also a resident of the village of
occurrence and an eye witness to the occurrence inasmuch as at the time of the
occurrence, when she was at her house, the accused persons came there and
had broken the door open after setting the house on fire.  The accused persons
are said to have taken away her father-in-law and brother-in-law to the temple
where they were made to sit and after some time, they were taken near the canal
along with others.  When the lady went near the temple, she was asked by the
accused persons to go back to her house.  Thereafter upon hearing slogans of
the accused persons, this witness and other lady witness went towards the canal
where this witness claimed to have seen the accused persons slitting to death
along with others her father-in-law and brother-in-law with pasuli.  She also
stated that 35 persons were slittered to death and 5 to 6 were injured all of whom
belonged to one community.  The witness identified this accused as having
participated in the occurrence.	 This witness was examined by police two days
after the incident from which it cannot be inferred that there was inordinate delay
in her examination by the police for the reasons enumerated while considering
the evidence of Budhan Singh (PW 18).
Lalita Devi (PW 29) though claimed to have identified this accused
but could not identify him on account of very weak eye sight at the time of his
examination in Court.  Therefore, no reliance can be placed on the evidence of
such a witness.	 Thus, on the point of participation of this appellant, out of the
evidence of Yogendra Singh (PW 8), Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Budhan Singh
(PW 18), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19), Bunde Singh (PW 20), Ram Sumiran
Sharma (PW 21), Krishna Devi (PW 22) and Lalita Devi (PW 29), the evidence of
Yogendra Singh (PW 8), Ram Sagar Singh (PW 16), Budhan Singh (PW 18),
Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21) and	Krishna Devi (PW 22) is unimpeachable
whereas no reliance can be placed upon the statements of Dhananjay Singh
(PW 19), Bunde Singh (PW 20) and Lalita Devi (PW 29).
Coming now to the participation of the last appellant, namely, Bir
Kuer Paswan @ Beer Kuer Dusadh-appellant No. 4(accused No. 5), it may be
stated that this appellant, according to the prosecution, was identified by Lavlesh
Singh (PW 7), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) and Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21).
Out of the aforesaid witnesses, Lavlesh Singh (PW 7) who was also one of the
injured and was resident of the village of occurrence stated that at the time of
occurrence, when he was sleeping in the outer verandah of his house after
having heard the sounds of firing and explosion of bombs, started fleeing away.
In the mean time, the accused persons came armed with fire arms,  set fire in the
heap of	 straw which was kept outside the house, after breaking open the door of
the house, entered the same and took away his brother and sons along with him
to the temple where there were other accused persons and all of them
surrounded the villagers who had already been brought there from different
directions of the village.  Thereupon, the accused persons took the aforesaid
persons towards the canal after surrounding them and they were made to sit
near the canal after tying their hands and legs.   The accused persons slittered to
death several persons with pasuli and inflicted injuries with pasuli on the throat of
this witness as a result of which he fell down.	 This witness claimed to have
identified this appellant.  He stated that he remained hospitalised in Magadh
Medical College for 22 days and the police recorded his statement.  It has been
submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants that this
witness was examined by the police after 22 days for which there is no
foundation as this witness has nowhere stated that he was examined after 22
days of the alleged occurrence nor there is any other evidence to this effect.
Rather it appears from the evidence of this witness that he was examined by the
police in the hospital itself.	Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants pointed out that during the course of cross-examination in paragraph 7
of his evidence, the witness admitted that after the accused persons entered the
house upon breaking open the door, he became unconscious and regained
consciousness in the hospital.	Therefore, it cannot be said that he witnessed
anything after the accused persons entered the house.  I have perused
paragraph 7 of the statement of this witness from which it appears that after the
accused persons entered the house upon breaking open the door, the witness
was so much terrified that he became completely nonplussed and regained
normalcy by the time, he arrived at the hospital.  Thus, I do not find any ground to
reject testimony of the witness on the point of participation of this appellant in the
crime.
Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) though claimed that he identified this
appellant but he wrongly identified one Bihari Manjhi as this appellant.  Thus, the
evidence of this witness cannot be used to show complicity of this appellant with
the crime.
Last witness on the question of participation of this appellant is
Ram Sumiran Sharma (PW 21).  This witness claimed to have identified this
appellant and on the point of participation of this appellant, there is nothing to
doubt the credibility of the witness, especially in view of the grounds mentioned
while considering the evidence of this witness in relation to appellant No.2-
Dharmendra Singh @ Dharu Singh (Accused No. 9). Thus, out of the three
witnesses, namely, Lavlesh Singh (PW 7), Dhananjay Singh (PW 19) and Ram
Sumiran Sharma (PW 21) on the question of participation of this appellant in the
crime, no reliance can be placed on the evidence of Dhananjay Singh (PW 19)
but I do not find any infirmity in the evidence of Lavlesh Singh (PW 7) and Ram
Sumiran Sharma (PW 21).
From the above, it would be plain that in relation to appellant no. 1
evidence of four witnesses, appellant no. 2  one witness, appellant no. 3 five
witnesses, appellant no. 4 two witness has been found credible.	  It has been
submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants that though,
in ordinary case, trustworthy evidence of a solitary witness may be enough to
convict an accused, but where a criminal court has to deal with evidence
pertaining to the commission of an offence involving a large number of offenders
and large number of victims, like the present one, it is usual to adopt the test that
the conviction could be sustained only if it is supported by two or three or more
witnesses who give a consistent account of the incident inasmuch as in the
present case as far as appellant no. 2 is concerned, evidence of only one
witnesses and in relation to appellant no. 4 evidence of only two witnesses has
been found to be credible.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has
heavily relied upon a 4-Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case of
Masalti
vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh
,	 AIR 1965 SC 202.  That was a case in which five
persons were murdered, 40 accused were put on trial and the prosecution
examined 12 eye-witnesses in support of its case.  Out of 40 accused persons,
five were acquitted by the trial court and 35 convicted under
Sections 302
/
149
of
the Indian Penal Code.	Out of the 35 persons convicted, 10 accused persons
were sentenced to death whereas remaining 25 were awarded imprisonment for
life.  When the matter was taken in appeal to the High Court of Allahabad, out of
the 12 eye-witnesses, 2 were disbelieved and reliance was placed upon the
remaining 10.  The High Court  confirmed conviction of only those accused
persons against whom four or more eye-witnesses had given  a consistent
account of the incident and by adopting this test, seven accused persons were
acquitted as the number of eye-witnesses in relation to them was less than four.
The High Court, however, maintained the conviction of the remaining 28 accused
persons, out of whom 16 persons appealed to this Court and their conviction was
upheld by this Court also.  It may be stated that against the order of acquittal, no
appeal was preferred by the State.  On these facts, it was contended on behalf of
the accused persons, whose conviction was upheld by the High Court, that the
Court was not justified in upholding the conviction by mechanically evolving a
formula that four or more witnesses had given a consistent account of the
incident in relation to them.  In that light, to meet the submission,
Gajendragadkar, C.J., speaking for the Court, observed in paragraph 16 at page
210 thus:-
".where a criminal court has to deal with evidence pertaining
to the commission of an offence involving a large number of
offenders and a large number of victims, it is usual to adopt the test
that the conviction could be sustained only if it is supported by two
or three or more witnesses who give a consistent account of the
incident.  In a sense, the test may be described as mechanical; but
it is difficult to see how it can be treated as irrational or
unreasonable.  Therefore, we do not think that any grievance can
be made by the appellants against the adoption of this test.  If at all
the prosecution may be entitled to say that the seven accused
persons were acquitted because their cases did not satisfy the
mechanical test of four witnesses, and if the said test had not been
applied, they might as well have been convicted.  It is, no doubt, the
quality of the evidence that matters and not the number of
witnesses who give such evidence.  But sometimes it is useful to
adopt a test like the one which the High Court has adopted in
dealing with the present case."
[ Emphasis added ]

Thus, it appears that this Court laid down that in the matter of
appreciation of evidence what matters is the quality of evidence and not the
number of witnesses, but sometimes, in appropriate cases, Court may adopt a
test like the one adopted by the Allahabad High Court
in that case
.  Though
in
that case
basis of conviction of the appellants before this Court was credible
evidence of four or more eye-witnesses, but still the Court observed that,
ordinarily, in cases where there were large number of offenders and large
number of victims it would be safe to convict only if the case is supported by two
or three or more witnesses who give consistent account of the incident.	 This
Court has observed such a rule of caution ordinarily, which would obviously
mean that there is no blanket ban or rule of universal application that if the
number of eye-witnesses is less than two, in no case conviction can be upheld.
That apart, as
in that case
the appellants were convicted on the basis of
evidence of four or more eye-witnesses, as a matter of fact the apex Court was
not called upon to go into this question, but even then it has made such
observations.	As noted above, no rule of universal application was intended to
be laid down or has been laid down.  The decision is, therefore, not applicable to
the facts of the present case.
It is matter of common experience that in recent times there has
been sharp decline of ethical values in public life even in developed countries
much less developing one, like ours, where the ratio of decline is higher.  Even in
ordinary cases, witnesses are not inclined to depose  or their evidence is not
found to be credible by courts for manifold reasons.  One of the reasons may be
that they do not have courage to depose against an accused because of  threats
to their life, more so when the offenders are habitual criminals or high-ups in the
Government or close to powers, which may be political, economic or other
powers including muscle power.	A witness may not stand the test of cross-
examination which may be sometime because he is a bucolic person and is not
able to understand the question put to him by the skilful cross-examiner and at
times under the stress of cross-examination, certain answers are snatched from
him.  When a rustic or illiterate witness faces an astute lawyer, there is bound to
be imbalance and, therefore, minor discrepancies have to be ignored.  These
days it is not difficult to gain over a witness by money power or giving him any
other allurence or giving out threats to his life and/or property at the instance of
persons, in/or close to powers and muscle men or their associates.    Such
instances are also not uncommon where a witness is not inclined to depose
because in the prevailing social structure he wants to remain indifferent.   It is
most unfortunate that expert witnesses and the investigating agencies and other
agencies which have an important role to play are also not immune from decline
of values in public life.  Their evidence sometimes becomes doubtful because
they do not act sincerely, take everything in a casual manner and are not able to
devote proper attention and time.
Thus, in a criminal trial a prosecutor is faced with so many odds.   The
Court while appreciating the evidence should not lose sight of these realities of
life and cannot afford to take an unrealistic approach by sitting in ivory tower.  I
find that in recent times the tendency to acquit an accused easily is galloping
fast.	 It is very easy to pass an order of acquittal on the basis of minor points
raised in the case by a short judgment so as to achieve the yardstick of disposal.
Some discrepancy is bound to be there in each and every case which should not
weigh with the Court so long it does not materially affect the prosecution case.  In
case discrepancies pointed out are in the realm of pebbles, court should tread
upon it, but if the same are boulders, court should not make an attempt to jump
over the same.	These days when crime is looming large and humanity is
suffering and society is so much affected thereby, duties and responsibilities of
the courts have become much more.   Now the maxim "let hundred guilty
persons be acquitted, but not a single innocent be convicted" is, in practice,
changing world over and courts have been compelled to accept that "society
suffers by wrong convictions and it equally suffers by wrong acquittals".    I find
this Court in recent times has conscientiously taken notice of these facts from
time to time.
In the case
Inder Singh and another  v. State (Delhi
Administration
),  AIR 1978 Supreme Court 1091, Krishna Iyer, J. laid down that
"Proof beyond reasonable doubt is a guideline, not a fetish and guilty man cannot
get away with it because truth suffers some infirmity when projected through
human processes."
In the case of
State of U.P.	 v. Anil Singh
AIR 1988
Supreme Court 1998, it was held that a Judge does not preside over a criminal
trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished.  A Judge also presides to
see that a guilty man does not escape.	One is as important as the other.  Both
are public duties which the Judge has to perform.
In the case of
State of West
Bengal	v.  Orilal Jaiswal and another
(1994) 1 Supreme Court Cases 73, it
was held that Justice cannot be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let
hundred guilty escape than punish an innocent.	Letting guilty escape is not
doing justice, according to law.  In the case of Mohan Singh and anr.  v. State
of M.P. (1999) 1 Supreme Court Reports 276,  it was held that the courts have
been removing chaff from the grain.  It has to disperse the suspicious cloud and
dust out the smear of dust as all these things clog the very truth.  So long chaff,
cloud and dust remains, the criminals are clothed with this protective layer to
receive the benefit of doubt.  So it is a solemn duty of the courts, not to merely
conclude and leave the case the moment suspicions are created.	It is onerous
duty of the court, within permissible limit to find out the truth.  It means, on one
hand no innocent man should be punished but on the other hand to see no
person committing an offence should get scot free.  If in spite of such effort
suspicion is not dissolved, it remains writ at large, benefit of doubt has to be
credited to the accused.
Thus, in the present case where there was more or less a caste
war between haves and have nots, gruesome murder of 35 persons of one
community in which several persons were injured, great commotion in the
locality, people became panicky as the accused persons were members of MCC,
which is a very violent organisation, even if the complicity of the accused is
proved by credible evidence of one or two witnesses, it would not be unsafe to
convict an accused, rather a duty is enjoined upon the court not to acquit an
accused on this ground alone unless the prosecution case is otherwise found to
be untrustworthy. It is well settled that in a criminal trial credible evidence of even
a solitary witness can form basis of conviction and that of even half a dozen
witnesses may not form such a basis unless their evidence is found to be
trustworthy inasmuch as what matters in the matter of appreciation of evidence of
witnesses is not the number of witnesses, but the quality of their evidence.  Thus,
I do not find any substance in the submission of the learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the appellants on this count.
Learned counsel next contended that participation of the appellants
in the crime becomes highly doubtful as their names have not been enumerated
in the confessional statement of accused  Bihari Manjhi wherein he is said to
have named several accused persons.  In our view, there may be various
reasons for non-disclosure of names of these appellants in the confessional
statement of co-accused; they might not be fully known to the confessing
accused or for reasons best known to him, with an oblique motive, to save the
appellants, their names might not have been disclosed.
It has been further submitted that the informant  Satendra Kumar
Sharma has not been examined as such, First Information Report cannot be
used as substantive piece of evidence inasmuch as on this ground as well the
appellants are entitled to an order of acquittal.  The submission is totally
misconceived. Even if the first information report is not proved, it would not be a
ground for acquittal, but the case would depend upon the evidence led by
prosecution.  Therefore, non-examination of the informant cannot in any manner
affect the prosecution case.
It has been also contended that Inspector Ram Japit Kumar, who
was one of the investigating officers, has not been examined. The alleged
occurrence had taken place on 12.2.1992 and in the same night on the basis of
fard-beyan of the informant recorded by PW.33, as stated above, Inspector of
Police	Ram Janam Singh drew the  formal First Information Report.  From the
evidence of this witness, it would appear that the Superintendent of Police, Gaya
directed Inspector  Ram Japit Kumar to investigate this case and so long he did
not take charge of the investigation, this witness was entrusted to commence the
investigation under verbal orders of the Superintendent of Police, Gaya.  PW 33,
thereafter, inspected the place of occurrence and seized blood stained earth,
empties and reminiscence of bomb explosion.  This witness further stated that as
till 17th February, 1992 Inspector Ram Japit Kumar did not make himself
available for taking over investigation of the case, he requested Superintendent
of Police to give necessary direction whereupon the investigation was entrusted
to one Suresh Chandra Sharma (PW.17) who, at that time, was posted as
Inspector, Chandauti Police Station and PW.33 made over charge of the case to
PW.17 on 19.2.1992, who, after completing investigation which was supervised
by the Superintendent of Police himself, submitted chargesheet.	  From the
above facts it would be plain that as Inspector Ram Japit Kumar	 had neither
taken over charge of the investigation of the case at any point of time, much less
investigated the same, no adverse inference can be drawn against the
prosecution on account of his non-examination and non-furnishing of explanation
for his not taking over charge of investigation.  Thus, he having not conducted
any investigation,  the evidence of Inspector Ram Japit Kumar could not be of
any avail either to the prosecution or the defence.  That apart, it is well settled
that non-examination of any witness would not affect the prosecution case, but in
a given case non-examination of a material witness may affect the same.
Reference in this connection may be made to the decision of this Court in the
case of
Masalti
(supra).  It is well settled that non-examination of investigating
officer is not fatal for the prosecution unless it is shown that the accused has
been prejudiced thereby.  In the case on hand, in any view of the matter,  it could
not be pointed out that the defence has been prejudiced in any manner by non-
examination of	Inspector  Ram Japit Kumar.
It has been then submitted on behalf of the appellants that nothing
incriminating could be recovered from them which goes to show that they had no
complicity with the crime.  In my view, recovery of no incriminating material from
the accused cannot alone be taken as a ground to exonerate them from the
charges, more so when their participation in the crime is unfolded in ocular
account of the occurrence given by the witnesses, whose evidence has been
found by me to be unimpeachable.
It was pointed out that as the alleged occurrence is said to have
taken place during the night, it was not possible to identify the accused persons,
much less any of the appellants.  Firstly, I find that the witnesses have stated that
there was no electricity in the village during that night and consistently they have
deposed and supported each other on the point that accused persons had set
fire in houses and heaps of straw  in the light of which they had identified the
accused persons, including the appellants.   In view of the fact that the night was
not dark and there was sufficient light	 by virtue of setting fire in the houses and
heaps of straw, it cannot be said that it was not possible for the witnesses to
identify the accused persons much less any of the appellants.
Learned counsel further pointed out that according to the
prosecution case and evidence, none of the appellants are alleged to have
assaulted either any of the 35 deceased or the injured persons and that from
mere presence at the place of occurrence their participation in the crime cannot
be inferred inasmuch as they may be even sight seers.  In my view, there is
absolutely no foundation for the submissions that the accused persons may be
sight seers as	no  suggestion was given to any of the witnesses on this score.
According to the prosecution case and the evidence, the accused persons
arrived at the village of occurrence, pursuant to a conspiracy hatched up by
them, they divided themselves into several groups, different groups went to the
houses of different persons in the village, entered the houses by breaking open
the door, forcibly took away inmates of the house after tying their hands, taken
them first to the temple and thereafter near the canal where their legs were also
tied and there some of them were done to death at the point of firearm, but a vast
majority of them were massacred by slitting their throats with pasuli.	 One thing
is clear that all these acts were done by the accused persons pursuant to a
conspiracy hatched up by them to completely eliminate members of a particular
community in the village and to achieve that object, they formed unlawful
assembly and different members of that unlawful assembly had played different
role.  In view of these facts, merely because the appellants are not said to have
assaulted either any of the deceased or injured persons, it cannot be inferred that
they had no complicity with the crime, more so according to the evidence they
were also armed with deadly weapons, like firearms, bombs, etc., but did not use
the same.  Reference in this connection may be made to a decision of this Court
in the case of
Masalti
(supra) where it was laid down that where a crowd of
assailants, who were members of an unlawful assembly, proceeds to commit the
crime in pursuance of the common object of that assembly, it is often not
possible for witnesses to describe actual part played by each one of them and a
large crowd of persons armed with weapons assaults the intended victims, it may
not be necessary that all of them have to take part in the actual assault as
in that
case
several weapons were carried by different members of unlawful assembly
and an accused who was member of such an unlawful assembly and was
carrying firearm cannot take any advantage from the fact that he did not use the
firearms, though other members of the unlawful assembly used their respective
arms.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, in the
alternative, submitted that the present case cannot be said to be rarest of the
rare one so as to justify imposition of extreme penalty of death.  This question
has been examined by this Court times without number.
In the case of
Masalti
(supra) a 4-Judge Bench of this Court had examined the question as to whether
a member of unlawful assembly, the object of which was to commit murder of
certain persons and some of the members of which had assaulted and done five
members of a family to death, and others, though armed with weapon did not use
the same, can be absolved from extreme penalty of death.  It was contended that
such a member of the unlawful assembly, who was not the assailant, could not
be awarded the extreme penalty of death.  Repelling the contention,
Gajendragadkar, C.J., observed at pages 211-212 thus:-
"As a mere proposition of law, it would be difficult to accept the
argument that the sentence of death can be legitimately imposed
only where an accused person is found to have committed the
murder himself.	 Whether or not sentences of death should be
imposed on persons who are found to be guilty not because they
themselves committed the murder, but because they were
members of an unlawful assembly and the offence of murder was
committed by one or more of the members of such an assembly  in
pursuance of the common object of that assembly, is a matter
which has to be decided on the facts and circumstances of each
case.  In the present case, it is clear that whole group of persons
belonged to Laxmi Prasad's faction, joined together armed with
deadly weapons and they were inspired by the common object of
exterminating the male member in the family of Gayadin.	 10 of
these persons were armed with fire-arms and the others with
several other deadly weapons, and evidence shows that five
murders by shooting were committed by the members of this
unlawful assembly.  The conduct of the members of the unlawful
assembly both before and after the commission of the offence has
been considered by the courts below and it has been held that in
order to suppress such fantastic criminal conduct on the part of
villagers it is necessary to impose the sentences of death on 10
members of the unlawful assembly who were armed with firearms.
It cannot be said that discretion in the matter has been improperly
exercised either by the trial Court or by the High Court.  Therefore,
we see no reason to accept the argument urged by Mr. Sawhney
that the test adopted by the High Court in dealing with the question
of sentence is mechanical and unreasonable."
[ Emphasis added ]

In the case of
Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab
, AIR 1980 SC
898, before a Constitution Bench of this Court validity of the provision for death
penalty was challenged on the ground that the same was violative of
Articles 19
and
21
of the Constitution and while repelling the contention, the Court laid down
the scope of exercise of power to award death sentence and the meaning of the
expression `rarest of the rare'	 so as to justify extreme penalty of death and
considered that
Article 6
Clauses (1) and (2) of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights to which India has acceded in 1979 do not abolish or
prohibit the imposition of death penalty in all circumstances.	All that they
required is that, firstly, death penalty shall not be arbitrarily inflicted; secondly, it
shall be imposed only for most serious crimes in accordance with a law, which
shall not be an ex post facto legislation.  The Penal Code prescribes death
penalty as an alternative punishment only for heinous crimes which are not more
than seven in number.
Section 354 (3)
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 in
keeping with the spirit of the International Covenant, has further restricted the
area of death penalty.	 Now according to this changed legislative policy, which is
patent on the face of Section 354(3), the normal punishment for murder and six
other capital offences under the Penal Code, is imprisonment for life (or
imprisonment for a term of years) and death penalty is an exception.   The
present legislative policy discernible from Sec. 235(2) read with Section 354(3) is
that in fixing the degree of punishment or making the choice of sentence for
various offences, including one under Section 302, Penal Code, the Court should
not confine its consideration "principally" or merely to the circumstances
connected with the particular crime, but also give due consideration to the
circumstances of the criminal.	In many cases, the extremely cruel or beastly
manner of the commission of murder is itself a demonstrated index of the
depraved character of the perpetrator.	And it is only when the culpability
assumes the proportion of extreme depravity that "special reasons" can
legitimately be said to exist.	Judges should never be blood thirsty.  It is,
therefore, imperative to voice the concern that courts, aided by the broad
illustrative guidelines indicated, will discharge the onerous function with evermore
scrupulous care and humane concern, directed along the highroad of legislative
policy outlined in Section 354(3), viz., that for persons convicted of murder, life
imprisonment is the rule and death sentence an exception.
In the case of
Machhi Singh vs. State of Punjab
, 1983 (3) SCC
470, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court following the decision in
Bachan Singh
(supra), observed that in rarest of rare cases when collective conscience of the
community is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the judicial power
centre to inflict death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as regards
desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty.  The community may entertain
such a sentiment in the following circumstances:
I.	When the murder is committed in an extremely brutal, grotesque,
diabolical, revolting or dastardly manner so as to arouse intense and
extreme indignation of the community.  For instance, when the house of
the victim is set aflame with the end in view to roast him alive in the house;
when the victim is subjected to inhuman acts of torture or cruelty in order
to bring about his or her death; and  when the body of the victim is cut into
pieces or his body is dismembered in a fiendish manner.
II.	When the murder is committed for a motive which evinces total depravity
and meanness.  For instance when a hired assassin commits murder for
the sake of money or reward or	a cold-blooded murder is committed with
a deliberate design in order to inherit property or to gain control over
property of a ward or a person under the control of the murderer or vis--
vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position or in a position of trust,
or  a murder is committed in the course for betrayal of the motherland.
III.	When murder of a member of a Scheduled Caste or minority community
etc., is committed not for personal reasons but in circumstances etc.,
which arouse social wrath.  For instance when such a crime is committed
in order to terrorise such persons and frighten them into fleeing from a
place or in order to deprive them of, or make them surrender, lands or
benefits conferred on them with a view to reverse past injustices and in
order to restore the social balance.  In cases of `bride burning' and what
are known as `dowry deaths' or when murder is committed in order to
remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once again or to marry another
woman on account of infatuation.
IV.	When the crime is enormous in proportion.  For instance when multiple
murders say of all or almost all the members of a family or a large number
of persons of a particular caste, community, or locality, are committed.
V.	When the victim of murder is (a) an innocent child who	could not have or
has not provided even an excuse, much less a provocation, for murder (b)
a helpless woman or a person rendered helpless by old age or infirmity (c)
when the victim is a person vis--vis whom the murderer is in a position of
domination or trust (d) when the victim is a public figure generally loved
and respected by the community for the services rendered by him and the
murder is committed for political or similar reasons other than personal
reasons.
In the said case, the Court further observed that in this background
the guidelines indicated in the case of
Bachan Singh
(supra) will have to be
culled out and applied to the facts of each individual case and where the question
of imposing death sentence arises, the following proposition emerge from the
case of
Bachan Singh
(supra):-
(i)	The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in gravest cases
of extreme culpability.
(ii)	Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the `offender'
also require to be taken into consideration along with the circumstances of
the `crime'.
(iii)	Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.  In other
words death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment
appears to be an altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the
relevant circumstances of the crime, and provided, and only provided, the
option to  impose sentence of imprisonment for life cannot be
conscientiously exercised having regard to the nature and circumstances
of the crime and all the relevant circumstances.
(iv)	A balance-sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be
drawn up and in doing so the mitigating circumstances have to be
accorded full weightage and a just balance has to be struck between the
aggravating and the mitigating circumstances before the option is
exercised.
The Court thereafter observed that in order to apply these
guidelines the following questions may be answered:-
(a)	Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for life inadequate and calls for a death sentence?
(b)	Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to
impose death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the
mitigating circumstances which speak in favour of the offender?
Ultimately, in the said case of Machhi Singh  (supra ), the Court
observed that if upon an overall global view of all the circumstances in the light of
the aforesaid proposition and taking into account the answers to the questions
posed hereinabove, the circumstances of the case are such that death sentence
is warranted, the Court would proceed to do so.
In the light of the law already
laid down by
this Court
referred to
above
, now this Court is called upon to consider whether the present case would
come within the realm of the rarest of the rare or not.		From the evidence
adduced, it has been amply proved that the accused persons belonged to a
militant group, being members of M.C.C. which is considered to be  an
organisation of militants, hatched up a conspiracy to massacre members of one
particular community in the village in question and were raising slogans 'long live
MCC' and 'whoever comes in their way, would be destroyed'.  Pursuant to the
conspiracy hatched up, the militants formed different groups and went to different
localities in the village in police uniforms armed with fire arms and explosive
substances, broke open the doors of houses of members of that particular
community, took out the entire family members after tying their hands, had taken
some of them to the temple and thereafter to the canal whereas others were
directly taken to the canal after tying their hands where their legs were also tied
and after surrounding them from all sides, when they were in most helpless
condition and could not take recourse to save their lives, some of them were
done to death by fire arms but vast majority were massacred  by slittering their
throats with pasuli which resulted into 35 casualties and several persons were
injured including prosecution witnesses.  The number of accused persons was
vast but upon completion of investigation, charge sheet was submitted against
119 persons and so many persons were shown as prosecution witnesses
therein.  The accused persons also set fire to the houses of the members of  the
said community in the village.	As a result of this incident, there was	 great
commotion in the locality.  There cannot be any manner of doubt that the
villagers were done to death in an extremely diabolic, revolting and dastardly
manner and had affected the normal tempo of life of the community in the
locality.  The crime in the present case is not only ghastly, but also enormous in
proportion as 35 persons, all of whom belonged to one community, were
massacred.  Thus, after taking into consideration the balance sheet of
aggravating and mitigating circumstances, in which 35 persons have been
deprived of their lives by the accused persons who were thirsty of their blood, I
have no doubt in holding that culpability of the accused persons assumes the
proportion of extreme depravity that a special reason can legitimately be said to
exist within the meaning of
Section 354(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure  in
the case on hand and it would be mockery of justice if extreme penalty of death
is not imposed.	 Thus, I am clearly of the opinion that the Designated Court was
quite justified in upholding convictions of the appellants and awarding the
extreme penalty of death which punishment alone was called for in the facts of
the present case.
In the circumstances of the case, the appeal fails and the same is
dismissed but the reference is accepted and death penalty awarded against the
appellants is confirmed.
J.
								[ B.N.AGRAWAL ]
April 15, 2002.