[Cites
5
, Cited by
38
]
Supreme Court of India
Nirmala Anand vs Advent Corporation Pvt. Ltd. & Ors on 10 May, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 2290, 2002 AIR SCW 2416, 2002 (6) SRJ 463, (2002) 3 ALLMR 582 (SC), 2002 SCFBRC 3 535, 2002 (5) SCC 481, 2002 (2) UJ (SC) 906, 2002 (4) SLT 74, 2002 UJ(SC) 2 906, 2002 (1) JT (SUPP) 522, 2002 (3) ALL MR 582, 2002 (4) SCALE 601, 2002 (2) ALL CJ 1464, (2002) 2 CURCC 256, (2002) 4 ANDHLD 3, (2002) 4 SUPREME 255, (2002) 2 RECCIVR 815, (2002) 3 ICC 686, (2002) 4 SCALE 601, (2002) WLC(SC)CVL 512, (2002) 2 UC 238, (2002) 3 CIVLJ 603, (2002) 6 BOM CR 134
Author:
Ashok Bhan
Bench:
Ashok Bhan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 574  of  1988



PETITIONER:
NIRMALA ANAND

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ADVENT CORPORATION PVT. LTD. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	10/05/2002

BENCH:
Ashok Bhan




JUDGMENT:
Bhan, J.
I have carefully gone through the judgment proposed by my learned
brother.  I agree with him that the 4th plaintiff appellant is entitled to the
specific performance of the agreement dated 8.9.1966 entered into by her
with defendant Nos.1 and 2 for sale of Flat No. 71 on the 7th floor of the
building known as "Divya Prabha"  situated at No. 12 A, Foreshore Road,
Bombay.	 I am also in agreement with term Nos. (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi)
imposed and set out by my brother in the last paragraph of his judgment.
But after giving considerable thought  and with due deference and respect I
am unable to pursued myself to agree to the proposed term (ii) wherein the
4th plaintiff has been fastened with the liability to pay an additional sum of
Rs. 40 lakhs over and above the payment already made as condition
precedent to the execution of the sale deed in her favour  in pursuance to the
agreement to sell.
In my view she is entitled to get the sale deed executed in her favour
on payment of the sum mentioned in the agreement to sell (already paid and
balance, if any) plus the amount she becomes liable to pay under term (iv)
and first portion of term (v) for completion of building in case the appellant
agrees to get the building completed from 7th respondent on payment of the
prevailing market rates as per mutual agreement.
Reasons as to why term No. (ii) requiring the 4th plaintiff-appellant to
pay the sum of Rs. 40 lacs and consequent term (vii) should not imposed are:
Section 20
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 provides that relief of the
specific performance lies in the discretion of the Court and the Court is not
bound to grant such relief merely because it is lawful to do so.   The
discretion cannot be exercised arbitrarily.  It has to be exercised in a sound
and reasonable manner guided  by judicial principles.  Sub-Section (2)
enumerates the circumstances in which the Court may exercise its discretion
in not granting the decree of specific performance; sub-section (3) gives
guidelines for proper exercise of the discretion in decreeing the relief of
specific performance; and sub-section (4) does away with the requirement of
mutuality as a condition for grant of relief of specific performance.  The
circumstances enumerated in sub-sections (2) and (3) are not exhaustive.
Grant of relief of specific performance being discretionary, it cannot
be claimed as a matter of right.  It is governed by sound judicial principles
and one of the	foremost principle is that the Court should be satisfied that
circumstances are such that it is equitable to grant the relief of specific
performance of	the contract.  Under this principle one of the questions
which has been considered at times by the Courts is:  as to whether due to
delay in the grant of decree and the escalation of prices of the real estate
during the period is a ground to deny the relief of specific performance.  It
has  repeatedly been held that per se the delay or the escalation of price is no
ground to deny the relief of specific performance.  In certain cases the
Courts in equity and  to mitigate the hardship to the vendor have directed the
vendee to pay further compensatory amount.  But this is not a principle of
universal application.	It would depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case.
Although facts have been succinctly brought about by my learned
brother but it would be necessary for me to recapitulate a few facts.
Respondent No. 1 sometime in February, 1962 advertised in
newspapers thereby calling upon the public to apply for flats in the building
sought to be constructed and named as "Divya Prabha".  Various agreements
with bonafide flat purchasers were entered into during that time.  The
appellant similarly entered into an agreement for the purchase of Flat No. 71
(7th Floor).  The consideration amount to be paid by the appellant was Rs.
60,000/-.  The building was to be completed and possession of flats was to
be handed over on 30.6.1969.  On 27.6.1969 Bombay Municipal
Corporation (for short "the BMC") served notices on the lessees thereby
terminating the lease of the plot of land on which "Divya Prabha" was
constructed.  The notices, inter alia, claimed that the termination was done as
the lessees have committed defaults in payment of the lease rent and have
also violated other terms of the lease.	   The stage of the construction of
'Divya Prabha' at that time was incomplete.  At this point, it is germane to
point out that subsequent to 1969 the construction of the building was again
resumed on or around 1998 which continued till 1999.  The building is still
incomplete.
On 30th July, 1969, the appellant along with 7 other similar purchasers
instituted a suit for specific performance of their flat purchase agreements.
However, when the suit was finally adjudicated upon by the learned single
Judge of the Bombay High Court (as trial Court on original side), all the
plaintiffs except plaintiff No. 4 (appellant herein)   and plaintiff No. 7 had
settled their disputes with defendants-respondent Nos. 1 and 2.	 The Trial
court in its order dated 23.3.1981 came to factual conclusion that the
appellant had always been and is ready and willing to carry out her part of
the agreement.	The agreement was still valid and subsisting and  Defendant
No. 1 had committed  breach of the agreement. Trial Court did not grant the
specific performance of the agreement for the reasons that a Court ought not
to grant a decree of specific performance in circumstances when the lease of
the land on which the building stood terminated and the building was
incomplete.
Appellant along with plaintiff No. 7 preferred an appeal before the
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court.  During the pendency of the
appeal plaintiff No. 7 also entered into a settlement with the defendant No.
1.  Appeal filed by appellant was dismissed on 15.7.1987.  Appellate Court
reasoned that the decree of specific performance could not be granted as the
lease was yet to be secured from the Corporation;  building plans were to be
revived; and the entire building was to be completed before possession of
the completed flat could be handed over to the appellant.  It was held that in
the circumstances the relief of the specific performance could not be
granted.  Thereafter, the appellant approached this Court in appeal by way of
special leave petition which was granted.
It was brought to the notice of this Court, which fact is noted in the
order dated 28.7.1999, that the building known as "Divya Prabha" had been
sold by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in favour of someone else.  The Court
directed the respondents to place on record the documents showing the
sales/assignments of the said building or the respondents' rights therein.
Subsequent purchaser of the building M/s Gaurva Overseas Pvt. Ltd. was
thereafter added as Respondent No. 7. State of Maharashtra was added as
Respondent No. 8.
Another fact which needs to be mentioned is that the Government of
Maharashtra promulgated an ordinance thereby amending
Section 91B
of the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act.  The said ordinance makes it lawful for
the State Government to lease afresh to the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
of any land specified in Schedule  W for a term not exceeding 30 years.
Counsel appearing for the BMC on 27.2.2002 made a statement before this
Court that BMC now has a right to grant lease and revise the building plans
of "Divya Prabha".  The lease and the revised plan, on an application filed,
can be granted provided the conditions laid down are fulfilled.
Another fact which needs to be noticed is that the parties during the
pendency of the appeal tried to come to an amicable settlement of their
dispute.  Respondents offered to pay a sum of Rs. 60 lakhs to compensate
the appellant in lieu of the specific performance of the agreement.  The
counsel for the respondents had taken the stand that the market value of the
flat as on today was Rs. 1.80 crores and the appellant was prepared to accept
a sum of Rs. 1.50 crores by way of damages.  He later on scaled down the
demand to Rs. 1.20 or 1.25 crores which was not acceptable to the
respondents.
It is well-settled  that in cases of contract for sale of immovable
property the grant of relief of specific performance is a rule and its refusal an
exception based	 on valid and cogent grounds.  Further, the defendant cannot
take advantage of his own wrong and then plead that decree for specific
performance  would  be an unfair advantage to the plaintiff.
My learned brother has already enumerated the reasons with which I
agree that the appellant in the circumstances of the case is entitled to the
specific performance of the agreement irrespective of the fact that certain
permissions are required to be taken from the Government authorities for
completing the building.  I need not re-emphasis the same.  The appellant
had come to the Court for seeking specific performance of an agreement
promptly.   The Trial Court as well as the appellate Court have recorded a
finding that the appellant was ready and willing, at the time of filing of the
suit as well as later, to perform her part of the agreement and it was the
defendants who were not prepared to perform their part of the contract.	 The
appeal has been pending in this Court for the last 15 years.  Delay by itself
due to pendency of the suit/appeal in the courts is no ground to refuse the
relief of specific performance unless certain compelling circumstances are
brought on record to take a view to the contrary.
Escalation of price during the period may be a relevant consideration
under certain circumstances for either refusing to grant the decree  of
specific performance  or for decreeing the specific performance with a
direction to the plaintiff to pay an additional amount to the defendant and
compensate him.	 It would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
case.
In
Gobind Ram Vs. Gian Chand
, 2000 (7) SCC 548, this Court did
grant an additional amount by way of compensation to be paid to the vendee.
In the said case the vendor who was appellant had agreed to sell the disputed
property situated at Lajpat Nagar IV, New Delhi, for a consideration of Rs.
16,000/- to the vendee, who was the respondent on 24.1.1973.  A sum of Rs.
1,000/- was paid as earnest money.  As the appellant did not execute the sale
deed in spite of the time granted, the respondent filed the suit for specific
performance of the contract which was decreed.	Immediately, on the decree
of the suit the respondent deposited a sum of Rs. 15,000/- in the trial Court.
The vendee filed the appeal in the High Court which was dismissed.
However, to mitigate the hardship to the appellant and as the respondent
agreed to pay more sum, the High Court directed the respondent to deposit a
further sum of Rs.  1,00,000/- which was to be released to the vendor on
giving possession of the suit property.	  The said sum was also deposited in
the Registry of the High Court.	   The vendor came up in an appeal before
this Court by way of special leave petition.   Senior counsel who appeared
for the vendor offered to pay a sum of Rs. 1,16,000/- to the vendee to cancel
the contract and get out of the decree.	 The vendee after his appearance in
this Court offered another sum of Rs. 50,000/- so as to make the total
consideration of Rs. 1,50,000/-.  This Court came to the conclusion that the
vendor was trying to wriggle out of the contract due to escalation in prices of
real estate properties and therefore under circumstances the vendor is
entitled to get a decree as he had not taken any undue or unfair advantage
over the appellant.  On a concession made the vendor was directed to deposit
a further sum of Rs. 3 lakhs.
The conclusion recorded by this Court in para
9 is:
"In view of the above clear finding of the High
Court that the appellant tried to wriggle out of the
contract between the parties because of escalation
in prices of real estate properties, we hold that the
respondent is entitled to get a decree as he has not
taken any undue or unfair advantage over the
appellant.  It will be inequitable and unjust at this
point of time to deny the decree to the respondent
after two courts below have decided in favour of
the respondent.	 While coming to the above
conclusion we have also taken note of the fact that
the respondent deposited the balance of the
consideration in the trial court and also the amount
in the High Court, as directed.	 On the other hand
the appellant, as held by the High Court, tried to
wriggle out of the contract in view of the
tremendous escalation of prices of real estate
properties.  However, to mitigate the hardship to
the appellant we direct the respondent to deposit a
further sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- within 4 months
from today with the Registry of this Court and the
amount shall be kept in short term deposit in a
nationalised bank.  While giving the above
direction we have taken note of the offer made to
us on behalf of the respondent.	 This amount is to
be paid to the appellant on his giving possession of
the suit property to the respondent within 6 months
from the date of the deposit of the above amount.
The appellant shall also be entitled to withdraw the
amount already deposit in the trial court and the
amount of Rs. 1,00,000/- which has been kept in
interest-bearing fixed deposit in the Registry of the
High Court. "
[Empahsis supplied]


It would be seen from the perusal of the judgment and the findings recorded
by this Court that the amount by way of compensation was ordered to be
paid by the vendee to the vendor on a concession made by the vendee.
In
K.S. Vidyanadam & Ors. Vs. Vairavan
,	 1997 (3) SCC 1,  this
Court refused to grant the relief of specific performance of the contract due
to escalation of price because the agreement stipulated that the vendee was
required to purchase the stamp papers, tender the balance amount and call
upon the defendant to execute the sale deed and deliver possession of the
property within a period of six months.	 It was after a lapse of 2-1/2 years
that the proposed vendee issued a notice through his advocate to the
proposed vendor -defendant stating that he had always been ready and
willing to perform his part of the contract, requiring the defendants to
execute the sale deed on payment of the balance amount.	 The Court while
taking note of delay in filing the suit by the plaintiff came to the conclusion
that the exercise of discretion vested in the Court may not be exercised in
granting the relief of specific performance because of the escalation in price
and the advantage sought to be taken by the plaintiff by filing the suit at a
belated stage though within limitation.	 It was held:
"In the present case, the case of the defendants is
acceptable. In the agreement of sale there is no
reference to the existence of any tenant in the
building.  No letter or notice was issued by the
plaintiff to the defendants calling upon them to get
the tenant vacated and get the sale deed executed
until he issued the suit notice on 11.7.1981.  From
15.12.1978 till 11.7.1981, i.e., for a period of more
than 2-1/2 years, the plaintiff was sitting quiet
without taking any steps to perform his part of the
contract under the agreement.  It is thus not a case
of mere delay.	It is a case of total inaction on the
part of the plaintiff for 2-1/2 years in clear
violation of the terms of agreement which required
him to pay the balance, purchase the stamp papers
and then ask for execution of sale deed within six
months.	 Further, the delay is coupled with
substantial rise in prices  according to defendants,
three times  between the date of agreement and
the date of suit notice.  They delay has brought
about a situation where it would be inequitable to
give the relief of specific performance to the
plaintiff."
In
V.Pechimuthu Vs. Gowrammal
, 2001 (7) SCC 617, it was held that
rise in price of the land agreed to be conveyed may be a relevant factor in
denying relief of specific performance where the Court is considering
whether or not to grant a decree for specific performance for the first time.
It would be seen in none of the above noted cases this Court has laid
an absolute rule that the proposed vendee would be required to compensate
the proposed vendor for the escalation of price of the land and building
during the pendency of the proceeding in Court at different level.
The appellant has always been ready and willing to perform her part
of contract at all stages.  She has not taken any advantage of her own wrong.
The appellant is in no way responsible for the delay at any stage of the
proceeding.  It is the respondents who have always been and are trying to
wriggle out of the contract.  The respondents cannot take advantage of their
own wrong and then plead that the grant of decree of specific performance
would amount to an unfair advantage to the appellant.
Requiring the appellant to pay further sum  of	Rs. 40 Lakhs
would/may amount to frustrating the agreement itself as the appellant may
not be in a position to pay the sum of Rs. 40 lakhs.  Respective counsel for
the parties had quoted the figure of a particular sum which could be paid to
the appellant in lieu of avoiding the decree of specific performance. The
appellant had not made an offer to pay any additional sum over and above
the quoted price to sell by way of compensation. It does not indicate the
financial position of the appellant to pay the additional sum of Rs. 40 lakhs.
With due respect, in my view, it would be unfair to grant the decree of
specific performance by one hand and take it back by the other.
For the reasons stated above, I am of the view that the appellant is
sentitled to the specific performance of agreement to sell the flat No. 71  on
7th floor of Divya Prabha Building on the price mentioned in the agreement
to sell which would be subject to the terms (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the last
paragraph of the judgment of my learned brother.  There would be no order
as to costs.
.J.
( Ashok Bhan)

May 10, 2002