[Cites
13
, Cited by
107
]
Supreme Court of India
First Land Acquisition Collector & Ors vs Nirodhi Prakash Gangoli & Anr on 7 March, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 1314, 2002 AIR SCW 1129, 2002 (2) SLT 426, 2002 (2) SCALE 513, 2002 (2) ALL CJ 1122, (2002) 2 JT 620 (SC), 2002 (1) LRI 733, 2002 (4) SCC 160, 2002 ALL CJ 2 1122, (2002) 2 PAT LJR 276, (2002) 1 UC 689, (2002) 2 CIVLJ 618, (2002) 2 ALL WC 1131, (2002) 2 LANDLR 14, (2002) 2 MAD LJ 139, (2002) 2 SCJ 352, (2002) 2 LACC 2, (2002) 2 SUPREME 320, (2003) 1 RECCIVR 37, (2003) 2 ICC 520, (2002) 2 SCALE 513, (2002) 2 JLJR 150, (2002) 47 ALL LR 758, (2002) 3 CAL HN 23, (2002) 2 CURCC 21
Author:
Brijesh Kumar
Bench:
Brijesh Kumar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 1913  of  2002



PETITIONER:
FIRST LAND ACQUISITION COLLECTOR & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NIRODHI PRAKASH GANGOLI & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	07/03/2002

BENCH:
G.B. Pattanaik & Brijesh Kumar




JUDGMENT:
PATTANAIK,J.
Leave granted.
The acquisition proceeding in respect of Premises No. 27/1
and 27/B on Dehi Serampore Road, Calcutta having been set
aside by the Calcutta High Court, the Land Acquisition
Collector is in appeal against the same.  The premises in
question had been requisitioned under the provisions of West
Bengal Requisition and Control (Temporary Provision) Act,
1947, for accommodating students of Calcutta National
Medical College, Calcutta by order dated 10th April, 1948.
An acquisition proceeding in respect of the same premises
was initiated by issuance of a notice under
Section 4
of the
Land Acquisition Act (hereinafter referred to as "
The Act
"),
by Notification dated 17.12.1982.  Declaration under
Section
6
of the Act was issued on 13.12.1989. The acquisition
proceedings related to both the premises, as aforesaid as well
as a common passage.  One K.K. Dugar and one AP Ganguly
claiming right of way on the common passage assailed the
aforesaid acquisition proceeding by filing a Writ Petition in
the Calcutta High Court. The learned Single Judge of the
Calcutta High Court quashed the Notification by order dated
3rd April, 1992.  The said order was assailed by filing an
appeal to the Division Bench, but the appeal itself being
barred by time and the application for condonation not
having been allowed the appeal stood dismissed.
Subsequently a fresh Notification was issued under
Section 4
only in respect of the premises No. 27/1a and 27/1b
excluding the common passage and notices were issued
under
Sections 9
,
10
and
11
of the Act requiring interested
persons to file application for compensation.  Be it be stated,
that  the premises in question stood de-requisitioned by an
order dated 2.7.1993.  Writ Petition having been filed
Challenging the notices issued under
sections 9
,
10
and
11
was registered as Writ Petition No. 805 of 1994.  The High
Court quashed the notices issued under
Sections 9
,
10
&
11
of
the Act by Order dated 25.8.1994 and it was further directed
that the vacant possession of the disputed premises should be
handed over within a period of six months.  The aforesaid
Writ Petition had been filed by the owner of the premises in
question.  Though time was extended by the Court for
delivery of possession but it is alleged that no possession had
been delivered to the owner.  On 29.11.1994 a fresh
Notification was issued under
Sections 4(1)
and
17(4)
of the
Act for the purpose of use of National Medical College.
Declaration under
Section 6
of the Act was issued on
30.8.1995.  Public Notices of substance of the declaration
was also given at the convenient places in the locality in two
daily newspapers published on 10.9.95.	Notices under
Sections 9
and
10
of the Act were served upon the interested
persons on 18.10.95 inviting claims by 2.11.95.	 The State
Government sanctioned Rs.50,41,515/- for paying the
compensation  amount.  The Land Acquisition Collector
issued notices under
Section 11
on 27.10.95 and the same
was served upon the persons interested on 2.11.95.  The
aforesaid notice was assailed by filing a Writ Petition which
was registered as Writ Petition No. 1900 of 1995 challenging
the entire acquisition.	 The learned Single Judge of the
Calcutta High Court disposed of the Writ Petition by
judgment dated 14.10.199 by holding that the Notification
issued under
Sections 4
and
6
as well as invocation of
Section 17(1)
and
17(4)
dispensing with hearing under
Section 5A
of the Act is not assailable.  It , however, directed
that the appropriate authority should proceed afresh from the
stage of issuance of Notification under
Section 9
and the
acquisition proceeding should be completed with utmost
expedition. Pursuant to the aforesaid judgment of the learned
Single Judge, Notification under
Section 9
of the Act was
issued again on 15.10.1999.  But the owners assailed the
legality of the order of the learned Single Judge by filing an
appeal to the  Division Bench.	The Division Bench of the
Calcutta High Court by judgment dated 17.5.2000 having
allowed the appeal  and having quashed the acquisition
proceeding, the Special Land Acquisition Officer has
approached this Court.	The Division Bench while disposing
of the Writ Appeal by the impugned judgment have been
persuaded to interfere, substantially on the ground that since
the earlier judgment and direction of the learned Single Judge
of Calcutta High Court dated 25.8.1994 directing delivery of
the possession to the owner has not been complied with, the
acquisition is malafide	 and is not in accordance with law.
The Division Bench in the impugned judgment came to hold
that grave urgency  and emergency being the pre-condition
for invoking powers under sub-sections (1) and (4) of
Section
17
, and in the case in hand, no such urgency having been
present, invocation of power under
Section 17(4)
gets vitiated
and, therefore, the commencement of the acquisition
proceeding must be held to be not in accordance with law.
Having quashed the acquisition proceeding the Court further
observed that it would be open to start a proceeding afresh in
accordance with law.
Mr. Altaf Ahmad, learned Additional Solicitor General
appearing for the appellant contended, that the purpose of
acquisition being undoubtedly a public purpose, namely, for
the use of National Medical College and the Competent
Authority being of the opinion that the facts situation require
invocation of urgency clause under
Section 17
of the Act, the
Court in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction could not
have interfered with the aforesaid subjective satisfaction of
the authority in the matter of urgency and, therefore, the
order is vitiated.  The learned Additional Solicitor General
further contended, that non-delivery of possession, pursuant
to the earlier direction of the High Court, could not be a
ground for quashing a valid Notification issued under
Sections 4(1)
&
17(4)
of the Act.  The High Court, therefore,
committed  serious error in interfering with the acquisition in
question.  According to the learned Additional Solicitor
General the conclusion of the High Court that the acquisition
is malafide is based upon non-existence of any materials, and
therefore, the same must be interfered with.  In reply to the
submission of the counsel appearing for the respondents to
the effect that the object of invoking the urgency clause
under
Section 17
being to take immediate possession of the
acquired land and in the case in hand that possession being
with the Medical College ever since the premises stood
requisitioned under the provisions of requisition under West
Bengal Act of 1947, the very pre-condition of attracting
Section 17
was non existent, it is stated that the earlier
possession was not the possession of a lawful owner and the
Notification for acquisition having been quashed by the
Court on two earlier occasions, the acquiring authority felt
the necessity of urgent acquisition, and therefore the
contention of the respondents' counsel is unsustainable.
Mr. Bhaskar Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing
for one of the respondent and Mr. Ashok H. Desai, learned
senior counsel, appearing for other respondents vehemently
urged that in respect of a land which is under possession of
the State Government or any other authority, the emergency
power under
Section 17
of the Act cannot be invoked
inasmuch as the legislature have conferred power to take
possession of the acquired land even without complying with
the provision of
Section 5A
of the Act only in case of grave
emergency where the acquisition cannot brook the delay of
30 days period which is contemplated for filing of Petition
under Section 5A.  This being the position and the Medical
College being in possession of the premises right from 1948
the appropriate authorities could not have invoked the
emergency provision under
Section 17
of the Act.  The
counsel also further urged that the right conferred under
Section 5A is a valuable right to the owner and the owner
should not be deprived of the same unless there exists real
emergency.  It was further urged that the High Court was
justified in taking into account the defiant attitude of the
Government in not delivering possession notwithstanding the
earlier orders of the Court directing possession to be
delivered within a period of six months.
The question of urgency of an acquisition under
Section
17(1)
and (4) of the Act is a matter of subjective satisfaction
of the Government and ordinarily it is not open to the Court
to make a scrutiny of the propriety of that satisfaction on an
objective appraisal of facts.  In this view of the matter when
the Government takes a decision, taking all relevant
considerations into account and is satisfied that there exists
emergency for invoking powers under
Section 17 (1)
and (4)
of the Act, and issues Notification accordingly, the same
should not be interfered with by the Court unless the Court
comes to the conclusion that the appropriate authority had not
applied its mind to the relevant factors or that the decision
has been taken by the appropriate authority mala fide.
Whether in a given situation there existed urgency or not is
left to the discretion and decision of the concerned
authorities.  If an order invoking power under
Section 17(4)
is assailed, the Courts may enquire whether the appropriate
authority had all the relevant materials before it or whether
the order has been passed by non-application of mind.  Any
post Notification delay subsequent to the decision of the State
Government dispensing with an enquiry under
Section 5(A)
by invoking powers under
Section 17(1)
of the Act would not
invalidate the decision itself specially when no mala fides on
the part of the government or its officers are alleged.
Opinion of the State Government can be challenged in a
Court of law if it could be shown that the State Government
never applied its mind to the matter or that action of the State
Government is  mala fide.    Though the satisfaction under
Section 17(4)
is a subjective one and is not open to challenge
before a Court of law, except for the grounds already
indicated, but the said satisfaction must be of the Appropriate
Government and that the satisfaction must be, as to the
existence of an urgency.     The conclusion of the
Government that there was urgency even though cannot be
conclusive but is entitled to great weight,  as has been held by
this Court in
Jage Ram and others vs. The Sxtate of
Haryana and Others
AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1033.
Even a mere allegation that power was exercised mala fide
would not be enough and in support of such allegation
specific materials should be placed before the Court.  The
burden of establishing	mala fides is very heavy on the person
who alleges it.	 Bearing in mind the aforesaid principles, if
the circumstances of the case in hand are examined it would
appear that the premises in question was required for the
students of National Medical College, Calcutta and the
Notification issued in December 1982 had been quashed by
the Court and the subsequent Notification issued on
25.2.1994 also had been quashed by the Court.	It is only
thereafter the Notification was issued under
Section 4(1)
and
17(4)
of the Act on 29.11.1994 which came up for
consideration before the High Court.  Apart from the fact that
there had already been considerable delay in acquiring the
premises in question on account of the intervention by
Courts,	  the premises was badly needed for the occupation of
the students of National Medical College, Calcutta.    Thus,
existence of urgency was writ large on the facts of the case
and therefore,	 said exercise of power in the case in hand,
cannot be interfered with by a Court of law on a conclusion
that there did not exist any emergency.	 The conclusion of the
Division Bench of Calcutta High Court, therefore, is
unsustainable.
It is indeed difficult for us to uphold the conclusion of
the Division Bench that acquisition is mala fide on the mere
fact that physical possession had not been delivered pursuant
to the earlier directions of  a learned Single Judge of Calcutta
High Court dated 25.8.94.  When the Court is called upon to
examine the question as to whether the acquisition is mala
fide or not, what is necessary to be inquired into and found
out is, whether the purpose for which the acquisition is going
to be made, is a real purpose or a camouflage.	 By no stretch
of imagination, exercise of power for acquisition can be held
to be mala fide, so long as, the purpose of acquisition
continues and as has already been stated, there existed
emergency to acquire the premises in question.	The premises
which was under occupation of the students of the National
Medical College, Calcutta, was obviously badly needed for
the college and the appropriate authority having failed in
their attempt earlier twice, the orders having been quashed by
the High Court, had taken the third attempt of issuing
notification under
Sections 4(1)
and
17(4)
of the Act, such
acquisition cannot be held to be mala fide and, therefore, the
conclusion of the Division Bench in the impugned Judgment
that the acquisition is mala fide, must be set aside and we
accordingly set aside the same.
The arguments advanced on behalf of the respondents
that as the premises in question continued to be under
possession of the Calcutta Medical College,  invocation of
special powers under
Section 17
was vitiated and a valuable
right of the land owners to file objections under Section 5A
could not have been taken away.	 According to the counsel
for the respondents,
Section 5A
of the Act,  merely gives an
opportunity to the land owner to object to the acquisition
within 30 days from the date of publication of the notification
under
Section 4
, the power under
Section 17
dispensing with
inquiry under Section 5A can, therefore, be invoked where
there exists urgency to take immediate possession of the land,
but where possession is with the acquiring authority, there
cannot exist any urgency, and, therefore the exercise of that
power is patently erroneous.
In support of this contention,
reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in
Balwant
Narayan Bhagde vs. M.D. Bhagwat and Ors.
, 1976(1)
S.C.C. 700 .   We are unable to accept this contention since
the same proceeds on a basic misconception about the
possession of the premises.  The premises in question had
been requisitioned under the provisions of the Requisition
Act and stood released from requisition by operation of
Section 10B of the said Act,  since 1993. Even though the
premises stood occupied by the students of the medical
college, but such occupation was neither as owner nor was
lawful in the eye of law.  To effectuate lawful possession and
the purpose being undoubtedly a public purpose, the State
Government had been attempting ever-since December, 1982
and each of its attempt had failed on account of Court's
intervention.  It is in this context, the legality of exercise of
power under
Section 17
of the notification dated 29.11.94 is
required to be adjudicated upon.    In our considered opinion,
having regard to the facts and circumstances narrated above,
the exercise of power under
Section 17
by the State
Government, cannot be held to be illegal or mala fide and
consequently, the impugned Judgment of the Division Bench
of Calcutta High Court cannot be sustained.  The learned
Judges of the High Court have been totally swayed away by
the  fact  of  non-implementation of the directions of
Batabyal J,   in his order dated 25.8.1994,  but that by itself
would not be a ground for annulling lawful exercise of power
under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
.  We,
therefore, set aside the impugned Judgment of the Division
Bench of Calcutta High Court and hold that the acquisition in
question is not vitiated on any ground.	 The acquisition
proceeding, therefore, is held to be in accordance with law.
The appeal is allowed.	 There will be no order as to costs.
............J.
					  (G.B.	 PATTANAIK)

					  .J.
					  (BRIJESH KUMAR)
March  07, 2002.