[Cites
10
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Vithal Tukaram More & Ors vs The State Of Maharashtra on 23 July, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 2715, 2002 AIR SCW 3060, (2002) 3 EASTCRIC 50, 2003 ALLMR(CRI) 310, (2002) SC CR R 813, (2002) 3 CURCRIR 44, 2002 (7) SCC 20, (2002) 2 CGLJ 246, (2002) 3 RAJ CRI C 837, 2002 UJ(SC) 2 1049, 2002 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 582, 2002 BOM LR 4 509, (2003) 1 GCD 45 (SC), (2002) 3 CRIMES 29, (2002) MAD LJ(CRI) 958, (2002) 3 RECCRIR 629, (2002) 2 UC 522, (2002) 2 ALD(CRL) 275, (2002) 4 CAL HN 150, (2002) 5 SUPREME 106, (2002) 2 ALLCRIR 2001, (2002) 5 SCALE 289, (2002) 3 ALLCRILR 721, 2002 CRILR(SC&MP) 582, (2002) 2 ANDHLT(CRI) 203, 2002 SCC (CRI) 1555, (2002) 5 JT 289 (SC)
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.) 801  of  2001



PETITIONER:
VITHAL TUKARAM MORE & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	23/07/2002

BENCH:
ND... MS.ANDTHOASRHMADHHEIGKDAERI




JUDGMENT:
DHARMADHIKARI, J


	This court by Order dated 04.5.2001 in this case has rejected the Special
Leave Petition preferred by appellants nos. 1 & 2 for appeal to this court against
their conviction and sentences under Sections 302, 323, 201  read with Section
34 on the
Indian Penal Code
[for short '
I.P.C
']. This appeal by grant of leave,
therefore, is confined to the consideration of the cases of appellants nos. 3 to 6.
By the judgment of the court of Additional Sessions Judge, Billoli in
Sessions Case No. 3 of 1994, the appellants before us have been convicted
under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of  IPC to undergo a sentence of
imprisonment of life and a fine of  Rs. 1,000/- each, in default of payment of
fine, RI for six months. They have also been convicted for offence under
Section
323
read with
Section 34
of  IPC and sentenced to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/- each
and in default, to undergo RI for six months.  They are separately convicted and
sentenced for offence under
Section 201
read with
Section 34
of IPC and
sentenced to undergo RI for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- each, in
default of payment of fine, further RI for 3 months.
The victim of the alleged crime is Sundarabai aged about 20 years. Her
parents died during her childhood. Her uncle Dashrath (PW-1) brought her up.
She was married to convicted accused Taterao, about two years before the date
of her death in the intervening night of 22.10.1993 and 23.10.1993.  It is alleged
that 10 or 12 days before she was found dead, she was beaten by her husband
for not attending to the household work and she had gone to complain about it
to her cousin, Raosaheb (PW-2). Raosaheb informed the incident to her uncle,
Dashrath. Both of them saw injuries over the head and back of the deceased.
Both of them then took her to her marital home and after pacifying the members
of her husband's family, she was left at their place at about 3.00 PM in the
afternoon of 22.10.1993. On the next day i.e. 23.10.1993, the co-accused, Vithal
Tukaram (who is one of the appellants before us) reported to Dashrath, uncle of
the deceased that she had gone to fetch water from the bore-well and from
there did not return.  Dashrath then went to the Police Station to lodge report of
the fact of missing of Sundarabai.  At that time, one villager Subhash Kondiba
(PW-4) came to the Police Station to report that he had seen a dead body
floating in the well of sarpanch of the village. The dead body was taken out of
the well. After inquest, autopsy was performed.	 The post-mortem report
revealed that there were as many as 15 injuries of the nature of 'contusions' of
different sizes on various parts of her body.  The cause of death found by the
autopsy surgeon was not 'drowning' but 'strangulation by neck'. On the evidence
of Dashrath (uncle of deceased) and  Raosaheb (cousin of the deceased) and
Ananda More (PW-3) who was (a neighbour of the accused) both the trial court
and the High Court in appeal accepted the prosecution case that the deceased
was subjected to physical assaults by members of the family on minor complaints
against her in course of household work and she was killed by them. Based on
the oral evidence and the medical evidence indicating her death to be homicidal,
the courts below came to the conclusion that all the accused participated in the
commission of the crime. They were, therefore, convicted and sentenced as
mentioned above.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submit that conviction
of the appellants is based purely on circumstantial evidence which is not of a
conclusive  nature. The learned trial Judge in considering and weighing the
evidence led by the prosecution has recorded that there is no direct evidence of
the appellants having participated in beating the deceased and killing her by
strangulation. According to learned trial Judge, as the incident took place inside
the house,  'the accused persons alone could have the knowledge as to how she
was physically assaulted leading to her death'. The learned trial Judge on the
basis of post-mortem report showing  presence of  15  ante-mortem injuries on
the body of the deceased raised the following inferences against the accused
which may be reproduced in his own words: -
"It  can be safely presumed that at the time of causing her
death by strangulation, some of the accused persons have
caught hold of the different  body parts such as hand, legs,
wrist of the deceased and one of them pressed her neck and
killed her by strangulation and there by voluntarily caused
injuries to her. The accused persons are the best persons
knowing about the manner of in which the incident  was
caused and they have not explained it. There is nothing on
record to show that there is possibility of any other
explanation, other than the fact that the accused persons are
the only guilty persons. Therefore, I hold that the
prosecution  has been able to prove the commission of
offence by the accused persons under
Sections 302
,
323
,
201
read with
Section 34
of IPC. Hence, I have recorded my
findings accordingly on point nos. 1 to 4".
The High Court in appeal has confirmed the conviction and sentences
against all the accused persons.
The High Court held the following circumstances to have been proved by
the prosecution to infer complicity of the accused.  The High Court in its
judgment has stated that the presence of the appellants in the house on the
night of the alleged incident of physical assault on the deceased,  has to be
believed because none of the accused in their statement under
Section 313
Criminal Procedure Code [for short '
Cr.P.C
.] stated that they were not in the
house on that night. What they stated is that since evening of 22.10.1993, the
deceased was not with them. The reasoning of the High Court is that this plea of
accused	 which is found to be false, leads to an inference that the accused were
in the house when Sundarabai was physically assaulted. In the opinion of the
High Court in the absence of clear statement under
Section 313
Cr.P.C by the
accused that they were not in the house on the night intervening to 22.10.1993
and 23.10.1993, their presence in the house at the time and date of incident is
fully established. For better appreciation of reasoning of the High Court,  the
relevant part of its judgment needs reproduction : -
"As it is, the accused also are not stating in their statement
under
Section 313
Cr.P.C, that they were not in the house on
that night. On the contrary, the statement made by the
accused under
Section 313
Cr.P.C indicates  that they want
to say that  Sundarabai was not with them on 22.10.93 since
evening. If it is read properly, it means that they were in the
house, but Sunderabai was not there. In such circumstances,
it is not necessary for the prosecution to establish
independently that all the accused were in the house in the
evening of 22.10.93 at about 7 P.M and onwards. The fact is
not denied by the accused. The other evidence brought on
record is sufficient to hold that the accused were at their
house. Generally, in the evening, it is expected that all the
family members will be at the house. This probability cannot
be ignored. But it does not remain in the realm of probability,
because there is evidence of Sambhaji (PW-8), which goes to
show that accused Tukaram and Hirabai were outside the
house, when he went there and the other accused had not
stated that they had gone out of the house and they were
not in the house during that time. So this is not the case of
"may be",  but this is a case of "must be"."
Having thus inferred presence of the appellants co-accused in the house
on the alleged date and time of incident, the High Court catalogued the following
circumstances which is in its opinion unerringly   point to the guilt of the present
appellants. It enumerates them thus :-
"If the facts of the present case are scanned as per the
guidelines given in this judgment, there  is sufficient evidence
to hold that  the accused had reason to assault Sunderabai,
because, once she was assaulted, driven out from the house
but she had  returned to their house. Immediately thereafter,
this incident has taken place. The second circumstance is that
not only Sunderabai was in the house, but all the six accused
were also in the house, when the alleged incident  took place.
The third circumstance is that the medical evidence clearly
indicates that it was a homicidal death and not a suicidal or
accidental death. As many as 15 injuries  were there on the
person	of Sunderabai and the accused have no explanation
for any of these injuries seen on the person of Sunderabai,
when the doctor specifically stated that all the injuries were
ante-mortem injuries".
The High Court for basing conviction on the above circumstantial evidence
reasoned thus :-
"It is impossible for the prosecution in such circumstances to
prove which of the accused did particular act to cause death
of Sunderabai. If that evidence had been there, then, it
would have been the case of direct evidence and not of
circumstantial evidence. In circumstantial evidence, when
more than one person is present at the place of the incident,
then the only circumstance which has to be looked into as to
what are the injuries on the person of the deceased to find
out whether that circumstance supports the prosecution
case. Here, there were six persons in the house. As many as
15 injuries are found on the person of Sunderabai. Some are
found even on her private part and the fatal injury was
caused on neck. So, these injuries amply prove that this was
not an act done by one person, but it was an act of more
than one person. In the given circumstances, there cannot be
evidence showing that accused no. 1 caused particular injury
or accused no. 6 caused particular injury. All of them jointly
took part in the incident. Some might have played a lesser
role, while some might have played a major role, but the fact
remains that they were together and they did assault
Sunderabai, a hapless woman alone in the house".
Lastly, taking note of the opinion of the Autopsy Surgeon on nature of
death as contained in his post-mortem report, the High Court draws its
conclusion thus :-
"Because of the medical evidence, it is amply proved that the
death was not due to drowning, but it was due to
strangulation and this circumstance clinches the prosecution
case that how the dead body of Sunderabai could go out of
the house when all the accused were in the house on that
night of event. The prosecution thus, has established the
case against all the accused. There is no ground to interfere
with the order of  conviction and sentence recorded by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge".
We have heard the learned counsel  appearing for the accused who
strenuously urged that the circumstances taken into consideration by learned
trial Judge and the Judges in appeal neither singly nor cumulatively prove the
involvement of the present appellants in the alleged offence of assault and
murder of the deceased. He submits that merely because the present appellants
are close relatives and lived in the same house with the deceased and the
convicted accused (her husband and father-in-law), no inference reasonably
could be drawn that they also participated in physically assaulting  the deceased
and had a common intention to commit her murder.
We have also heard the learned counsel appearing for the State who has
tried to support the conviction.
In the case of
State of U.P  vs.  Dr. Ravindra	Prakash Mittal
,	  [AIR
1992 SC 2045], this Court has held  that the essential ingredients to prove guilt
of an accused by circumstantial evidence are : (a) the circumstances from which
the conclusion is drawn should be fully proved; (b) the circumstances should be
conclusive in nature; (c) all the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of guilt  and inconsistent with innocence; (d) the
circumstances should to a moral certainty, exclude the possibility of guilt  of any
person other than the accused.
In considering the validity of the conviction of the present appellants,
therefore, we have to apply the above strict test before relying on the
circumstantial evidence. From the facts found and the reasoning adopted by the
learned Trial Court and the High Court in appeal, we find that the circumstantial
evidence in the present case falls short of  the required standard of proof. We
also find that there is fallacy	 in their reasoning  and therefore, in the inferences
drawn by them from the facts and circumstances alleged to have been proved.
The learned trial Judge	 (as seen from the relevant part of the judgment
quoted above) entered into the arena of surmises and tried to visualise by
imagination the manner of commission of the offence. On the basis of nature
and number of injuries found on the body of the deceased in the post-mortem
report, it is inferred	that all the accused persons must have caught hold of
different parts of the body of the deceased and assaulted her separately on
different parts. Such kind of  inference is highly speculative.
The High Court also fell into similar error. In its judgment, it is observed
that so many injuries of the nature of contusions found on various parts of the
body of deceased could not have been caused by one or two persons and all the
six persons must have participated in the assault. We have seen the post-
mortem report (Ex.40) which describes nature of injuries as "contusions" of
different sizes on different parts of the body. We fail to understand how the
learned Judges came to the conclusion that it was not possible for one or two
persons to have caused so many injuries on the person of deceased. Merely
because as many as 15 injuries were found on body of the deceased, it cannot
be inferred that all the accused must have participated	 by a joint assault. Such
inference, in our considered opinion, is highly imaginary.
So far as other circumstances held to have been proved by the High Court
are concerned, we find that they also fall short of the test of proof required for
basing conviction on circumstantial evidence.
Accepting the fact to have been proved that few days before the date of
incident, Sunderabai was driven out from her house and was brought back by
her uncle the same day,	 the said fact cannot lead to an irresistible conclusion
that all the present appellants as members of the family were unwilling to
receive her back to the house. The proof of presence of present appellants in the
house at the time and date of the alleged incident cannot also reasonably lead to
an inference that they all participated in the act of physical assault. The High
Court has referred to the statement of the accused under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. It
stated in its judgment that the accused in their statements took a common plea
that Sunderabai was not in the house on	 the alleged  date of incident but the
same is found to be false, therefore, indirectly the accused should be deemed to
have admitted their presence in the house on the date and hour of incident of
physical assault.
Assuming that the presence of all the accused persons on the date and
time of the incident is fully proved but  that fact alone cannot lead to an
inference that all of them jointly assaulted the deceased and had common
intention to kill her. Mere presence  of  the appellants/accused in the house
cannot reasonably lead to an inference of their joint participation in physical
assault and common  intention on their part with the convicted accused	to
commit her murder. The medical evidence showing that the death was not
'suicidal' but 'homicidal' also does not necessarily lead to the inference of
involvement of all the accused in the homicidal death of the deceased.
The High Court in a portion of the judgment (quoted above) has stated
that  the prosecution cannot be expected to discharge the impossible task of
proving by direct evidence the part played by each of the accused  in the alleged
crime  and the nature of injury/injuries  caused by each of them.
It is true that such crimes against married women are generally
committed within four-walls of a house and many times in secrecy. Independent
eye-witnesses or other direct evidence are scarcely available to the prosecution.
But that is no reason to rely on circumstantial evidence which is not of required
standard and base conviction on surmises. In the instant case, both the trial
court and the High Court  erred in not applying the strict test before relying on
the circumstantial evidence to pass the verdict of conviction. They convicted the
appellants before us only because they resided in the same house as members
of the joint family  of the deceased and the two convicted accused and	were
found to be present at the time and date of incident. There are several
circumstances pointing to the innocence of the accused which were not taken
into consideration. It is likely that the present appellants were present at that
hour and time of incident but did not join with the convicted accused in
physically assaulting the deceased. There may be inaction on their part in not
saving the deceased from assault by the convicted accused. Their apathy may be
morally reprehensible but would not make them criminally liable. Their statement
under
Section 313
Cr.P.C that Sunderabai was not in the house in that evening
has been found to be false but that could not lead to a necessary inference that
therefore they must have joined other convicted accused in assaulting the
deceased. The existence of so many ante-mortem injuries found on the body of
the deceased in her post-mortem report	also does not lead to an inference that
they could have been  caused only by more than one person. We fail to
understand why injuries like 15 contusions could not have been caused by two
convicted accused by repeatedly inflicting blows on the deceased.
In a sound criminal justice system such offences against women should
not escape unpunished but it is equally desirable in social interest that members
of the family of the victim are not made to suffer punishment merely because of
their relation with the deceased. It is the duty of the courts to see that the penal
provisions intended to curb such crimes by bringing the offenders to book  do
not cause injustice to innocent people.
We, therefore, set aside the conviction of the appellants and sentences
under
Sections 302
and
323
read with
Section 34
of IPC.
So far as the offence under
Section 201
read with
Section 34
of IPC for
which they are charged and convicted is concerned, from the discussion of the
evidence made by the two courts below and by us above, the evidence on
record, in our opinion,	 is sufficient to sustain their conviction for the said
offences. Their presence in the house has been proved. On recovery of the dead
body of the deceased from the well, the post-mortem shows the cause of death
to be homicidal and not suicidal. The present appellants have been found to be
present	 on the date and hour of the incident in the house in which the deceased
was done to death by physical assaults made by the two convicted accused. The
present appellants were certainly guilty of screening the offenders. The body of
the deceased after she was physically assaulted and murdered was thrown	 into
the well to the knowledge of the appellants. Yet they took a false plea that on
the date and hour of the incident, deceased was not in the house.
Consequently, this appeal partly succeeds. We set aside the conviction of
the appellants under
Section 302
,
323
read with
Section 34
of IPC. Their
conviction and sentences imposed on them under
Section 201
read with
Section
34
of IPC are maintained. The bail bonds of accused are cancelled and if they
have not completed  the period of  sentences imposed on them under
Section
201
read with
Section 34
, they will suffer the remaining part of the sentences.
The appellants/accused who have already suffered the period of sentences for
the above offences shall be forthwith released from the custody if not required in
any other case.