[Cites
7
, Cited by
225
]
Supreme Court of India
Shrimant Shamrao Suryavanshi And ... vs Pralhad Bhairoba Suryavanshi (D) By ... on 22 January, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2002 SUPREME COURT 960, 2002 (3) SCC 676, 2002 AIR SCW 659, (2002) 2 ALLMR 267 (SC), (2002) 3 CGLJ 313, 2002 (2) SCALE 118, 2002 SCFBRC 177, 2002 (2) ALL MR 267, 2002 (1) LRI 607, 2002 (1) BLJR 772, 2002 BLJR 1 772, (2002) 2 JT 24 (SC), 2002 (1) SLT 778, 2002 (1) UJ (SC) 515, 2002 (3) SRJ 496, 2002 (2) ALL CJ 972, (2003) ILR (KANT) (1) 503, (2002) 1 ALL RENTCAS 493, (2002) 1 CURCC 163, (2002) 1 LANDLR 397, (2002) 2 MAD LJ 115, (2002) 3 MAD LW 211, (2002) 2 MAH LJ 1, (2002) 2 MAHLR 836, (2002) 1 MPLJ 589, (2002) 1 RENCR 302, (2002) 1 RENTLR 494, (2002) 2 RAJ LW 313, (2002) 1 SCJ 425, (2002) 1 SUPREME 583, (2002) 2 ICC 161, (2002) 2 SCALE 118, (2002) WLC(SC)CVL 262, (2002) 1 UC 495, (2003) 1 GCD 189 (SC), (2002) 47 ALL LR 68, (2002) 2 ALL WC 918, (2002) 2 BLJ 511, (2002) 2 CIVLJ 227, 2002 (2) BOM LR 196, 2002 BOM LR 2 196
Author:
V.N.Khare
Bench:
V.N. Khare
,
Ashok Bhan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil) 2706  of  1991



PETITIONER:
SHRIMANT SHAMRAO SURYAVANSHI AND ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRALHAD BHAIROBA SURYAVANSHI (D) BY LRS. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	22/01/2002

BENCH:
V.N. Khare & Ashok Bhan




JUDGMENT:
(with C.A. Nos. 1349/1991, 1350/1991 & 3304/1993)
J U D G E M E N T

V.N.KHARE, J.
In this group of appeals the question that arises for our consideration
is "whether in a suit brought by a transferor for recovery of possession of the
suit property, a defendant transferee can defend or protect his possession
over the suit property obtained in pursuance of a part performance on an
agreement to sell under
Section 53A
of the Transfer of Property Act
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), even if a suit for specific performance
of an agreement to sell has barred by limitation".
Since common question of law is involved in these appeals, we are
deposed to notice the facts which have given rise to Civil Appeal No.
2706/1991.
The appellants herein were the defendants in the suit brought by the
plaintiff-respondents for recovery of the suit property and for mesne profit.
On 9th July, 1964,Respondent no. 3 executed an agreement for sale of an agricultural
land in favour of appellant no. 1 for a total consideration of Rs. 9,000/-.
Appellant no. 1 paid a sum of Rs. 5,700/- towards earnest money.  The
appellants in pursuance of the said agreement for sale was put in possession
over the said property.	  After the execution of the said agreement, it came to
the notice of the appellant that the transferor	 is negotiating for sale of the
said land in favour of respondent no. 1.  Under such circumstances, the
appellant brought a suit on 2nd August, 1965 for injunction restraining the
transferor from selling the said land in favour of respondent no. 1.  On 30th
April, 1966 the trial court granted injunction as prayed for.  It is the case of
the appellants that despite the said injunction order, the transferor sold the
said property through a registered sale deed dated 24th May, 1966 in favour
of respondent no. 1.
After the sale deed was executed, the plaintiff-respondent no. 1 on the
strength of the said sale deed	brought a suit for recovery of possession of
the land.  The appellants filed a written statement wherein the suit claim was
resisted on the ground that they are in possession of the property in
pursuance of agreement entered into on 9th July, 1964 and their possession is
protected as they are always and still willing and ready to perform their part
of the contract.  Another contention raised was that the decree passed by the
civil court  in a suit for injunction operates as res judicata and the sale deed
which is the basis of the title of the appellant has not been proved.  The trial
court dismissed the suit.  The Learned Single Judge of Bombay High Court
dismissed the appeal preferred by the plaintiff-respondents.  However, the
Letters Patent Bench allowed the Letters Patent Appeal filed by the plaintiff-
respondents.  The view taken by the Letters Patent Bench was that the
protection as regards possession is not available to the defendant-appellants
as the suit for specific performance  of agreement for sale is barred by
limitation.  It is against the said judgment of the Letters Patent Bench, the
appellants are in appeal before us.
The first question that arises for consideration is whether the
defendant-appellants are entitled to protect their possession of the suit
property obtained in pursuance to part performance of agreement for sale
even after the suit for specific performance of contract for sale is barred by
limitation.
The argument of learned counsel appearing for the  appellants is that
even though the suit for specific performance of the agreement for sale is
barred by limitation, still a transferee in a suit for recovery of possession by
the vendor,  can defend his possession under
Section 53A
of the Act  so long
as he is willing and ready to perform his part of the contract.	 Whereas, the
contention raised on behalf of the respondents' counsel is that, once a
remedy for specific performance of an agreement for sale is lost by
limitation, the equitable relief of protection of possession of the suit property
under the agreement for sale also comes to an end and is lost.	In other
words, the contention is that the right to defend possession to a vendee is
available so long as the period of limitation prescribed by law for its
enforcement continues and it comes to an end as soon as the period of
limitation expires.
A perusal of
Section 53-A
shows that it does not forbid a defendant
transferee from taking a plea in his defence to protect his possession over the
suit property obtained in part performance of a contract even though the
period of limitation for bringing a suit for specific performance has expired.
It also does not expressly provide that	 a defendant transferee is not entitled
to protect his possession over the suit property taken in part performance of
the contract if	 the period of limitation to bring a suit for specific
performance  has expired.  In absence of such a provision, we have to
interpret the provisions of
Section 53-A
in a scientific manner.  It means to
look into the legislative history and structure of the provisions of
Section 53-
A
of the Act.
Earlier, the assistance of historical facts or any document preceding
the legislation was very much frowned upon for purposes of construction of
statutes.  At that time, there was some injunction against applying principle
of looking into the historical facts or reports preceding the legislation in
construing a statute.  However, by passage of time, this embargo has been
lifted.
In
R.S. Nayak vs. A.R. Antulay
- 1984 (2) SCC 183,  it was held thus :
" Report of the Committee which preceded the
enactment of a legislation reports of Joint
Parliament Committee report of a commission set
up for collecting information leading to the
enactment are permissible external aid to
construction.  If the basic purpose underlying
construction of legislation is to ascertain the real
intention of the Parliament why should the aids
which Parliament availed of such as report of a
Special Committee preceding the enactment
existing State of Law, the environment
necessitating enactment of legislation and the
object sought to be achieved be denied to Court
whose function is primarily to give effect to the
real intention of the Parliament in enactment of the
legislation.  Such denial would deprive the Court
of a substantial and illuminating aid to
constructions.
The modern approach has to a considerable
extent eroded the exclusionary rule even in
England."
Now the accepted view is that the document or report preceding the
legislation can legitimately be taken into consideration while construing the
provisions of an Act.
We, therefore, proceed to examine  the question before us in the light
of facts stated hereinafter.
In England, the provisions of the law of
Property Act
of the Statute of
Fraud provided that no suit or action would be brought on agreement
relating to a property which was not in writing signed by the parties.	The
aim and object of the statute was to protect a party against fraud.  However,
certain difficulties were experienced when it was found that under an oral
agreement a party has performed his part of the contract, yet he was unable
to bring any action or suit against other party viz., transferor for a specific
performance of the agreement which was not in writing in view of the
provisions contained in the Statute of Fraud.  Under such  situations,
transferors managed to play fraud on innocent buyers who entered into an
oral agreement and performed their part of the contract.  In view of such
prevailing circumstances in England, the Court of Equity intervened on the
ground of equity and took action to enforce specific performance of a parole
agreement.  The view taken by the Court of Equity was that the object
behind the Law of Property of the Statute of Fraud was to protect against a
fraud, but the provisions of Law of Property of	 Statute of Fraud were being
used as an instrument to help and protect fraud.  Thus, the Court of Equity
did not permit the Statute of Fraud to be used as an instrument to cover the
fraud by the transferors where there was a part performance of a parole
agreement.
When the Transfer of Property Act
was enacted,
Section 53-A
did not
find place in it.  In the absence of
Section 53-A
, there arose difference of
opinion between various courts in India as regards the application of English
doctrine of part performance of contract as it was then prevailing in England.
Since there was a difference of opinion on question of	the application of
English equitable doctrine of part performance in various courts of India, the
Govt. of India resolved to set up a Special Committee for making
recommendations amongst others	whether the British equitable doctrine of
part performance be extended in India also.   The Special Committee was of
the view that an illiterate or ignorant buyer who had partly performed his
part of contract required statutory protection.	 The Committee was of the
further view that where a transferee in good faith that lawful instrument i.e. a
written contract would be executed by the transferor takes possession over
the property, the equity demanded that the transferee should not be treated as
trespasser by the transferor and subsequently evict him through process of
law in the absence of lawful transfer instrument.  The Special Committee
also considered the question whether protection under the proposed
Section
53-A
to a transferee would also be available even if the period of limitation
for bringing an action for specific performance of an agreement to sell has
expired.  On the said question, the Committee was of the view that even
after expiry of period of limitation, the relationship between the transferor
and transferee remains the same as it was within the period of limitation and,
therefore, the possession over the property taken in part performance of an
agreement is required to be protected even if the period of limitation for
bringing an action for specific performance has expired.
The aforesaid recommendation of the Special Committee were
accepted by the Govt. of India as the same is well reflected in the aims and
objects of amending Act 1929 whereby
Section 53-A
was inserted in the
Act.
The Special Committee's report which is reflected in the aims and
objects of amending Act 1929 shows that one of the purposes of enacting
Section 53-A
was to provide protection to a transferee who in part
performance of the contract had taken possession of the property even if the
limitation to bring a suit for specific performance has expired.  In that view
of the matter,
Section 53-A
is required to be interpreted in the light of the
recommendation of Special Committee's report and aims, objects contained
in amending Act 1929 of the Act and specially when
Section 53-A
itself
does not  put any restriction to plea taken in defence by a transferee to
protect his possession under
Section 53-A
even if the period of limitation to
bring a suit for specific performance has expired.
But there are certain conditions which are required to be fulfilled if a
transferee wants to defend or protect his possession under
Section 53-A
of
the Act.  The necessary conditions are
1)	there must be a contract to transfer for
consideration any immovable property;
2)	the contract must be in writing, signed by the
transferor, or by someone on his behalf;
3)	the writing must be in such words from which the
terms necessary to construe the transfer can be
ascertained;
4)	the transferee must in part performance of the
contract take	possession of the property, or of any part
thereof;
5)	the transferee must have done some act in
furtherance of the contract; and
6)	the transferee must have performed or be willing to
perform his part of the contract.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that if the conditions enumerated
above are complied with,  the law of limitation does not come in the way of
a defendant taking plea	 under
Section 53-A
of the Act to protect his
possession of the suit property even though a suit for specific performance
of a contract has barred by limitation.
The matter may be examined from another angle.	The established
rule of limitation is that law of limitation  is not applicable to a plea taken in
defence unless expressly a provision  is made in the statute.  The law of
limitation applies to the suits and applications.   The various articles of the
Limitation  Act
show that they do not apply to a defence taken by a
defendant in a suit.  Thus, the law of limitation bars only an action in a court
of law.	 In fact, what the
Limitation Act
does is, to take away the remedy of
a plaintiff to enforce his rights by bringing an action in a court of law, but it
does not place any restriction to a defendant to put forward any defence
though such defence as a claim made by him may be barred  by limitation
and cannot be enforced in a court of law.  On the said principle, a defendant
in a suit can put forward any defence though such defence may not be
enforceable in a court of law, being barred by limitation.
In
M.K. Venkatachari &	 Ors. vs. I.A.R. Arunachalam Pillai & Ors.
AIR 1967 Madras, 410, it was held, thus:
"that defence to limitation is a creature of a
positive law and, therefore, cannot be extended to
cases which do not strictly fall within the
enactment.  It is an established canon of
construction of law of limitation not to enlarge the
scope of statutory provisions of limitation by
analogy or logic".
It is, therefore, manifest that the
Limitation Act
does not extinguish a
defence, but only bars the remedy.  Since the period of limitation bars a suit
for specific performance of a contract, if brought after the period of
limitation, it is open to a defendant in a suit for recovery of possession
brought by a transferor to take a plea in defence of part performance of the
contract to protect his possession, though he may not able to enforce that
right through a suit or action.
In the present case, it is not disputed that the transferee has taken
possession over the property in part performance of the contract.   It is also
not disputed that the transferee has not brought any suit for specific
performance of the agreement to sell within the period of limitation.  It is
also not disputed that the transferee was always and still ready and willing to
perform his part of the contract. Further, the view taken by the High Court
in judgment under appeal was overruled by the Full Bench of the Bombay
High Court in the case of
Mahadeo Nathuji Patil vs. Surajbai Khushal Chand
Lakkad & Ors.
-	 1994 Maharashtra Law Journal, 1145, which, according to
our view, lay down the correct view of law.  In that view of the matter these
appeals deserve to be allowed.
Since the High Court has allowed the appeals solely on the ground
that the remedy for bringing a suit for specific performance is lost, therefore,
the defendant is not entitle to protect his possession under
Section 53-A
of
the Act, we,  after setting aside the judgment under challenge, send the
matters back to the High Court to decide any other question of law, if arises
in these appeals.
Consequently, the appeals are allowed.	There shall be no order as to
costs.
..J.
								(V. N. KHARE)


								.J.
								(AHOK BHAN)
January 22, 2002