[Cites
30
, Cited by
150
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Unique Butyle Tube Industries Pvt. ... vs U.P. Financial Corporation & Ors on 20 December, 2002
Equivalent citations: AIR 2003 SUPREME COURT 2103, 2003 (2) SCC 455, 2003 AIR SCW 104, 2003 ALL. L. J. 427, 2003 (1) SLT 235, 2003 (3) SRJ 520, (2003) 2 JCR 156 (SC), (2003) 1 BANKJ 485, (2003) 1 ALLMR 1196 (SC), 2003 (1) ALL MR 1196, 2003 ALL CJ 2 1114, 2003 (1) BLJR 666, (2003) 1 UPLBEC 901, (2003) 3 RECCIVR 378, (2003) 113 COMCAS 374, (2003) 2 ANDHLD 52, (2003) 1 SUPREME 333, (2003) 4 ICC 495, (2003) 1 UC 522, (2003) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 471, (2003) 1 BANKCLR 422, (2003) 2 CIVLJ 258, (2003) 2 PUN LR 65, (2002) 9 SCALE 778
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
,
Arijit Pasayat
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  8624 of 2002
Special Leave Petition (civil)  10315 of 2001

PETITIONER:
M/s. Unique Butyle Tube Industries Pvt. Ltd.

RESPONDENT:
U.P. Financial Corporation & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 20/12/2002

BENCH:
SYED SHAH MOHAMMED QUADRI & ARIJIT PASAYAT.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Leave granted.
The only question that falls for determination in this
case is whether the proceedings for recovery initiated by
U.P. Financial Corporation (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Corporation') under the Uttar Pradesh Public Monies
(Recovery of Dues) Act, 1972 (in short 'the U.P. Act') on
6.1.2001 are maintainable in view of
Section 34 (2)
of the
Recovery of Debts Due to Bank and Financial Institutions
Act, 1993 (in short 'the Act').
Factual position sans unnecessary details is as
follows:
Certificate was issued under the U.P. Act for recovery
of certain dues from the appellant for its alleged failure
to comply with the terms and conditions of loan granted to
it; similar failure was alleged by three Directors and
three guarantors. On 14.2.2001 Citation for recovery was
issued by the Tehsildar, Varanasi, for recovery of the
alleged dues as arrears of land revenue. Appellant
challenged the said action before the Allahabad High Court
in CMWP No.13738 of 2001 on the ground that after the
enactment of the Act, the proceedings were not maintainable.
Reliance was placed on the provisions contained under
Section 32(G)
of the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951
(in short 'the Financial Act') to contend that no other
proceeding is permissible to be taken under the Act.
Reference was made to
Sections 17
and
34
of the Act to
substantiate his stand.	 Stand of the Corporation before the
High Court was that alternative modes of recovery were
prescribed under different statutes and one cannot stand on
the way of the other mode. Choice was left upon to the
Corporation to act either under the Act or under the modes
permissible under the Financial Act. Proceedings initiated
under the U.P. Act were covered by the said Act.  A Division
Bench of the High Court on consideration of the rival
submissions held that the language of
Section 34(2)
of the
Act placed the position beyond controversy and concluded as
follows:
"The choice is clearly left open to the
Financial Corporation which may proceed under
the
D.R.T. Act
or may proceed under the other
modes of recovering the debts as are
permissible under the S.F.C. Act, i.e. it can
proceed under the provisions of the U.P.
Public Money (Recovery of Dues) Act."
Judgment of the High Court dated 27.4.2001 is under
challenge.
In support of the appeal learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that the field of operation so far as
the Act is concerned, has been clearly delineated in
Allahabad Bank vs. Canara Bank and Anr.
(2000 (4) SCC 406).
Section 34
of the Act confers overriding effect vis--vis
others statutes. The only exceptions to such overriding
effect are enumerated in sub-section (2) thereof.
Proceedings under the U.P. Act are not encompassed by the
exceptions. On the contrary, the action permissible so far
as Financial Act is concerned, can be spelt out from
Section
32 (G)
of the said Act.
In response, learned counsel for the Corporation
submitted that
Allahabad Bank
's case (supra) has no
application to the facts of the case.  Under the U.P. Act,
there is no question of any adjudication of dues payable and
once there is default, there is statutory empowerment to
issue a certificate in terms of
Section 3
of the said Act.
With reference to the decision of this Court in
Director of
Industries, U.P. and Ors. vs. Deep Chand Agarwal
(1980 (2)
SCC 332), it was submitted that validity of the said
provisions has been upheld by this Court and the procedure
adopted in the present case has been held to be legally
permissible.  The authorized functionary can take action,
the moment there is default and no adjudicatory process is
involved. The procedure is not in conflict with any
proceeding that can be taken under the Act.  The statutory
intention for enactment of the Act was to do away with the
cumbersome procedures involved for recovery and provisions
are not inconsistent with any provision of the U.P. Act,
which in terms of
Section 3(3)
prohibits institution of a
case for recovery of the sums due.  Therefore, the High
Court was justified in its conclusion. In any event,
according to him, the procedures under the Act are in pari
material with those which can be taken under the Financial
Act. So such a prescription has to be read into sub-section
(2) of
Section 34
of the Act by application of the principle
known as casus omissus and the deficiency, if any, can be
reconciled by purposive interpretation by reading the said
statute as a whole, and finding out the true legislative
intent.
In order to appreciate the rival submissions a few
provisions throwing light on the controversy need to be
noted.
Act:
"34: Act to have over-riding effect-
(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section
(2), the provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force or in any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than
this Act.
(2)	The provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, the
Industrial Finance
Corporation Act, 1948
(15 of 1948), the
State
Financial Corporations Act, 1951
(63 of
1951), the
Unit Trust of India Act, 1963
(52
of 1963), the
Industrial Reconstruction Bank
of India Act, 1984
(62 of 1984), the
Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985
(1 of 1986) and the
Small
Industries Development Bank of India Act,
1989
(39 of 1989).
Financial Act:
"32G: Recovery of amounts due to the
Financial Corporation as an arrear of land
revenue.  Where any amount is due to the
Financial Corporation in respect of any
accommodation granted by it to any industrial
concern, the Financial Corporation or any
person authorized by it in writing in this
behalf, may, without prejudice to any other
mode of recovery, make an application to the
State Government for the recovery of the
amount due to it, and if the State Government
or such authority, as that Government may
specific in this behalf, is satisfied, after
following such procedure as may be
prescribed, that any amount is so due, it may
issue a certificate for that amount to the
Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to
recover that amount in the same manner as an
arrear of land revenue.]




U.P. Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act,
1972:
3. Recovery of certain dues as arrears of
land revenue  (1) Where any person is party
(a)........
(b)........
(c)	to any agreement relating to a guarantee
given by the State Government or the
Corporation in respect of a loan raised by an
industrial concern; or
d)	 to any agreement providing that any
money payable thereunder to the State
Government or the Corporation shall be
recoverable as arrears of land revenue; and
such person
(i)	makes any default in repayment of
the loan or advance or any
instalment thereof; or
(ii)	having become liable under the
conditions of the grant to refund
the grant or any portion thereof,
makes any default in the refund of
such grant or portion or any
instalment thereof; or

.................
(2)	The Collector on receiving the
certificate shall proceed to recover the
amount stated therein as an arrear of land
revenue.
(3) No suit for the recovery of any sum due
as aforesaid shall lie in the civil court
against any person referred to in sub-section
(1).
(4) In the case of any agreement referred to
in sub-section (1) between any person
referred to in that sub-section and the State
Government or the Corporation, no arbitration
proceedings shall lie at the instance of
either party for recovery of any sum claimed
to be due under the said sub-section or for
disputing the correctness of such claim:
Provided that whenever proceedings are
taken against any person for the recovery of
any such sum he may pay the amount claimed
under protest to the officer taking such
proceedings and upon such payment the
proceedings shall be stayed and the person
against whom such proceedings were taken may
make a reference under or otherwise enforce
an arbitration agreement in respect of the
amount so paid, and the provisions of
Section
183
of the Uttar Pradesh Land Revenue Act,
1901, or
Section 287-A
, of the Uttar Pradesh
Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act,
1950, as the case may be, shall mutatis
mutandis apply in relation to such reference
or endorsement as they apply in relation to
any suit in the civil court."
Allahabad Bank
's case (supra) did not specifically deal
with
Section 34(2)
of the Act. However, certain observations
made in
the said judgment
are of relevance:
"20. We shall refer to
Sections 17
and
18
in
Chapter III of the RDB Act which deal with
adjudication of the debt:
"17. Jurisdiction, powers and authority
of Tribunals  (1) A Tribunal shall
exercise, on and from the appointed day,
the jurisdiction, powers and authority
to entertain and decide applications
from the banks and financial
institutions for recovery of debts due
to such banks and financial
institutions.
(2) An Appellate Tribunal shall
exercise, on and from the appointed day,
the jurisdiction, powers and authority
to entertain appeals against any order
made, or deemed to have been made, by a
Tribunal under this Act.
18.  Bar of jurisdiction  On and from
the appointed day, no court or other
authority shall have, or be entitled to
exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or
authority (except the Supreme Court, and
a High Court exercising jurisdiction
under
Article 226
and
227
of the
Constitution) in relation to the matters
specified in
Section 17
."
It is clear from
Section 17
of the Act that
the Tribunal is to decide the applications of
the banks and financial institutions for
recovery of debts due to them.	We have
already referred to the definition of
"debt" in
Section 2(g)
as amended by
Ordinance 1 of 2000.  It includes "claims"
by banks and financial institutions and
includes the liability incurred and also
liability under a decree or otherwise.	In
this context
Section 31
of the Act is also
relevant.  That section deals with transfer
of pending suits or proceedings to the
Tribunal. In our view, the word
"proceedings" in
Section 31
includes
"execution proceedings" pending before a
civil court before the commencement of the
Act.  The suits and proceedings so pending on
the date of the Act stand transferred to the
Tribunal and have to be disposed of "in the
same manner" as applications under Section
19.
21.	In our opinion, the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal in regard to adjudication is
exclusive.  The RDB Act requires the Tribunal
alone to decide applications for recovery of
debts due to banks or financial institutions.
Once the Tribunal passes an order that the
debt is due, the Tribunal has to issue a
certificate under
Section 19(22)
formerly
under
Section 19(7)
to the Recovery Officer
for recovery of the debt specified in the
certificate.  The question arises as to the
meaning of the word "recovery" in
Section
17
of the Act.	It appears to us that
basically the Tribunal is to adjudicate the
liability of the defendant and then it has to
issue a certificate under
Section 19(22)
.
Under
Section 18
, the jurisdiction of any
other court or authority which would
otherwise have had jurisdiction but for the
provisions of the Act, is ousted and the
power to adjudicate upon the liability is
exclusively vested in the Tribunal. This
exclusion does not however apply to the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or of a
High Court exercising power under
Articles
226
or 227 of the Constitution).  This is the
effect of
Sections 17
and
18
of the Act.
Section 34
of the Act consists of two parts.  Sub-
section (1) deals with the over-riding effect of the Act
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than the
Act. Sub-section (1) itself makes an exception as regards
matters covered by sub-section (2). The U.P. Act is not
mentioned therein.  The mode of recovery of debt under the
U.P. Act is not saved under the said provision i.e. sub-
section (2) which is of considerable importance so far as
the present case is concerned.	Even a bare reading therein
makes it clear that it is intended to be in addition to and
not in derogation of certain statutes; one of which is the
Financial Act. In other words, a Bank or Financial
institution has the option or choice to proceed either under
the Act or under the modes of recovery permissible under the
Financial Act. To that extent, the High Court's conclusions
quoted above were correct.  Where the High Court went wrong
is by holding that proceedings under the U.P. Act were
permissible.  U.P. Act deals with separate modes of recovery
and such proceedings are not relatable to proceedings under
the Financial Act.
Since a plea of casus omissus for purposes of
interpretation was urged, we think it necessary to deal with
that plea also.
It is well settled principle in law that the Court
cannot read anything into a statutory provision which is
plain and unambiguous. A statute is an edict of the
legislature. The language employed in a statute is the
determinative factor of legislative intent. The first and
primary rule of construction is that the intention of the
Legislation must be found in the words used by the
Legislature itself. The question is not what may be supposed
and has been intended but what has been said. "Statutes
should be construed not as theorems of Euclid". Judge
Learned Hand said,  "but words must be construed with some
imagination of the purposes which lie behind them". (See
Lenigh Valley Coal Co. v. Yensavage 218 FR 547).
The view
was re-iterated in
Union of India and Ors. v. Filip Tiago De
Gama of Vedem Vasco De Gama
(AIR 1990 SC 981).
In D.R Venkatchalam  and Ors. etc. vs. Dy. Transport
Commissioner and Ors. etc. (AIR 1977 SC 842) it was observed
that Courts must avoid	the danger of apriori determination
of the meaning of a provision based on their own pre-
conceived notions of ideological structure or scheme into
which the provision to be interpreted is somewhat fitted.
They are not entitled to usurp legislative function under
the disguise of interpretation.
While interpreting a provision the Court only
interprets the law and cannot legislate it. If a provision
of law is misused and subjected to the abuse of process of
law, it is for the legislature to amend, modify or repeal
it, if deemed necessary.  [See
Rishabh Agro Industries Ltd.
vs. P.N.B. Capital Services Ltd.
(2000 (5) SCC 515)].	`The
legislative casus omissus cannot be supplied by judicial
interpretative process. Language of
Section 6(1)
is plain
and unambiguous.
There is no scope for reading something
into it, as was done in
N.Narasimhaiah and Ors. v. State of
Karnataka and Ors.
etc. (1996 (3) SCC 88).
In State of
Karnataka and Ors. v. Nanjudaiah and Ors. (1996 (10) SCC
619) the period was further stretched to have the time
period run from date of service of High Court's order.	Such
a view cannot be reconciled with the language of
Section
6(1)
. If the view is accepted it would mean that a case can
be covered by not only clauses (i) and/or (ii) of the
proviso to
Section 6(1)
, but also by a non-prescribed
period. Same can never be the legislative intent.
Two principles of construction	one relating to casus
omissus and the other in regard to reading the statute as a
whole  appear to be well settled.  Under the first
principle a casus omissus cannot be supplied by the Court
except in the case of clear necessity and when reason for it
is found in the four corners of the statute itself but at
the same time a casus omissus should not be readily inferred
and for that purpose all the parts of a statute or section
must be construed together and every clause of a section
should be construed with reference to the context and other
clauses thereof so that the construction to be put on a
particular provision makes a consistent enactment of the
whole statute. This would be more so if literal construction
of a particular clause leads to manifestly absurd or
anomalous results which could not have been intended by the
Legislature. "An intention to produce an unreasonable
result", said Danckwerts, L.J., in Artemiou v. Procopiou
(1966 1 QB 878), "is not to be imputed to a statute if
there is some other construction available".  Where to
apply words literally would "defeat the obvious intention
of the legislation and produce a wholly unreasonable
result" we must "do some violence to the words" and so
achieve that obvious intention and produce a rational
construction.  [Per Lord Reid in Luke v. I.R.C. (1966 AC
557) where at p. 577 he also observed: "this is not a new
problem, though our standard of drafting is such that it
rarely emerges".]  Therefore, the High Court's conclusions
holding proceedings under the U.P. Act to be in order are
indefensible.
We may notice here that to strengthen his arguments,
learned counsel for the appellant referred to the decision
of this Court in
S.K. Bhargava vs. Collector, Chandigarh and
Ors.
(1998 (5) SCC 170).  The said case related to
Haryana
Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act, 1979
(in short
'Haryana Act').	 With reference to certain observations in
paragraph 8 of
the said judgment
, it was submitted that a
process of adjudication is inbuilt, even when the Managing
Director of the Corporation takes action.  We notice that
Section 3 of the Haryana Act is couched differently from
Section 3 of the U.P. Act.
Reference was made in the said
case to
Director of Industries
's case (supra), and held that
while upholding the validity of Section 3 of the U.P. Act,
the Court was not called upon to deal with the question as
to whether the principles of natural justice were implicit
in the said Section.  We also do not think it necessary to
go into that question.
The impugned order is set aside and the proceedings
under the U.P. Act are quashed.	 It shall be, however, open
to the Corporation to take such action under the Act or the
Financial Act as is legally available to it.  The appeal is
allowed without any costs.