[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hiralal Motilal Parikh (Deceased ... vs Spl. Laq Officer on 27 March, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 815                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016

             HIRALAL MOTILAL PARIKH
             (DECEASED THROUGH LRS)                                        APPELLANT(S)
                                                 VERSUS
             SPL. LAQ OFFICER & ANR.                                      RESPONDENT(S)


                                            J U D G M E N T
J.K. MAHESHWARI, J.
1. Arising out of the order dated 20.07.2015 passed

             by the High Court of Gujarat in the First Appeal No.

             1036 of 2002 preferred by the legal representatives

             of the original claimant, assailing the award dated

             05.11.20011 passed by the Reference Court; which was

             against the award passed on 30.07.19882 by Special

             Land           Acquisition     Officer        (in    short    ‘LAO’),    the

             present appeal has been preferred. In this appeal,

             the adequacy of compensation granted by the LAO, the

             Reference          Court     and   also       the   High   Court   has   been

             questioned.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
2. For the sake of convenience, it is noted that the
   NIDHI AHUJA
   Date: 2025.07.10
   17:20:53 IST
   Reason:
1   Land Acquisition Case No. 394 of 1989.
2   LAQ Case No. 2397.
1
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


subject land is non-agricultural bearing Survey No.

25, admeasuring about 33387 sq. mtrs., situated at

village/taluka         ‘Mehmedabad’,       District       –     Kheda,

Gujarat, which was acquired by Gujarat Housing Board

for    residential/housing/construction               purpose.      The

notification under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition

Act,   1894     (hereinafter       referred   to    as    ‘LAA’     for

brevity)   was    published        on   30.07.1985,      followed    by

notification under
Section 6
dated 31.07.1986. After

inviting objections, compensation at the rate of Rs.

4.50/- per square metre was determined by LAO, which

was enhanced to Rs. 45/- per square metre                       by the

Reference Court along with 30% solatium on the market

value,    10%   severance      charges,     plus    12%   per    annum

interest from the date of publication of notification

under
Section 4
till the date of Award/date of taking

possession of the land whichever is earlier, plus 9%

interest for one year from the date of taking of

possession      and   15%    per   annum   till    realization.      In

appeal,    the        High    Court      further    enhanced        the

compensation to Rs 53/- per square metre, including

other statutory benefits as granted by the Reference
2
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


Court.
3. Mr.        Harish        Raval,        learned          senior        counsel,

appearing       on       behalf    of    the    appellants            has     placed

reliance on the letter of allotment – Exhibit 44,

made     in    January,          1985    by     the    Collector            of    the

district       to    one     Harishchandra            Hiralal         Dalwadi       of

Survey No. 864, at the rate of Rs. 65/- per square

metre.    The       said    land    was       adjacent      to    the       subject

land. He further relied upon Exhibit 53, i.e., the

sale    deed     dated      29.08.1985         of     an    adjoining            land,

executed within a month from the date of notification

of
Section       4
LAA,     indicating         the       value       at    Rs.

152.37/-       per       square    metre.      In     reference         to       these

exemplars,          learned       Senior       Counsel      submitted            that

compensation as allowed by the Reference Court and

High Court is inadequate.
4. It     is     also       urged,       potentiality            of     the      land

acquired is a relevant factor; the land belonging to

appellants is a piece of Survey No. 25, and is one

kilometre       away       from    the       railway       station       and       bus

stand, as admitted by the departmental witness in his

statement.           Therefore,         adequacy           of     compensation
3
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


awarded by the Reference Court, marginally enhanced

by the High Court, is not proportionate to the value

of    the    land.
In    support          of    the     said    submissions,

reliance has been placed on the judgment of
‘Union of

India v. Raj Kumar Baghal Singh (Dead) Through Legal

Representatives and Others
, (2014) 10 SCC 422’ and

also in ‘Mehta Ravindrarai Ajitrai (Deceased) Through

His Heirs and LRs.
and
Others v. State of Gujarat
,

(1989)       4    SCC    250’        and       enhancement          of    fair        and

reasonable         amount      of    compensation             has    been       prayed

for.
5. Per contra, learned counsel representing the State

has    strenuously           urged    that          exemplar    Exhibit          44   is

merely an allotment order made by the Collector and

Exhibit 53, i.e., a sale deed of a small piece of

land    of       Society     where     roads         were     laid       with    other

amenities, cannot be used as reference to determine

the compensation. It is said in the facts and on the

material         placed,      the    Reference         Court        and    the    High

Court       has    rightly      determined             the     compensation            to

which interference in this appeal is not warranted.
6. In the facts and submissions made above, the short
4
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


question that falls for consideration is, whether the

compensation      awarded        by        the        Reference       Court,

marginally    enhanced     by    the       High       Court    along    with

other statutory benefits is fair and reasonable?
7. After     having      heard           and     given      our      anxious

consideration to the material placed, in particular

the exemplar of January 1985 – Exhibit 44, relied

upon   by   the   appellants,            i.e.,     allotment      of    land

bearing Survey No. 864 made by Collector at the rate

of Rs. 65/- per square metre, which is prior to the

date   of    acquisition        of       subject       land    and     other

documents    Exhibits     52    and       53,     i.e.,    testimony       of

purchaser    Kantibhai     Veljibhai            and    sale    deed    dated

29.08.1985     executed     immediately               within   one     month

respectively, vis-à-vis the date of acquisition and

proximity of subject land, in our view, no plausible

reason is on record for not accepting these documents

or not to rely upon them to determine compensation.
8. In the present case, Exhibit 53, i.e., sale deed

dated 29.08.1985 was executed within a month from the

date of notification under
Section 4
of the LAA. The

proximity of sale deed and the date of notification
5
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


is   not   in   dispute.        In   this    regard,       an    important

question is needed to be answered, i.e., whether a

document proximate to the date of notification can be

considered        as     exemplar          for      determination          of

compensation? The said issue has been considered by

this Court in the case of
‘Chimanlal Hargovinddas Vs.

Special    Land    Acquisition           Officer,     Poona     and     Anr.
,

(1988)     3    SCC     751’.    This       Court      summed      up    the

principles as follows: -
“10.     It    is    well   settled   in   determining
      compensation for the acquired land, price paid in a
      bona fide transaction of sale by a willing seller
      to a willing buyer is adopted subject to such
      transaction being for land adjacent to acquired
      land, proximate to the date of acquisition and
      possessing similar advantages. Of course, there are
      other well-known methods of valuation like opinion
      of experts and yield method. In absence of any
      evidence    of    a   similar   transaction,   it   is
      permissible to take into account transaction of
      nearest land around the date of notification under
Section 4
of the Act by making a suitable
      allowance. There can be no fixed criteria as to
      what would be the suitable addition or subtraction
      from the value of the relied upon transaction.
In
Chimanlal      Hargovinddas v. Land     Acquisition
      Officer
[(1988) 3 SCC 751] this Court summed up the
      principle as follows: (SCC pp. 753-56, para 4)
          “4. The following factors must be etched on
      the mental screen:
(1)-(4)***
           (5) The market value of land under acquisition
           has to be determined as on the crucial date of
           publication of the notification under
Section 4
6
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


of   the
Land  Acquisition Act
(dates    of
notifications under
Sections 6
and
9
are
irrelevant).
(6) The determination has to be made standing
on the date line of valuation (date of
publication of notification under
Section 4
) as
if the valuer is a hypothetical purchaser
willing to purchase land from the open market
and is prepared to pay a reasonable price as on
that day. It has also to be assumed that the
vendor is willing to sell the land at a
reasonable price.
(7) In doing so by the instances method, the
court has to correlate the market value
reflected in the most comparable instance which
provides the index of market value.
(8) Only genuine instances have to be taken
into account. (Sometimes instances are rigged
up in anticipation of acquisition of land.)
(9) Even post-notification instances can be
taken into account (1) if they are very
proximate, (2) genuine, and (3) the acquisition
itself has not motivated the purchaser to pay a
higher price on account of the resultant
improvement in development prospects.
(10) The most comparable instances out of the
genuine instances have to be identified on the
following considerations:
(i) proximity from time angle,
(ii) proximity from situation angle.
(11) Having identified the instances which
provide the index of market value the price
reflected therein may be taken as the norm and
the market value of the land under acquisition
may be deduced by making suitable adjustments
for the plus and minus factors vis-à-vis land
under acquisition by placing the two in
juxtaposition.
(12) A balance sheet of plus and minus factors
may be drawn for this purpose and the relevant
factors may be evaluated in terms of price
variation as a prudent purchaser would do.
7
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


(13) The market value of the land under
acquisition has thereafter to be deduced by
loading the price reflected in the instance
taken as norm for plus factors and unloading it
for minus factors.
(14) The exercise indicated in clauses (11) to
(13) has to be undertaken in a common sense
manner as a prudent man of the world of
business would do. We may illustrate some such
illustrative (not exhaustive) factors:
Plus                      Minus
        factors                   factors
1. smallness of size        1. largeness of area
2. proximity to             2. situation in the
a road                      interior at a distance
                            from the road
3. frontage       on        3.   narrow strip of
a road                      land with very small
                            frontage compared to
                            depth
4.    nearness         to   4.     lower    level
developed area              requiring         the
                            depressed portion to
                            be filled up
5.        regular           5.   remoteness    from
shape                       developed locality
6. level vis-à-vis          6.     some    special
land         under          disadvantageous factor
acquisition                 which would deter a
                            purchaser
7. special value for
an   owner   of   an
adjoining   property
to whom it may have
some   very  special
advantage
(15) The evaluation of these factors of course
depends on the facts of each case. There cannot
be any hard-and-fast or rigid rule. Common
8
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


           sense is the best and most reliable guide. For
           instance, take the factor regarding the size. A
           building plot of land say 500 to 1000 sq yd
           cannot be compared with a large tract or block
           of land of say 10,000 sq yd or more. Firstly
           while a smaller plot is within the reach of
           many, a large block of land will have to be
           developed by preparing a layout, carving out
           roads, leaving open space, plotting out smaller
           plots, waiting for purchasers (meanwhile the
           invested money will be blocked up) and the
           hazards of an entrepreneur. The factor can be
           discounted by making a deduction by way of an
           allowance at an appropriate rate ranging
           approximately between 20% to 50% to account for
           land required to be set apart for carving out
           lands and plotting out small plots. The
           discounting will to some extent also depend on
           whether it is a rural area or urban area,
           whether building activity is picking up, and
           whether waiting period during which the capital
           of the entrepreneur would be locked up, will be
           longer or shorter and the attendant hazards.
           (16) Every case must be dealt with on its own
           fact pattern bearing in mind all these factors
           as a prudent purchaser of land in which
           position the Judge must place himself.
           (17) These are general guidelines to be applied
           with understanding informed with common sense.”
                        xx    xx        xx     xx
9. On perusal of the above, it is clear that bona

fide transaction of sale, if proximate to the land

acquired and the date, in absence of any evidence

that acquisition has not motivated the purchaser to

pay    a    higher    price        on        account    of     resultant

improvement in development prospects, can be relied

upon   while   determining     the           compensation.     The    said
9
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


judgment has been followed by this Court in the case

of
Raj Kumar Baghal Singh (Dead
) (supra).
10. Similarly, in the judgment of Mehta Ravindrarai

Ajitrai   (supra),   this   Court   has   clearly    spelt    out

that post notification instances may be taken into

consideration while computing the compensation. The

relevant paragraphs are reproduced as thus: -
“4.    We do not feel called upon to enter into a
      detailed scrutiny of the evidence led by the
      parties before the learned Civil Judge. The main
      instance relied upon by the claimants was by way
      of an agreement to sell dated January 21, 1957
      and a sale deed dated April 2, 1957 in respect of
      the sale of 42552 square yards of land out of
      survey No. 333/2 which is adjoining the land with
      which we are concerned which forms part of survey
      No. 33 1. The land sold under this instance was
      known as "Kesarbagh" and was sold to Mahalaxmi
      Mills Limited by Prince Nirmalkumarsinghji. The
      rate at which it was sold works out to Rs. 3 per
      sq. yard. On the basis of this instance, the
      claimants had made their claim at Rs.3 per square
      yard before the Land Acquisition Officer. The
      High Court inter alia rejected this instance on
      the basis that the contents of the sale deed were
      not properly proved. However, after an order for
      remand made by this Court on August 25, 1981
      evidence has been led regarding this sale and the
      sale deed has been duly proved by the evidence of
      one Dharamdas, a director of Mahalaxmi Mills
      Limited, the purchaser, and the vendor Prince
      Nirmalkumarsinghji. It was marked originally as
      Exhibit 87 and after the evidence on remand as
      Exhibit 152. The evidence shows that this land
      was just adjacent to the land of the purchaser,
      Mahalaxmi Mills Limited. The agreement of sale is
      dated January 21, 1957 and the conveyance or
10
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


sale-deed is dated April 2, 1957 as aforestated.
The price has been fixed under the agreement of
sale. This agreement of sale was entered into
about five months after the publication of
section 4
notification in the case before us The
High Court rejected the said instance on the
ground that the contents of the sale-deed were
not proved although the execution was thereof
duly proved. In view of the evidence led after
remand, it cannot be disputed that this agreement
of sale as well as the sale deed have been duly
proved and they have been duly marked as
exhibits. The High Court further took the view
that in any event, no reliance could be placed on
this instance of sale because the acquisition of
the land in question before us was for the
construction of an industrial estate at Bhavnagar
and such construction was bound to have pushed up
the price of land in the surrounding area. There
is, however, nothing in the evidence to show that
there was any sharp or speculative rise in the
price of the land after the acquisition and this
has been noticed by the High Court.
It appears
that under these circumstances, the High Court
was not justified in not taking this instance
into account at all as it has done on the ground
that it was a post-acquisition sale and could not
be regarded as a comparable instance at all. The
market value of a piece of property for purposes
of
section 23
of the Land Acquisition Act is
stated to be the price at which the property
changes hands from a willing seller to a willing,
but not too anxious a buyer, dealing at arms
length. Prices fetched for similar lands with
similar advantages and potentialities under bona
fide transactions of sale at or about the time of
the preliminary notification are the usual and,
indeed the best, evidences of market value. (See:
Administrator   General   of   West   Bengal   v.
Collector, Varanasi
, [1988] 2 SCC 150 at para 8.)
5.     Keeping these factors in mind, we feel
that although the instance reflected in the sale
deed (Exhibit 152) and the agreement for sale in
connection with that land, pertains to a sale
11
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


         after the acquisition, it can be fairly regarded
         as reasonably proximate to the acquisition and,
         in the absence of any evidence to show that there
         was any speculative or sharp rise in the prices
         after the acquisition the agreement to sell dated
         January 21, 1957 must be regarded as furnishing
         some light on the market value of the land on the
         date of publication of
section 4
notification.
However, certain factors have to be taken into
         account and appropriate deductions made from the
         rate disclosed in the said agreement to sell in
         estimating the market value of the land with
         which we are concerned at the date of the
         acquisition. One of these factors is that there
         seems to have been some rise in the price of land
         on account of the acquisition of the land in
         question before us for purposes of constructing
         an industrial estate. Another factor is that the
         land proposed to be purchased under the said
         agreement to sell was adjoining the land of the
         purchaser and the purchaser might have paid some
         extra amount for the convenience of getting the
         neighbouring land.
11. Indeed, it is true that every case must be dealt

with   on    its   own   facts   bearing   in   mind   that    all

factors are relevant to be understood by a prudent

purchaser of land and the judge while determining the

compensation must keep those factors in mind. In the

said context, Exhibit 53 sale deed was executed in

favour of Danjibhai Samji Patel, Kantibhai Veljibhai

Patel and Manibhai Veljibhai Patel for plot no. 33 of

Survey      No.    954   admeasuring   59.29     square      metre

situated in Navjivan Cooperative Housing Society. The
12
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


purchaser Kantibhai was brought in witness box and

his    statement        is    Exhibit       –    52,     wherein     he     has

categorically       deposed         that,       he     and   his    brothers

purchased the plot from the Society. In rebuttal, a

bald statement to say sale deed is not genuine, was

not enough to not accept the same for a reason that

the purchaser of the land was not motivated to pay

the higher price for execution of the said sale deed

because it was in colony developed by Society. The

land of sale deed is proximate to the land acquired.
In this view, relying upon the principles enunciated

in
Chimanlal         Hargovinddas
(supra)       and     Mehtra

Ravindrarai (supra), we are constrained to accept the

document Exhibit – 53 as exemplar. At the same time,

we cannot lose sight of the fact that Collector of

the District himself allotted the land of Survey No.

864 in the name of Harishchandra Hiralal Dalwadi at

the   rate    of   Rs.       65/-     per   square       metre      prior   to

acquisition, meaning thereby, the government wanted

to    fetch   higher         amount    by       allotting     land    to    an

individual.        In        such     scenario,          computation        of

compensation by Reference Court and High Court at a
13
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


lower rate for the land acquired cannot be accepted.

As such, said exemplar is also relevant to determine

the fair and reasonable amount of compensation.
12. So far as contention of potentiality of the land

qua    compensation     is   concerned,       the     statement      of

Shripat     Dattatreya        (departmental           witness)       is

relevant, whereby it is admitted by him that railway

station and the bus station are one kilometer away

from      the   place        of        acquisition,      therefore,

potentiality of the land cannot be doubted.
13. We have perused the reasonings given by Reference

Court on Issue No. 1, wherein the details of Exhibit

53 have been specifically mentioned in paragraph 8 to

10 indicating that the said land is adjoining to the

subject land acquired by the respondent. It is true

that the Court has not given findings in this regard,

but without disputing the contentions as advanced by

the counsel for the appellant, compensation has been

determined at the rate of Rs. 45/- per square metre.

During hearing before us, it has not been objected by

the respondent that the subject land and the land

indicated in exemplar Exhibit 53 are not adjoining,
14
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


therefore, we accept the fact that the land acquired,

and the land of exemplar Exhibit 53 are adjoining.
14. Proceeding further, since the land acquired is a

non-agricultural land and its acquisition is for use

and        occupation        by         Housing       Board         for

residential/housing/construction            purpose,        therefore,

it    is   imperative   for       the   Housing     Board     to    have

development of the land. Thus, for the purpose of

development,     some   part       of    the      subject    land    is

required to be left. As we are accepting the exemplar

of a piece of land situated in a colony developed by

Navjivan Cooperative Society, therefore, at least 30%

of the acquired land is required to be left by the

Housing Board for the development out of the subject

land. In the said event, if we accept the value of

Exhibit 53 – sale deed, which is a piece of plot,

after leaving the land for development, in the said

contingency, on deduction of 30% as the development

cost, the compensation would come at the rate of Rs.

107/- per square metre, as rightly discussed by the

Reference Court in paragraph 14.
15. As     already   noted    above,       even     prior     to    the
15
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


notification, the land was allotted by the Collector

at the rate of Rs. 65/- per square metre [Exhibit

44]. Thus,      even if we take mean of the documents

Exhibit 44 and Exhibit 53 [i.e., (65 + 152.37) / 2]

which comes to Rs. 108.68/- per square metre. The

said value is also nearer to the value as determined

in    the   above   paragraphs    i.e.,   Rs.    107     per   square

metre.
16. In view of the discussions made hereinabove and

considering the entirety of facts, the compensation

as determined by the High Court at the rate of Rs.

53/- per square metre is on the lower side. In lieu

of acceptance of exemplar Exhibit 53 at the rate of

Rs. 53/- and mean of exemplars Exhibits 44 and 55

comes to Rs. 108.68/- per square metre. Therefore, we

direct      that    the    compensation     of     the     land     be

determined accepting value at the rate of Rs. 107/-

per    square      metre   and   the   question     as    posed     is

answered. Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed

in part.
17. The other benefits regarding solatium, severance

charges,     per     annum   interest     from     the     date     of
16
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1438 OF 2016


publication     of   the   notification,     till      the   date    of

award/ date of taking possession along with interest

as specified in the order passed by the Reference

Court shall also commensurately be allowed.
18. The   respondents      are   directed    to     calculate       the

compensation and paid to appellants within a period

of three months from the date of communication of

this   order.   Pending     application(s),       if    any,   shall

stand disposed of.
……………………………………………………., J.
[ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]



                                      ……………………………………………………., J.
[ ARAVIND KUMAR ]

   New Delhi;
March 27, 2025.
17