[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Ramasamy vs R. Nallammal on 3 March, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 310




                                                             NON-REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.______________ OF 2025
                                     (@S.L.P. (C) No. 2177 of 2024)


                            K. RAMASAMY                            …Appellant

                                                   VERSUS

                            R. NALLAMMAL & ORS.                …Respondents

                                             JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
Leave granted.
2. An ex­parte judgment & decree dated
                            13.04.2016, for specific performance, was sought to
Signature Not Verified   be set aside by application dated 04.01.2020, after
Digitally signed by
condoning the delay of 1312 days, long after legal
   Jayant Kumar Arora
   Date: 2025.03.03
   18:30:55 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 11
representatives of the 1st defendant appeared in an
execution petition filed by the plaintiff.
3. We heard learned Senior Counsel, Sri. Dama
Seshadri Naidu for the appellant and Sri. Gopal
Shankarnarayanan, learned Senior Counsel for the
respondents.
4. The impugned order referred to two
decisions     of     this   Court   in
Collector,   Land
Acquisition, Anantnag & Anr. Vs. Mst
. Katiji &
Ors.1 and H. Dohil Constructions Company Pvt.
Ltd. v. Nahar Exports Ltd.2
, both on the issue of
condonation of delay and applied the principles of
the former to condone the delay and allow the
application, setting aside the ex­parte decree on
payment of cost of Rupees One lakh and a further
direction to file a written statement within a period
of four weeks. The suit was also directed to be
disposed of within a period of three months from the
date of receipt of copy of order. The reasoning for
the exercise of such equitable jurisdiction was on

1 (1987) 2 SCC 107
2 (2015) 1 SCC 680
Page 2 of 11
the ground that the predecessor­in­interest who was
the defendant in the suit and who had also half
interest in the property though had appeared before
the Trial Court had not filed a written statement and
later died, upon which the wife and son, the legal
representatives     came      into   the   picture.   The
contention that the Counsel who was handling the
case on behalf of the deceased had taken time to
hand   over   the    files;   which    were    misplaced,
eventually handed over on 16.12.2019 soon after
which the petition to set aside the ex­parte decree
was filed, found favour with the learned Single
Judge. The High Court reversed the detailed order of
the Trial Court which refused to condone the delay
on the facts coming out from the records.
5. On the subject matter of the suit, suffice it
to notice that the defendants 1 and 2 jointly owned
the scheduled property and the first defendant; who
is now deceased and is represented by his legal
representatives, executed a power of attorney in
favour of the second defendant.               The second
defendant on his behalf and also on behalf of the
first defendant executed a sale agreement in favour
Page 3 of 11
of the plaintiff for consideration of Rs. 20 lacs out of
which Rs. 5 lacs were paid.        The plaintiff though
always willing and ready to discharge his part of the
agreement, the second defendant failed so to do and
also refused to turn up at the Sub Registrar’s Office
where the plaintiff had gone on 14.01.2016 with the
balance    sale   consideration;    resulting   in   the
initiation of the suit for specific performance. The
first   defendant,   the   predecessor­in­interest    of
respondents herein appeared but did not file a
written statement. The second respondent also did
not appear and the Trial Court passed judgment in
the case which is produced as Annexure P­6 herein.
Admittedly an execution petition was filed in which
the legal representatives, the respondents herein
had appeared. It was much later that the petition for
setting aside the ex­parte decree was filed.
6. Sri. Naidu argued that there was
absolutely no cause for the High Court to reverse
the well­considered order of the Trial Court. The
delay was not properly explained and the grounds
taken cannot at all be countenanced. The suit was
decreed on 13.04.2016 and the death of the first
Page 4 of 11
defendant occurred much later on 22.02.2017. The
claim that first defendant was hospitalised cannot
be accepted since the document produced indicated
it to be a hospitalisation long after the judgment
and decree. Further the very contention taken up
before the trial court that the files were handed over
late, also cannot be countenanced since the very
same lawyer continued to represent one of the legal
representatives. There is no equity in now seeking to
set aside a decree of specific performance especially
when the plaintiff had deposited the balance
consideration of Rs. 15 lacs at the time of filing the
suit itself and there is considerable escalation of the
value of the property in the time ensuing, which
benefit has to go to the plaintiff­appellant.
7. Sri. Shankarnarayan however points out
that there are umpteen number of cases in which
this Court has exercised the equitable jurisdiction
when there is sufficient hardship shown. It is
argued that the agreement for sale was a purely
collusive affair without knowledge of the first
defendant, that the first defendant had cancelled
the power of attorney on coming to know of it. The
Page 5 of 11
various transactions between the parties indicated
that none had intended the sale agreement to be
acted upon, which were suppressed by the plaintiff.
The very valuable property was sold away for a
pittance and the legal representatives are entitled to
the benefit of the property purchased by the hard­
earned money of their predecessor. It is also
undertaken that the entire advance amount can be
deposited and there is sufficient protection granted
to the plaintiff by the impugned order which
directed expeditious disposal of the suit.
8. The agreement itself is of the year 2013
and the suit of the year 2015, admittedly the first
defendant appeared, but since no written statement
was filed, he was declared ex­parte. There is nothing
to show that the first defendant suffered from any
ailment which disabled him to contest the matter;
which is the first aspect to be considered while
entertaining an application for setting aside the ex­
parte   decree.   Moreover    the   trial    court   had
specifically spoken of the delay. Admittedly the first
defendant had died long after the suit was decreed
in which period also he did not contest the suit.
Page 6 of 11
Though a contention was taken by the learned
Senior Counsel that the predecessor­in­interest of
the respondents was suffering from parkinsonism,
the gravity of the affliction was not evident from the
document produced before the trial court. This
assumes significance since the 1st defendant had
appeared in the suit. The hospitalisation, proved by
the document, as found by the Trial Court was of
only four days and that too long after the Decree.
9. The plaintiff initiated execution
proceedings   in    the   year     2018    and    both   the
respondents appeared before the execution court on
20.08.2018 wherein also, no serious contest was
made. The contention of the respondent is that they
were unaware of the ex­parte decree and had
approached     their      lawyer     who     had      taken
considerable time in returning the files which was
eventually done on 16.12.2019, soon after which an
application to set aside the ex­parte decree was
filed. We are unable to accede to the same, since,
information regarding the ex­parte decree, if not
earlier available to the respondents was definitely
available on 20.08.2018 when they appeared before
Page 7 of 11
the execution court. The only contention regarding
the further delay caused after the appearance in the
execution proceeding is that the files were not
handed over by the lawyer. In the more than one
year, that it took for the lawyer to trace out the
misplaced files, definitely certified copy of the
records could have been taken and an application to
set aside the ex­parte decree filed. In any event the
ex­parte decree would be available in the execution
proceedings itself and there was no difficulty in
filing an application for setting aside the ex­parte
decree immediately. In fact, the respondents having
contested the execution proceedings, the Court itself
had executed the conveyance to satisfy the decree of
specific performance.
10. In Mst. Katiji1, this Court deprecated
a pedantic approach in seeking for an explanation
for every day’s delay and exhorted the doctrine to be
applied   in    a    rational,     common    sensical    and
pragmatic manner. It was also held that substantial
justice and technical considerations, pitted against
each   other,       the   former    should   be     preferred
Page 8 of 11
especially in cases of non­deliberate delay which
cannot result in an injustice being done. Even going
by
the said decision
, we cannot find a non­
deliberate delay in the above matter. As we already
found, there is no explanation for the deceased first
defendant, to have not contested the matter, the
joint ownership with the other defendant and the
power of attorney executed in his favour as also the
sale agreement being admitted. If in fact the power
of attorney was cancelled as pleaded then it should
have made the defendant more alert in contesting
the suit in which he appeared. The suit for specific
performance     filed    in   his   lifetime    was    left
uncontested despite the appearance. The death of
the first defendant was long after the decree. The
legal representatives though claimed to be unaware
of the decree, was made aware when a notice of
execution proceeding was served on them. They
appeared   in   the     execution   court   and    neither
contested it nor filed an application to set aside the
decree for long. A frivolous contention has been
raised that the lawyer took time to return the files;
which contention is also a bland statement made
Page 9 of 11
without the date on which they approached the
lawyer being specified. A specific question was put
to the first defendant who was examined on oath, in
support of the application to set aside the ex­parte
decree, as to the same lawyer having been engaged
by his mother, which was not denied.
11. Learned Senior Counsel appearing
for the respondent vehemently argued on the
equitable principles applicable in the teeth of
genuine hardship; which however we do not find in
the present case. On the question of hardship, the
learned Senior Counsel only addressed us on the
merits of the subject matter, the apprehension that
it could have been a collusive affair while asserting
the   agreement   to   have   shown   a   pittance   as
consideration. We are of the clear opinion that the
impugned judgment was not on good grounds and
the cost awarded and the directions for expeditious
consideration would not unsettle the imbalance
which would be caused to the plaintiff who had been
waiting to get possession of the property for the last
one decade. We are unable to accept the reasoning
of the impugned order to condone the delay
Page 10 of 11
occasioned, because there is falsity writ large, in the
submission of the lawyer having misplaced the files.
The application to set aside the ex­parte decree was
only an afterthought and purely experimental. The
law favours the diligent and not the indolent. We
set aside the order of the High Court, thus restoring
the order of the Trial Court rejecting the application
for condonation of delay.
12. The appeal, hence, stands allowed.
……………………..……………, J.
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA]


                      ……………………..……………, J.
[K. VINOD CHANDRAN]




NEW DELHI;
MARCH 03, 2025.
Page 11 of 11