[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Alchemist Hospitals Ltd vs M/S Ict Health Technology Services ... on 6 November, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1289                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. ………….. OF 2025
                               [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 19647/2024]


            M/S ALCHEMIST HOSPITALS LTD.                                      … APPELLANT

                                                         VS.

            M/S ICT HEALTH TECHNOLOGY
            SERVICES INDIA PVT. LTD.                                        … RESPONDENT




                                                      JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.          Leave granted.
2.          The present civil appeal assails the judgment and order of the High

                            Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh1 in ARB No. 471 of 2021,

                            whereby a learned Judge of the High Court dismissed an application

                            under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19962

                            filed by the appellant.
BRIEF FACTS
3.          The material facts relevant to decide the present appeal are as
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant       follows:
Date: 2025.11.06
   17:51:34 IST
   Reason:
1
High Court
2
A&C Act
1
a. The appellant is a private healthcare institution having its

               principal establishment at Panchkula, Haryana. Desirous of

               upgrading its existing hospital-information software to a more

               advanced, integrated system, the appellant entered into

               a Software Implementation Agreement3 dated 1st November

               2018 with the respondent, a Bengaluru-based technology

               company specialising in digital health-management platforms.
b. Under the agreement, the respondent undertook to implement

               its proprietary hospital-management product known as “HINAI

               Web Software”4, a software intended to streamline patient-care

               operations, billing, diagnostics, and record management across

               the appellant’s facilities.
c. Clause 8.28 of the Agreement which forms the focal point of

               this lis is reproduced as follows:
“8.28 – Arbitration


                     The parties shall attempt in good faith to resolve any dispute
                     arising out of or relating to this Agreement promptly by
                     negotiation between executives, who have authority to settle
                     the controversy and who are at a higher level of management,
                     than the persons with direct responsibility for administration
                     of this Agreement.
If the matter is not resolved by negotiation pursuant to
                     paragraph above, then the matter will proceed to mediation as
                     set forth below:
Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating in
                     any way to the Agreement/the relationship, including without
                     limitation, any dispute concerning the construction, validity,
3
Agreement
4
HINAI software
2
interpretation, enforceability or breach of the Agreement, shall
        be resolved by arbitration through senior management
        comprising respective Chairmen of the two parties
        (Arbitrators). Should the dispute not be resolved within fifteen
        (15) days after arbitration, the complaining party shall seek
        remedies through the courts of law. The demand for
        arbitration should be made within a reasonable time
        (maximum 60 days) after the dispute or matter in question
        has arisen.”

d. Following execution of the agreement, the appellant began

  implementing the HINAI software in November 2018. However,

  the appellant alleges that there were repeated procedural

  delays and technical failures on the part of the respondent,

  including sluggish performance, billing malfunctions, and

  incomplete integration of diagnostic modules.
e. Relying on assurances from the respondent, the appellant

  permitted a second attempt at implementation within three

  months. The HINAI software went live again on 1st January

  2020. The appellant alleges that there were numerous

  operational issues once again and the system was rolled back

  on 1st April 2020.
f. On even date, the appellant addressed an e-mail to the

  respondent invoking Clause 8.28 of the Agreement and

  requesting a mediation meeting between the Chairmen of the

  two companies at Panchkula or, alternatively, through video-

  conference in view of pandemic restrictions. The respondent

  replied on 3rd April, 2020 vide e-mail asking for the appellant’s

  cooperation.
3
g. Appellant called upon the respondent to concur in the

          appointment of a sole arbitrator and suggested the names of

          two retired Chief Justices for acting as an arbitrator by a notice

          dated 29th June, 2020, issued under Sections 11 and 21 of the

          A&C Act. Respondent acknowledged receipt of the notice by e-

          mail dated 29th July 2020, sought time to respond, and on 25th

          August 2020 filed a reply requesting trial of the project one last

          time.
Having spent so much of effort by both parties. It was
                   an unfortunate decision of roll back. For ICT it is not
                   only loss of name but also loss in revenue as our cost
                   incurred till date is more than the revenue we have got
                   from Alchemist. We still request Alchemist if there is
                   any way for making the project lie which will be in the
                   best interest of both sides. For which if ITC has to spent
                   some more effort, we will be honouring the same if
                   Alchemist ensures Master date and processes are frozen
                   and agreed one last time.
h. Constrained by the respondent’s communication, the appellant

          approached the High Court invoking Section 11(6) of the A&C

          Act and praying for the appointment of a sole arbitrator to

          adjudicate the disputes arising under the Agreement.


IMPUGNED JUDGMENT AND ORDER
4.   The High Court observed that on a plain reading of Clause 8.28 of the

     Agreement, the parties had envisaged a three-tier process for

     resolving disputes: first, by negotiation between senior management

     executives;    next,   through   mediation   between    the   respective

     Chairmen of the parties; and finally, by permitting the complaining
4
party to seek remedies through the courts of law if the dispute

        remained unresolved within fifteen days.
5.      The High Court held that the term “arbitration” had been loosely

        employed in Clause 8.28 and that the true intention discernible from

        its language was only to provide for negotiation and mediation at an

        internal company level. It was further observed that the Chairmen of

        both parties could not be regarded as private or independent

        adjudicators, and that no element of finality or binding effect was

        attached to their determination. Also, in the event of a disagreement

        between the two Chairmen, an outcome not improbable, the process

        would reach a deadlock, after which the parties were expressly free

        to approach civil courts.
6.      The High Court further observed that nothing in Clause 8.28 indicated

        any intention of the parties to refer their disputes to a private

        adjudicatory forum or to abide by its decision. The clause, in the High

        Court’s view, merely contemplated negotiation and mediation without

        creating a binding arbitral process and hence, it proceeded to dismiss

        the appellant’s application under Section 11(6) of the A&C Act holding

        that Clause 8.28 is not a valid arbitration agreement.


ISSUE
7.      The seemingly simple question that we are tasked to decide in this

        appeal is whether Clause 8.28 of the Agreement can be considered

        to be a valid arbitration agreement under the A&C Act.
5
ANALYSIS
8.   We have heard Mr. Puneet Bali, learned senior counsel for the

      appellant and Mr. Shamik Sanjanwala, learned counsel for the

      respondent.
9.   An “arbitration agreement” is defined by the A&C Act as follows:
7. Arbitration agreement.—

            (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an agreement by the
            parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
            arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal
            relationship, whether contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration
            clause in a contract or in the form of a separate agreement.

            (3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.

            (4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in—
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of
                    telecommunication      including     communication     through
                    electronic means which provide a record of the agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which
                    the existence of the agreement is alleged by one party and not
                    denied by the other.
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an
            arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract
            is in writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration
            clause part of the contract.
10.   Modelled on the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial

      Arbitration, 1985, the A&C Act forms the primary legislation for

      arbitration of disputes, especially for contractual and commercial

      disputes, giving primacy to the intent of the parties and every step
6
of the way is dictated by party autonomy, as far as practicable.
Section 7 of the A&C Act is no exception to this rule and party

      autonomy is foundational for any reference to arbitration of any

      dispute and/or difference that arises or might arise by and between

      the parties.
11.   Therefore, Section 7 of the A&C Act posits certain requirements that

      need to be fulfilled so as to satisfy the attributes of an arbitration

      agreement. They are (a) there must exist an agreement between the

      parties to refer a dispute/all disputes to arbitration, either before or

      after the said disputes arise; (b) the disputes must be in connection

      with a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not, and

      lastly, (c) the agreement must be in writing.
12.   The second and the third requirements of the disputes being in

      connection with a defined legal relationship and that the agreement

      must be in writing, are non-issues in the instant case. The crux of the

      controversy lies in the first requirement, i.e., whether the parties

      agreed to have the disputes and differences arising by and between

      them referred to arbitration in terms of Clause 8.28.
13.   It is settled law that Section 7 or any other provision of the A&C Act

      requires that an arbitration agreement need not be in any specific

      form, apart from compliance with the requirements that Section 7 of

      the A&C Act ordains. One may profitably refer to the decision in
Smt.
7
Rukmanibai Gupta v. Collector, Jabalpur & Ors.
5 for this

         proposition.
14.
In
K.K. Modi v. K.N. Modi6
, this Court set out the relevant factors

         to determine the existence of an arbitration agreement. The

         indicative factors and attributes are:
17. Among the attributes which must be present for an agreement
                to be considered as an arbitration agreement are:
(1) The arbitration agreement must contemplate that the
                        decision of the tribunal will be binding on the parties to the
                        agreement,

                        (2) that the jurisdiction of the tribunal to decide the rights of
                        parties must derive either from the consent of the parties or
                        from an order of the court or from a statute, the terms of which
                        make it clear that the process is to be an arbitration,

                        (3) the agreement must contemplate that substantive rights
                        of parties will be determined by the agreed tribunal,

                        (4) that the tribunal will determine the rights of the parties in
                        an impartial and judicial manner with the tribunal owing an
                        equal obligation of fairness towards both sides,

                        (5) that the agreement of the parties to refer their disputes to
                        the decision of the tribunal must be intended to be enforceable
                        in law and lastly,

                        (6) the agreement must contemplate that the tribunal will
                        make a decision upon a dispute which is already formulated at
                        the time when a reference is made to the tribunal.
18. The other factors which are relevant include, whether the
                agreement contemplates that the tribunal will receive evidence from
                both sides and hear their contentions or at least give the parties an
                opportunity to put them forward; whether the wording of the
                agreement is consistent or inconsistent with the view that the
                process was intended to be an arbitration, and whether the
                agreement requires the tribunal to decide the dispute according to
                law.
5
(1980) 4 SCC 536
6
(1998) 3 SCC 573
8
15.      It would further be apposite to refer to
Jagdish Chander v. Ramesh

         Chander7
where this Court has succinctly encapsulated the law on

         the point. The relevant passage therefrom reads:
8. This Court had occasion to refer to the attributes or essential
                elements of an arbitration agreement in
K.K. Modi v. K.N. Modi
[(
1998) 3 SCC 573] , Bharat Bhushan Bansal v. U.P. Small Industries
                Corpn. Ltd.
[(
1999) 2 SCC 166] and Bihar State Mineral Development
                Corpn. v. Encon Builders (I) (P) Ltd.
[(2003) 7 SCC 418] In
State of
                Orissa v. Damodar Das
[(1996) 2 SCC 216] this Court held that a
                clause in a contract can be construed as an “arbitration agreement”
                only if an agreement to refer disputes or differences to arbitration is
                expressly or impliedly spelt out from the clause. We may at this
                juncture set out the well-settled principles in regard to what
                constitutes an arbitration agreement:
(i) The intention of the parties to enter into an arbitration
                        agreement shall have to be gathered from the terms of the
                        agreement. If the terms of the agreement clearly indicate an
                        intention on the part of the parties to the agreement to refer
                        their disputes to a private tribunal for adjudication and a
                        willingness to be bound by the decision of such tribunal on
                        such disputes, it is arbitration agreement. While there is no
                        specific form of an arbitration agreement, the words used
                        should disclose a determination and obligation to go to
                        arbitration and not merely contemplate the possibility of going
                        for arbitration. Where there is merely a possibility of the
                        parties agreeing to arbitration in future, as contrasted from an
                        obligation to refer disputes to arbitration, there is no valid and
                        binding arbitration agreement.
(ii) Even if the words “arbitration” and “Arbitral Tribunal (or
                        arbitrator)” are not used with reference to the process of
                        settlement or with reference to the private tribunal which has
                        to adjudicate upon the disputes, in a clause relating to
                        settlement of disputes, it does not detract from the clause
                        being an arbitration agreement if it has the attributes or
                        elements of an arbitration agreement. They are: (a) The
                        agreement should be in writing. (b) The parties should have
                        agreed to refer any disputes (present or future) between them
                        to the decision of a private tribunal. (c) The private tribunal
                        should be empowered to adjudicate upon the disputes in an
                        impartial manner, giving due opportunity to the parties to put
                        forth their case before it. (d) The parties should have agreed
7
(2007) 5 SCC 719
9
that the decision of the private tribunal in respect of the
            disputes will be binding on them.
(iii) Where the clause provides that in the event of disputes
            arising between the parties, the disputes shall be referred to
            arbitration, it is an arbitration agreement. Where there is a
            specific and direct expression of intent to have the disputes
            settled by arbitration, it is not necessary to set out the
            attributes of an arbitration agreement to make it an arbitration
            agreement. But where the clause relating to settlement of
            disputes, contains words which specifically exclude any of the
            attributes of an arbitration agreement or contains anything
            that detracts from an arbitration agreement, it will not be an
            arbitration agreement. For example, where an agreement
            requires or permits an authority to decide a claim or dispute
            without hearing, or requires the authority to act in the
            interests of only one of the parties, or provides that the
            decision of the authority will not be final and binding on the
            parties, or that if either party is not satisfied with the decision
            of the authority, he may file a civil suit seeking relief, it cannot
            be termed as an arbitration agreement.
(iv) But mere use of the word “arbitration” or “arbitrator” in a
            clause will not make it an arbitration agreement, if it requires
            or contemplates a further or fresh consent of the parties for
            reference to arbitration. For example, use of words such as
            “parties can, if they so desire, refer their disputes to
            arbitration” or “in the event of any dispute, the parties may
            also agree to refer the same to arbitration” or “if any disputes
            arise between the parties, they should consider settlement by
            arbitration” in a clause relating to settlement of disputes,
            indicate that the clause is not intended to be an arbitration
            agreement. Similarly, a clause which states that “if the parties
            so decide, the disputes shall be referred to arbitration” or “any
            disputes between parties, if they so agree, shall be referred to
            arbitration” is not an arbitration agreement. Such clauses
            merely indicate a desire or hope to have the disputes settled
            by arbitration, or a tentative arrangement to explore
            arbitration as a mode of settlement if and when a dispute
            arises. Such clauses require the parties to arrive at a further
            agreement to go to arbitration, as and when the disputes arise.
Any agreement or clause in an agreement requiring or
            contemplating a further consent or consensus before a
            reference to arbitration, is not an arbitration agreement, but
            an agreement to enter into an arbitration agreement in future.
(emphasis ours)

What, therefore, follows from the above passage is that the mere use

of the word “arbitration” is not sufficient to treat the clause as an
10
arbitration agreement when the corresponding mandatory intent to

         refer the disputes to arbitration and the consequent intent to be

         bound by the decision of the arbitral tribunal is missing.
16.      A similar issue arose before this Court in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
v. IVRCL AMR Joint Venture8. The clause in question therein was

         as follows:
“15. Settlement of Disputes/Arbitration:
15.1. It is incumbent upon the contractor to avoid litigation and
                disputes during the course of execution. However, if such disputes
                take place between the contractor and the department, effort shall
                be made first to settle the disputes at the company level. The
                contractor should make request in writing to the Engineer-in-Charge
                for settlement of such disputes/claims within 30 (thirty) days of
                arising of the case of dispute/claim failing which no disputes/claims
                of the contractor shall be entertained by the company.
15.2. If differences still persist, the settlement of the dispute with
                government agencies shall be dealt with as per the Guidelines issued
                by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India in this regard. In
                case of parties other than government agencies, the redressal of the
                disputes may be sought in the court of law.”

         The Court held that the mere use of the word “Arbitration” in the title

         of the clause without any corresponding substantive part relating to

         arbitration could not be considered a valid arbitration agreement

         under Section 7 of the A&C Act.
17.      The above rulings lead us to the irresistible conclusion that mere use

         of the word “arbitration” in a clause of an agreement is not clinching

         or decisive. Section 7 presupposes an express intention of the
8
(2022) 20 SCC 636
11
dispute/difference being resolved through arbitration and mere

      reference to the term is not sufficient to meet this threshold. The A&C

      Act acknowledges the existence of an arbitration agreement based on

      its substance rather than its form. Regardless of the formal structure,

      effect has to be given to an arbitration agreement in essence.

      Arbitration being the creature of a contract, the ad idem intention of

      the parties is paramount to determine whether there exists a valid

      arbitration agreement. That being said, the invocation of the word

      “arbitration” nonetheless provides, at the very least, a discernible

      clue to the parties’ underlying intention.
18.   The exercise of legal drafting partakes equally of art, science and

      logic, but we fear that Clause 8.28 does not seem to show allegiance

      to any. Be that as it may, the task of interpreting the clause is

      embarked upon bearing in mind the authoritative rulings in the field.
19.   Clause 8.28 of the Agreement states that the parties must first

      attempt to negotiate the dispute in good faith. This part of the clause

      is admittedly not disputed in its meaning. The next part of the clause

      specifies that if the negotiation fails, then the parties would be

      obligated to mediate in the stated procedure and is then followed by

      the punctuation (:) colon, following which it prescribes that any

      dispute arising out of or relating in any way to the Agreement shall

      be resolved by “arbitration” through senior management comprising

      respective Chairmen of the two parties (Arbitrators). Moreover, the

      agreement further stipulates that should the dispute not be resolved
12
within fifteen (15) days after the proposed “arbitration”, the

         complaining party shall seek remedies through the courts of law.
20.      The word “arbitration” apart from appearing in the title of the relevant

         clause has been used 3 (three) times in the body of the clause. It is

         but obvious that the appellant has sought to rely on this inclusion of

         the word within the clause to submit that it forms an arbitration

         agreement.
21.      Is mere repetitive use of the word “arbitration” clinching/decisive? It

         is now time to ascertain in line with the aforesaid decisions, whether

         the parties’ intention was indeed to arbitrate, or merely to delineate

         a structured process of mediation.
22.      Since, at this stage, we are reminded of the decision in the case of
Bangalore Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. v. E.S. Solar Power (P)

         Ltd.9
, it would be apt to note what was observed. There occurs an

         interesting passage of what the Court should be minded about while

         gathering the intentions of the parties in a clause of the contract. It

         was observed:
17. The duty of the court is not to delve deep into the intricacies of
                human mind to explore the undisclosed intention, but only to take
                the meaning of words used i.e. to say expressed intentions [
Kamla
                Devi v. Takhatmal Land
, (1964) 2 SCR 152 : AIR 1964 SC 859]. In
                seeking to construe a clause in a contract, there is no scope for
                adopting either a liberal or a narrow approach, whatever that may
                mean. The exercise which has to be undertaken is to determine what
                the words used mean. It can happen that in doing so one is driven
                to the conclusion that clause is ambiguous, and that it has two
                possible meanings. In those circumstances, the court has to prefer
                one above the other in accordance with the settled principles.
If one
                meaning is more in accord with what the court considers to be the
9
(2021) 6 SCC 718
13
underlined purpose and intent of the contract, or part of it, than the
             other, then the court will choose the former or rather than the
             latter [Ashville Investments Ltd. v. Elmer Contractors Ltd., 1989 QB
             488 : (1988) 3 WLR 867 : (1988) 2 All ER 577 (CA)]. The intention
             of the parties must be understood from the language they have used,
             considered in the light of the surrounding circumstances and object
             of the contract.
[
Bank of India v. K. Mohandas
, (2009) 5 SCC 313 :
(2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 524 : (2009) 2 SCC (L&S) 32] . Every contract is
             to be considered with reference to its object and the whole of its
             terms and accordingly the whole context must be considered in
             endeavouring to collect the intention of the parties, even though the
             immediate object of inquiry is the meaning of an isolated
             clause. Bihar SEB v. Green Rubber Industries [Bihar SEB v. Green
             Rubber Industries, (1990) 1 SCC 731].
23.    In a catena of decisions, this Court has ruled that, in essence, an

       arbitration agreement should have an element of the nature of finality

       to refer the matters to arbitration. To name a few, one may make a

       reference to the decisions made in the cases of
Wellington

       Associates     Ltd.    v.   Kirit    Mehta10
,
Bihar    State    Mineral

       Development Corporation v. Encon Builders11
,
BGM and M-

       RPL-JMCT (JV) v. Eastern Coalfields Limited12, K.K. Modi
(supra) and Mahanadi (supra).
24.
In
Jagdish Chander
(supra), this Court discussing a similar situation

       as is in the present case, observed that when an agreement provides

       that the decision of the authority will not be final and binding on the

       parties, or that if either party is not satisfied with the decision of the

       authority, he may file a civil suit seeking relief, it cannot be termed

       as an arbitration agreement. That is precisely the case here.
10
(2000) 4 SCC 272
11
(2003) 7 SCC 418
12
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1471
14
25.   Upon a perusal of Clause 8.28, we are of the view that there is no

      indication that the proposed “arbitration” was supposed to be final

      and binding. In fact, the penultimate sentence of the clause stipulates

      that should the dispute not be resolved within fifteen (15) days after

      arbitration, the complaining party shall seek remedies through the

      courts of law. This suggests an attempt at amicable resolution inter

      se rather than a definitive submission to arbitration, failing which the

      party has the option to proceed to the courts of law.
26.   Lastly, the individuals designated as “arbitrators” under the clause

      are the respective Chairmen of the parties themselves. Ordinarily,

      arbitration contemplates reference to a neutral third party, a process

      supported by Section 12 read with the Seventh Schedule of the A&C

      Act. Here, however, the mechanism envisaged is akin to an internal

      settlement process between the Chairmen of the two companies.

      While this does not ipso facto disqualify the clause from being an

      arbitration agreement—since this may be waived under the proviso

      to Section 12(5)—it remains a significant circumstance in discerning

      the true intention of the parties.
27.   In our view, Clause 8.28 of the Agreement does not evince an

      intention to refer disputes to arbitration, for the above-mentioned

      reasons.
28.   Before we part, one other interesting point that has been raised is to

      be looked into. Whether the non-denial of the arbitration agreement

      by the respondent in the correspondence between the parties post
15
the notice being issued by the respondent would have any bearing

         upon the decision to refer the parties to arbitration.
29.
In
Powertech World Wide Ltd. v. Delvin International General

         Trading    LLC13
,    this   Court     no   doubt   took   the   view    that

         correspondence post issuance of the notice for arbitration can be a

         factor to determine the intention of the parties. The pertinent

         passage is extracted hereunder:
29. Thus, any ambiguity in the arbitration clause contained in the
               purchase contract stood extinct by the correspondence between the
               parties and the consensus ad idem in relation to the existence of an
               arbitration agreement and settlement of disputes through arbitration
               became crystal clear. The parties obviously had committed to settle
               their disputes by arbitration, which they could not settle, as claims
               and counterclaims had been raised in the correspondence exchanged
               between them. In view of the above, even the precondition for
               invocation of an arbitration agreement stands satisfied.
However, a closer perusal of the decision reveals that the decision

         stands on a much different footing. The respondent therein had in

         effect consented to the arbitration by stating that they wish to

         appoint a different arbitrator than the one proposed. No such

         correspondence exists in the present case. For ease of reference,

         paragraph 28 of the decision observes:
… the respondent had neither denied the existence nor the binding
               nature of the arbitration clause. On the contrary, it had requested
               the petitioner not to take any legal action for appointment of an
               arbitrator, as they wanted to suggest some other name as an
               arbitrator, that too, subject to the consent of the petitioner. This
               letter conclusively proves that the respondent had admitted the
               existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties and
               consented to the idea of appointing a common/sole arbitrator to
               determine the disputes between the parties. However, thereafter
               there had been complete silence from its side, necessitating the filing
13
(2012) 1 SCC 361
16
of the present petition under Section 11(6) of the Act by the
                petitioner.
(emphasis ours)
30.
In the case of
Visa International Ltd. v. Continental Resources

          (USA) Ltd.14
, this Court relying on the correspondence between the

          parties held that this proves the existence of the arbitration

          agreement. This decision too can be distinguished on similar lines as
in that case
, in response to the applicant's letter invoking the

          arbitration clause, the respondent merely objected to the names of

          the arbitrators inter alia contending that the suggested arbitration

          would not be cost-effective and the demand for arbitration itself was

          a premature one and there was no denial of an arbitration agreement

          by the respondent therein.
31.       In the instant case, we agree that there has indeed been no denial of

          the existence of an arbitration agreement by the respondent in its

          responses to the notice issued by the appellant. However, here, when

          there has indeed been no arbitration agreement in the first place,

          therefore, subsequent correspondence between the parties cannot

          displace the original intention. Such correspondence would have

          indeed been sufficient to displace the original intention if it was

          unequivocally clear about referring the disputes to arbitration, i.e.,

          the test mentioned under Section 7 of the A&C Act, which does not

          exist in the instant case. Once we take the view that there has, in
14
(2009) 2 SCC 55
17
fact, been no arbitration agreement in the first place, there exists no

      option available to the appellant other than approaching the courts of

      law.
CONCLUSION
32.   The impugned final judgment and order of the High Court is affirmed

      and the appeal is consequently dismissed.
33.   Appellant is free to seek remedy in accordance with law before the

      competent civil court. If the benefit of
Section 14
of the Limitation

      Act, 1963 is claimed, the relevant court may decide such claim

      appropriately.
34.   Parties shall bear their own costs.
………………………………….……J.
                                                 (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                            …………………………….…………J.
                                            (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
 NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 06, 2025.
18