[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation ... vs Kashmiri Lal Batra on 4 November, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1281                                              REPORTABLE


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.10522 OF 2025


             U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION
             THROUGH ITS CHIEF GENERAL MANAGER          … APPELLANT


                                          VS.

             KASHMIRI LAL BATRA & ORS.                  … RESPONDENTS



                                          WITH

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.10523 OF 2025

             PANKAJ PANDEY & OTHERS                    … APPELLANTS


                                          VS.

             THE STATE OF M.P. & OTHERS                … RESPONDENTS



                                          WITH

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.10524 OF 2025

             U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
             CORPORATION & OTHERS                      … APPELLANTS


                                          VS.
   Signature Not Verified

             GURUPRIT SINGH & OTHERS
   Digitally signed by
   JATINDER KAUR
                                                       … RESPONDENTS
   Date: 2025.11.04
   17:32:13 IST
   Reason:




                                           1
                                     WITH

      SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) DIARY NO.29083 OF 2018

U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
CORPORATION & OTHERS                                      … APPELLANTS


                                       VS.

JAVED AKHTAR & OTHERS                                     … RESPONDENTS



                                      AND

                   WRIT PETITION (C) NO.748 OF 2024

VIRENDER SINGH & OTHERS                                   … APPELLANTS


                                       VS.

UTTAR PRADESH STATE TRANSPORT
AUTHORITY & OTHERS                                        … RESPONDENTS




                               J U D G M E N T
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
INTRODUCTION
1.     The MOTOR VEHICLES ACT OF 19391 was a legislation dealing with a host

       of matters of everyday concern related to use of motor vehicles till its

       repeal in 1988. It dealt with matters concerning various kinds of motor

       vehicles, its registration, license to drive and operate, insurance, road
1
1939
MV Act
2
rules, traffic control, control of public transport, the transport

     authorities, the necessity to obtain permits, inter-State reciprocal

     transport       agreements,   State   Road   Transport    Corporations2,

     compensation in case of road accidents caused by errant vehicles by a

     duly constituted tribunal and so on. After almost 60 (sixty) years of its

     existence, the Parliament introduced the 1988
MV Act
w.e.f. 1 st July,

     1988. The 1988
MV Act
is more or less like its precursor but with

     certain additional provisions to tackle modern day challenges. Spread

     over 15 chapters, the 1988
MV Act
is considered to be a complete code

     in itself for anything and everything related to motor vehicles. One

     notable feature of the 1988
MV Act
is that it brought about a sea

     change in the policy regarding grant of permits for plying stage

     carriages on intra-Region, inter-Region and inter-State routes.

     Challenge to the liberalized policy of grant of permits came up for

     consideration before a 3-Judge Bench of this Court in
Mithilesh Garg

     v. Union of India3
. This Court held that the policy neither infringed
Article 14
nor
Article 19
rights of existing operators.
2.   In these appeals arising out of judgment(s) and order(s) of the High

     Court of Madhya Pradesh4 and the sole writ petition under
Article 32
of

     the Constitution seeking enforcement of rights guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(g)
thereof, we too are concerned with grant of permits

     but on certain inter-State routes which overlap portions of certain
2
SRTCs
3
(1992) 1 SCC 168
4
High Court
3
intra-State notified routes. Thus, Chapter V of the 1988
MV Act
titled

     CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES and Chapter VI thereof titled SPECIAL

     PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS and V form the

     focal point of our consideration.
3.   Delay in presenting SLP (C) Diary No. 29083 of 2018 is condoned.
Leave granted.
THE IMPUGNED ORDERS


IMPUGNED ORDER IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.10522 – 10523 OF 2025
4.   Kashmiri Lal Batra5, approached the High Court, Bench at Gwalior, in

     its public interest litigation jurisdiction by filing a writ petition6, inter

     alia, seeking a mandamus to the respondents to countersign permits

     granted by the State Transport Authority of Madhya Pradesh7. The

     respondents before      the   High Court were        the   state   transport

     authorities/departments of the States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar

     Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Haryana.
5.   The case pleaded in the writ petition by Kashmiri Lal reveals that in

     terms of an inter-State reciprocal transport agreement dated 21st

     November, 20068 executed by and between the STA, MP and the State

     Transport Authority, Uttar Pradesh9 under
Section 88
of the 1988 MV
5
Kashmiri Lal
6
WP No.8678 of 2013 (PIL)
7
STA, MP
8
IS-RT Agreement
9
STA, UP
4
Act, the Madhya Pradesh State Transport Corporation10 had exclusive

     right to operate buses on inter-State routes specified in Schedule B of

     the IS-RT Agreement. Schedule A of the IS-RT Agreement earmarked

     routes exclusively for plying of stage carriages by private operators.
6.   It was alleged that MPSRTC had been wound up and, thus, it stopped

     plying buses on these routes which came to be de-notified. Clause 4(3)

     of the IS-RT Agreement provided that once de-notified, the routes in

     Schedule B would be deemed to be included in Schedule A. The private

     operators had claimed that routes specified in Schedule B be converted

     and included in Schedule A so that they could be selected and issued

     permits to ply stage carriages on the routes mentioned in Schedule A,

     subject to provisions of the 1988
MV Act
.
7.   To operate stage carriages on the routes mentioned in Schedule B,

     which stood de-notified, the private operators applied for and were

     granted temporary permits by the STA, MP. However, the STA, UP

     refused to counter-sign these permits.
8.   Aggrieved by refusal of the STA, UP, as aforesaid, Kashmiri Lal

     approached the High Court seeking, inter alia, a mandamus to the STA,

     UP to grant countersignature on the permits issued by the STA, MP.

     The High Court, vide the impugned order11, directed the State of

     Madhya Pradesh12 to initiate proceedings to grant permanent stage

     carriage permits for the routes mentioned in Schedule B of the IS-RT
10
MPSRTC
11
dated 26th November, 2014 in W.P. 8678/2013 (PIL)
12
State of MP
5
Agreement, and to complete the proceedings within 2 months from the

     date of the order. Within 15 days thereafter, the State of Uttar

     Pradesh13 was directed to countersign the permits.
9.   Dissatisfied with the direction of the High Court contained in the

     impugned order, Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation14 has

     carried it to this Court in the lead appeal by special leave.
10. The same order is under challenge in the connected appeal, at the

     instance of Pankaj Pandey, Manohar Sharma, and Kuldeep Sharma.


IMPUGNED ORDER IN CIVIL APPEAL NO.10524 OF 2025
11. Guruprit Singh and Seema Arora, the respondents in the civil appeal,

     presented a writ petition15 before the High Court alleging that though

     they possessed the requisite permit to ply a stage carriage from

     Gwalior to Chandigarh under the IS-RT Agreement, the Transport

     Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh was not permitting them to

     park their vehicle at the respective bus stops.
12. A Single Judge of the High Court, vide order dated 27th February, 2017,

     disposed of the writ petition granting liberty to the permit holders/

     petitioners to approach the Depot Manager, Agra, who was then

     directed to decide the issue and give effect to the permit in accordance

     with the IS-RT Agreement, and also observed that pending such
13
State of UP
14
UPSRTC
15
WP No.8703/2016
6
consideration, there would be no hindrance caused for the pick-up and

     drop services.
13. Challenging this order, the UPSRTC preferred a writ appeal16 before a

     Division Bench of the High Court, claiming that it was beyond the

     territorial jurisdiction of the Single Judge to issue a mandamus when

     no cause of action arose in the State of MP. Rejecting the writ appeal,

     the Division Bench vide order dated 11th December, 2017 held that the

     State of UP had an obligation under the IS-RT Agreement and, as such,

     it was within the jurisdiction of the Single Judge to have issued the

     direction it did; consequently, the writ appeal was dismissed.
14. The order dated 11th December, 2017 is under challenge in the

     connected appeal by special leave.
IMPUGNED ORDER IN SLP (C) DIARY NO.29083 OF 2018
15. Javed Akhtar, the petitioner before the High Court in a petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution, sought a mandamus to the UPSRTC to

     permit parking of his vehicle as well as pick-up and drop of passengers

     in terms of the IS-RT Agreement and the permit granted to him on the

     route Chhatarpur to Kanpur.
16. Relying on the order dated 27th February, 201717, as confirmed by the

     order dated 11th December, 201718 passed by a co-ordinate bench of
16
Writ Appeal No. 189/17
17
Guruprit Singh and Anr. v. UPSRTC and Ors. in Writ Petition No. 8703 of 2016
18
UPSRTC and Ors. v. Gurupurit Singh and Ors. in Writ Appeal No. 189 of 2017
7
the High Court, the directions therein were made applicable mutatis

    mutandis.
WRIT PETITION NO. 748 OF 2024
17. Operators of 3 (three) stage carriages on the routes Shahdol to

    Allahabad, Sidhi to Varanasi and Rewa to Allahabad have presented

    the writ petition seeking similar and identical relief as were sought

    before the High Court by the petitioners therein, noted above. The

    respondents are the STA, MP and the STA, UP, among others. In

    essence, the petition seeks a mandamus to the STA, UP to counter-

    sign the stage carriage permits issued to the petitioners, under the IS-

    RT Agreement.
ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES
18. We have heard Ms. Garima Prashad, learned senior counsel for the

    appellant, i.e., the UPSRTC; Mr. Mishra, learned counsel for the State

    of UP, and Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned senior counsel and Mr. B S

    Rajesh Agrajit, learned counsel for the respondents/petitioners, being

    the private operators who are holders of permit issued by the STA, MP.
19. Ms. Prashad objected to maintainability of the public interest litigation

    before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh on the ground that Kashmiri

    Lal had been set up as a petitioner by the permit holders to espouse

    their cause and his writ petition, lacking in bona fides, ought to have

    been summarily dismissed. On merits, she claimed that no private
8
operator has a right to ply a stage carriage even on an inter-State

    route, a portion whereof is common to a notified route being part of

    an approved scheme under Chapter VI of the 1988
MV Act
, except to

    the extent allowed by such scheme; hence, there was no question of

    private permit holders being permitted to ply on portions of routes

    which are part of notified routes. Multiple authorities were cited by her

    to support her contention.
20. Mr. Mishra adopted the submissions of Ms. Prashad.
21. Per contra, Ms. Gupta and Mr. Agrajit for the rival parties, i.e., the

    permit holders, were quite vocal in their claim that although the

    UPSRTC would have been justified in resisting their claims so long the

    MPSRTC were plying its stage carriages on the inter-State routes, but

    now that the MPSRTC had been wound up, the terms of the IS-RT

    Agreement binds the State of UP; and since such agreement permits

    issuance of inter-State permits to private operators on routes

    mentioned in Schedule B thereof and permits having been issued by

    the STA, MP in favour of the private operators following due procedure

    laid down in the 1988
MV Act
, it is the duty of the State of UP to ensure

    that the terms of the IS-RT Agreement are given effect particularly

    when it is a party to it. According to the private permit holders, neither

    the STA, UP nor the UPSRTC has any authority or jurisdiction in law to

    nullify such a binding agreement.
22. Drawing our attention to the proviso to
Section 100
of the 1988
MV

    Act
, it has been contended that no approval of the Central Government
9
has been placed on record by the State of UP, or for that matter, by

       the UPSRTC. In the absence of such an approval, question of any route

       being notified does not and cannot arise and hence, the arguments

       advanced on behalf of the UPSRTC and the State of UP lack substance.


QUESTION FOR DECISION
23. The civil appeals and the writ petition under consideration seem to

       raise a substantial question of law. It is: whether a stage carriage

       permit can be granted to a private operator on an inter-State route in

       terms of an IS-RT Agreement executed by and between two

       neighbouring States under
Section 88
of the 1988
MV Act
when portion

       of such inter-State route is common to an intra-State route which has

       been notified in terms of a scheme approved per the provisions of

       Chapter VI of the 1988 MV Act19?
THE RELEVANT LAW
24. It would be profitable to read the provisions of the 1988
MV Act
which

       have a material bearing on the question arising for decision in this set

       of matters. Chapters V of the 1988 Act contains
Section 88
while

       Chapter VI thereof contains special provisions for the road transport

       undertakings.
25. The law relating to IS-RT Agreement appears in sub-sections (5) and

       (6) of
Section 88
reading as follows:
19
approved scheme
10
Section 88
. Validation of permits for use outside region in which
      granted.-
***
5) Every proposal to enter into an agreement between the States to fix the
      number of permits which is proposed to be granted or countersigned in
      respect of each route or area, shall be published by each of the State
      Governments concerned in the Official Gazette and in any one or more of
      the newspapers in regional language circulating in the area or route
      proposed to be covered by the agreement together with a notice of the date
      before which representations in connection therewith may be submitted,
      and the date not being less than thirty days from the date of publication in
      the Official Gazette, on which, and the authority by which, and the time and
      place at which, the proposal and any representation received in connection
      therewith will be considered.
Corresponding Law: S. 63(3-A) of the 1939
MV Act
(6) Every agreement arrived at between the States shall, in so far as it
      relates to the grant of countersignature of permits, be published by each of
      the State Governments concerned in the Official Gazette and in any one or
      more of the newspapers in the regional language circulating in the area or
      route covered by the agreement and the State Transport Authority of the
      State and the Regional Transport Authority concerned shall give effect to it.

      Corresponding Law: S. 63(3-B) of the 1939 MV Act
26. Chapter VI comprises of 9 (nine) sections of which the first 6 (six) are

    required to be read for resolving the controversy under consideration.

    They read as follows:
97. Definition.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,
      “road transport service” means a service of motor vehicles carrying
      passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward.
Corresponding Law: S. 68-A of the 1939 MV Act
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws.—The provisions of
      this Chapter and the rules and orders made thereunder shall have effect
      notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in Chapter V or
      in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
      effect by virtue of any such law.
Corresponding Law: S. 68-B of the 1939 MV Act
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road
      transport service of a State transport undertaking.—

      (1) Where any State Government is of opinion that for the purpose of
      providing an efficient, adequate, economical and properly co-ordinated road
11
transport service, it is necessary in the public interest that road transport
services in general or any particular class of such service in relation to any
area or route or portion thereof should be run and operated by the State
transport undertaking, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of
other persons or otherwise, the State Government may formulate a
proposal regarding a scheme giving particulars of the nature of the services
proposed to be rendered, the area or route proposed to be covered and
other relevant particulars respecting thereto and shall publish such proposal
in the Official Gazette of the State formulating such proposal and in not less
than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route
proposed to be covered by such scheme and also in such other manner as
the State Government formulating such proposal deem fit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when a proposal
is published under that sub-section, then from the date of publication of
such proposal, no permit shall be granted to any person, except a
temporary permit during the pendency of the proposal and such temporary
permit shall be valid only for a period of one year from the date of its issue
or till the date of final publication of the scheme under
Section 100
,
whichever is earlier.
Corresponding Law: S. 68-C of the 1939 MV Act
100. Objection to the proposal.—

(1) On the publication of any proposal regarding a scheme in the Official
Gazette and in not less than one newspaper in the regional language
circulating in the area or route which is to be covered by such proposal any
person may, within thirty days from the date of its publication in the Official
Gazette, file objections to it before the State Government.
(2) The State Government may, after considering the objections and after
giving an opportunity to the objector or his representatives and the
representatives of the State transport undertaking to be heard in the
matter, if they so desire, approve or modify such proposal.
(3) The scheme relating to the proposal as approved or modified under sub-
section (2) shall then be published in the Official Gazette by the State
Government making such scheme and in not less than one newspaper in
the regional language circulating in the area or route covered by such
scheme and the same shall thereupon become final on the date of its
publication in the Official Gazette and shall be called the approved scheme
and the area or route to which it relates shall be called the notified area or
notified route:
Provided that no such scheme which relates to any inter-State route shall
be deemed to be an approved scheme unless it has the previous approval
of the Central Government.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a scheme is
not published as an approved scheme under sub-section (3) in the Official
Gazette within a period of one year from the date of publication of the
proposal regarding the scheme in the Official Gazette under sub-section (1),
the proposal shall be deemed to have lapsed.
Explanation.—In computing the period of one year referred to in this sub-
section, any period or periods during which the publication of the approved
12
scheme under sub-section (3) was held up on account of any stay or
injunction by the order of any Court shall be excluded.

Corresponding Law: S. 68-D of the 1939 MV Act
102. Cancellation or modification of scheme.—
(1) The State Government may, at any time, if it considers necessary, in
the public interest so to do, modify any approved scheme after giving—
(i) the State transport undertaking; and
(ii) any other person who, in the opinion of the State Government, is likely
to be affected by the proposed modification, an opportunity of being heard
in respect of the proposed modification.
(2) The State Government shall publish any modification proposed under
sub-section (1) in the Official Gazette and in one of the newspapers in the
regional languages circulating in the area in which it is proposed to be
covered by such modification, together with the date, not being less than
thirty days from such publication in the Official Gazette, and the time and
place at which any representation received in this behalf will be heard by
the State Government.
Corresponding Law: S. 68-E of the 1939 MV Act
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings.—
(1) Where, in pursuance of an approved scheme, any State transport
undertaking applies in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government in this behalf for a stage carriage permit or a goods carriage
permit or a contract carriage permit in respect of a notified area or notified
route, the State Transport Authority in any case where the said area or
route lies in more than one region and the Regional Transport Authority in
any other case shall issue such permit to the State transport undertaking,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Chapter V.
(2) For the purpose of giving effect to the approved scheme in respect of a
notified area or notified route, the State Transport Authority or, as the case
may be, the Regional Transport Authority concerned may, by order,—
(a) refuse to entertain any application for the grant or renewal of any other
permit or reject any such application as may be pending;
(b) cancel any existing permit;
(c) modify the terms of any existing permit so as to—
(i) render the permit ineffective beyond a specified date;
(ii) reduce the number of vehicles authorised to be used under the permit;
(iii) curtail the area or route covered by the permit insofar as such permit
relates to the notified area or notified route.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no appeal shall lie
against any action taken, or order passed, by the State Transport Authority
or any Regional Transport Authority under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2).
Corresponding Law: S. 68-F of the 1939
MV Act
13
RELEVANT DECISIONS ON THE POINT
27. There are multiple decisions of this Court declaring the law that private

    operators can be completely excluded from plying their stage carriages

    on notified routes and/or part of a notified route. However, there are

    at least 5/6 (five/six) decisions of this Court which seem to us to have

    a direct bearing on the question arising for decision vis-à-vis the

    situation of the nature that is projected before us.
28. As the ensuing discussion would unfold, there is a decision of a

    coordinate Bench which supports the contentions raised by Kashmiri

    Lal and the permit holders. This coordinate Bench decision, however,

    is contrary to the law laid down in two/three previous three-Judge

    bench decisions. However, a subsequent larger Bench decision did not

    agree with the said coordinate Bench decision. The said larger Bench

    decision has since been approved by a subsequent Constitution Bench

    decision. The sixth decision, also of a coordinate Bench, followed the

    decisions of the larger Bench and the Constitution Bench since it was

    bound by the same. Thus, the question, which we are tasked to answer

    appears to be no longer res integra in view of all these decisions of this

    Court rendered by larger/Constitution Benches, which too are equally

    binding on us.
29. We may now proceed to note the precedents in the field in seriatim

    most of which, coincidentally, arose from proceedings in the erstwhile

    State of Mysore.
14
30. The first decision on the point to be noted is that of a three-Judge

       Bench in
T.N. Raghunatha Reddy v. Mysore State Transport

       Authority20
. It was held there that:
“16. Regarding the third point we were unable to appreciate how an
              inter-State agreement overrides the provisions of Chapter IV-A. The
              inter-state agreement is not law and to hold that an inter-State
              agreement overrides Chapter IV-A would be to completely disregard
              the provisions of
Section 68-B
of the Act which provides that ‘the
              provisions of this Chapter and the rules and orders made thereunder
              shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
              contained in Chapter IV of this Act or in any other law for the time
              being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such
              law’. …”.
31. The next decision of relevance is
S. Abdul Khader Saheb v. Mysore

       Revenue Appellate Tribunal21
.
Accepting the law
laid down in
T.N.

       Raghunatha Reddy
(supra), it was held there that an IS-RT

       Agreement is an agreement between two States and, therefore, not a

       law. Thus, a scheme of nationalisation approved under Section 68-D

       of the 1939
MV Act
would prevail over an inter-State agreement in

       respect of an inter-State route. The relevant passage is extracted

       hereunder:
“6. The next point on which a great deal of emphasis has been laid
              on behalf of the appellant is that an inter-State route comes into
              existence by virtue of an agreement between the States through
              which the route passes. The main provisions in that respect are to be
              found in
Section 63
of the Act. Any scheme of nationalisation of a
              route by a State, as approved under Section 68-D, cannot override
              the inter-State agreements in respect of the inter-State routes. This
              Court has in
T.N. Raghunatha Reddy v. Mysore State Transport
              Authority
answered this question in the negative. It has been held
              that the inter-State agreement is not law and to hold that an inter-
              State agreement overrides Chapter IV-A would be to completely
              disregard the provisions of
Section 68-B
of the Act. In other words a
20
(1970) 1 SCC 541
21
(1973) 1 SCC 357
15
scheme of nationalisation approved under Section 68-D would prevail
               over an inter-State agreement in respect of an inter-State route.”
32.
In
Mysore SRTC v. Mysore Revenue Appellate Tribunal22

       [Mysore SRTC (I
)], a coordinate Bench of this Court formulated the

       question as under:
“Can a permit be granted to an inter-State Transport Operator for the
               whole of his route despite the fact that a part of the route overlaps a
               part of a notified intra-State route?”
33. The coordinate Bench examined three schemes framed under Section

       68-C of the 1939
MV Act
which, in some manner, partly overlapped the

       notified intra-State routes. It was held that though the State has power

       under Section 68-C to totally exclude private operators (including

       inter-State operators) from notified routes, such exclusion must be

       expressed clearly in the scheme itself. A mere physical overlap of

       routes is insufficient unless a scheme unequivocally prohibits inter-

       State operators from even traversing overlapping portions. In such

       case, the private operators cannot be denied permits. It was observed

       that if the intent was such as to exclude the routes which happened to

       overlap, they should have been mentioned in the scheme. Thus, the

       permits granted either by the Regional Transport Office or the State

       Appellate Authority were upheld.
34. The next decision was rendered by a 3-Judge Bench in
Mysore SRTC

       v. Mysore STAT23 [Mysore SRTC (II
)]. There, the Mysore State
22
(1975) 4 SCC 192
23
(1974) 2 SCC 750
16
Road Transport Corporation plied buses on a route notified under

    Chapter IV of the 1939
MV Act
. It objected to renewal of permit to one

    C. Abdul Rahim on the ground that the permit so sought, would overlap

    3 miles of the notified route. The Regional Transport Authority granted

    permit by negativing the contention of overlap. While granting the

    permit, the Authority held that the notified route is not affected if the

    distance of the overlapping portion is less than five miles and if a

    condition not to pick up or set down passengers on the notified route

    is attached.
35. Appeal against the grant of permit failed before the State Transport

    Authority, whereafter there was an unsuccessful challenge in a writ

    petition before the Karnataka High Court (then Mysore High Court).
36. The larger Bench of this Court in
Mysore SRTC (II
) (supra)

    distinguished
Mysore SRTC (I
) (supra) holding that it was a case

    concerning inter-State routes whereas in the present case, the case

    concerned intra-State routes and, thus, proceeded to examine the

    issue.
37. This Court held that there was no justification to hold that the integrity

    of the notified scheme would not be affected if the overlapping portion

    of permit is under five miles or by stipulating a condition. No permit or

    renewal of permit could have been granted—however short the

    distance of the route might be—if the scheme totally or partially

    prohibits other operators from operating on the route or a part thereof.
17
Thus, setting aside the order of the Mysore High Court which upheld

    the grant of permit, this Court directed the Regional Transport

    Authority to comply with the requirements of the scheme.
38. Incidentally, Hon’ble M.H. Beg, J. (as the Chief Justice then was) was

    a member of both the Benches. His Lordship wrote a dissenting view

    in
Mysore SRTC (II
) (supra) while reiterating the views expressed in
Mysore SRTC (I
) (supra).
39. The reason for the conclusion drawn by His Lordship in
Mysore SRTC

    (I
) (supra) is found in paragraph 3. The same reads:
“3. Section 68-C requires, as a condition precedent to any exclusion
           of private operators under a scheme of nationalisation from ‘any area
           or route or portion thereof’, that the scheme should give ‘particulars
           of the nature of services proposed to be rendered, the area or route
           proposed to be covered and such other particulars respecting thereto
           as may be prescribed’. Each scheme has to be published in the
           Official Gazette and also ‘in such manner as the State Government
           may direct’. A scheme finally emerges, after opportunities given
           under
Section 68-D
of the Act for objections by persons interested in
           providing transport facilities as well as by local and police authorities
           within the area or upon the routes proposed to be covered by a
           scheme, as an approved scheme in which the original proposals may
           or may not have been modified. Each scheme so approved can be
           either cancelled or modified by the State Transport Undertaking
           under
Section 68-E
of the Act in accordance with the procedure
laid
           down by
Sections 68-C
and
68-D
of the Act.”
40. Though sounding logical having regard to the enormity of the process

    that is involved in reaching an IS-RT Agreement by and between two

    States, the said ruling ceases to have any effect in view of the

    precedents that it did not follow and which has since been expressly
18
overruled by the Constitution Bench in
Adarsh Travels Bus Services

       v. State of Uttar Pradesh24
.
41.
In
Adarsh Travels Bus Services
(supra), the Constitution Bench had

       the occasion to consider both the aforementioned decisions and settled

       the law.
While specifically dissenting from the view taken in
Mysore

       SRTC (I
) (supra) and agreeing with the view in
Mysore SRTC (II
)

       (supra), this Court affirmed earlier decisions of this Court which

       interpreted the law in Chapter IV-A of the 1939
MV Act
excluding

       private operators from plying on a common stretch of a notified route

       as perfectly in order. The relevant paragraphs from such decision read

       as follows:
“13.
In
Mysore State Road Transport Corpn. v. Mysore Revenue
               Appellate Tribunal, Beg and Chandrachud, JJ.
, departing from the
               views generally taken till then, took the view that a scheme which
               totally excluded inter-State private operators from using any part of
               a notified route must make the intention clear. There was a difference
               between area and route. Route denoted the abstract conception of
               line of travel. A difference in the two termini of two routes would
               make the two routes different, even if there was overlapping. Unless
               the scheme clearly indicated that the user of any portion of the
               highway covered by the notified route was prohibited, inter-State
               operators could not be debarred from plying their vehicles over the
               overlapping part of the inter-State route merely because of the
               physical fact of the overlapping of the two routes.
The learned Judges
               did not notice the earlier decisions of the Court in
C.P.C
. Motor
               Service v. State of Mysore (
AIR 1966 SC 1661) and Abdul Khader v.
               Mysore Revenue Appellate Tribunal
[(1973) 1 SCC 357].
Nilkanth
               Prasad case (AIR 1962 SC 1135) was noticed but bypassed with the
               observation ‘whatever may be said about the correctness of the
               decision’ etc.
14.
In
Mysore State Road Transport Corpn. v. Mysore State Transport
               Appellate Tribunal
[(1974) 2 SCC 750], all the earlier cases were
               noticed and it was held:
‘It is, therefore, apparent that where a private transport owner
                      makes an application to operate on a route which overlaps
24
(1985) 4 SCC 557
19
even a portion of the notified route i.e. where the part of the
      highway to be used by the private transport owner traverses
      on a line on the same highway on the notified route, then that
      application has to be considered only in the light of the scheme
      as notified. If any conditions are placed then those conditions
      have to be fulfilled and if there is a total prohibition then the
      application must be rejected.
*      *      *
      This Court has, consistently taken the view that if there is a
      prohibition to operate on a notified route or routes no licences
      can be granted to any private operator whose route traversed
      or overlapped any part or whole of that notified route. The
      intersection of the notified route may not, in our view, amount
      to traversing or overlapping the route because the prohibition
      imposed applied to a whole or part of the route on the highway
      on the same line of the route. An intersection cannot be said
      to be traversing the same line, as it cuts across it.’

The learned Judges expressly dissented from the decision of Beg and
Chandrachud, JJ. in
Mysore State Transport Corpn. v. Mysore
Revenue Appellate Tribunal
[(1975) 4 SCC 192] and approved the
decisions of the court in Nilkanth Prasad case and
Abdul Khader
case.
We agree with the view taken by this Court in
Mysore State Road
Transport Corpn. v. Mysore State Transport Appellate Tribunal
and
dissent from the view taken in
Mysore State Road Transport Corpn.
v. Mysore Revenue Appellate Tribunal
. We however wish to introduce
a note of caution. When preparing and publishing the scheme under
Section 68-C and approving or modifying the scheme under Section
68-D care must be taken to protect, as far as possible, the interest
of the travelling public who could in the past travel from one point to
another without having to change from one service to another en
route. This can always be done by appropriate clauses exempting
operators already having permits over common sector from the
scheme and by incorporating appropriate conditional clauses in the
scheme to enable them to ply their vehicles over common sectors
without picking up or setting down passengers on the common
sectors. If such a course is not feasible the State Legislature may
intervene and provide some other alternative as was done by the
Uttar Pradesh Legislature by the enactment of the Uttar Pradesh Act
27 of 1976 by
Section 5
of which the competent authority could
authorise the holder of a permit of a stage carriage to ply his stage
carriage on a portion of a notified route subject to terms and
conditions including payment of licence fee. There may be other
methods of not inconveniencing through passengers but that is
entirely a matter for the State Legislature, the State Government and
the State Transport Undertaking. But we do wish to emphasise that
good and sufficient care must be taken to see that the travelling
public is not to be needlessly inconvenienced.
***
16. In one of the cases it was argued before us that though the
scheme framed by the Uttar Pradesh Transport Undertaking
prohibited the plying of private stage carriages on the notified part
20
of an inter-state route within the State of Uttar Pradesh, a later
               Madhya Pradesh scheme published by the Madhya Pradesh State
               Transport Undertaking pursuant to an inter-State agreement allowed
               the plying of stage carriages by private operators on that part of the
               route which was in Uttar Pradesh also. The argument was that the
               later scheme superseded the earlier scheme and therefore the
               operators could ply their vehicles on the Uttar Pradesh part of the
               route also. We are unable to see how the scheme framed by the Uttar
               Pradesh State Transport Undertaking can be superseded by the
               scheme framed by the Madhya Pradesh State Transport Undertaking.”
42.
In
T.V. Nataraj v. State of Karnataka25
, a coordinate Bench was

       tasked to decide the following question:
“1. Whether notification of a route under
Section 68-C
of the Motor
               Vehicles Act, 1939 (for short ‘the Act’) excluding completely or
               partially private operators from plying on the notified route results in
               excluding the operators of inter-State route as well is the question of
               law that arises for consideration in these appeals.”

       Answering the question in the affirmative, it was specifically held as

       follows:
“5. Mr Ashoke Sen, the learned senior counsel for the appellant,
               relied on observations in
Adarsh Travels
case [(1985) 4 SCC 557]
               and urged that whether a scheme was for total or partial exclusion
               depended on interpretation of the scheme itself. According to him, a
               reading of the scheme indicated that since operators of inter-State
               route are not excluded from the scheme, the view taken by the High
               Court or the Transport Authority cannot be upheld.
The submission
               cannot be accepted in view of overruling of the earlier decision of this
               Court in
Mysore State Road Transport Corpn. v. Mysore Revenue
               Appellate Tribunal
[(1975) 4 SCC 192] by the Constitution Bench.
Even though the Bench in
Mysore State Road Transport Corpn. v.
               Mysore Revenue Appellate Tribunal
did not consider it necessary to
               decide if publication of scheme precludes an inter-State operator
               from plying on notified portion of intra-State route as the Bench was
               satisfied that the scheme did not exclude an inter-State operator
               from plying but in view of the decision in
Adarsh Travels
case and in
               absence of express authorisation in the scheme, the controversy is
               no more res integra.
6. In the result, these appeals fail and are dismissed. We may,
               however, while dismissing these appeals, reiterate what was said in
Adarsh Travels
case that it is for the State to take steps so as to
25
(1994) 2 SCC 32
21
avoid any inconvenience to the public either by framing a proper
          legislation or by taking steps, as were pointed out in that decision.”
43. We   have   extensively   quoted      the   statutory   provisions,   more

   particularly,
Section 88
of the 1988
MV Act
to highlight how a draft IS-

   RT Agreement is to be published in the Official Gazette inviting

   objections and also that only upon consideration of the same is the

   final IS-RT Agreement published for information of all concerned. Since

   the IS-RT Agreement was given effect upon concurrence of both the

   States - State of MP and State of UP - it is presumed that objections

   lodged, if any, were duly considered. There was a provision in the IS-

   RT Agreement that should the MPSRTC be wound up, the routes

   earmarked for it in Annexure B would be included in Annexure A and

   private operators permitted to apply for and obtain permits on such

   routes. Whether or not the UPSRTC lodged any objection or the same,

   though lodged, was not considered, is of little consequence. UPSRTC

   can be said to have accepted the position that in the event of the

   MPSRTC not being in a position to ply its stage carriages on the routes

   included in Annexure B, the said routes would stand included in

   Annexure A and the private permit holders entitled in law to obtain

   permits to ply stage carriages on such routes. Based on the materials

   placed on record, the private operators urge us to accept that MPSRTC

   has been wound up. However, there is no clinching evidence to that

   effect. At best, the materials on record hint at the process of winding

   up of MPSRTC being underway.
22
44. Now, in view of the precedents governing the field which answer the

    substantial question of law formulated by us fairly and squarely, grant

    of relief to the private operators seems well-nigh impossible unless of

    course MPSRTC is clearly shown to have been wound up.
45. In addition, what also stands in the way of grant of relief in favour of

    the private operators is the statutory ordainment of Chapter VI

    overriding Chapter V. An IS-RT Agreement can be executed by two

    States drawing power from
Section 88
of the 1988
MV Act
, which is

    part of Chapter V thereof. As has been noted, the consistent view of

    this Court has been that an IS-RT Agreement by its very nature is an

    agreement between two States but not a law under the relevant
MV

    Act
. Approved schemes and notified routes, which are envisaged in

    Chapter VI, would obviously override
Section 88
, in view of Section 98

    of the 1988
MV Act
.
MSRTC –
I
(supra) being no longer good law,

    such decision cannot aid the private operators though it seems logical

    that plying of a stage carriage by a private operator on an inter-State

    route, which happens to overlap a part of a notified intra-State route,

    should be expressly excluded by incorporating requisite recitals in the

    IS-RT Agreement, which is subsequent in point of time, because no

    such agreement can surface in the absence of consensus between two

    neighbouring States. Once two States hold talks for formulating and

    opening up routes for plying of stage carriages connecting cities/towns

    in such States on reciprocal basis and reduce the agreed terms to a

    written agreement, which is also given wide publicity to remove any
23
possible hurdles, there is a presupposition of various objects and

    purposes having been factored therein, which undoubtedly have

    serving public interest at the forefront. If the two reciprocating States

    fail to notice that the services to be introduced would face road-blocks

    because certain inter-State routes overlap a few intra-State routes,

    public interest is rendered a casualty and thereby, the whole object

    and purpose of the IS-RT Agreement would be frustrated and lost in

    the process. Before closing the discussion on this topic, we are left with

    no option but to lament noticing the apparent lack of application of

    mind and of purpose by the States of UP and MP which have dented

    the prospect of maximisation of public interest consequent upon

    introduction of a few of the inter-State routes overlapping part of

    routes notified in favour of the UPSRTC. Much was expected of the

    States of UP and MP as well as the UPRSTC to protect the interest of

    the passengers and commuters, which unfortunately has not fructified.

    While we propose to allow the civil appeals and dismiss the writ

    petition, it would not be in the best interest of the people of the States

    of UP and MP for us to remain as mute spectators. We wish to make a

    few parting observations and directions.
46. While considering evolution of road transport in India, one cannot miss

    the significant transformation that it has undergone over the years.

    Sincere and serious attempts to revolutionise travel on road by

    passengers and commuters are discernible. Leaving behind the humble

    beginnings, focus on infrastructure development has seen a quantum
24
leap. India has developed, in this century, an intricate network of

    highways providing accessibility to nearby cities and towns from the

    remotest of villages, thereby establishing ‘last-mile connectivity’.

    Expressways have been constructed to facilitate faster movement of

    people and goods between distant locations and thereby reduce travel

    time. These highways and expressways are transforming India’s

    transportation landscape and driving economic growth, among others.

    What    deserves    special   note    is   that   the   surface   of   these

    highways/expressways is smoother than ever before. With the

    introduction of modern vehicles, operators of stage carriage services

    have been providing comfort and convenience which are comparable

    with services available abroad. Switch to electric vehicles for both

    public and private use has facilitated sustainable transportation. A

    feature of smart transportation has been integration of technology to

    enhance efficiency and safety. In fine, with continued innovation and

    investment, the road transport sector seems to have progressed to

    attain more efficiency, sustainability and accessibility.
47. Data that is presently available on the websites of a number of State

    Road Transport Corporations do suggest that a couple of these

    corporations are thriving, with impressive growth and adoption of

    technology. Digitalisation has been a game changer. To adapt to the

    changing transportation landscape, leveraging technology to improve

    services and customer experience is the priority for these corporations.

    Bookings are now made on online platforms and live tracking is
25
available on mobile apps. Measures have been taken to expand

    services and to streamline operations. Notwithstanding that in certain

    areas/routes old buses which are on the verge of being phased out are

    being plied, modern-era vehicles such as e-buses have been

    introduced in some sectors by the SRTCs.
48. None can possibly dispute that the nation having made substantial

    progress in the road transport sector, interests of passengers and

    commuters ought to be of prime concern for the transport authorities;

    in this case, of both the States, i.e., UP and MP. While no permission

    can be granted at this stage to any private operator having a permit

    issued by the STA, MP to ply his vehicle on an inter-State route

    connecting two cities in the neighbouring States, which overlaps any

    notified intra-State route in the State of UP, we are inclined to the view

    that much can be achieved through dialogue between the two States.

    The parting observations in
Adarsh Travels Bus Services
(supra),

    as reiterated in
T.V. Nataraj
(supra) cannot be lost sight of. Stage

    carriage services are provided for the benefit of a vast cross-section of

    the population and subjecting them to inconvenience would amount to

    disservice by the States of MP and UP. After all, an inference can

    legitimately be drawn that the STA, MP having issued permits to

    private operators on routes hitherto before reserved for the MPSRTC,

    the same might not have been possible if the MPSRTC had been plying

    its vehicles on such routes. However, the terms of the IS-RT

    Agreement specifically required the MPSRTC to be wound up for the
26
private operators to stake claims for obtaining permits on routes

    earmarked for it. Though it has not been conclusively established

    before us that the MPSRTC has been wound up, an opportunity ought

    to be extended to establish it and if proved, at least an attempt ought

    to be made to fully work out the IS-RT Agreement with modifications

    which itself contemplates that such a modification could be made.
49. To facilitate such an exercise, it would be desirable if the Principal

    Secretaries of the Transport Departments of the States of MP and UP,

    together with other responsible officers of the said departments, meet

    at a mutually convenient venue within 3 months from date to discuss

    the modalities for fully working out the IS-RT Agreement. If indeed,

    the transport authorities of the State of MP satisfy the transport

    authorities of the State of UP that the MPSRTC has been wound up or

    is on the verge of being wound up and, therefore, not in a position to

    ply stage carriages on the routes earmarked for it (Annexure B),

    appropriate decision may be taken to include the routes in Annexure

    B of the IS-RT Agreement in Annexure A thereof and measures taken

    to give effect to such inclusion. Needless to observe, such measures

    ought to be affected upon a consensus being reached for permitting

    private operators to ply on the inter-State routes originating from the

    State of MP and terminating in the State of UP and back. To what

    extent and, if at all, the interest of the UPSRTC needs to be protected

    and can be achieved is left to the discretion of the transport authorities

    of the States of UP and MP. In addition, so long few intra-State routes
27
in the State of UP are notified in favour of the UPSRTC and portions

    thereof fall in the line of travel of stage carriages of certain inter-State

    routes, both the States may also consider the desirability of exploring

    whether partial exclusion of inter-State routes from the approved

    scheme [as referred to in
Section 99
of the 1988
MV Act
] can be

    permitted so as to further the interests of the passengers and the

    commuters. Should there be consensus, no time ought to be wasted

    for grant/issue of permits and countersignature thereof by the

    reciprocating State. In the unlikely event of absence of consensus

    between the two States to permit private operators to ply their vehicles

    as stage carriages from routes originating in the State of MP and

    terminating in the State of UP as well as the return trip from the State

    of UP to the State of MP, the State of MP shall also be at liberty to

    decide its future course of action keeping in mind that an IS-RT

    Agreement cannot be revoked without the consent of both the States.

    We reiterate, these being matters of policy, should be left to both the

    States to decide and we do hereby reserve it for their consideration.


Conclusions
50. Based on what is discussed above and considering the circumstances

    that have since unfolded, we proceed to order as under:
i.   The judgment and order of the High Court under challenge in the

          lead appeal being Civil Appeal No. 10522 of 2025 [U.P. State
28
Road Transport Corporation through its Chief General Manager

           v. Kashmiri Lal Batra & Ors.] stands set aside.
ii.   The other judgment(s) and order(s) under challenge in the

           connected civil appeals also stand set aside.
iii.   Writ Petition No. 748 of 2024 stands dismissed.
iv.    The States of MP and UP may proceed in the manner we have

           observed in paragraph 49 supra.
51. On the aforesaid terms, the proceedings stand closed without any

    order as to costs.
………………………………….……J.
                                               (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                          …………………….…………………J.
                                          (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 04, 2025.
29