[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India on 11 November, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 1306                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                   IN RE : DELHI RIDGE


                                              I.A. NO. 117204 OF 2024
                                            (CEC REPORT No. 5 of 2024)
                                                          in
                                      WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995
                                                              and
                                  Issue regarding order dated 16th April 2025
                                  passed in Writ Petition (c) No. 4677 of 1985


                   T. N. Godavarman Thirumulpad                                          … Petitioner


                                                            versus


                   Union of India & Others                                           … Respondents


                                                  Table of Contents

                   INTRODUCTION                   ……………………………………………………2
                        History of the Delhi Ridge ..................................................... 3
                        Importance of the Ridge ........................................................ 6
                        Morphological Ridge.............................................................. 7
                        History of DRMB ................................................................. 12
                        Working of the DRMB ......................................................... 14
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   NARENDRA PRASAD


                        Multiple Authorities Supervising Ridge ............................... 16
   Date: 2025.11.11
   16:51:34 IST
   Reason:




                                                                                              Page 1 of 39
                   Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS …………………………………….21
  Status of Final Notification under Section 20 ...................... 22
  Removal of Encroachments ................................................. 23
  Identification of the Morphological Ridge............................. 23
  Reconstitution of the DRMB................................................ 24
  Statutory Backing of DRMB ................................................ 25
  Representative of CEC in DRMB ......................................... 30
  Standing Committee for DRMB ........................................... 31
  Functions of the DRMB ...................................................... 33
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS                     ……………………………..35

                              JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, CJI



INTRODUCTION
1.     In the present matter, we are called upon to adjudicate on

the issue concerning the various bodies/authorities monitoring,

regulating and permitting construction activities in the Delhi

Ridge which is an area of vital ecological and geographical

significance in the National Capital Territory1. The Delhi Ridge

which is at the tail end of the Aravali Ranges, contains a variety

of flora and fauna and is widely known as the “Green Lungs” of

the city.
1 For short, “the NCT”.
Page 2 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
History of the Delhi Ridge
2.    The Aravali Range in the NCT of Delhi comprises of the

rocky outcrop stretching from the Delhi University in the North

to the NCT Border in the South and beyond, with sizable areas

of the same having been designated as the Ridge. However, the

Ridge, as it stands today, is not a continuum as various

intervening stretches have been urbanized with the passage of

time. For example, the Central Ridge area was planned as an

integral part of capital city of New Delhi in the early part of the

twentieth century.
3.    The Master Plan for Delhi, 2001 notified on 1st August 1990

identifies the Delhi Ridge as an area admeasuring 7,777

hectares of land, which is divided in four zones, i.e., Northern,

Central, South Central (Mehrauli) and Southern. Over the time,

due to deterioration in the Ridge area, the Lieutenant Governor

of Delhi constituted a 10-member committee known as the

“Lovraj Committee” for preparing a management plan of the

Ridge. The said committee inter alia suggested the creation of a

Ridge Management Supervisory Committee chaired by the Chief

Secretary of Delhi to address land-related legal matters. It was
Page 3 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
suggested that the entire Ridge area be notified as “Reserved

Forest” under the
Indian Forest Act
, 19272
4.     Pursuant to the Lovraj Committee’s Report, a preliminary

notification under
Section 4
of the Forest Act was issued on 24th

May 1994 thereby declaring 7,777 hectares of land as Reserved

Forests. The Additional District Magistrate (Revenue)3 was

appointed to be the Forest Settlement Officer under the said

notification. Though a period of more than three decades has

passed, no further proclamation under
Section 6
of the Forest

Act has been issued thus far. Since then, only an area to the

extent of 103.48 hectares has been notified as Reserved Forests

under
Section 20
of the Forest Act.
5.     One more notification under
Section 4
of the Forest Act was

also issued on 19th March 1996 for an extent of 7 hectares in

Nanakpura Ridge. A notification dated 2nd April 1996, under

Section 154 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 19544 was issued in

compliance with the orders dated 25th January 1996 and 13th

March, 1996 passed by this court in IA No. 18 and 22 in the case




2 Hereinafter referred to as, “the
Forest Act
”.
3 For short, “ADM (Revenue)”.
4 Hereinafter referred to as, “the
Land Reforms Act
”.
Page 4 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
of MC Mehta v. Union of India5
. The proviso to
Section 154
of

the Land Reforms Act concerns uncultivable areas in the Gaon

Sabha which may be excluded from vesting in the Gaon Sabha.

In compliance with the orders of this court, the excess land

measuring 4206.68 hectares from 14 different villages was

placed at the disposal of the Forest Department. This area had

already been identified in the Master Plan which was notified on

1st August 1990.
6.     The entire identified portions of the Delhi Ridge are as

under:
Southern Ridge            6,200 hectares
                 Northern Ridge             87 hectares
               South Central Ridge          626 hectares
                   (Mehrauli)
                  Central Ridge            864 hectares
                Nanakpura Ridge              7 hectares
                     Total                7,784 hectares
7.     As already stated hereinabove, though the total identified

area was 7,784 hectares, the final notification under
Section 20
of

the Forest Act has been issued only in respect of 103.48 hectares

of land.
5 Writ Petition (C) No. 4677 of 1985.
Page 5 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
8.     The Central Empowered Committee6 submitted a Report on

8th May 2024 stating therein that 5% of the Ridge area is under

encroachment, 4% has been diverted and only 1.33% has been

notified under Section 20. The CEC thus recommended that “it is

crucial to comprehensively address all relevant issues by

thoroughly considering every aspect that directly or indirectly

impacts the Ridge.”

Importance of the Ridge
9.     This court has continuously been reiterating the importance

of Delhi Ridge. The Master Plan notified on 1st August 1990 also

stressed on the protection of the Ridge, while this court by order

dated 9th May 1996 in M.C.Mehta5 noted that the Ridge is required

to be protected in all its pristine glory.
10. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations made

by this court vide aforesaid order dated 9th May 1996:
“The provisions of the Master Plan makes it
               mandatory that the Ridge is to be kept free
               from encroachers and its pristine glory must
               be maintained for all times. It is a pity that
               neither the Central Government nor the NCT
               Delhi Administration has ever applied its
               mind towards maintain the Ridge and River
               Yamuna which is necessary to maintain the
               ecological balance of the city.”

6 For short ‘the CEC’
Page 6 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
Morphological Ridge
11. Through the years, it has also been noticed that though some

parts of the NCT of Delhi have all the features of the Ridge, they

were not identified as the “Ridge”. In this respect, it will be relevant

to note that when the geological and geomorphological mapping of

1,482 sq. km area of the NCT of Delhi was carried out by the

Geological Survey of India7, it was found that a large area ought to

be included as “residual hills/ridges”. These landforms were found

to have rocky surface and characteristics similar to the Ridge. It

will also be relevant to note that even though these areas are now

identified to be ridge-like, they do not form part of the Ridge areas

under the Master Plan, 2001 or Master Plan, 2021. This area is

now known as the “Morphological Ridge”.
12. It is relevant to note that the High Court of Delhi vide an

order dated 30th November 2011 passed in
Ashok Kumar

Tanwar v. Union of India
and others8, for the first time held

that areas having characteristics of a “Geological Ridge” though

falling outside the Notified Forest Ridge Land also require

protection. The Delhi High Court in the said case was dealing with


7 For short, “the GSI”.
8 2011 SCC OnLine Del 5733
Page 7 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
a writ petition against the construction by the Border Roads

Organization in the Morphological Ridge. The High Court noted

that permission of the Delhi Ridge Management Board9 or this

court, through the CEC, was required for such a construction. It

will be relevant to refer to the following observations made by the

Delhi High Court in
Ashok Kumar
(supra)8:
“4. It is clear from the aforesaid that the
               area in question is given the character of a
               “Geological Ridge” though falling outside
               the Notified Forest Ridge Land. Even in
               respect of such a land, clearance from the
               Ridge Management Board or the Hon'ble
               Supreme Court through the Central
               Empowered Committed is to be obtained
               before carrying out any construction. Such
               permission is a pre-requisite prerequisite in
               view of the directions of the Supreme Court.
               It is also mentioned that for laying of Metro
               Lines and NHAI for upgradation of NH-236
               in the said area, DMRC and NHAI had taken
               permission of the Ridge Management Board
               in the non-forest land having morphological
               features of the Ridge. Admittedly, no such
               permission is sought by the BRO.
xxxx      xxxx       xxxx
7. In these circumstances, we restrain the
               BRO from carrying out any further
               construction works on the land aforesaid
               till it obtains necessary clearance from the
               Ridge Management Board or the Hon'ble
               Supreme Court through the Central
               Empowered Committee.”
9 Hereinafter referred to as “the DRMB” or alternatively as “the Board”.
Page 8 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
13. This court also had an occasion to consider the validity of the

above order passed by the Delhi High Court in the case of
Delhi

Development Authority v. Kenneth Builders & Developers (P)

Ltd10
. This court in the said case directed the CEC to investigate

the matter of allotment of lands by the Delhi Development

Authority11 in the Morphological Ridge areas. The CEC submitted

its Report dated 18th November 2015 to this court thereby

recommending that construction on the Morphological Ridge area

must be undertaken only after obtaining the clearance from the

DRMB and after obtaining the permission of this court. It will be

relevant to refer to the following observations of this court:
“22. …..However, a decision was rendered
              by the Delhi High Court in a case filed by
              Ashok Kumar Tanwar [WP (C) No. 3339 of
              2011 decided on 30-11-2011 [
Ashok
              Kumar Tanwar v. Union of India, WP (C)
              No.
3339 of 2011, decided on 30-11-2011
              (Del)] ] to the effect that a development
              project on land outside the notified Ridge
              area but having morphological features
              conforming to the Ridge would also require
              clearance from the Ridge Management
              Board and this Court. Therefore, as far as
              the present case is concerned though the
              project land falls outside the Ridge but has
              morphological features conforming to the
              Ridge bringing it within the extended

10 (2016) 13 SCC 561
11 For short, “DDA”.
Page 9 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
               Ridge, the project of DDA involving non-
forestry use of the land could be permitted
               only after obtaining clearance from the
               Ridge Management Board and after
               obtaining the permission of this Court..…”
14. Thereafter, this court has on various occasions considered

the issue with regard to definition and legal sanctity of the

“Morphological         Ridge”.   When   the   Directorate   of   Revenue

Intelligence12 was allotted land in the Morphological Ridge, this

court directed the CEC to examine the issue. The CEC submitted

its Report dated 1st December 2022 thereby recommending that

the project be undertaken only after 5% of the project cost is

deposited in the DRMB Fund. The DDA submitted its reply dated

6th February 2023 stating that the “Morphological Ridge” is

without sanction of law and that the DDA cannot be made liable

to pay. It was further the contention of the DDA that since the

Forest Department has never defined the “Morphological Ridge”

nor has quantified it, there cannot be any legal impediment

against the DDA allotting lands in these areas. This court by an

order dated 8th February 2023 passed in
T.N.Godavarman

Thirumulpad v. Union of India
and others13 allowed the


12 For short, “DRI”.
13 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1951
Page 10 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
construction by the DRI subject to the terms and conditions as set

out by the CEC in its report. Pertinently, this court found that the

“Morphological Ridge” needs to be identified and, in that respect

appointed a committee for the said purpose. It will be relevant to

note the following observations of this court in the order dated

8th February 2023:
“13. The High Court of Delhi vide order
             dated 30.11.2011 in Writ Petition No.
             3339/2011 (
Ashok Kumar Tanwar v. Union
             of India1
,) and this Court in
DDA v. Kenneth
             Builders & Developers (P) Ltd.2
[(2016) 13
             SCC 561] has held that land falling outside
             the demarcation of notified ridge but having
             similar ‘morphological features’ of ridge
             should be given same protection as is given
             to the notified areas and no construction
             should be permitted thereon. It cannot be
             doubted that the ridge in Delhi acts as a
             lung, which supplies oxygen to the citizens
             of Delhi. The necessity to protect the ridge,
             therefore, cannot be undermined.
14. It appears that there has been some
             difficulty in identifying the areas of ridge,
             which are not notified but also have the
             same features.
15. We, therefore, find it appropriate that
             the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
             Climate Change (MoEFCC), appoints a
             Committee consisting of the following
             officials/officers, to work out the modalities
             for identifying the said area which has
             similar ‘morphological features’ as that of a
             notified ridge and which needs to be
             protected as a notified ridge…”
Page 11 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
History of DRMB
15. The DRMB was constituted pursuant to an order dated

29th September 1995 passed by this court in the case of
M.C.

Mehta v. Union of India and Others14
making it the primary

authority for the conservation, protection and preservation of the

Ridge.
16. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations made

by this court in the order dated 29th September 1995:
“Pursuant to this Court’s order dated
              September 1, 1995, affidavits have been filed
              by Mr. DS Negi, Secretary Environment,
              Government of Delhi; Mr. DN Sapolia,
              Deputy Commisioner, Govt of Delhi, Mr. BM
              Nimesh, L&DO, Ministry of Urban
              Development and Mr. DP Singh, Director
              (Horticulture), MCD. The contents of these
              affidavits have been discussed with the
              learned counsel for the parties. Mr. Altaf
              Ahmad, learned Addl. Solicitor General
              stated before us on September 1, 1995 that
              the Lt. Governor had already taken a
              decision to constitute a Ridge Management
              Board. Mr Altaf Ahmad states that the
              orders in this respect are likely to be issued
              by the Lt. Governor shortly. Mr. Altaf Ahmad
              may place a copy of the order constituting
              the Board before this Court on the next date
              of hearing. The name of the conservators as
              members of the said Board may also be
              indicated.”

14 Writ Petition (C) No. 4677 of 1985
Page 12 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
17. By a Government Order dated 6th October 1995, the

Lieutenant Governor of Delhi constituted the DRMB, with the

following members:
i.    Chief Secretary, Delhi
ii.   Vice Chairman, DDA
iii.  Secretary, Env. & Forests, Delhi
iv.   Finance Secretary, Delhi
v.    Representative of Indian Society of Environmental
      Management (NGO)
vi. Representative of Prakarti – Centre for Environmental
      Protection & Development (NGO)
vii. Conservator of Forests, Delhi (Member and Chief Executive)
viii. Dy Conservator of Forests, Delhi
18. The membership and functions of the DRMB were amended

from time to time. Vide Notifications dated 06th October 1995, 30th

April 2013, 3rd July 2017 and 1st March 2021 the Board was

reconstituted time and again.
19. The functions of the DRMB, at present, are as under:
i.    Execution of the management scheme for the
              Ridge Forests as the green lungs of Delhi;
       ii.    Protection of the boundary and boundary fences
              of the Ridge;
iii.   Preparation and execution of detailed plans for
              upgradation of the Ridge in accordance with
              sound silvicultural practices applicable to city
              forests and natural resources;
iv.    Control of usage by the public of such areas of
              the Ridge Forests as may be declared as “open”
              by the Board;
Page 13 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
       v.    Ensuring that there are no encroachments in
             excess of the areas allotted to the lawful allottees
             till they are shifted from the Ridge Forests under
             appropriate orders;
vi.    Any other functions ancillary to the above
             purposes.
vii.   The Board may coopt for any of its meetings not
             more than two persons having special
             knowledge of forestry, regional ecology, nature
             conservation and related subjects.
20.     It is pertinent to note that though there have been a number

of notifications for the constitution of the DRMB, none of them

trace their authority to the Environment (Protection) Act, 198615 or

any other statute. As such, the constitution of the DRMB is only

pursuant to the orders passed by this court and without any

statutory backing.
Working of the DRMB
21.
In view of the order dated 7th September 2007 passed by this

court in
T.N.Godavarman v. Union of India
and others16, all

diversion of forest land is to be preceded by the permission of the

DRMB and also of this court. Such permissions have been granted

subject to deposit of 5% of the estimated project cost with the

DRMB.
15 Hereinafter referred to as, “the
EP Act
”.
16 (2013) 8 SCC 200
Page 14 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
22.    This court has passed orders from time to time thereby

permitting certain activities in the Ridge Areas/Extended Ridge

Areas. A gist of the orders is as follows:
a)    7th September 2007- For construction of bridge over the Neela
      Hauz water body;
b)    7th December 2007- For construction of Express Metro Link to
      the Airport;
c)    17th October 2008-For renovation, upgradation and new
      construction of Dr.Karni Singh Shooting Range, Tughlakabad,
      Delhi;
d)    18th November 2011- Permission to DMRC;
e)    2nd November 2012- For the construction of transit, training
      and other infrastructure facilities for the personnel of Border
      Road Organization;
f)    21st October 2013- For underground tunnelling activity for
      construction of line 7 corridor in Phase-III of Mass Rapid
      Transport System project;
g)    10th May 2016- For construction of staff quarters near Naraina
      Village;
h)    10th November 2016- For construction of a project to
      Jawaharlal Nehru University;
i)    05th February 2018- For engineered landfill at Tehkhand
      Okhla on 47.346 acres of land. However, the Court made it
      clear that for future landfill sites the concerned agencies shall
      not be allowed to be located in Delhi Ridge area/Ridge
      Forest/Morphological Ridge area;
j)    22nd March 2018- Permission to NHAI for widening of National
      Highway and improvement of T-Junction near Dhaula Kuan
      Metro Station;
Page 15 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
k)       10th April 2018- Permission to Delhi Jal Board for laying of
         water pipeline;
l)       29th August 2018- For construction of CBI Housing Complex;
m) 26th September 2018- Permission for construction of Flyover
   and Underpass between Mahipalpur Bypass Road and Airport
   Road;
n)       8th April 2019- For Referral and Research Army Hospital,
         Ministry of Defence;
o)       4th November 2019- Permission to BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd.
for laying the underground cables; and
p)       29th November 2021- Phase IV of Mass Rapid Transportation
         Systems Project.
Multiple Authorities Supervising the Ridge
23. Apart from the DRMB, several other authorities have also

been examining the issues pertaining to the Ridge. For instance,

one Sonya Ghosh approached the National Green Tribunal17 by

way of an OA bearing No. 58/2013 (
Sonya Ghosh v. Government

of NCT of Delhi
and others18) seeking notification of the Ridge

under
Section 20
of the Forest Act. The learned NGT by order

dated 15th January 2021 directed the Chief Secretary to notify the

undisputed area within a period of three months and stated that

there should be an action plan for removal of encroachments. The



17 Hereinafter referred to as, “the NGT”.
18
2021 SCC OnLine NGT 608
Page 16 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
learned NGT also appointed an Oversight Committee to be headed

by the Director General, Forests, Ministry of Environment, Forest

and Climate Change19 with other members, to oversee progress

with regard to removal of encroachments from the Ridge.
24. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of the

learned NGT in
Sonya Ghosh
(supra)18:
“17. We direct constitution of an Oversight
              Committee (OC) to be headed by DG Forest,
              MoEF&CC, Government of India with the
              Secretaries Revenue and Forest, Delhi
              Govt., the PCCF, Delhi, the concerned
              Deputy Commissioners, Delhi and the
              nominees of Police Commissioner, Delhi
              and the Forest Survey of India, Dehradun
              as members. Main function of the OC will
              be to oversee progress with regard to the
              removal of encroachments from the Ridge,
              its protection by way of fencing/boundary
              wall and preparation of management plan
              for its restitution. The Committee will be
              free      to      co-opt      any      other
              authorities/Experts. The Nodal agency will
              be the PCCF, Delhi for coordination and
              compliance. First meeting of the Committee
              may be held within one month and
              thereafter review may be undertaken
              periodically preferably at least once in a
              month till the action plan is executed.”
25.     It was noticed by this Court vide an order dated 6th August

2025 passed in the present proceedings that apart from the


19 Hereinafter referred to, as “MoEF&CC”.
Page 17 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
DRMB, numerous other bodies were also constituted by the orders

passed by this court, the High Court of Delhi and the learned NGT

which were also entrusted with the task of monitoring the issue

with regard to Ridge areas.
26. This Court by the said order was referring to the following

different bodies/committees/authorities:
i. Oversight Committee constituted vide order dated 15th

    January 2021 passed by the learned NGT in
Sonya Ghosh
(supra)18;
ii. Centrally Empowered Committee constituted vide Judgment

    dated 30th November 2021 passed by the High Court of Delhi

    in
Ashok Kumar
(supra)8;
iii. High-Powered Committee under order dated 8th February 2023

    passed by this court in
T.N.Godavarman
(supra)13.

iv. Committee under order dated 8th February 2023 passed by this

    court     in
T.N.Godavarman
(supra)13   to   identify   the

    Morphological Ridge.
27. Noticing that a number of committees were monitoring the

issue with regard to the Delhi Ridge area resulting in duplication

of work, overlap of jurisdiction and even conflicting outcomes, this
Page 18 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
court passed the aforesaid order on 6th August 2025. It will be

appropriate to refer to the following paragraphs of the said order:
“1. We find that insofar as the issues
               concerning the Delhi Ridge are concerned,
               several    committees     are     currently
               monitoring the issues. The authorities are
               required to seek permission from several
               committees/Bodies for land diversion,
               which, at times, results in conflicting
               orders.
2. We, therefore, direct the Ministry of
               Environment, Forest and Climate Change
               (MoEF&CC) to take all the stake holders on
               board, including the Government of NCT of
               Delhi, the CEC and the various
               Committees/Bodies appointed by this
               Court or the High Court of Delhi and to
               come out with a proposal wherein one
               uniform body can be entrusted with
               monitoring the issues relating to the Delhi
               Ridge.”
28. It is further relevant to note that the High Court of Delhi in

the case of
Devinder v. Lt. Governor and Others20
was

considering the same issue. The High Court by judgment dated 8th

November 2023 found the Chief Secretary to be prima facie in

contempt of the order dated 15th January 2021 passed by the

learned NGT. In its order dated 15th December 2023, the High

Court observed thus:
20 Writ Petition (C) No. 9965 of 2016
Page 19 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
              “3. The affidavit only seems to suggest that
              action will be taken in the near future but
              is totally silent as to what action has been
              taken till day from 08.11.2023, what is the
              time frame within which the notification will
              be issued and the time frame within which
              the encroachment will be removed from the
              Ridge land.”
29. It appears from the proceedings before the High Court that

when the matter was heard on 8th January 2024, the Government

of NCT of Delhi21 undertook to issue the Notification under Section

20 within four weeks. It will be relevant to refer to the undertaking

recorded by the High Court in its order dated 8th January 2024:
“3. On the other hand, Mr. Satyakam,
              learned ASC, GNCT of Delhi submits that
              the steps for such process of issuance of
              notification has already been initiated,
              however it is taking some time to complete
              the same.
4. He seeks and is granted four weeks’ time
              to ensure that the notification under
              Section 20 of IFA, 1927 is issued within the
              same frame of time.”
30. It will also be relevant to note that this court itself was

parallelly hearing the same issue in two separate proceedings i.e.,

the present proceedings and
MC Mehta v. Union of India
(supra).
Noticing all this, this court passed an order dated 24th July 2024


21 Hereinafter referred to as, “GNCTD”.
Page 20 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
directing the Registrar (Judl.) to place the matter before Hon’ble

the Chief Justice of India for constitution of a Special Bench.

Paragraphs 10 and 11 of the said order reads thus:
“10. We are of the considered view that, in
             order to avoid the possibility of conflicting
             order(s) being passed by two different
             Benches, it will be appropriate that all the
             matters pertaining to the Delhi Ridge Area
             are heard by one Bench.
11. The Registrar(Judl.) is, therefore,
             directed to place the matter before Hon’ble
             the Chief Justice of India seeking
             appropriate order.”
31. That is how the issue with regard to Delhi Ridge is before us

in the present proceedings.
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
32. We have heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Senior Counsel

who is assisting this court as an Amicus                Curiae and

Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General of India

at length.
33. Three issues that fall for consideration before this court in

the present proceedings are as under:
i.   Issuance of final notification of the Delhi Ridge under
Section

      20
of the Forest Act;
Page 21 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
 ii.   Removal of encroachments from the Delhi Ridge and the

       Morphological Ridge from at least 9th May 1996; and

iii.   The identification of Morphological Ridge.

Status of Final Notification under Section 20
34. The learned NGT vide an order dated 15th January 2021 in
Sonya Ghosh
(supra) and the High Court of Delhi by an order

dated 8th January 2024 in
Devinder
(supra)20 have directed the

GNCTD to issue final notification under
Section 20
of the Forest

Act. However, the final notification has not been published yet. In

the Status Report dated 8th August 2024, the GNCTD has stated

that they are still in the process of settlement of rights and that

the joint demarcation of the ridge areas is still underway.
35. It cannot be gainsaid that the effect of non-notification of

Ridge as Reserve Forest deprives the said area of any protection.

We are, therefore, of the view that without proper statutory

protection, it would not be possible to properly preserve the

integrity of the Ridge. We find that the GNCTD has not acted with

swiftness in protecting the Ridge. Though this court observed as

early as in May, 1996 that the Government has not taken proper
Page 22 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
steps for conservation of the Ridge, not much has been done even

after a lapse of almost three decades therefrom.

Removal of Encroachments
36. The CEC and various other authorities have found that the

Ridge Areas are now being rampantly encroached. The entire

purpose of the ecological conservation of the Ridge is futile if illegal

constructions are coming up throughout the area and the very

purpose of the order dated 29th September 1995 passed by this

court in
M.C.Mehta
(supra)14 regarding creation of the DRMB

would be frustrated if no steps are taken to contain such rampant

encroachments. However, there does not appear to be any active

steps taken by GNCTD towards securing the Ridge to preserve its

sanctity.
Identification of the Morphological Ridge
37. As observed hereinabove, the Morphological Ridge is an

equally important portion which requires preservation. The stand

taken by the DDA in the DRI matter that the Morphological Ridge

has no legal backing, requires to be seriously addressed by the

Committee appointed by this court by order dated 8th February
Page 23 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
2023 in
T.N.Godavarman
(supra)13. Though a preliminary report

was submitted, the Committee is yet to submit its final report.
38. We are, however, of the view that without proper

identification or preservation of the Ridge, the integrity of the

entire ecology would be compromised. The Ridge acts as the green

lungs of the city, especially in the present conditions of increased

pollution. We, therefore, find that the DRMB needs to actively work

towards protecting and preserving the Delhi Ridge after its due

identification.
Reconstitution of the DRMB
39. It will be relevant to note that CEC in its Report dated 8th May

2024 (5th Report of 2024) also found that “the management of

Ridge Land does not seem to be up to the mark.” The said Report

was placed before this court and this court vide order dated 6th

August, 2025 directed the MoEF&CC to take all stakeholders on

board including the GNCTD, the CEC and the various

committees/bodies appointed by this court or the High Court of

Delhi or the learned NGT and to come out with a proposal wherein

one uniform body can be entrusted with monitoring the issues

relating to the Delhi Ridge.
Page 24 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
40. The MoEF&CC has filed its compliance affidavit dated 7th

October 2025 stating that a Ridge Management Board will be

constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, GNCTD

with a total of 12 members. However, it is to be noted that the

proposal does not mention the statutory basis for the DRMB, i.e.,

under what provisions, the DRMB has been constituted.

Statutory Backing of the DRMB
41. As has been observed by us hereinabove, the DRMB has

been acting without any statutory authority. The Original

Notification dated 6th October 1995 was issued only pursuant to

this court’s order dated 29th September 1995 in
M.C.Mehta
(supra)14 and that too without any statutory backing for the

Board. We are, however, of the considered view that without a

statutory backing, it will not be possible for the Board to function

effectively.
42. A statutory backing will firstly ensure that the fundamental

principles of administration would directly apply to the Board.

Secondly, a statutory authority working under
Section 3(3)
of the

EP Act would be subject to the jurisdiction of the NGT under
Section 14
of the NGT Act, 2010. Thirdly, the accountability and
Page 25 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
transparency required of a statutory body, such as publication

of reports on websites, being subject to the RTI Act22 etc., would

be ensured by the Board being an Authority under
Section 3(3)
of the EP Act.
43. We may also note that the CEC was also working as an ad-

hoc body without having any statutory backing until the

MoEF&CC vide Notification dated 5th September 2023 granted

statutory recognition to it upon a judgment passed by this court

thereby deprecating the practice of ad-hoc institutions and

requesting               the       learned        Solicitor   General   of    India    to

institutionalize it as an authority under the
EP Act
. This court

vide judgment and order dated 31st January 2024 passed in
T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and

Others23
observed thus:
“20. We find that by virtue of the
                     Notification  dated    05.09.2023,    our
                     concerns regarding the functioning of the
                     CEC as an ad hoc body and that hereinafter
                     it should be institutionalised as a
                     permanent body have been taken care of.
                     The said Notification provides for the
                     constitution of the CEC, its powers,
                     functions, mandate, members, method of
22
short for ‘
Right to Information Act, 2005
’
23 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 86
Page 26 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
             appointment, terms of service,        and
             monitoring of its functioning.”
44. It will be relevant to note that this court in the case of

Madhya Pradesh High Court
Advocates Bar Association and

Another v. Union of India and Another24
has held that the

learned NGT under
Sections 14
and
22
of the NGT Act does not

oust the High Court’s jurisdiction under
Articles 226
and
227
as

the same is part of basic structure of the Constitution. It is

further held that the appeal to this court under
Section 22
of the

NGT Act is intra vires the Constitution of India. In the said case,

the court held thus:
“45. In consequence of the above analysis,
             our conclusions are:
A. The National Green Tribunal under
Section 14
&
22
of the NGT Act does not
             oust the High Court's jurisdiction under
Article 226
& 227
as the same is a part of
             the basic structure of the Constitution.
             B. The remedy of direct appeal to the
             Supreme Court under
Section 22
of the
             NGT Act is intra vires the Constitution of
             India.”
45.    It can thus be seen that if the DRMB is given statutory

status, its orders can be judicially scrutinized either by the

learned NGT under
Section 14
of the NGT Act and by this court


24 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 639
Page 27 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
by way of appeal under Section 22 of the said act or by the High

Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution of India.
46.
In the judgment of this court dated 31st January 2024 in
T.N.Godavarman
(supra)23, this court held that environmental

rule of law fosters open, accountable, and transparent decision-

making and participatory governance. It has been held that the

renewed role of constitutional courts will be to undertake judicial

review to ensure that institutions and regulatory bodies comply

with the principles of environmental rule of law. It will be

relevant to note the following observations made by this court in

the said case:
“32. In furtherance of the principles of
             environmental rule of law, the bodies,
             authorities, regulators, and executive
             offices entrusted with environmental
             duties must function with the following
             institutional features:
i.  The    composition,      qualifications,
              tenure, method of appointment and
              removal of the members of these
              authorities must be clearly laid down.
              Further, the appointments must be
              regularly made to ensure continuity and
              these bodies must be staffed with persons
              who have the requisite knowledge,
              technical expertise, and specialisation to
              ensure their efficient functioning.
Page 28 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
              ii. The authorities and bodies must
              receive adequate funding and their
              finances must be certain and clear.
              iii. The mandate and role of each
              authority and body must be clearly
              demarcated so as to avoid overlap and
              duplication of work and the method for
              constructive    coordination     between
              institutions must be prescribed.
              iv. The authorities and bodies must
              notify and make available the rules,
              regulations, and other guidelines and
              make them accessible by providing them
              on the website, including in regional
              languages, to the extent possible. If the
              authority or body does not have the power
              to frame rules or regulations, it may issue
              comprehensive       guidelines     in     a
              standardised form and notify them rather
              than office memoranda.
v. These bodies must clearly lay down
              the applicable rules and regulations in
              detail and the procedure for application,
              consideration, and grant of permissions,
              consent, and approvals.
vi. The authorities and bodies must
              notify norms for public hearing, the
              process of decision-making, prescription
              of right to appeal, and timelines.
              vii. These bodies must prescribe the
              method of accountability by clearly
              indicating the allocation of duties and
              responsibilities of their officers.
              viii. There  must   be   regular   and
              systematic audit of the functioning of
              these authorities.”
Page 29 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
47. The MoEF&CC has opposed giving statutory status to the

DRMB. It has expressed apprehension that if the Central

Government issues a notification, there will be an overlap of

other authorities. However, we do not find any substance in the

said submission of MoEF&CC. The very purpose of the earlier

orders passed by this court and the present judgment is to avoid

having multiple authorities considering the issue with regard to

the Delhi Ridge. We, therefore, propose to direct the DRMB to be

a single-window authority insofar as issues concerning Delhi

Ridge are concerned. Like the CEC, if the DRMB is also given a

statutory status, it will be in a position to function effectively and

also be accountable and answerable.
Representative of the CEC in the DRMB
48. We further find that rather than the DRMB reporting to the

CEC every now and then and having two levels of scrutiny, it will

be appropriate that a representative of CEC is made a member of

the DRMB. It is only pursuant to the Report of the CEC that the

present litigation has commenced. The CEC has also been integral

to the protection of the Ridge insofar as it has submitted
Page 30 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
numerous reports to this court regarding encroachments and

permissions for construction in the Ridge areas.
49. The MoEF&CC has submitted that a member of the CEC may

be co-opted as and when the DRMB requires. However, it is to be

noted that the CEC is a nodal body appointed by this court to look

after the environmental issues in the country. The CEC has done

yeomen service for the last 3 decades in preserving the

environment by bringing to the notice of this court the

environmental issues which are plaguing the nation. Since the

CEC is continuously assisting this court as far as environmental

matters are concerned, the presence of its representative would

only add to the strength of the DRMB.
Standing Committee for DRMB
50. We are also of the considered view that taking into

consideration the constitution of the DRMB, it would not be

possible for it to regularly function on a day-to-day basis. It will,

therefore, be appropriate that the DRMB constitutes a Standing

Committee which can look after the day-to-day affairs of the

Board. We may also take note that for the National Board for

Wildlife, constituted under Section 5A of the Wildlife Protection Act,
Page 31 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
197225, the Hon’ble Prime Minister is the Chairperson. However,

the day-to-day functioning of the National Board for Wildlife is

executed through its Standing Committee which is constituted

under Section 5B of the WP Act.
51. We, however, find that the Standing Committee must consist

of experts and technicians who have worked in the field of

conservation. We further find that for the purpose of preservation

and protection of Delhi Ridge, it is necessary that the Standing

Committee should meet regularly.
52. The MoEF&CC has opposed the proposal for constitution of

a   Standing       Committee            on   the   ground   that   under   the

Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, DRMB would be able to

ensure the active engagement of all the members. However, it is to

be taken note of that the proposed DRMB consists of senior

officers from various departments and as such, it would not be

practical for the DRMB to meet on a day-to-day basis thereby

necessitating the constitution of a Standing Committee.




25Hereinafter known as, “the WP Act”.
Page 32 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
Functions of the DRMB
53. Having considered the issues with regard to constitution of

the DRMB and the Standing Committee, it is now necessary to

consider as to what will be the functions of the DRMB.
54. The core functions of the DRMB must be directed towards

conservation of the existing Ridge Forests and removal of existing

encroachments from the Ridge. The very purpose of the DRMB is

to preserve the integrity of the Ridge, as a morphological and

ecological feature. Therefore, the DRMB should focus on

preservation of existing Ridge forests and further improving the

areas through scientific conservation measures. The DRMB

should also ensure that fragmentation of Ridge Forests is

prevented.
55. This court recently in judgment dated 6th March 2024

pronounced in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of

India (In Re: Gaurav Kumar Bansal)26 has observed thus:
“173. It could thus be seen that,
             worldwide    as    well    as   in   our
             jurisprudence, the law has developed and
             evolved emphasizing on the restoration
             of the damaged ecological system. A
             reversal of environmental damage in

26 (2025) 2 SCC 641
Page 33 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
             conformity with the principle under
Article 8(f)
of the CBD is what is required.
At times, the compensatory afforestation
             permits forestation at some other site.
However, the principle of restoration of
             damaged ecosystem would require the
             States to promote the recovery of
             threatened species. We are of the
             considered view that the States would be
             required to take steps for the identification
             and effective implementation of active
             restoration measures that are localized to
             the particular ecosystem that was
             damaged. The focus has to be on
             restoration of the ecosystem as close and
             similar as possible to the specific one that
             was damaged.
xxxx        xxxx      xxxx
175. We find that, bringing the culprits to
             face the proceedings is a different matter
             and restoration of the damage already done
             is a different matter. We are of the
             considered view that the State cannot run
             away from its responsibilities to restore the
             damage done to the forest. The State, apart
             from preventing such acts in the future,
             should take immediate steps for restoration
             of the damage already done; undertake an
             exercise for determining the valuation of the
             damage done and recover it from the
             persons found responsible for causing such
             a damage.”
                                     (emphasis supplied)
56. We are of the considered view that in tune with aforesaid, the

DRMB must work with the sole purpose of preservation and

restoration of the Delhi Ridge area.
Page 34 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
57. We, therefore, pass the following order:
i.   We direct the MoEF&CC to constitute the DRMB by issuing

      notification under
Section 3(3)
of the EP Act with the

      membership as under:
1. Chief Secretary, GNCT of Delhi, Chairman
2. Vice-Chairman, Delhi Development Authority, Member
3. Representative of the Director General of Forests &

         Special Secretary, MoEF&CC, Government of India, not

         below the rank of Inspector General of Forests, Member
4. Representative of the Ministry of Housing and Urban

         Affairs, Gol (not below the rank of JS), Member
5. Commissioner,           Municipal   Corporation   of   Delhi,

         Member
6. Chairman, New Delhi Municipal Council, Member
7. Director General, Central Public Works Department,

         Government of India, Member
8. Representative of the Commissioner of Police, Delhi

         (not below the rank of Joint Commissioner), Member
Page 35 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
9. Principal Secretary/Secretary (Environment & Forests),

         GNCTD, Member
10. Principal Secretary/Secretary (Land Revenue), GNCTD,

         Member
11. Two representatives from NGOs and Civil Societies (to

         be nominated by GNCT of Delhi), Member
12. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, GNCTD,

         Member-Secretary
13. Representative of Central Empowered Committee

         (CEC), Member

 ii.   The DRMB on its constitution would constitute a Standing

       Committee as under:
1. Member of the CEC, Chairperson;
2. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, GNCTD;
3. Two Representatives from NGOs and Civil Societies

             who are already part of the DRMB;
4. Nominee of the Chief Secretary, GNCTD; and
5. Nominee of the Delhi Development Authority.
The nominees to be appointed by the Chief Secretary,
       GNCTD and DDA must be experts in the field of
       conservation.
Page 36 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
iii.   The functioning of the DRMB would be as under:
a)   The Board shall act as a single-window authority

                insofar as the Delhi Ridge and the Morphological

                Ridge is concerned;
b)   The Board must ensure the preservation of the Delhi

                Ridge and Morphological Ridge in its pristine glory by

                removing all encroachments and taking all necessary

                steps to improve the Ridge;
c)   The Board must remove all encroachments in the

                Delhi Ridge as well as the Morphological Ridge;
d)   The Board must duly ensure that the identification

                process of the Morphological Ridge is complete as per

                order dated 8th February, 2023 in
T.N. Godavarman
(supra)13 and report its compliance, along with

                comments, if any, to this court;
e)   The Board must ensure the protection, scientific

                management, ecological restoration of the Ridge and

                the Morphological Ridge including afforestation and

                habitat conservation;
Page 37 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
f)   The Board must submit periodic Reports every six

                months to this court regarding the status of the Ridge

                and the Morphological Ridge and the compliance of

                the directions of this court;
g)   The Board must act fairly and transparently in

                discharge of its functions – this would include having

                a website, provide public notices for hearings in

                advance, public consultation, and uploading of

                reports on the website as soon as they are placed

                before this court or any other Authority; and
h) All authorities in the territory of the NCT of Delhi

                must act in aid of the discharge of duties of the

                Board.
iv.   The Member of the CEC who will officially act as the

      representative to the DRMB is directed to report to this court

      every three months on proper functioning of the DRMB and

      the Standing Committee.
58.    Before we part with this judgment, we place on record our

appreciation       for    the       valuable   assistance   provided   by

Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG and Mr. K. Parameshwar,
Page 38 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995
learned Amicus Curiae ably assisted by Mr. Mukunda, Ms. Kanti,

Mr. Shreenivas Patil and Ms. Raji Gururaj.
.........................CJI
                                                         (B.R. GAVAI)



                                       ……...............................J
                                        (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 11, 2025.
Page 39 of 39
Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995