[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jai Balaji Industries Ltd vs M/S Heg Limited on 28 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1362                                                     REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                            TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) NO. 1099 OF 2025
                  (ARISING OUT OF TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) D. NO. 24362 OF 2025)




             JAI BALAJI INDUSTRIES LTD. AND ORS.                ...PETITIONER(S)


                                              Versus


             M/S HEG LTD.                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                              WITH



                            TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) NO. 1100 OF 2025
                  (ARISING OUT OF TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) D. NO. 24506 OF 2025)


                            TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) NO. 1101 OF 2025
             (ARISING OUT OF TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) D. NO. 24500 OF 2025)


                            TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) NO. 1102 OF 2025
             (ARISING OUT OF TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) D. NO. 24493 OF 2025)



   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   VISHAL ANAND
   Date: 2025.11.28
   14:38:01 IST
   Reason:




                                         JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following

parts:
INDEX

A.        FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................................. 3

B.        ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ....................................................... 6

C.        ANALYSIS .............................................................................................. 6
(i) Position of law as regards jurisdiction of courts prior to the
         Amendment Act, 2015 ............................................................................ 7
         a. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Bhaskaran .................... 7
          b. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Harman
             Electronics .......................................................................................... 13
          c. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Dashrath Rupsingh
             Rathod ................................................................................................ 18
(ii) Position of law as regards jurisdiction of courts after the enactment
          of the Amendment Act, 2015................................................................ 27
          a. Meaning of the expressions “delivered for collection through an
             account” and “presentation for payment otherwise through an
             account” .............................................................................................. 30
          b. Meaning of the expression “maintains an account” under Section
             142(2) .................................................................................................. 35
          c. Conjoint reading of Section 142(2)(a) and the Explanation
             thereto ................................................................................................. 38
(iii)Determination of the issues framed .................................................... 57
          a. Whether the MM, Kolkata has the jurisdiction to try the
             complaint? ........................................................................................... 57
          b. Whether a case of transfer of the complaint from the court of JMFC,
             Bhopal to MM, Kolkata is made out?................................................. 58

D.        CONCLUSION ..................................................................................... 60
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 60
1.   Since the issues raised in all the captioned transfer petitions are the same,

     those were taken up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by

     this common judgment and order.
2.   For the sake of convenience, the Transfer Petition (Criminal) Diary No.

     24362 of 2024 is treated as the lead matter.
3.   This transfer petition filed under Section 446 of the Bhartiya Nagarik

     Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter, “BNSS”) read with Order XXXIX of

     the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 is at the instance of a private limited

     company through its directors, praying for transfer of the Complaint Case

     No. RCT 2501046/2017 titled as "M/s HEG Limited vs Jai Balaji Industries

     Ltd. & Ors” pending in the court of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bhopal

     to the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Kolkata.
The transfer is prayed for

     on the ground that this Court, in
Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of

     Maharashtra
reported in (2014) 9 SCC 129 had held that cases where the

     trial had reached the stage of summoning, appearance of accused, and the

     recording of evidence had commenced as per
Section 145(2)
Negotiable

     Instruments Act, 1881 (for short, the “Act, 1881”), those should continue in

     the same court where the trial was ongoing.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 2 of 60
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   The petitioner no. 1 herein (Jai Balaji Industries Ltd.) is the original accused

     no. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the “accused company”), while the other

     petitioners are the directors of the accused company. The respondent (M/s

     HEG Limited), is the original complainant (hereinafter referred to as the

     “complainant company” or “complainant”).
5.   A cheque for the amount of Rs. 19,94,996/- was drawn by the accused

     company through its directors, against an invoice generated by the

     complainant company, dated 23.03.2014. The cheque was drawn by the

     accused on the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Kolkata and the same was

     deposited by the complainant on 19.06.2014 in its account maintained with

     the State Bank of India, Bhopal branch.
6.   The cheque
referred to above
came to be dishonoured due to insufficiency

     of funds on 20.06.2025 pursuant to which, the complainant issued the

     statutory notice dated 11.07.2014 to all the accused persons through

     registered speed post A/D, demanding that the sum of Rs. 19,94,996/- be

     paid within a period of 15 days as prescribed under
Section 138
of the Act,

     1881 in lieu of the dishonoured cheque. The said notice was delivered on

     14.07.2014.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 3 of 60
7.   The accused company replied vide the letter dated 26.07.2014 which was

     received by the complainant on 30.07.2014, wherein all the accused persons

     took the defence that the said cheque had been issued as a ‘Security Deposit’

     and not in discharge of any enforceable debt. As a result, the complainant

     company filed the Complaint Case No. 406978 of 2014 in the court of the

     Metropolitan Magistrate, Kolkata (the “MM, Kolkata”) on 16.08.2014. The

     same was registered on 29.01.2015 and summons were issued to the accused

     company and other accused persons on 29.01.2015. Consequently, the MM,

     Kolkata proceeded to frame charge to which the accused persons pleaded

     not guilty and claimed to be tried. On 27.04.2015, the affidavit of evidence-

     in-chief of the complainant company’s officer was taken on record by the

     MM, Kolkata.
8.   While the case was pending before the MM, Kolkata, the Government

     enacted the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015 (the

     “Amendment Act, 2015”) on 26.12.2015. In accordance with the terms of

     the amendment to the Act, 1881, more particularly,
Section 142
thereof, the

     territorial jurisdiction for prosecution and trial of cases registered under
Section 138
was stipulated to be at the place where the payee or holder

     maintains his bank account. In this case, the payee, i.e., the complainant

     company maintained its bank account with the State Bank of India, Bhopal

     branch.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 4 of 60
9.   Upon request made by the complainant company, the MM, Kolkata returned

     the complaint to the respondent vide order dated 28.07.2016 observing that

     it lacked the jurisdiction to conduct trial for the case in hand and allowed the

     complainant to present the matter before the court of competent jurisdiction.
10. In such circumstances referred to above, the complainant company got the

     complaint for dishonour of cheque registered in the court of the Judicial

     Magistrate First Class, Bhopal (the “JMFC, Bhopal”) bearing Complaint

     Case No. RCT 1501046 of 2017. The accused company raised an objection

     as regards the territorial jurisdiction of the JMFC, Bhopal to try the offence

     relying on the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (the “Act,

     1973”). Besides according to the accused persons, the MM, Kolkata could

     not have returned the complaint once the recording of evidence as per
Section 145(2)
had already commenced. However, the said objections were

     rejected by the JMFC, Bhopal. The same was then challenged by the accused

     persons vide Criminal Revision before the Sessions Court, Bhopal which is

     still pending adjudication.
11. Be that as it may, the question before us is not one relating to the merits of

     the claims of the parties herein. What is discernible is the fact that the cheque

     so issued was dishonoured, and the sum for which such cheque was drawn

     was not made good by the accused despite a statutory notice. This
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 5 of 60
conspectus of facts has enabled the complainant to prosecute the accused

     and the sole controversy before us is as to which court has the territorial

     jurisdiction to try the accused persons for the offence punishable under
Section 138
of the Act, 1881.
B.   ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
12. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

     through the materials on record, the following two questions fall for our

     consideration:
i.    Whether after the enactment of the Amendment Act, 2015, the court

           within whose local jurisdiction the drawee bank is situated, has the

           jurisdiction to try a complaint under Section 138?
ii.   Whether after the enactment of the Amendment Act, 2015, a complaint

           under
Section 138
of the Act, 1881 can be transferred to the court

           within whose local jurisdiction the drawee bank is situated, if the

           recording of evidence under Section 145 has already commenced in the

           said court?
C.   ANALYSIS
13. Before adverting to the conspectus of facts before us, we must discuss or

     rather clarify the position of law as regards jurisdiction of courts to entertain

     complaints under
Section 138
of the Act, 1881 especially after the
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 6 of 60
introduction of Sections 142(2) and 142A respectively by the Amendment

     Act, 2015. For that, we must look into few judgments of this Court to better

     understand the legal backdrop in which the present dispute has arisen.
(i)       Position of law as regards jurisdiction of courts prior to the

               Amendment Act, 2015
14. Prior to the enactment of the Amendment Act, 2015, the issue relating to

     territorial jurisdiction was quite complex. With a view to dispel any doubt

     and lend clarity, this Court, in several of its judgments, had addressed the

     issue of jurisdiction.
a. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Bhaskaran
15.
In
K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan
, reported in (1999) 7 SCC

     510, this Court addressed itself on the issue of territorial jurisdiction in

     detail.
16. In the said case, the cheque was issued by the accused at Adoor, Kerala and

     the same was presented by the complainant at the bank in Kayamkulam,

     Kerala, for encashment. The drawee bank dishonoured the cheque due to

     funds being insufficient in the account of the accused. Consequently, the

     complainant therein issued the statutory notice as required under
Section 138
of the Act, 1881 but the same remained unclaimed and not delivered to the

     accused as the addressee (the accused) was not found at the address
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 7 of 60
mentioned in the notice. The complainant proceeded to file the complaint

     before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Adoor (“JMFC,

     Adoor”).
17. The accused questioned the jurisdiction of the JMFC, Adoor on the ground

     that the cheque was dishonoured at the bank situated in Kayamkulam where

     the complainant had presented the cheque for encashment and therefore,

     there was no occasion for the complainant to file a case at Adoor. The JMFC,

     Adoor accepted the said submission canvassed by the accused and held that

     he had no territorial jurisdiction to try the case as the cheque was

     dishonoured in a different district of Kerala. On the other hand, the High

     Court set aside the trial court’s judgment and held that since the cheque was

     issued at Adoor, i.e., within the territorial jurisdiction of the JMFC, Adoor,

     he was competent to conduct the trial in respect of the complaint.
18. This Court took the view that the JMFC, Adoor had erroneously held that

     the trial of the complaint was outside its jurisdiction. It was observed that

     although
Section 177
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the “
CrPC
”)

     lays down the rule that every offence must be tried by a court within whose

     jurisdiction it was committed, yet this rule was not invariable. Situations that

     may present uncertainty as regards the question of jurisdiction are accounted
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 8 of 60
for by the
CrPC
, more particularly Section 178 thereof. Section 178 reads

     thus:
“178. Place of inquiry or trial.
(a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an
                   offence was committed, or
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area
                   and partly in another, or
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be
                   committed in more local areas than one, or
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local
                   areas,
               it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction
               over any of such local areas.”
19. The plain reading of Section 178(d
)
referred to above
clarifies that when it

     is not possible to answer the question of jurisdiction with certainty due to

     several acts having been done in different local areas, the offence could be

     tried in a court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
20. This Court highlighted that the offence under Section 138 is a consequence

     of the dishonour of cheque but such dishonour by itself does not result in the

     offence unless and until the following acts are established:
(i)     Drawing of the cheque,
(ii) Presentation of the cheque to the bank,
(iii) Returning the cheque unpaid by the drawee bank,
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 9 of 60
(iv) Issuing notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque demanding

           payment of the cheque amount,
(v) Failure of the drawer to make payment within 15 days of the receipt of

           the notice.
21. This Court held that the complainant may choose to lodge his complaint in

     any court exercising jurisdiction over the localities where the aforesaid acts

     may have been done. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced

     below:
“11. We fail to comprehend as to how the trial court could
              have found so regarding the jurisdiction question. Under
              Section 177 of the Code “every offence shall ordinarily be
              enquired into and tried in a court within whose jurisdiction it
              was committed”. The locality where the Bank (which
              dishonoured the cheque) is situated cannot be regarded as
              the sole criterion to determine the place of offence. It must be
              remembered that offence under Section 138 would not be
              completed with the dishonour of the cheque. It attains
              completion only with the failure of the drawer of the cheque
              to pay the cheque amount within the expiry of 15 days
              mentioned in clause (c) of the proviso to
Section 138
of the
              Act. It is normally difficult to fix up a particular locality as
              the place of failure to pay the amount covered by the cheque.
              A place, for that purpose, would depend upon a variety of
              factors. It can either be at the place where the drawer resides
              or at the place where the payee resides or at the place where
              either of them carries on business. Hence, the difficulty to fix
              up any particular locality as the place of occurrence for the
              offence under
Section 138
of the Act.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 10 of 60
12. Even otherwise the rule that every offence shall be tried
              by a court within whose jurisdiction it was committed is not
              an unexceptional or unchangeable principle. Section 177
              itself has been framed by the legislature thoughtfully by using
              the precautionary word “ordinarily” to indicate that the rule
              is not invariable in all cases. Section 178 of the Code
              suggests that if there is uncertainty as to where, among
              different localities, the offence would have been committed
              the trial can be had in a court having jurisdiction over any of
              those localities. The provision has further widened the scope
              by stating that in case where the offence was committed
              partly in one local area and partly in another local area the
              court in either of the localities can exercise jurisdiction to try
              the case. Further again, Section 179 of the Code stretches its
              scope to a still wider horizon. It reads thus:
“179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence
                 ensues.—When an act is an offence by reason of anything
                 which has been done and of a consequence which has
                 ensued, the offence may be enquired into or tried by a court
                 within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done
                 or such consequence has ensued.”
13. The above provisions in the Code should have been borne
              in mind when the question regarding territorial jurisdiction
              of the courts to try the offence was sought to be determined.
14. The offence under
Section 138
of the Act can be
              completed only with the concatenation of a number of acts.
The following are the acts which are components of the said
              offence: (1) drawing of the cheque, (2) presentation of the
              cheque to the bank, (3) returning the cheque unpaid by the
              drawee bank, (4) giving notice in writing to the drawer of the
              cheque demanding payment of the cheque amount, (5) failure
              of the drawer to make payment within 15 days of the receipt
              of the notice.
15. It is not necessary that all the above five acts should have
              been perpetrated at the same locality. It is possible that each
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 11 of 60
of those five acts could be done at five different localities. But
              a concatenation of all the above five is a sine qua non for the
              completion of the offence under Section 138 of the Code. In
              this context a reference to Section 178(d) of the Code is
              useful. It is extracted below:
“178. (a)-(c)***
(d) where the offence consists of several acts done in
                 different local areas,
                 it may be enquired into or tried by a court having
                 jurisdiction over any of such local areas.”
16. Thus it is clear, if the five different acts were done in five
              different localities any one of the courts exercising
              jurisdiction in one of the five local areas can become the
              place of trial for the offence under
Section 138
of the Act. In
              other words, the complainant can choose any one of those
              courts having jurisdiction over any one of the local areas
              within the territorial limits of which any one of those five acts
              was done. As the amplitude stands so widened and so
              expansive it is an idle exercise to raise jurisdictional question
              regarding the offence under
Section 138
of the Act.”
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
22. The decision in
Bhaskaran
(supra) took into account or rather highlighted

     that Section 138 would get attracted upon commission of multifarious acts.

     Such acts may not always share local areas and might have been done in

     different jurisdictions. It was recognized that the special nature of the

     offence contained in the said section gave rise to jurisdictional ambiguity

     which was hindering the complainants’ litigations to recover their money.

     To remedy the mischief that was being perpetuated by the absence of a

     specific jurisdiction, this Court held that the amplitude of the offence under
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 12 of 60
Section 138 was so wide as to confer jurisdiction on all the courts in whose

     territorial jurisdiction any of the five acts as mentioned above, might have

     been committed.
b. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Harman Electronics
23.
In
Harman Electronics (P) Ltd. v. National Panasonic India (P) Ltd.
,

     reported in (2009) 1 SCC 720, the cheque was issued by the drawer in

     Chandigarh and was presented by the complainant in Chandigarh itself. The

     complainant sent the statutory notice under Section 138 from Delhi which

     was admittedly served on the drawer in Chandigarh. Upon non-clearance of

     dues, the complainant filed a complaint under Section 138 before the

     Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi (the “ASJ, Delhi”).
24. It was the grievance of the accused therein that although most of the acts

     required to constitute an offence under Section 138 were committed in

     Chandigarh, yet the complainant had filed the complaint in the court at New

     Delhi only on the strength of the fact that the statutory notice was issued in

     Delhi. The accused therein had contended that this by itself would amount

     to absurdity if the complaint was entertained in Delhi.
25. The ASJ, Delhi held that the court in Delhi had the territorial jurisdiction to

     conduct trial in respect of the complaint as the statutory notice was sent by

     the complainant from Delhi. The High Court of Delhi affirmed the decision
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 13 of 60
of the ASJ, Delhi saying that this Court’s judgment in
Bhaskaran
(supra)

     had clarified that if five different acts constituting the offence under Section

     138 were found to have been done in five different localities, any one of the

     courts exercising jurisdiction in one of such five areas could become the

     place of trial. The High Court held that the issuance of statutory notice being

     one of the acts mandatory for the completion of an offence under Section

     138, the court in Delhi exercising territorial jurisdiction over the place from

     which the statutory notice was issued, would have the jurisdiction to try the

     complaint.
26. The question that fell for the consideration of this Court was whether the

     sending of notice from Delhi, by itself would give rise to a cause of action

     for taking cognizance under Section 138.
27. This Court held that the cause of action for proceeding against an accused

     person under Section 138 would arise not from the mere sending of the

     statutory notice but rather from its receipt by the accused person. The object

     behind sending of notice was considered by this Court and it was observed

     that it is only upon receipt of the notice that an accused person may elect to

     either pay the amount due and payable within a period of 15 days or not to

     pay the same. Therefore, issuance of notice by itself would not give rise to
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 14 of 60
a cause of action. The service of notice is imperative as it is only when the

     communication thereof is complete that the cause of action arises.
28. This Court also noted that allowing multitudinous courts the jurisdiction to

     try a single complaint would enable or rather place a complainant in the

     position to misuse the law and cause harassment to the accused.
29. In light of such considerations, this Court held that though the statutory

     notice was sent from Delhi, yet its receipt was recorded in Chandigarh. As

     the cause of action accrued in Chandigarh, it was held that the court in Delhi

     had no jurisdiction to try the matter. The relevant portions of the judgment

     are reproduced below:
“12. The complaint petition does not show that the cheque
              was presented at Delhi. It is absolutely silent in that regard.
              The facility for collection of the cheque admittedly was
              available at Chandigarh and the said facility was availed of.
              The certificate dated 24-6-2003, which was not produced
              before the learned court taking cognizance, even if taken into
              consideration does not show that the cheque was presented
              at the Delhi branch of Citibank. We, therefore, have no other
              option but to presume that the cheque was presented at
              Chandigarh. Indisputably, the dishonour of the cheque also
              took place at Chandigarh. The only question, therefore,
              which arises for consideration is that as to whether sending
              of notice from Delhi itself would give rise to a cause of action
              for taking cognizance under the
Negotiable Instruments Act
.
13. It is one thing to say that sending of a notice is one of the
              ingredients for maintaining the complaint but it is another
              thing to say that dishonour of a cheque by itself constitutes
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 15 of 60
an offence. For the purpose of proving its case that the
              accused had committed an offence under
Section 138
of the
              Negotiable Instruments Act, the ingredients thereof are
              required to be proved. What would constitute an offence is
              stated in the main provision. The proviso appended thereto,
              however, imposes certain further conditions which are
              required to be fulfilled before cognizance of the offence can
              be taken. If the ingredients for constitution of the offence
laid
              down in
provisos (a), (b) and (c) appended to
Section 138
of
              the Negotiable Instruments Act are intended to be applied in
              favour of the accused, there cannot be any doubt that receipt
              of a notice would ultimately give rise to the cause of action
              for filing a complaint. As it is only on receipt of the notice
              that the accused at his own peril may refuse to pay the
              amount. Clauses (b) and (c) of the proviso to Section 138
              therefore must be read together. Issuance of notice would not
              by itself give rise to a cause of action but communication of
              the notice would.
---xxx---
17.
Section 177
of the Code of Criminal Procedure
              determines the jurisdiction of a court trying the matter. The
              court ordinarily will have the jurisdiction only where the
              offence has been committed. The provisions of
Sections 178
and
179
of the Code of Criminal Procedure are exceptions to
              Section 177. These provisions presuppose that all offences
              are local. Therefore, the place where an offence has been
              committed plays an important role. It is one thing to say that
              a presumption is raised that notice is served but it is another
              thing to say that service of notice may not be held to be of any
              significance or may be held to be wholly unnecessary. (…)
---xxx---
19. Presumption raised in support of service of notice would
              depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. Its
              application is on the question of law or the fact obtaining.
Presumption has to be raised not on the hypothesis or
              surmises but if the foundational facts are laid down therefor.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 16 of 60
Only because presumption of service of notice is possible to
              be raised at the trial, the same by itself may not be a ground
              to hold that the distinction between giving of notice and
              service of notice ceases to exist.
20. Indisputably all statutes deserve their strict application,
              but while doing so the cardinal principles therefor cannot be
              lost sight of. A court derives a jurisdiction only when the
              cause of action arose within its jurisdiction. The same cannot
              be conferred by any act of omission or commission on the
              part of the accused. A distinction must also be borne in mind
              between the ingredient of an offence and commission of a
              part of the offence. While issuance of a notice by the holder
              of a negotiable instrument is necessary, service thereof is
              also imperative. Only on a service of such notice and failure
              on the part of the accused to pay the demanded amount within
              a period of 15 days thereafter, the commission of an offence
              completes. Giving of notice, therefore, cannot have any
              precedent over the service. It is only from that view of the
              matter that in
Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. v. Galaxy
              Traders & Agencies Ltd.
[(2001) 6 SCC 463 : 2001 SCC
              (Cri) 1163 : AIR 2001 SC 676] emphasis has been laid on
              service of notice.
21. We cannot, as things stand today, be oblivious of the fact
              that a banking institution holding several cheques signed by
              the same borrower can not only present the cheque for its
              encashment at four different places but also may serve
              notices from four different places so as to enable it to file four
              complaint cases at four different places. This only causes
              grave harassment to the accused. It is, therefore, necessary
              in a case of this nature to strike a balance between the right
              of the complainant and the right of an accused vis-à-vis the
              provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                          Page 17 of 60
30. This Court, while applying the principles relating to jurisdiction as
laid down

     in
Bhaskaran
(supra), explained the legal effect of the act of sending the

     statutory notice under Section 138 for the purpose of determining the

     jurisdiction to try a complaint thereunder. It was recognized that conferring

     jurisdiction on the locality from where the notice was sent would give

     unfettered powers to a complainant to set jurisdiction at a particular location

     that may be inconvenient or cause undue hardship to the accused person.
Thus, the dictum in
Harman Electronics
(supra) curtailed the wide

     jurisdictional empowerment expounded in
Bhaskaran
(supra) to some

     extent.
c. Analysis of the observations of this Court in Dashrath Rupsingh
        Rathod
31. This Court, in its landmark decision in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra), was

     faced with the conundrum of jurisdictional ambiguity for trial of offence

     under
Section 138
of the Act, 1881 posed by the differing interpretations

     thereof expounded in
Bhaskaran
(supra),
Harman Electronics
(supra) and
Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd. v. Jayaswals
respectively and several other

     judgments.
32. A three-Judge Bench recognized the position of law in this regard as settled

     by
Bhaskaran
(supra), as well as the limits placed on wide jurisdiction by
Harman Electronics
(supra).
While analysing these decisions, this Court
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 18 of 60
observed that
Bhaskaran
(supra) adopted a liberal approach influenced by

     a curial compassion towards the unpaid payee. It was also noted that such

     approach was prone to abuse and had resulted in miscarriage of justice over

     the years.
33. This Court was of the view that for the purpose of determining jurisdiction,

     the commission of crime ought to be distinguished from its prosecution. It

     was held that though the five concomitants of Section 138 enabled

     prosecution of the offence thereunder, yet the offence itself came to be

     committed as soon as the cheque was dishonoured by the drawee bank. As

     a natural consequence, only the court exercising jurisdiction over the

     territory where the offence, i.e., the dishonour of cheque, was committed,

     was clothed with the power to try a complaint in respect of such offence.

     The relevant portions of the judgment in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) are

     reproduced below:
“10. It is axiomatic that when a court interprets any statutory
              provision, its opinion must apply to and be determinate in all
              factual and legal permutations and situations. We think that
              the dictum in
Ishar Alloy [Shri Ishar Alloy Steels
              Ltd. v. Jayaswals Neco Ltd.
, (2001) 3 SCC 609 : 2001 SCC
              (Cri) 582] is very relevant and conclusive to the discussion
              in hand.
It also justifies emphasis that
Ishar Alloy [Shri Ishar
              Alloy Steels Ltd. v. Jayaswals Neco Ltd.
, (2001) 3 SCC 609 :
2001 SCC (Cri) 582] is the only case before us which was
              decided by a three-Judge Bench and, therefore, was binding
              on all smaller Benches. We ingeminate that it is the drawee
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 19 of 60
Bank and not the complainant's bank which is postulated in
              the so-called second constituent of
Section 138
of the NI Act,
              and it is this postulate that spurs us towards the conclusion
              that we have arrived at in the present appeals. There is also
              a discussion of
Harman [Harman Electronics (P)
              Ltd. v. National Panasonic India (P) Ltd.
, (2009) 1 SCC 720
              : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 332 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 610] to
              reiterate that the offence under Section 138 is complete only
              when the five factors are present. It is our considered view,
              which we shall expound upon, that the offence in the
              contemplation of
Section 138
of the NI Act is the dishonour
              of the cheque alone, and it is the concatenation of the five
              concomitants of that section that enable the prosecution of
              the offence in contradistinction to the completion/commission
              of the offence.
11. We have also painstakingly perused
Escorts Ltd. [Escorts
              Ltd. v. Rama Mukherjee
, (2014) 2 SCC 255 : (2014) 1 SCC
              (Civ) 789 : (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 808] which was also decided
              by the
Nishant [Nishant Aggarwal v. Kailash Kumar
              Sharma
, (2013) 10 SCC 72 : (2013) 4 SCC (Civ) 627 : (2013)
              3 SCC (Cri) 189] two-Judge Bench. Previous decisions were
              considered, eventually leading to the conclusion that since
              the cheque concerned had been presented for encashment at
              New Delhi, its Metropolitan Magistrate possessed territorial
              jurisdiction to entertain and decide the subject complaint
              under
Section 138
of the NI Act.
Importantly, in a subsequent
              order, in FIL Industries Ltd. v. Imtiyaz Ahmed Bhat [(2014)
              2 SCC 266 : (2014) 1 SCC (Civ) 800 : (2014) 4 SCC (Cri)
              58] passed on 12-8-2013, it was decided that the place from
              where the statutory notice had emanated would not of its own
              have the consequence of vesting jurisdiction upon that place.
Accordingly, it bears repetition that the ratio
              in
Bhaskaran [K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan
,
              (1999) 7 SCC 510 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 1284] has been
              drastically diluted in that the situs of the notice, one of the so-
              called five ingredients of
Section 138
, has now been held not
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                           Page 20 of 60
to clothe that court with territorial competency. The
              conflicting or incongruent opinions need to be resolved.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
34. The aforesaid exposition stands fortified by the plain language of
Section

     138
of the Act, 1881. The primary part of the Section delineates the return

     of a cheque unpaid by the person who issued such cheque as an offence.

     However, the conditions stipulated in the proviso to the Section indicate that

     though the offence may come into existence upon dishonour of cheque, the

     consequences arising therefrom would be kept in abeyance till the time the

     concomitants contained in the provisory portion of the Section are also

     completed. In other words, the ingredients contained in the provisory portion

     of
Section 138
are necessarily to be fulfilled to successfully initiate

     prosecution in respect of the offence of dishonour of cheque which is

     committed when the cheque is returned unpaid by the drawee bank. The

     relevant paragraphs of the judgment read thus:
“18.
Section 138
of the NI Act is structured in two parts—the
              primary and the provisory. It must be kept in mind that the
              legislature does not ordain with one hand and immediately
              negate it with the other. The proviso often carves out a minor
              detraction or diminution of the main provision of which it is
              an appendix or addendum or auxiliary. Black's Law
              Dictionary states in the context of a proviso that it is
                 “[a] limitation or exception to a grant made or authority
                 conferred, the effect of which is to declare that the one
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 21 of 60
shall not operate, or the other be exercised, unless in the
                 case provided.
A clause or part of a clause in a statute, the office of which is
              either to except something from the enacting clause, or to
              qualify or restrain its generality, or to exclude some possible
              ground of misinterpretation of its extent”.
It should also be kept in perspective that a proviso or a
              condition are synonymous. In our perception in the case in
              hand the contents of the proviso place conditions on the
              operation of the main provision, while it does (sic not) form
              a constituent of the crime itself, it modulates or regulates the
              crime in circumstances where, unless its provisions are
              complied with, the already committed crime remains
              impervious to prosecution. The proviso to
Section 138
of the
              NI Act features three factors which are additionally required
              for prosecution to be successful. In this aspect
Section 142
correctly employs the term “cause of action” as compliance
              with the three factors contained in the proviso are essential
              for the cognizance of the offence, even though they are not
              part of the action constituting the crime. To this extent we
              respectfully             concur             with
Bhaskaran [K.
              Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan
, (1999) 7 SCC 510 :
1999 SCC (Cri) 1284] in that the concatenation of all these
              concomitants, constituents or ingredients of
Section 138
of
              the NI Act, is essential for the successful initiation or launch
              of the prosecution. We, however, are of the view that so far
              as the offence itself the proviso has no role to play.
              Accordingly a reading of
Section 138
of the NI Act in
              conjunction with
Section 177
CrPC leaves no manner of
              doubt that the return of the cheque by the drawee bank alone
              constitutes the commission of the offence and indicates the
              place where the offence is committed.
19. In this analysis we hold that the place, situs or venue of
              judicial inquiry and trial of the offence must logically be
              restricted to where the drawee bank is located. The law
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 22 of 60
should not be warped for commercial exigencies. As it is
Section 138
of the NI Act has introduced a deeming fiction of
              culpability, even though, Section 420 is still available in case
              the payee finds it advantageous or convenient to proceed
              under that provision. An interpretation should not be
              imparted to
Section 138
which will render it as a device of
              harassment i.e. by sending notices from a place which has no
              causal connection with the transaction itself, and/or by
              presenting the cheque(s) at any of the banks where the payee
              may have an account. In our discernment, it is also now
              manifest that traders and businessmen have become reckless
              and incautious in extending credit where they would
              heretofore have been extremely hesitant, solely because of the
              availability of redress by way of criminal proceedings. It is
              always open to the creditor to insist that the cheques in
              question be made payable at a place of the creditor's
              convenience. Today's reality is that every Magistracy is
              inundated with prosecutions under
Section 138
of the NI Act,
              so much so that the burden is becoming unbearable and
              detrimental to the disposal of other equally pressing
              litigation. We think that courts are not required to twist the
              law to give relief to incautious or impetuous persons; beyond
Section 138
of the NI Act.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
35. It was further observed in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) that the infusion of

     the concept of ‘cause of action’ in criminal proceedings as done by
Bhaskaran
(supra) perpetuated ambiguity relating to jurisdiction by

     allowing filing of a complaint under
Section 138
at multiple venues. This

     Court held that the interpretation of
Sections 177
and
178
of the CrPC

     respectively, set forth in
the said judgment
ran counter to the approach of
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 23 of 60
simplifying law. It was observed that Section 178 despite being an exception

     to Section 177 which informs about criminal jurisdiction ordinarily, did not

     envisage the concept of ‘cause of action’ as being a consideration germane

     for determining territorial jurisdiction in criminal trials. Therefore, the plain

     meaning obtained from Sections 177 and 178 respectively ought not to be

     warped for commercial exigencies and the logical conclusion flowing

     therefrom can only be that territorial jurisdiction was anchored at the place

     where the offence was committed. The relevant portions of the judgment are

     reproduced below:
“16.1. Unlike civil actions, where the plaintiff has the burden
              of filing and proving its case, the responsibility of
              investigating a crime, marshalling evidence and witnesses,
              rests with the State. Therefore, while the convenience of the
              defendant in a civil action may be relevant, the convenience
              of the so-called complainant/victim has little or no role to
              play in criminal prosecution. Keeping in perspective the
              presence of the word “ordinarily” in
Section 177
CrPC, we
              hasten to adumbrate that the exceptions to it are contained in
CrPC
itself, that is, in the contents of the succeeding Section
178.
CrPC
also contains an explication of “complaint” as
              any allegation to a Magistrate with a view to his taking action
              in respect of the commission of an offence; not being a police
              report. Prosecution ensues from a complaint or police report
              for the purpose of determining the culpability of a person
              accused of the commission of a crime; and unlike a civil
              action or suit is carried out (or “prosecuted”) by the State or
              its nominated agency. The principal definition of
              “prosecution” imparted by Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edn.
is
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 24 of 60
“[a] criminal action; a proceeding instituted and carried
                on by due course of law, before a competent tribunal, for
                the purpose of determining the guilt or innocence of a
                person charged with crime”.
These reflections are necessary because
Section 142(b)
of the
              NI Act contains the words, “the cause of action arises under
              clause (c) of the proviso to
Section 138
”, resulting arguably,
              but in our opinion irrelevantly, to the blind borrowing of
              essentially civil law attributes onto criminal proceedings.

              16.2. We reiterate that Section 178 admits of no debate that
              in criminal prosecution, the concept of “cause of action”,
              being the bundle of facts required to be proved in a suit and
              accordingly also being relevant for the place of suing, is not
              pertinent or germane for determining territorial jurisdiction
              of criminal trials.
Section 178
CrPC explicitly states that
              every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a
              court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed.
              Section 179 is of similar tenor. We are also unable to locate
              any provision of the
NI Act
which indicates or enumerates the
              extraordinary circumstances which would justify a departure
              from the stipulation that the place where the offence is
              committed is where the prosecution has to be conducted.
In
              fact, since cognizance of the offence is subject to the
              five
Bhaskaran [K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan
,
              (1999) 7 SCC 510 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 1284] components or
              concomitants the concatenation of which ripens the already
              committed offence under
Section 138
of the NI Act into a
              prosecutable offence, the employment of the phrase “cause
              of action” in
Section 142
of the NI Act is apposite for taking
              cognizance, but inappropriate and irrelevant for determining
              commission of the subject offence. There are myriad
              examples of the commission of a crime the prosecution of
              which is dependent on extraneous contingencies such as
              obtainment of sanction for prosecution under
Section 19
of
              the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Similar situation is
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 25 of 60
statutorily created by
Section 19
of the Environment
              (Protection) Act, 1986;
Section 11
of the Central Sales Tax
              Act, 1956;
Section 279
of the Income Tax Act;
Sections 132
and
308
CrPC;
Section 137
of the Customs Act, etc. It would
              be idle to contend that the offence comes into existence only
              on the grant of permission for prosecution, or that this
              permission constitutes an integral part of the offence itself. It
              would also be futile to argue that the place where the
              permission is granted would provide the venue for the trial.
              If sanction is not granted the offence does not vanish.
              Equally, if sanction is granted from a place other than where
              the crime is committed, it is the latter which will remain the
              place for its prosecution.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
36. It is abundantly clear from the aforesaid that in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra),

     this Court viewed the question of jurisdiction strictly from the lens of

     ‘territoriality of offences’. In other words, the payee cannot select the

     jurisdiction for trial of an offence under
Section 138
by presentation of the

     cheque at a location of his choosing. Though the presentation of cheque at

     any branch of the payee’s bank is permitted by the Act, 1881 for the purposes

     of commercial convenience, yet it cannot be said that such act of

     presentation confers jurisdiction on the court within whose territorial

     jurisdiction the said bank branch may be situated.
37. Since an offence under
Section 138
could be said to be committed upon

     dishonour of cheque by the drawee bank, it was held that such offence would

     be localised at the place where the drawee bank is situated. Therefore, only
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 26 of 60
the court within whose territorial jurisdiction the drawee bank is situated, is

     empowered to proceed against an accused person under
Section 138
.
(ii)   Position of law as regards jurisdiction of courts after the

            enactment of the Amendment Act, 2015
38. The exposition of law in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) resulted in several

     representations from the commercial sector to the government, registering

     protests against the accused-centric interpretation of the jurisdictional issue

     adopted by this Court. Such representations were considered by the

     Parliament and the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015 was

     enacted by the Parliament to inter alia, clarify the issue of jurisdiction to try

     the offence under
Section 138
.
39. The Amendment Act, 2015 introduced sub-section (2) to
Section 142
of the

     Act, 1881. The amended
Section 142
reads thus:
“142. Cognizance of offences.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of
              Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974),
(a) no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
              under
section 138
except upon a complaint, in writing, made
              by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in due course
              of the cheque;
(b) such complaint is made within one month of the date on
              which the cause of action arises under clause (c) of the
              proviso to
section 138
:
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 27 of 60
Provided that the cognizance of a complaint may be taken by
              the Court after the prescribed period, if the complainant
              satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not making
              a complaint within such period;
(c) no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or
              a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence
              punishable under
section 138
.
(2) The offence under
section 138
shall be inquired into and
              tried only by a court within whose local jurisdiction,--
(a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an
              account, the branch of the bank where the payee or holder in
              due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is
              situated; or
(b) if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or
              holder in due course, otherwise through an account, the
              branch of the drawee bank where the drawer maintains the
              account, is situated.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of clause (a), where a
              cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of the bank
              of the payee or holder in due course, then, the cheque shall
              be deemed to have been delivered to the branch of the bank
              in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may
              be, maintains the account.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
40. A bare textual reading of the amended
Section 142
indicates that the

     jurisdiction to try the offence under
Section 138
has been specified in two

     circumstances: first, when the cheque is delivered for collection through an

     account, and secondly, when the cheque is presented for payment otherwise

     through an account. It is also worth noting that the Explanation to
Section

     142(2)(a)
further clarifies the question of jurisdiction by taking into account
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 28 of 60
the realities of negotiating by way of cheques and the technological

     advancement in the field. However, this Court as well as the High Courts

     have been divided over the conjoint reading of
Section 142(2)(a)
and the

     Explanation thereto.
41. We find it necessary to resolve this controversy and eliminate divergent

     positions in this regard, and for that we must understand the true import of

     the amendments made to
Section 142
. In such view of the matter, it is

     apposite to consider the following definitions:
•     “Drawer” refers to the maker of a bill of exchange or cheque [See:
Section 7
of the Act, 1881].
•     “Drawee” refers to the person who is directed to pay the amount

           specified in the bill of exchange or cheque made by the drawer [See:
Section 7
of the Act, 1881].
•     “Payee” refers to the person named in the instrument, to whom or to

           whose order the money is by the instrument directed to be paid [See:
Section 7
of the Act, 1881].
The relevant provision reads thus:
“7. "Drawer".-- The maker of a bill of exchange or cheque
                is called the drawer; the person thereby directed to pay is
                called the drawee.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 29 of 60
"Drawee in case of need". -- When in the Bill or in any
                indorsement thereon the name of any person is given in
                addition to the drawee to be resorted to in case of need
                such person is called a "drawee in case of need".
                "Acceptor". -- After the drawee of a bill has signed his
                assent upon the bill, or, if there are more parts thereof than
                one, upon one of such parts, and delivered the same, or
                given notice of such signing to the holder or to some person
                on his behalf, he is called the "acceptor".
"Acceptor for honour". -- When a bill of exchange has been
                noted or protested for non-acceptance or for better
                security,] and any person accepts it supra protest for
                honour of the drawer or of any one of the indorsers, such
                person is called an "acceptor for honour".
"Payee". -- The person named in the instrument, to whom
                or to whose order the money is by the instrument directed
                to be paid, is called the "payee".”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)


     a. Meaning of the expressions “delivered for collection through an
        account” and “presentation for payment otherwise through an account”
42. The expression “delivered for collection through an account” is an integral

     part of
Section 142(2)(a)
and distinguishes it from the provision in
Section

     142(2)(b)
which comes into operation when a cheque is “presented for

     payment otherwise through an account”. We find it apposite to clarify that

     the expressions “delivered for collection” and “presented for payment”

     respectively, are distinct. They operate in separate stages of discharging a

     liability by way of a cheque.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 30 of 60
43. The word “delivery” is defined in
Section 46
of the Act, 1881 and reads thus:
“46. Delivery.
The making, acceptance or indorsement of a promissory note,
              bill of exchange or cheque is completed by delivery, actual or
              constructive.
As between parties standing in immediate relation, delivery
              to be effectual must be made by the party making, accepting
              or indorsing the instrument, or by a person authorised by him
              in that behalf.
As between such parties and any holder of the instrument
              other than a holder in due course, it may be shown that the
              instrument was delivered conditionally or for a special
              purpose only, and not for the purpose of transferring
              absolutely the property therein.
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable to
              bearer is negotiable by the delivery thereof.
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable to
              order is negotiable by the holder by indorsement and delivery
              thereof.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
44. What is discernible from the aforesaid is that the “making” of a cheque is

     complete only upon delivery of the same by the drawer. The act of

     “delivery” thus, creates a relationship between the drawer and the payee

     Such relationship is what describes the entitlement of the payee to the

     amount of money for which the cheque is drawn and enables the payee to

     encash the same.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 31 of 60
45. Upon perusal of
Section 142(2)(a)
, we are of the considered opinion that the

     terms “delivered” and “for collection through an account” are to be read in

     such a manner that the latter describes the nature of delivery. The plain

     reading of
Section 46
supports this line of argument as the definition

     contained therein indicates that the making of the cheque is complete upon

     the act of delivery. Therefore, the nature of the cheque becomes crystallized

     as an account payee cheque once the drawer delivers it to the payee who

     further delivers it to the bank in which he maintains his account. Once the

     cheque is delivered by the payee to his bank, the “making” of the cheque is

     said to be complete. The inclusion of the expression “for collection through

     an account” in
Section 142(2)(a)
is only to indicate the intention of the

     drawer to “make” the cheque in such a manner that it can only result in a

     transaction between the bank accounts of the drawer and the payee.
46. Presentment, on the other hand, is the stage that immediately succeeds

     “delivery”. The expression “presentment for payment” is defined under
Section 64
of the Act, 1881. It stipulates that a cheque must be presented for

     payment to the maker of such cheque (the drawer) or the person to whom

     directions are given to pay the amount specified in the cheque (the drawee).

     Such presentment must be by or on behalf of the payee. The relevant

     provision reads thus:
“64. Presentment for payment.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 32 of 60
(1) Promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheques must
                   be presented for payment to the maker, acceptor or
                   drawee thereof respectively, by or on behalf of the
                   holder as hereinafter provided. In default of such
                   presentment, the other parties thereto are not liable
                   thereon to such holder.
Where authorized by agreement or usage, a presentment
                   through the post office by means of a registered letter is
                   sufficient.
Exception.--Where a promissory note is payable on
                   demand and is not payable at a specified place, no
                   presentment is necessary in order to charge the maker
                   thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 6
, where
                   an electronic image of a truncated cheque is presented
                   for payment, the drawee bank is entitled to demand any
                   further information regarding the truncated cheque
                   from the bank holding the truncated cheque in case of
                   any reasonable suspicion about the genuineness of the
                   apparent tenor of instrument, and if the suspicion is that
                   of any fraud, forgery, tampering or destruction of the
                   instrument, it is entitled to further demand the
                   presentment of the truncated cheque itself for
                   verification:
Provided that the truncated cheque so demanded by the
                   drawee bank shall be retained by it, if the payment is
                   made accordingly.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 33 of 60
47. Therefore, presentment creates a relationship between the drawee bank and

     the payee (in case of an account bearer cheque) or the payee’s bank (in case

     of an account payee cheque).
48. We may with a view to obviate any confusion, clarify at the threshold that

     presentment under
Section 64
of the Act, 1881 and presenting of cheque by

     the payee to his bank are two distinct acts. The presentation of cheque by a

     payee to the payee’s bank is included in the concept of “delivery” defined

     under
Section 46
of the Act, 1881. It is nothing but an extension of delivery

     in the case of non-transferable account payee cheques. The jurisdiction in

     such cases has been anchored by
Section 142(2)(a)
at the place where branch

     of the bank in which the payee maintains an account is situated. The sketch

     below explains the concepts of “delivery” and “presentment”:
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                     Page 34 of 60
b. Meaning of the expression “maintains an account” under
Section 142(2)
49. Having discussed the bifurcation created by the legislature for the purposes

     of determining jurisdiction as regards any dispute pertaining to account

     payee cheques and account bearer cheques respectively, we may now

     explain the meaning of the expression “the branch of the bank where the

     payee or holder in due course, as the case maybe, maintains the account”.
50. This Court in Bijoy Kumar Moni v. Paresh Manna, reported in 2024 SCC

     OnLine SC 3833, had the occasion to provide an exhaustive explanation for

     the expression “maintains an account” as it appears in
Section 138
of the

     Act, 1881. The issue therein was whether it was permissible for a third party

     to draw a cheque on the bank account of the company of which he was a

     director, to discharge his individual liability. This Court observed that the

     expression “on an account maintained by him with a banker” describes an

     intrinsic relationship between an account holder and the bank in which he

     holds such account. Such relationship could not be altered by a delegation

     of authority. Therefore, even though a person may draw a cheque on the

     bank account of another person, it is not possible to hold such a person who

     draws the cheque, liable for the offence under
Section 138
as he is not the

     one who maintains the account with the bank. The relevant portion of the

     judgment in Bijoy Kumar Moni (supra) is reproduced below:
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                     Page 35 of 60
“45. It is of vital importance to understand the import of the
              expression “on an account maintained by him with a banker”
              used in
Section 138
of the NI Act. The expression, in our
              considered opinion, describes the relationship between the
              account holder and the banker. This relationship is
              fundamental to the application of
Section 138
. The act of
              maintaining an account is exclusively tied to the account
              holder and does not extend to any third party whom the
              account holder may authorize to manage the account on its
              behalf. Therefore, any delegation of authority to manage the
              account does not alter the intrinsic relationship existing
              between the account holder and the banker as envisaged
              under the
NI Act
. Corporate persons like companies, which
              are mere legal entities and have no soul, mind or limb to work
              physically, discharge their functions through some human
              agency recognised under the law to work. Therefore, if some
              function is discharged by such human agency for and on
              behalf of the company it would be an act of the company and
              not attributable to such human agent. One such instance of
              discharge of functions could be the authority to manage the
              bank accounts of the company, issue and sign cheques on its
              behalf, etc. which may be delegated to an authorised
              signatory. However, such authorisation would not render the
              authorised signatory as the maker of those cheques. It is the
              company alone which would continue to be the maker of these
              cheques, and thus also the drawer within the meaning of
Section 7
of the NI Act.
(Emphasis supplied)
51. It is abundantly clear from the aforesaid exposition that when a person

     maintains an account with a bank, he establishes a relationship with such

     bank for the management of his money. The scheme of the Act, 1881 leaves
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 36 of 60
no manner of doubt in our minds that such relationship forms the

     substructure of all transactions in respect of the account so maintained.
52. Having clarified the meaning of the expression “maintains an account”, we

     may proceed to determine the precise details of the relationship between a

     person and the bank in which he maintains an account. A bare perusal of
Section 138
indicates that for an offence to be made out thereunder, a person

     must draw a cheque on an account maintained by him with a bank. There is

     no further stipulation as regards the nature of such account or requirement

     of any other details of the bank that may be relevant for the purpose of

     adjudication. Therefore, what
Section 138
describes by use of the expression

     “on an account maintained by him with a banker” is a simpliciter

     relationship between a person and his banker.
53. Sub-section (2) of
Section 142
adopts a similar language, to indicate the

     same relationship as described in
Section 138
. However, it does so with a

     slight modification. The expressions “the branch of the bank where the

     payee or holder in due course, as the case maybe, maintains the account”

     or alternatively “the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer maintains

     the account” include the word “branch”. This indicates that the payee or

     drawer, by maintaining the account in a particular branch of the bank, share

     a relationship not with the bank as a whole but with the specific branch
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 37 of 60
thereof (we may refer to this specific branch as the “home branch” for ease

     of exposition). Therefore, the inclusion of “branch” in
Sections 142(2)(a)
and (b) places an additional condition for determining the place where the

     payee or drawer maintains the account. This additional condition is placed

     on the relationship between a person and his banker, in order to decide the

     question of jurisdiction and streamline the process of adjudication. In other

     words, for deciding jurisdiction, it is not sufficient to establish whether a

     person maintains an account in a particular bank. It is necessary to also

     ascertain the specific branch of the bank in which he maintains the account

     to completely and unambiguously decide the said question.



     c. Conjoint reading of
Section 142(2)(a)
and the Explanation thereto
54. It is limpid from the aforesaid discussion that the necessary corollary of

     including ‘branch’ as a factor that shapes the relationship between the

     payee/drawer and their bank, is that a complaint under
Section 138
would

     be triable only by the court in whose local jurisdiction the branch of the bank

     where the payee/drawer maintain their account, is situated.
55. Before we explain the
Section 142(2)(a)
, we deem it fit to briefly discuss
Section 142(2)(b)
.
In the case of account bearer cheques governed by
Section 142(2)(b)
, the provision of jurisdiction by way of the Amendment

     Act, 2015 is partially reinforced by the position of law expounded in
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 38 of 60
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra).
Section 142(2)(b)
confers jurisdiction on the

     court within whose local area the drawee bank is situated and upon

     presentation, the cheque comes to be dishonoured. It is, however, worth

     noting that since the introduction of ‘payable at par’ cheques, the

     encashment of cheques can happen at any branch of the drawee bank. It is

     not necessary that the branch which is honouring or dishonouring the cheque

     may be that particular branch in which the drawer maintains the account.

     Therefore, the technological advancements in the banking sector have made

     it so that the offence of dishonour of cheque can be committed at any branch

     of the drawee bank.
In such a case, if the law as explained in
Dashrath

     Rupsingh
(supra) is applied strictly then the jurisdiction would be fixed at

     the branch of the drawee bank where the cheque was actually dishonoured.

     Such branch may not necessarily be the branch in which the drawer

     maintains an account. Having taken into account this possibility, we

     recognize that the Amendment Act, 2015 has worded
Section 142(2)(b)
in

     such a manner that even if a cheque is dishonoured elsewhere, the

     jurisdiction for trial of the complaint under
Section 138
would lie with the

     court within whose local jurisdiction the branch of the drawee bank in which

     the drawer maintains the account, is situated.
56. The legislature has adopted a similar route under
Section 142(2)(a)
to

     determine jurisdiction in cases pertaining to the dishonour of account payee
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                    Page 39 of 60
cheques. The distinction between
Section 142(2)(a)
and (b) respectively is

     not only limited to the nature of the cheque sought to be encashed but also

     the stage at which jurisdictional ambiguity may arise, i.e., at the stage of

     delivery or presentment in the case of account payee cheque and account

     bearer cheque respectively. In the case of an account payee cheque, the

     jurisdictional uncertainty may arise in the first stage of delivery itself. As

     discussed in the aforesaid, “delivery” is continued by the payee to also

     include delivery of the cheque to the payee’s bank. In such a case, the act of

     making of the cheque is influenced by the payee allowing him to deliver the

     cheque for collection at any branch of the bank in which he maintains an

     account.
57. If the aforesaid be so and the jurisdiction is to be decided on the basis of the

     place where the cheque was delivered to the bank of the payee, the same

     would lead to conferring unbridled power to the payee in deciding

     jurisdiction which may be misused for the purposes of forum shopping. We

     are cognizant of the fact that the dictum in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra)

     sought to minimize such abuse of law that arose from the wide ambit of

     jurisdiction specified in
Bhaskaran
(supra).
While a bare perusal of the

     amended
Section 142
and the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the

     Amendment Act, 2015 shows that the Parliament has made a departure from

     the offence-centric understanding of jurisdiction in
Dashrath Rupsingh
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 40 of 60
(supra), yet we find it difficult to accept that the legislature would relegate

     the position of law back to a situation that would facilitate its manipulation.
58. At this juncture, it is relevant to refer to the Explanation to
Section 142(2)(a)
.
A bare textual reading of the provision indicates that the Explanation creates

     a legal fiction that a cheque, when delivered for collection through an

     account, at ‘any branch’ of the bank in which the payee maintains the

     account, would be deemed to have been delivered to the particular branch of

     the bank in which the payee maintains his account, i.e., the home branch of

     the payee. Therefore, by way of Explanation, the legislature ensures

     convenience of transaction by recognizing that a payee may deliver a cheque

     at ‘any branch’ of his bank. However, in a situation where such cheque

     comes to be dishonoured, it would be deemed that the cheque was delivered

     at the home branch so as to empower the court, within whose local territorial

     jurisdiction the said branch falls, to try the complaint in this regard.
59. We may advert to the following illustrative table to lend further clarity to

     the aforesaid exposition:
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 41 of 60
Payee’s Home Branch: DELHI               Drawer’s Home Branch: MUMBAI

                        Drawer issues the cheque in Ahmedabad.
SECTION 142(2)(a)                      SECTION 142(2)(b)

      In case of an account payee cheque       In case of an account bearer cheque
      (governed by
Section 142(2)(a)
),         (governed by
Section 142(2)(b)
),
      Payee delivers the cheque for            Payee presents the cheque in branch
      collection in branch of the payee’s      of the drawee bank situated at
      bank situated in CHENNAI.                BANGALORE.

      Jurisdiction in case of account          Jurisdiction in case of account
      payee cheque, under Section              bearer cheque, under
Section
      142(2)(a)
is vested with the courts      142(2)(b) is vested with the courts
      at DELHI.                                at MUMBAI.

      Reason:                                  Reason:

      The legal fiction created in the         The plain language of Section
      Explanation to
Section 142(2)(a)
142(2)(b)
indicates that jurisdiction
stipulates that jurisdiction would lie   in cases of account bearer cheques
      at the Home Branch of the Payee          would lie at the Home Branch of the
      (DELHI) irrespective of where the        Drawer (MUMBAI) irrespective of
      cheque has been delivered by the         where the cheque has been
      Payee (in this case at Chennai).         presented by the Payee (in this case,
                                               at Bangalore).
60. This Court had the occasion to apply the principles of jurisdiction
laid down

     in
Section 142(2)(a)
for the first time in
Bridgestone India (P) Ltd. v.

     Inderpal Singh
, reported in (2016) 2 SCC 75 wherein it was observed that

     the legal position declared in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) has been
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 42 of 60
overturned by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Second Ordinance,

     2015 whereby
Section 142
was amended such that the jurisdiction would be

     fixed at the place where the cheque is delivered for collection, i.e., the branch

     of the bank in which the payee maintains an account.
The relevant portions

     of the judgment in
Bridgestone
(supra) are reproduced below:
“11.
In order to overcome the legal position declared by this
              Court in
Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod
case [
Dashrath
              Rupsingh Rathod v. State of Maharashtra
, (2014) 9 SCC 129
              : (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 676 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 673] , the
              learned counsel for the appellant has drawn our attention to
              the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Second Ordinance,
              2015 (hereinafter referred to as “the Ordinance”). A perusal
              of
Section 1(2)
thereof reveals that the Ordinance would be
              deemed to have come into force with effect from 15-6-2015.
              It is, therefore, pointed out to us that the Negotiable
              Instruments (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2015 is in
              force. Our attention was then invited to
Section 3
thereof,
              whereby, the original
Section 142
of the Negotiable
              Instruments Act, 1881, came to be amended, and also,
Section
              4
thereof, whereby,
Section 142-A
was inserted into the
Negotiable Instruments Act
.
---xxx---
13. A perusal of the amended
Section 142(2)
, extracted
              above, leaves no room for any doubt, specially in view of the
              Explanation thereunder, that with reference to an offence
              under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,
              the place where a cheque is delivered for collection i.e. the
              branch of the bank of the payee or holder in due course,
              where the drawee maintains an account, would be
              determinative of the place of territorial jurisdiction.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 43 of 60
61. We are of the considered view that the paraphrasing of
Section 142(2)(a)
as

     done in
Bridgestone
(supra) bears some relevance and requires explanation.

     This Court applied the provision as intended by the language of
Section

     142(2)(a)
, however, in the process of exposition, rephrased the same and the

     Explanation thereto in a manner that gives primacy to the expression “for

     collection” without indicating the complete context in which it occurs in the

     provision. A perusal of
Section 142(2)(a)
reflects that the expression “for

     collection through an account” is employed by the legislature to identify the

     nature of the cheque as an account payee cheque.
Therefore, the use of the

     phrase “delivered for collection” with incomplete context in
Bridgestone
(supra) gave rise to a cleavage of opinion.
This is evident from this Court’s

     decision in
Yogesh Upadhyay v. Atlanta Ltd.
, reported in (2023) 19 SCC
404.
62.
In
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra), the petitioner therein had prayed for transfer

     of the two complaints filed in Nagpur to Delhi, as the complaint in respect

     of other four cheques, between the same parties, were registered before the

     competent court in Delhi.
This Court, on a conjoint reading of the
Statement

     of Objects and Reasons of the Amendment Act, 2015 and Para 13 of

     Bridgestone
(supra) respectively, held that the jurisdiction to try an offence

     under
Section 138
will lie with a court within whose local jurisdiction the

     cheque has been delivered for collection i.e., through an account in the
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 44 of 60
branch of the bank where the payee maintains an account. The relevant

     paragraphs of the judgment are reproduced below:
“12. Perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons in
              Amendment Act 26 of 2015 makes it amply clear that
              insertion of
Sections 142(2)
and
142-A
in the 1881 Act was a
              direct consequence of the judgment of this Court in
Dashrath
              Rupsingh Rathod [Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of
              Maharashtra
, (2014) 9 SCC 129 : (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 676 :
(2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 673] . Therefore, the use of the
              phrase:“shall be inquired into and tried only by a court
              within whose local jurisdiction …” in
Section 142(2)
of the
              1881 Act is contextual to the
ratio
laid down in
Dashrath
              Rupsingh Rathod [Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of
              Maharashtra
, (2014) 9 SCC 129 : (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 676 :
              (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 673] to the contrary, whereby territorial
              jurisdiction to try an offence under
Section 138
of the 1881
              Act vested in the court having jurisdiction over the drawee
              bank and not the complainant's bank where he had presented
              the cheque.
Section 142(2)
now makes it clear that the
              jurisdiction to try such an offence would vest only in the court
              within whose jurisdiction the branch of the Bank where the
              cheque was delivered for collection, through the account of
              the payee or holder in due course, is situated. The newly
              inserted
Section 142-A
further clarifies this position by
              validating the transfer of pending cases to the courts
              conferred with such jurisdiction after the amendment.
13. The later decision of this Court in Bridgestone India (P)
              Ltd. v. Inderpal      Singh [Bridgestone        India       (P)
              Ltd. v. Inderpal Singh, (2016) 2 SCC 75 : (2016) 1 SCC (Civ)
              588 : (2016) 1 SCC (Cri) 472] affirmed the legal position
              obtaining after the amendment of the 1881 Act and endorsed
              that
Section 142(2)(a)
of the 1881 Act vests jurisdiction for
              initiating proceedings for an offence under
Section 138
in the
              court where the cheque is delivered for collection i.e. through
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 45 of 60
an account in the branch of the bank where the payee or
              holder in due course maintains an account.
This Court also
              affirmed that
Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod [Dashrath
              Rupsingh Rathod v. State of Maharashtra
, (2014) 9 SCC 129
              : (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 676 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 673] would
              not non-suit the company insofar as territorial jurisdiction
              for initiating proceedings under
Section 138
of the 1881 Act
              was concerned.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
63. We also find it apposite to refer to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of

     the Amendment Act, 2015. The same reads thus:
“Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015
              Prefatory Note—Statement of Objects and Reasons.—

              (…) 3. The Supreme Court, in its judgment dated 1st August,
              2014, in the case of
Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of
              Maharashtra
, (2014) 9 SCC 129, held that the territorial
              jurisdiction for dishonour of cheques is restricted to the court
              within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed,
              which in the present context is where the cheque is
              dishonoured by the bank on which it is drawn. The Supreme
              Court has directed that only those cases where, post the
              summoning and appearance of the alleged accused, the
              recording of evidence has commenced as envisaged in
Section 145(2)
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, will
              proceeding continue at that place. All other complaints
              (including those where the accused/respondent has not been
              properly served) shall be returned to the complainant for
              filing in the proper court, in consonance with exposition of
              the law, as determined by the Supreme Court.
4. Pursuant to the judgment of the Supreme Court,
              representations have been made to the Government by
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 46 of 60
various stakeholders, including industry associations and
              financial institutions, expressing concerns about the wide
              impact this judgment would have on the business interests as
              it will offer undue protection to defaulters at the expense of
              the aggrieved complainant; will give a complete go-by to the
              practice/concept of ‘Payable at Par cheques’ and would
              ignore the current realities of cheque clearing with the
              introduction of CTS (Cheque Truncation System) where
              cheque clearance happens only through scanned image in
              electronic form and cheques are not physically required to be
              presented to the issuing branch (drawee bank branch) but are
              settled between the service branches of the drawee and payee
              banks; will give rise to multiplicity of cases covering several
              cheques drawn on bank(s) at different places; and adhering
              to it is impracticable for a single window agency with
              customers spread all over India.
5. To address the difficulties faced by the payee or the lender
              of the money in filing the case under
Section 138
of the said
              Act, because of which, large number of cases are stuck, the
              jurisdiction for offence under
Section 138
has been clearly
              defined. The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Bill, 2015
              provides for the following, namely—
(i) filing of cases only by a court within whose local
              jurisdiction the bank branch of the payee, where the payee
              presents the cheque for payment, is situated;
(ii) stipulating that where a complaint has been filed against
              the drawer of a cheque in the court having jurisdiction under
              the new scheme of jurisdiction, all subsequent complaints
              arising out of
Section 138
of the said Act against the same
              drawer shall be filed before the same court, irrespective of
              whether those cheques were presented for payment within the
              territorial jurisdiction of that court;
(iii) stipulating that if more than one prosecution is filed
              against the same drawer of cheques before different courts,
              upon the said fact having been brought to the notice of the
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 47 of 60
court, the court shall transfer the case to the court having
              jurisdiction as per the new scheme of jurisdiction; and
(iv) amending Explanation I under
Section 6
of the said Act
              relating to the meaning of expression “a cheque in the
              electronic form”, as the said meaning is found to be deficient
              because it presumes drawing of a physical cheque, which is
              not the objective in preparing “a cheque in the electronic
              form” and inserting a new Explanation III in the said section
              giving reference of the expressions contained in the
Information Technology Act, 2000
. (…)”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
64. What has been conveyed by this Court in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) is that

     the account which the payee maintains in a particular branch of the bank,

     serves only as a conduit for the payee to deliver the cheque at any branch of

     the bank, for subsequent presentment to the drawee bank. In other words,

     the payee is only required to maintain an account in a branch of the bank,

     for the said bank to present the cheque to the drawee bank from any of its

     branches. Therefore, the act of “maintaining an account in a branch” is to

     enable the primary action of “delivery for collection”. Accordingly, the

     jurisdiction must lie at the place where the primary action was performed,

     i.e., the branch of the payee’s bank where the cheque was actually delivered

     for collection, is situated.
65. The reasoning adopted in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) may find some support

     in the literal reading of Para 5(i) of the aforesaid Statement of Objects and
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 48 of 60
Reasons which states that cases would be filed in the court having

     jurisdiction over the branch of the bank in which the payee presents the

     cheque for payment. It is apposite to note that, on the face of it, the language

     used in the Statement of Objects and Reasons is not synonymous with the

     language of
Section 142(2)(a)
and the Explanation thereto.
Therefore, in our

     considered view,
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) could not have derived support

     from the Statement of Objects and Reasons.
66. We say so because no value could have been attached to the language

     adopted in the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the purpose of

     discerning the true meaning and effect of a substantive provision occurring

     in the statute book. This principle of interpretation has been settled by this

     Court in
Devadoss v. Veera Makali Amman Koil Athalur
, reported in

     (1998) 9 SCC 286 wherein it was observed thus:
“21. The question arises naturally whether the court can
              refer to the Statement of Objects and Reasons mentioned in a
              bill when it is placed before the legislature and even if it is
              permissible, to what extent the court can make use of the
              same. On this aspect, the law is well settled.
In
Narain
              Khamman v. Parduman Kumar Jain
[(1985) 1 SCC 1] it was
              stated that though the Statement of Objects and Reasons
              accompanying a legislative bill could not be used to
              determine the true meaning and effect of the substantive
              provisions of a statute, it was permissible to refer to the same
              for the purpose of understanding the background, the
              antecedent state of affairs, the surrounding circumstances in
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 49 of 60
relation to the statute and the evil which the statute sought to
              remedy.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
67. Further, we must also closely scrutinize the reliance placed by
Yogesh

     Upadhyay
(supra) on the phrasing of
Section 142(2)(a)
in
Bridgestone
(supra).
We say so because the application of
Section 142(2)(a)
in
Bridgestone
(supra), in no manner, supports how the provision was applied

     in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra).
Though the judgment in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) does not mention where the branch of the bank was situated in which

     the payee maintained an account, was situated, yet it is discernible from the

     decision that this Court gave primacy to the place where the cheque was

     “delivered for collection” when it upheld the correctness of institution of

     complaints in Nagpur.
68.
In our considered view, the interpretation of jurisdiction under
Section

     142(2)(a)
in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) is not borne out of the statutory

     scheme of the Act, 1881. A perusal of the judgment shows that it did not

     take into account the deeming fiction put forth in the Explanation to
Section

     142(2)(a)
that delivery of a cheque at any branch of the payee’s bank will be

     deemed to have been delivered at the branch of the bank in which the payee

     maintains the account, i.e., the home branch of the payee.
Even though, this

     Court in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) does not go so far as to discuss the
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 50 of 60
meaning and import of the Explanation, yet we may attempt to harmoniously

     read the language of the Explanation with the reasons provided in
the said

     judgment
in the interests of gauging the correct position of law.
69. Therefore, in arguendo, we may look at the Explanation from one another

     angle. The language used in the Explanation may also create a legal fiction

     that would enable ‘any branch’ of the payee’s bank to be deemed as ‘the

     branch in which the payee maintains an account’ (the “home branch”). This

     construction of the Explanation would mean that by virtue of
Section

     142(2)(a)
, the court within whose local jurisdiction the home branch is

     situated, has an inherent power to try a complaint under
Section 138
filed by

     the payee. However, the payee delivered the cheque for collection at another

     branch instead of the home branch. According to the dictum as laid in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra), primacy has to be accorded to the action of the

     payee in “delivery of the cheque for collection” for the purpose of

     determining jurisdiction. The only understanding that we can obtain from

     the aforesaid is that the court exercising territorial jurisdiction over the home

     branch will have to share the inherent powers that it possesses under
Section

     142(2)(a)
, with the court in whose jurisdiction such other branch is situated,

     in which the payee delivered the cheque for collection.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                         Page 51 of 60
70. Having undertaken the academic exercise of understanding the ways in

     which the Explanation may be read, we do not have any qualms in saying

     that the aforesaid construction of
Section 142(2)(a)
and the Explanation

     thereto does not appeal to us. We say so for the following two reasons:
(i)   First, the understanding of the Explanation in such a manner leads to

           distorting of the plain language of
Section 142(2)(a)
. This Court, in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) observed that “the legislature does not

           ordain with one hand and immediately negate it with the other”. We

           find the said principle to be of much significance especially while

           reading explanations attached to the provisions that seek to clarify the

           operation of such provision. In our considered view, an explanation

           cannot be raised to such a high pedestal that the provision which it

           intends to clarify becomes a mere supporting device.
(ii) Secondly, a perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the

           Amendment Act, 2015 indicates that the legislature intended to change

           the process of determination of jurisdiction for trial of complaints under
Section 138
. The inclusion of
Section 142(2)
in the Act, 1881, which

           is a special legislation, meant that the jurisdictional vacuum was filled.
The natural consequence of such amendment was that there remained

           no requirement of approaching the issue of jurisdiction from an

           ordinary criminal perspective as provided in the
CrPC
, as was done in
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 52 of 60
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra). However, the Statement of Objects and

           Reasons gives no indication that
the said judgment
made erroneous

           observations about the misuse of the wide ambit of jurisdiction by

           complainants to the inconvenience of the accused persons. In our

           considered view, it could not have been the intention of the Parliament

           to let abuse of law go unchecked.
It is for this reason that the judgment

           in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) does not impress us. If we accept the

           construction placed on
Section 142(2)(a)
by the decision in
Yogesh

           Upadhyay
(supra), we will be allowing a payee to manipulate the

           question of jurisdiction in his favour by letting him decide where he

           wants to deliver the cheque for collection. We are of the firm opinion

           that the legislature could not have intended to let misuse perpetuate in

           such a manner.
71. We find it apposite to also look into the decision rendered in
Shri Sendhur

     Agro & Oil Industries v. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.
, reported in 2025 SCC

     OnLine SC 508 wherein this Court placed reliance on both
Bridgestone
(supra) as well as
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) respectively.
The phraseology

     employed in
Sendhur Agro
(supra) suggests that this Court was in

     agreement with the law expounded in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) in respect

     of “delivery for collection”.
However, upon a closer examination, it is clear

     that this Court understood the term “delivered” and “for collection through
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 53 of 60
an account” in a disjunct manner which is not in consonance with how
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) perceived
Section 142(2)(a)
. It was observed that

     presentation of a cheque to the drawee bank will be “through the account”

     of the payee and that such place would be determinative for the purpose of

     identifying jurisdiction.
The relevant portion of the judgment in
Sendhur

     Agro
(supra) is reproduced below:
“61. It is clear on a reading of
Section 142(2)(a)
and the
              Explanation thereto that, for the purposes of clause (a),
              where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of
              the bank of the payee or holder in due course, then, the
              cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered to the branch
              of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the
              case may be, maintains the account.
62. A conjoint reading of
Section 142(2)(a)
along with the
              explanation thereof, makes the position emphatically clear
              that, when a cheque is delivered or issued to a person with
              liberty to present the cheque for collection at any branch of
              the bank where the payee or holder in due course, as the case
              may be, maintains the account then, the cheque shall be
              deemed to have been delivered or issued to the branch of the
              bank, in which, the payee or holder in due course, as the case
              may be, maintains the account, and the court of the place
              where such cheque was presented for collection, will have the
              jurisdiction to entertain the complaint alleging the
              commission of offence punishable under
Section 138
of the
              N.I. Act. In that view of the position of law, the word
              ‘delivered’ used in
Section 142(2)(a)
of the N.I. Act has no
              significance. What is of significance is the expression ‘for
              collection through an account’. That is to say, delivery of the
              cheque takes place where the cheque was issued and
              presentation of the cheque will be through the account of the
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 54 of 60
payee or holder in due course, and the said place is decisive
              to determine the question of jurisdiction.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
72. What is discernible from the aforesaid exposition is that this Court

     considered the requirement of “maintaining of the account” implicit in “for

     collection through an account”. In other words, once it is identified that the

     cheque in question is an account payee cheque, the delivery must be to such

     branch in which the payee maintains the account as it is this branch of the

     bank that will receive the funds in the account maintained by the payee, from

     the drawee bank which will debit the drawer’s account to send such amount.

     However, the necessity of delivery of an account payee cheque to the home

     branch is only legal and not commercial. It is to address commercial

     exigencies that the legislature enacted the Explanation to
Section 142(2)(a)
.

     The deeming fiction in the Explanation ensures that even if a cheque is

     delivered to a branch other than the home branch for commercial

     convenience, it shall be considered to have been delivered to the home

     branch for the legal purpose of determining jurisdiction. This understanding

     is also apparent from this Court’s recent judgment in Prakash Chimanlal

     Sheth v. Jagruti Keyur Rajpopat, reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1511.
73. The aforesaid comparison may be better illustrated through the following

     diagram depicted hereunder:
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 55 of 60
Section 142(2)(a)
–
      (2) The offence under
section 138
shall be inquired into and tried only by
      a court within whose local jurisdiction,--
(a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch
      of the bank where the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be,
      maintains the account, is situated
Bridgestone
(supra) –
Yogesh Upadhyay          Sendhur Agro
(supra)
                                   (supra) –                –
Section 142(2)(a)
of
Section             142(2)
now In that view of the
      the 1881 Act vests makes it clear that the position of law, the
      jurisdiction           for jurisdiction to try such word ‘delivered’ used
      initiating proceedings an offence would vest in
Section 142(2)(a)
of
      for an offence under only in the court within the
N.I. Act
has no
Section 138
in the whose jurisdiction the significance. What is of
      court where the cheque branch of the Bank significance                        is
      is              delivered where the cheque was the                   expression
      for     collection     i.e. delivered for collection ‘for            collection
      through an account in , through the account through an account’.
the branch of the bank of the payee or holder That is to say, delivery
      where the payee or in            due      course,   is of the cheque takes
      holder in due course situated                         place where the cheque
      maintains an account                                  was      issued        and
                                                            presentation      of   the
                                                            cheque      will        be
                                                            through the account of
                                                            the payee or holder in
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                        Page 56 of 60
due course, and the
                                                          said place is decisive to
                                                          determine the question
                                                          of jurisdiction.
74. The above diagrammatic representation shows that each judgment has

     considered specific phrases together or disjunct from each other due to

     which there have been variations in understanding of the provision in
Section 142(2)(a)
and the Explanation thereto.
75.
In such view of the matter, we are constrained to observe that the position

     of law expounded in
Yogesh Upadhyay
(supra) is per incuriam.
(iii)   Determination of the issues framed

             a. Whether the MM, Kolkata has the jurisdiction to try the
                complaint?
76. In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is as clear as a noon day that the

     jurisdiction to try a complaint filed under
Section 138
in respect of a cheque

     delivered for collection through an account, i.e., an account payee cheque,

     is vested in the court within whose local jurisdiction the branch of the bank

     in which the payee maintains the account, i.e., the payee’s home branch, is

     situated. Therefore, we find no force in the petitioner’s argument that as per

     the relevant provisions of the
CrPC
, the jurisdiction to try the complaint
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 57 of 60
under
Section 138
is vested in the court within whose local bounds the

     drawee bank is situated where the cheque was dishonoured. We say so

     because the enactment of the Amendment Act, 2015 and the introduction of
Section 142(2)
thereby, being a special legislation, occupies the field over a

     general procedural legislation viz.
CrPC
. Thus, the MM, Kolkata does not

     have jurisdiction to try the case.
b. Whether a case of transfer of the complaint from the court of
                JMFC, Bhopal to MM, Kolkata is made out?
77. The petitioner, who is the accused company in the complaint instituted by

     the respondent-complainant, has prayed for transfer of the complaint on the

     ground that the MM, Kolkata, before returning the complaint, had already

     reached the stage of recording of evidence under
Section 145(2)
of the Act,

     1881.
78. It is apposite to note that
Section 142A
of the Act, 1881 provides for transfer

     of pending cases under
Section 138
, to the court having jurisdiction in terms

     of
Section 142(2)
. We are aware that the jurisdiction to try the complaint in

     the instant case lied exclusively with the JMFC, Bhopal. If the matter had

     remained pending at the stage prior to the recording of evidence, there would

     have been no difficulty in accepting the deemed transfer of the complaint

     under
Section 142A(1)
to the court of JMFC, Bhopal from the court of MM,

     Kolkata. However, much water has floated under the bridge. We were
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 58 of 60
informed that the court of MM, Kolkata returned the complaint when it had

     already reached the stage of recording of evidence under
Section 145(2)
of

     the Act, 1881. In such view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion

     that allowing the parties to contest the complaint afresh before the JMFC,

     Bhopal would amount to a procedural impropriety that may prove to be

     detrimental to the case of the accused.
79.
In
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra), this Court, with a view to obviate and

     eradicate legal complications, had allowed the category of complaint cases

     in which proceedings had reached the stage of recording evidence under
Section 145(2)
, to remain in the court where they were pending, despite such

     courts not being vested with jurisdiction in terms of the judgment. The

     relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced below:
“22. (…) To obviate and eradicate any legal complications,
              the category of complaint cases where proceedings have
              gone to the stage of
Section 145(2)
or beyond shall be deemed
              to have been transferred by us from the court ordinarily
              possessing territorial jurisdiction, as now clarified, to the
              court where it is presently pending.”
80.
In light of the observations in
Dashrath Rupsingh
(supra) and to meet the

     ends of justice, we are of the view that the instant case be transferred to the

     jurisdiction of MM, Kolkata and the proceedings be resumed from the stage

     before the order of return of complaint dated 28.07.2016.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                       Page 59 of 60
D.   CONCLUSION
81. Having regard to the pleadings in the memorandum of the transfer petition,

     we have reached the conclusion that a case has been made out for transfer

     of the proceedings in question.
82. In the result, the petition succeeds and is hereby allowed. All other

     connected transfer petitions are also disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
83. The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to all the High

     Courts.
84. Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                                    (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                              ………………………………….J.
                                                   (R. MAHADEVAN)

New Delhi.
28th November, 2025.
T.P. (Crl.) D. No. 24362 of 2025                                      Page 60 of 60