[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Raj Kumar @ Bheema vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 17 November, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1322




                                                           REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).                OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No (s). 697 of 2024)


                            RAJ KUMAR @ BHEEMA                       ….APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

                            STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                  ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                 JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.    Heard.
2.    Leave granted.
3.    The instant appeal is directed against the final

                            judgment and order dated 29th September, 2022,

                            passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of

                            Delhi at New Delhi1 in Criminal Appeal No. 281 of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.11.17
16:21:39 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.
1
2021, whereby the appeal preferred by the appellant

Raj Kumar @ Bheema2 came to be dismissed,

affirming the judgment dated 12th February, 2021,

rendered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,

South East, Saket Courts, New Delhi3. By the said

judgment, while the accused-appellant was acquitted

of the charges under
Sections 3
,
3(1)(i)
,
3(1)(ii)
,
3(2)
,

and
3(4)
of the Maharashtra Control of Organised

Crime Act, 19994, and Sections 396, 307, 397, 412

read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 18605,

he was convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC, whereas the remaining co-accused

were acquitted. The High Court further affirmed the

order on sentence dated 20th February, 2021,

whereby the accused-appellant was sentenced to



2 Hereinafter, referred to as the “accused-appellant”.
3 Hereinafter, referred to as the “trial Court”.
4 For short, ‘MCOCA’.
5 For short, ‘
IPC
’.
2
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
undergo imprisonment for life with a fine of

Rs.5,000/-, and in default whereof, to further

undergo simple imprisonment for a period of one

month.
PROSECUTION CASE
4.   On the intervening night of 2nd/3rd November,

2008, at about 1:50 a.m., an information was

received at Police Station, New Friends Colony

through wireless operator, regarding an incident of

house breaking by night at House No. 81, Sukhdev

Vihar, near Escort Hospital, where the intruders were

allegedly assaulting the occupants of the premises.

At about 2:00 a.m., further information was received

at the said Police Station, which was reduced into

writing vide DD No. 29A, as per which, Head

Constable Bhagirath (PW-7) informed that SI Sanjeev

Solanki (PW-17) may be sent to the spot.
3
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
5.   Pursuant thereto, SI Sanjeev Solanki (PW-17),

accompanied by Constable Ashok Kumar (PW-9),

proceeded to the place of occurrence and apprised

the Additional S.H.O., who arrived there shortly

thereafter. Upon entering the premises, they found

the sliding door of the drawing room broken, the side

grill bent, the house ransacked, and the household

articles scattered. A large pool of blood was noticed

in the lobby, where the dead body of an elderly male

(deceased-Madan Mohan Gulati) was lying, alongside

certain articles. Bloodstains and articles in disarray

were also observed in the adjoining bedroom.
6.   On hearing faint cries emanating from the

adjoining bedroom, the police officials rushed inside

and found an elderly lady, later identified as Smt.

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18), lying in an injured

condition. She was immediately shifted to AIIMS

Hospital by the PCR. Thereafter, SI Sanjeev Solanki
4
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
(PW-17), accompanied by Inspector S.K. Sharma

(PW-15), proceeded to the Trauma Centre, AIIMS,

where Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) was under
treatment. Medico-Legal Certificate (MLC)6 of the

injured, Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) was

prepared on 3rd November, 2008, by Dr. Sharwan.
The MLC recorded that the injured was fit for

statement and noted multiple grievous stab injuries,

including blood clots around the nether region, scalp-
deep wounds, and a lacerated wound near the right

eyebrow. The nature of the weapon used to cause the

injuries was opined to be sharp.
7.   Upon being declared fit, the statement (Fard

bayan)7 of Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) was

recorded by SI Sanjeev Solanki (PW-17) and based on

the said statement, Inspector S.K. Sharma (PW-15)



6 Exh. 21/A.
7 Exh. PW-17/A.
5
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
prepared a rukka and handed it over to SI Sanjeev

Solanki (PW-17), pursuant to which an FIR8 came to

be registered at Police Station, New Friends Colony,

for    the    offences      punishable     under
Sections

394
/
397
/
302
/
307
/
34
of IPC.
8.    On 5th November, 2008, body of the deceased

Madan Mohan Gulati was identified by his son-Vivek

Gulati, and by his nephew-Servesh Gulati (son of the

deceased’s      younger       brother).   The   post-mortem

examination of the deceased was thereafter carried

out, and the post-mortem report was issued wherein

the cause of death was opined to be shock and

haemorrhage on account of multiple antemortem

injuries. The opinion on the weapon of offence

(knife/chheni) was also obtained from the doctor.
8 FIR No. 601/2018 dated 3rd November, 2008.
6
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
9.    The accused-appellant was apprehended on 21st

November, 2008, based on the description allegedly

provided by the injured eye-witness, Smt. Indra

Prabha Gulati (PW-18). It is alleged that the accused-

appellant gave a disclosure statement9, and in

furtherance thereof, he led the police party to an open

area near bushes situated at Pul Prahladpur, from

where a blood-stained Eagle brand pant was

recovered from a pit. The pant was duly seized and

sealed. On the following day, while the appellant was

on police remand, his disclosure led to the arrest of

the co-accused persons.
10. On 25th November, 2008, pursuant to a

supplementary disclosure statement10, the appellant

purportedly led the police party to the bushes near

the railway track behind Priyanka Camp, from where



9 Exh. PW 14/A.
10 Exh. PW-14/N.
7
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
one chheni was recovered. The same was also seized

and sealed. Thereafter, the accused-appellant also

facilitated the recovery of the robbed articles, namely,

one idol of Lord Ganesha and a Panasonic CD player,

from his Jhuggi.
11. Shri Vivek Kumar Gulati, son of the deceased

and Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) identified the

case property in the Test Identification Parade11

conducted on 6th December, 2008. The proceedings12

of the TIP were conducted by Shri Devendra Kumar

Jangala (PW-16), learned Additional District Judge,

West, Tis Hazari Courts.
12. On 24th December, 2008, TIP was organized in

respect of the accused Raj Kumar @ Bheema,

Jawahar, Ranbir @ Sintu, and Naeem @ Mota;

however, they refused to participate in the same.



11 For short, ‘TIP’.
12 Exh. PW16/B.
8
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
Upon comparison, the fingerprints of the accused

Jawahar and Ranbir @ Sintu were found to tally with

the chance prints lifted from the spot. The site

inspection plan was prepared, and the material

exhibits were forwarded to the Forensic Science

Laboratory13       on     22nd     January,   2009.   Upon

completion of the investigation, chargesheet in

connection with the said FIR came to be filed on 2nd

February, 2002, against the accused, namely, Raj

Kumar @ Bheema, Ramesh Kumar @ Shankar,

Naeem Khan @ Mota, Jawahar, and Ranbir @ Sintu,

in the Court of the learned ACMM, for offences

punishable under
Sections 3
,
3(1)(i)
,
3(1)(ii)
,
3(2)
, and
3(4)
of the MCOCA, and Sections 396, 307, 397, 412

read with
Section 34
of IPC. One of the accused,

namely, Kastoori, could not be traced out despite best

efforts, and proceedings under Sections 82 and 83 of


13 For short, ‘FSL’.
9
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
the Code of Criminal procedure, 197314 were initiated

against him and his name was placed in Column No.

2 of the chargesheet. Since the offences were triable

exclusively by the Court of Sessions, the learned

ACMM, after compliance with the provisions of
Section 207
CrPC, committed the case to the Court

of Sessions for trial, where charges were framed

against the accused. They abjured their guilt and

claimed trial.
13. During the course of trial, the prosecution

examined 27 witnesses and exhibited 25 documents

in consolidated form to prove the guilt of the accused.

The accused Ramesh @ Shankar examined one

witness in defence. Upon closure of prosecution

evidence, statements of the accused persons were

recorded under
Section 313
CrPC affording them an

opportunity to explain the incriminating material


14 For short, ‘
CrPC
’.
10
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
appearing against them. The accused-appellant, in

answer to Question No. 82, categorically stated, “I am

innocent and have been falsely implicated in the

present case. PW-17 Inspector Sanjeev Solanki was

known to me prior to the present case, and he has

falsely implicated me in this case.”

FINDINGS OF THE TRIAL COURT
14. Upon consideration of the arguments advanced

by the prosecution and the defence, and after

appreciating the evidence available on record, the

trial Court, vide judgment dated 12th February, 2021,

acquitted the accused persons other than the

appellant Raj Kumar @ Bheema, holding that the

case against him stood proved beyond reasonable

doubt only for the offence punishable under
Section

302
IPC. He was acquitted of the remaining charges.

The conviction was primarily based on the testimony

of the eye-witness, Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18),
11
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
 who identified the appellant during her testimony

 (recorded over video conferencing) while failing to

 identify the remaining accused, coupled with the

 purported recovery of weapon of offence at the

 instance of the accused-appellant.
15. Further, the trial Court, vide order dated 20th

 February, 2021, directed the accused-appellant to

 undergo sentence as mentioned hereinabove.15

FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT
16.       In appeal by the accused-appellant, the High

Court affirmed the findings of the trial Court vide

judgment16 dated 22nd September, 2022, finding no

infirmity in the judgment and order passed by the trial

Court, holding that the prosecution case essentially

rested upon the identification of the accused-appellant

by the injured witness and the recoveries effected at
15
Supra para 3.
16 Crl.A. 218/2021.
12
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
his instance. The High Court rejected the submission

advanced on behalf of the appellant that the

identification of the appellant by Smt. Indra Prabha

Gulati (PW-18) was doubtful as she failed to identify

the other accused, on the ground that, insofar as the

present accused-appellant was concerned, she was

categorical in her testimony that he was one of the

assailants.
17.    The High Court observed that non-recovery of

the appellant’s finger prints from the place of incident

would not absolve him of participation in the offence,

which stood established by the identification made by

the injured victim, Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18).

It was further noted that pursuant to the disclosure

made by the appellant, the pant allegedly worn by him

at the time of incident was recovered, on which human

blood was detected, and no plausible explanation was

forthcoming from the appellant as to the presence of
13
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
human blood on his wearing apparel. The Court also

held that merely because the son of the deceased and

the injured victim, who had identified the robbed

articles in TIP, did not appear in the witness box to

identify the recovered articles, would not discredit the

rest of the evidence led by the prosecution, which was

sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellant for the

offence alleged, beyond reasonable doubt.
18.    Aggrieved, the accused-appellant is before us in

the   present      appeal      by    way   of   special   leave.

Submissions on behalf of accused-appellant
19.    Learned counsel for the appellant, vehemently

and fervently urged that the High Court fell in grave

error in affirming the conviction of the accused-

appellant recorded by the trial Court, which is wholly

unsustainable in law. It was contended that the

prosecution case rests entirely upon the testimony of

the old and infirm witness Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati
14
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
(PW-18), who was admittedly suffering from weak

eyesight. Accordingly, her testimony is riddled with

inconsistencies and is far too unconvincing so as to

form the sole basis for upholding a conviction for an

offence punishable with capital punishment.
20.    It was further contended that Smt. Indra Prabha

Gulati (PW-18) identified the appellant in Court

through video conferencing on 8th May, 2017, after an

inordinate delay of nearly eight and a half years from

the incident dated 2nd November, 2008, while notably

failing to identify any of the other accused. It was

urged that in his statement under
Section 313
CrPC,

the accused-appellant specifically alleged that PW-18

had been tutored, as his photographs had already

been shown to the witness prior to her deposition.
21. It     was     averred     that       there   were   material

 contradictions and improvements in the testimony of

 PW-18. In her initial statement under Section 161
15
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
CrPC
, she mentioned that the assailants were armed

with “knives, screwdriver, and rods,” but made no

reference to a “chheni.” The introduction of the

“chheni” for the first time during her sworn testimony

recorded after a lapse of more than eight years was a

material improvement, evidently tailored to align with

the alleged recovery. Moreover, she failed to identify

any of the co-accused, all of whom were acquitted,

rendering her solitary identification of the appellant

highly doubtful.
22. Learned counsel urged that the prosecution

placed reliance upon the alleged recoveries of a blood-

stained pant, a “chheni,” and articles such as a

Ganesh idol/CD player at the instance of the

accused-appellant. The first recovery attributed to

the accused-appellant was allegedly made pursuant

to his disclosure statement from an open area near

bushes at Pul Prahladpur, wherefrom a blood-stained
16
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
pant was recovered. The prosecution alleged that the

said pant had been worn by the appellant at the time

of the incident. However, the blood-stains detected on

the garment did not test positive for the blood group

lifted from the scene of occurrence. It was thus

contended that the said article could not be

connected with the present case, even after forensic

examination17.
23. It was further urged that the said recovery

cannot be read in evidence under
Section 27
of the

Evidence Act, 1872 inasmuch as in his disclosure

statement18 dated 21st November, 2008, the accused-

appellant did not state that he could get the article

recovered from an open place near Pul Prahladpur,

which, in any event, was accessible to all and sundry.

The learned counsel urged that all the recoveries were
17
Ex. PW-24/B read with Ex. PW-24/A.
18 Exhibit PW 14/A.
17
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
made     without      any     independent      witness   being

associated to corroborate the same. It was further

averred that the alleged weapon of offence, namely

the “chheni,” was shown to have been recovered after

a lapse of 22 days from bushes near a railway track.

The said article was never shown to Smt. Indra

Prabha      Gulati      (PW-18)      for   identification,   no

photographs were taken at the time of recovery, and

no independent witness was associated in the

process.
24. Placing reliance on the judgment of this Court

in
Koppula Jagdish v. State of Andhra Pradesh19
,

learned counsel further urged that the High Court

failed to appreciate that the appellant was wrongly

convicted for the offence under
Section 302
IPC

simpliciter, inasmuch as no separate charge under
Section 302
IPC was framed against him. It was


19 (2005) 12 SCC 425.
18
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
pointed out that in the present case, all the accused

were charged under Sections 394, 397, 302, 307,

read with 34
IPC
, and except for the appellant, all

other co-accused have been acquitted.
25. It was also urged that Shri Vivek Gulati, son of

the deceased, who had identified the robbed articles

during the TIP, did not appear in the witness box

during the trial to prove and identify the articles

allegedly recovered at the instance of the accused-

appellant, and hence, no adverse inference ought to

be drawn against the appellant on this count.
26. He, thus, implored the Court to accept the

appeal and set aside the impugned judgment(s).

Submissions on behalf of respondent-State
27. Per contra, Shri Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned

Additional Solicitor General, supported the impugned

judgment and urged that the appellant Raj Kumar @

Bheema was correctly identified by the injured eye-
19
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
witness, Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18), in her

examination-in-chief as            well as   in her   cross-

examination, as the person armed with a “chheni”

and a rod, who inflicted blows upon her and her

husband, resulting in the death of the latter. It was

further submitted that the said weapons were

recovered from the appellant pursuant to his

disclosure statement, thereby corroborating the

version of the injured witness Smt. Indra Prabha

Gulati (PW-18).
28. It was further contended that, as per the

opinion rendered by Dr. Arvind Kumar (PW-1) with

regard to the weapon of offence, Exhibit V, i.e., the

recovered “chheni,” could be one of the weapons used

in the offence and that injuries marked B, C, and D

on the person of injured Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati

(PW-18) were possible by the said weapon.
20
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
29. The conduct and antecedents of the appellant,

including his status as a history-sheeter, repeated

involvement       in    criminal      cases,   and     acts   of

misconduct during incarceration, clearly reflect a

persistent       pattern       of     unlawful       behaviour.

Considering the heinous nature of the offence, being

the murder (for gain) of a senior citizen, the accused-

appellant does not deserve any indulgence, and the

gravity of the crime and the attendant circumstances

warrant dismissal of the appeal filed on his behalf.
30. He thus implored the Court to dismiss the

appeal, urging that the High Court had rightly

affirmed the conviction of the accused-appellant and

the sentence awarded to him by the trial Court. It was

further urged that upon an independent and

comprehensive appraisal of the evidence on record,

including the consistent testimonies of Investigating

Officer Shri S.K. Sharma (PW-15) and Smt. Indra
21
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
Prabha Gulati (PW-18), both the trial Court and the

High Court had recorded concurrent findings that the

prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt, and hence no interference is warranted in the

impugned judgment.
Discussion and Analysis
31. We have given our thoughtful consideration to

the submissions advanced at bar and have carefully

gone through the impugned judgments, the material

available     on    record,     as    well   as   the   written

submissions filed on behalf of both sides.
32. Since the appellant seeks reversal of concurrent

findings of fact recorded by the trial Court as well as

the High Court, this Court is required to tread with

circumspection. It has been consistently held by this

Court in a catena of decisions that unless the

findings are shown to be perverse or rendered in

disregard of material evidence, this Court would be
22
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
slow in interfering with concurrent conclusions of the

Courts below. Reference in this regard may be made

to the decision of this Court in the case of
Mekala

Sivaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh20
, the relevant

para of which is quoted hereinbelow:
“15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncements
          that
Article 136
is worded in wide terms and
          powers conferred under the said Article are not
          hedged by any technical hurdles. This overriding
          and exceptional power is, however, to be
          exercised sparingly and only in furtherance of
          cause of justice. Thus, when the judgment
          under      appeal      has   resulted     in grave
          miscarriage         of     justice      by   some
          misapprehension or misreading of evidence or
          by ignoring material evidence then this Court
          is not only empowered but is well expected to
          interfere to promote the cause of justice.”
                                       (Emphasis is supplied)
33. Keeping the aforesaid principle in mind, this

Court would proceed to consider the appeal at hand

to examine whether there is some manifest error or

illegality in the impugned judgment, and if any grave

and    serious      miscarriage       of   justice   has   been


20 (2022) 8 SCC 253.
23
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
occasioned on account of misreading or ignoring of

material evidence in the present case.
34. Evidently, on a perusal of the judgments under

challenge and upon considering the submissions

advanced by learned Standing Counsel for the State,

it emerges that primarily three circumstances have

been relied upon by the prosecution to bring home its

case against the appellant:
i.    The identification of the appellant in Court by

       the prosecution witness Smt. Indra Prabha

       Gulati (PW-18) during her sworn testimony.
ii.    The refusal of the appellant to participate in the

       TIP, leading to an adverse inference being drawn

       against him.
iii.   Recovery of weapon of offence stained with

       human blood.
24
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
A. Identification by the Sole Eye-Witness
35. It is undisputed that the fulcrum of the

prosecution case is based on the testimony of Smt.

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18). Thus, for the sake of

ready reference, we quote the entire deposition of the

said witness below: -
“ON S.A.

        On 03.11.2008 I was present in my house at 81
        Sukhdev Vihar, New Delhi. It was the intervening
        night of 2nd and 3rd November, 2008 and time
        was 11.30/11.45pm. I and my husband heard
        the noise of falling of utensils. My husband went
        to see the same. I also followed him and we saw
        five persons had entered into our house from
        the door of drawing room. Out of those,
        one/two persons were in the kitchen and four
        persons came through door of drawing room.
        They were having chheni, screwdriver and
        knives in their hands. They asked for keys from
        my husband. We told them to wait and the one
        boy who came from drawing room and was
        having iron rod and chheni in his hands, gave
        the blow from the iron blow on the head of my
        husband. He fell down. I was also given blow
        and became unconscious. I do not remember
        now by whom the blow was given. I remained
        in the hospital for about two months. Someone
        called the police and I was taken by the police to
        the hospital. I am having an 8 inch cut on my
25
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        stomach. I remained in Trauma Center. I was
        also having bandage on my head and it might be
        possible that blow was given on the head also. I
        made statement to the police in the hospital
        itself. It was given orally whatever was in my
        memory as I was on hospital bed.
I remained in Moolchand Hospital for one
        month and 10 days. I never met with the
        police for this case after my discharge from
        the hospital. I have never seen those boys
        who came into my house thereafter.
        At this stage, scanned image of signatures on
        statement is shown to the witness through video-
        link and after seeing it the witness states that the
        same pertains to her which are at point A.
        I can identify the accused if shown to me.
        At this stage, accused persons who are facing
        charges in this case, are shown through
        audio-video link one by one and after seeing
        accused the witness states that he is the
        same boy who was having chheni and rod and
        was giving blows to my husband. (The name
        of accused is Raj Kumar).
Next accused is shown and after seeing him the
        witness states that she is not remembering
        complete and she is remembering face of only
        one as she became unconscious. (The name of
        accused is Ranbir).
Next accused is shown and after seeing him the
        witness states that she does not know anything
        about him. (The name of accused is Jawahar).
        Next accused is shown and after seeing him the
        witness states that she is remembering somehow
        and it was 12.00midnight and 8 years have
        passed she is not remembering further. She
        further states that she cannot say whether he
26
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        was among those persons or not. (The name of
        accused is Naeem)
        Next accused is shown and after seeing him the
        witness states that the boy shown first be stand
        with him so that she may identify again. The
        accused Raj Kumar is shown with this accused
        to the witness. After seeing the accused Raj
        Kumar, the witness states that he is one among
        those boys but she is not sure about second boy.
        (The name of second boy is Ramesh Kumar).
XXN by Sh. Sunil Dutt, Ld. Addl. P.P for the
        State.
It is correct that when my husband fell down
        after blows given to him, I was also given rod
        blows and knife blows.
I do not remember that I fell down in Angan as I
        was unconscious. I was told by the police
        officials that I was taken to the room by the boys
        dragging me. I do not know that they after
        breaking open the almirah in the room took away
        Rs.20000/- and the jewellery articles. I do not
        remember whether I raised noise or not or that I
        remained lied on the floor of the room. (Vol. I
        regained my consciousness in the Trauma
        Center). It is wrong to suggest that the number
        of boys who entered into the house was 3-4. (Vol.
        They were five in number).
I did not go to Patiala House Court on
        26.12.2008. (Vol. My son went to Patiala
        House court as I was ill). It is wrong to suggest
        that in the Patiala House Court I identified
        four boys as Raj Kumar @ Bheema, Ranbir @
        Shintu, Jawahar and Naeem @ Mota and
        stated to the police that they were the boys
        who gave blows to my husband and me in my
27
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        house and took away cash and jewellary from
        my house. (Vol. I did not go to PHC only my
        son went there).
XXN by Sh. Mihi Lal Chaudhary, counsel for
        accused Jawahar.
As far as I remember I regained consciousness
        after three/four days in the Trauma Center and
        at that time I was on ventilator.
XXN by Sh. S.M. Sallauddin, counsel for
        accused Raj Kumar and Naeem, XXN by Sh.
        V.P Kaushik, counsel for Ramesh Kumar, and
        XXN by Sh. Sallauddin Khan, counsel for
        accused Ranbir.
I do not remember the date when police met me
        for the first time and the last time.
I cannot tell the name of the police official by
        whom my statement was recorded. It was
        recorded in the hospital. The signatures were
        taken in the hospital and I do not remember now
        whether it was in Trauma Center or Moolchand.
        At that time police officials were present and my
        son was also present. My son and daughter met
        me in the Trauma Center. I do not remember the
        date when they came to me in the Trauma
        Center. It may be 4th or 5th. As far as I
        remember I left India on 27.12.2008. I do not
        remember whether my statement was written as
        I told or not. (Vol. Due to the incident I was
        unconscious and was not fit completely). I do not
        remember how many pages were got signed by
        me from the police. I do not remember whether I
        signed any blank paper or not. If my signatures
        were taken it might be that something was
        written on the papers then my signatures were
28
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        taken. I do not remember whether the writing
        were in hindi or english language. The witness
        is confronted with the statement Ex.PW17/A
        and is asked that in the same 'Chheni' word is
        not mentioned in the same. I do not
        remember        about   the    colour    of   the
        screwdriver. I do not remember what was the
        length of the iron rod. The accused Raj Kumar
        was worn black shirt. I do not remember
        about the clothes of remaining boys.
        I do not remember the name of tenant of that
        time. He was from Hyderabad. He was in the
        premises for about 2/2 1/2 years prior to
        incident. They vacated the premises after the
        incident as they were also afraid. I do not
        remember whether the verification of the tenant
        was got conducted from police or not. We were
        not having permanent servant or chowkidar at
        that time but however, Kamla was part-time
        domestic helper. She was working for the last 15
        years. She was residing in a room taken on rent
        in the Sukhdev Vihar. Her husband was residing
        with her occasionally. I do not know name of her
        village. (Vol. She had told me but due to my age
        I have forgotten the same).
I retired on 28.02.1997. It is correct that Kamla
        was residing in the jhuggi of Sukhdev Vihar. It is
        correct that in my presence no inquiries were
        made from Kamla and her husband not their
        statement was recorded in my presence. The
        tenant has vacated my premises before I
        discharge from hospital. I do not know whether
        inquiries were made by the police from my tenant
        in my presence. At the time of incident, I was
        using spectacles occasionally as I was having
        long sight (dur ki nazar kamzor thi). At
29
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        present I use the spectacles whenever I have
        to do some work of near distant. At present I
        am not wearing contact lenses. It is correct
        that I did not receive injury on my head and I
        received injury on my right side of forehead. I
        cannot say whether there was any stitching on
        the forehead or not but there was a bandage. I
        do not remember the number of lenses which I
        was using at that time.
The Counsel wants to contradict the witness
        with her statement Ex.PW17/A that in the
        same there is no description about the
        clothes and physique of the boys. (it will be
        looked by the court during the arguments as
        the witness is being recorded through video-
        conferencing). It is wrong to suggest that police
        did not take any statement from me and my
        signatures were taken on a blank paper. I never
        visited police station in respect of this case. I was
        shifted from Trauma Center to Moolchand
        after 20 days. I was discharged from
        Moolchand hospital on 24 оr 25.12.2008. I
        did not go to police after 25.12.2008. Police
        have not met me after 25.12.2008 till I left
        India. I do not remember how many times police
        met me while I was in Trauma Center. Perhaps,
        once or twice they met me. During those visits
        inquiries were made from me about the manner
        of the incident and the assailants. I do not
        remember the date when I regained my
        consciousness. As far as I remember police
        did not come to me while I was in Moolchand
        Hospital.
I do not know the name of chowkidar as it was
        kept by my son after the incident. It is wrong to
        suggest that the boy who has been identified by
30
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        me today i.e. Raj Kumar was not involved in the
        incident or that I have been shown the
        photographs by the police.
The co-assailants were calling him "Bhima aur
        maar, bhima aur maar to him". It is wrong to
        suggest that my counsel has sent photograph of
        Bhima to me and after seeing him I am
        identifying him today. It is wrong to suggest that
        my counsel has tutored me on telephone and
        upon tutoring I am deposing today or that copy
        of the statements has been sent to me and after
        going through the same I have deposed today. It
        is wrong to suggest that the dosier of Bhima with
        the police has been sent to me by the counsel. It
        is wrong to suggest that Bhima was not involved
        in the incident occurred in the intervening night
        of 2nd and 3rd November, 2008 or that I am
        naming him at the instance of police.
Dated: 8th May, 2017.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
36. Based upon the testimony, it is clear that the

witness Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) had

shifted to the United States of America immediately

after the incident, and her statement came to be

recorded through video conferencing on 8th May,

2017, i.e., after a gap of eight and a half years from

the occurrence. She stated that out of the five

assailants who had entered the house, one or two
31
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
went towards the kitchen, while four entered through

the drawing room door. They were armed with a

chheni, screwdriver, and knife, and demanded the

keys from her husband. Upon his request for some

time, one of the assailants, who was carrying an iron

rod and a chheni, inflicted a blow on the head of her

husband, who collapsed. She too was given a blow,

though she could not recollect as to who had inflicted

the injury. She further stated that she remained

admitted in Moolchand Hospital for about one month

and ten days. She categorically asserted that she

never saw the assailants thereafter and that she

neither met the police nor did she go to the Patiala

House Courts after being discharged.
37. The Public Prosecutor requested the witness to

identify the accused on the video display and from

amongst the accused present in the dock, who were

shown to the witness, she identified the accused-
32
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
appellant as the assailant who was armed with a

chheni and a rod and who had inflicted blows upon

her husband.
38. The witness further stated that she could

remember the face of only one accused, as she had

become unconscious, and thus she was unable to

identify any of the other assailants who were

presented for identification. The learned Public

Prosecutor sought permission of the Court to cross-

examine the witness on the ground that she was not

narrating       complete         facts    disclosed    during

investigation.       However,       in    response    to   the

suggestions of the Public Prosecutor, she gave

discrepant answers.
39. To a material suggestion, the witness replied: “I

did not go to Patiala House Court on 26.12.2008” and

volunteered that her son had gone to the Court as

she was unwell. She denied the suggestion that she
33
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
had identified four boys, namely Raj Kumar, Ranbir,

Jawahar, and Naeem @ Mota, in the Patiala House

Court and affirmed to the police that they were the

assailants who inflicted blows on her husband and

looted cash and jewellery from the house.
40. In her cross-examination, the witness stated

that she had left India on 27th December, 2008. She

admitted that she could not recollect whether her

statement had been recorded in the manner she had

spoken. She volunteered that owing to the assault,

she became unconscious and was not fully fit. She

further stated that the accused-appellant Raj Kumar

was wearing a black shirt, but she could not recollect

the clothes of the other assailants.
41. Learned defense counsel sought to confront and

contradict the witness with reference to her previous

statement21 under
Section 161
CrPC on the aspect


21 Exh PW-17/A.
34
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
that there was no description of the clothes or

physique of the assailants in such statement. The

trial   Court     observed      that      the    effect   of   such

omission/improvement would be considered at the

stage of final arguments, since the witness was being

examined through video conferencing. The witness

further    stated     that    she      was      discharged     from

Moolchand Hospital on 24th/25th December, 2008,

and that she did not go to the police after 25th

December,       2008.     She     was      confronted      with   a

pertinent suggestion that the police had shown her

the photographs of Raj Kumar and that her counsel

had also seen the photograph and tutored her for

identifying the appellant, which she denied.
42. We must take note of and resolve a very

important feature being a procedural irregularity

which has arisen in this case. As would be evident

from the discussion made hereinabove, the evidence
35
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
of the star prosecution witness Indra Prabha Gulati

(PW-18) was recorded through video conferencing

because she had in the intervening period shifted to

Canada.
43. During the course of cross-examination, the

defence tried to confront the witness (PW-18) with

her    previous       statement       so    as   to   elicit   a

contradiction/highlight an omission. However, the

trial Court observed that this objection would be

considered at the time of final adjudication because

the witness (PW-18) was not present before the Court

and the document being the previous statement in

writing could not be shown to her (supra).
44. However, on going through the trial Court’s

judgment, we do not find any discussion made

regarding this pertinent objection by the defence.
45.
The        Evidence        Act
/       Bharatiya   Sakshya

Adhiniyam, 2023 provide the procedure for evidence
36
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
as to the matters in writing and cross-examination as

to previous statements in writing. Section 147 of the

BSA (144 of the
Indian Evidence Act
and Section 148

of the BSA (
Section 145
of the Indian Evidence Act)

are    reproduced       hereinbelow       for   the   sake   of

convenience: -
“147. Evidence as to matters in
        writing.—Any witness may be asked,
        while under examination, whether any
        contract, grant or other disposition of
        property, as to which he is giving
        evidence, was not contained in a
        document, and if he says that it was, or if
        he is about to make any statement as to
        the contents of any document, which, in
        the opinion of the Court, ought to be
        produced, the adverse party may object to
        such evidence being given until such
        document is produced, or until facts have
        been proved which entitle the party who
        called the witness to give secondary
        evidence of it. Explanation.— A witness
        may give oral evidence of statements
        made by other persons about the contents
        of documents if such statements are in
        themselves relevant fact.
148. Cross-examination as to previous
        statements in writing.—A witness may
        be cross-examined as to previous
37
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
        statements made by him in writing or
        reduced into writing, and relevant to
        matters in question, without such writing
        being shown to him, or being proved; but,
        if it is intended to contradict him by the
        writing, his attention must, before the
        writing can be proved, be called to those
        parts of it which are to be used for the
        purpose of contradicting him.”
46. A plain reading of the above provisions would

make it clear that wherever questions are required to

be put as to the matters in writing/previous

statements in writing, the attention of the witness

must be drawn to the document/statement itself.

Thus, a question would arise as to how this

procedure would be followed in cases where the

evidence of the witness is being recorded over video

conferencing.
47. In this age of advancement of technology,

instances are galore where, the evidence of witnesses

are being recorded over video conferencing. In such

circumstances, none of the parties should be put to
38
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
a dis-advantage merely because the witness is not in

attendance         before       the       Court,   and   the

document/previous statement in writing with which

such witness is sought to be confronted, cannot be

shown/put to him.
48. Therefore, we hereby clarify and direct that in

every case where, it is proposed to record the

statement of a witness over video conferencing and

any previous written statement of such witness or a

matter in writing is available and the party concerned

is desirous of confronting the witness with such

previous statement/matter in writing, the trial Court

shall ensure that a copy of the statement/document

is transmitted to the witness through electronic

transmission mode and the procedure provided

under Section 147 and Section 148 of the Bharatiya

Sakshya Adhiniyam (corresponding Section 144 and
Section 145
of the Evidence Act) is followed in the
39
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
letter and spirit, so as to safeguard the fairness and

integrity of the trial.
49. This direction is being issued with a view to

avoid    procedural       irregularities   and   to   prevent

disadvantage to any party before the Court, and also

to uphold the principles of fair trial, effective cross-

examination, and proper appreciation of evidence.
50. From the statement of the witness, the following

material facts emerge:
(a) She identified the accused-appellant in Court

        while     being       examined     through      video

        conferencing, nearly eight and a half years after

        the incident.
(b) She admitted that she had been discharged

        from Moolchand Hospital on 24th or 25th

        December, 2008.
(c) She used to wear spectacles as her distance

        vision was weak.             At the time of dock
40
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
       identification, the witness was not wearing

       spectacles.
(d) Not even a bare suggestion was put to her by

       the Public Prosecutor that she had been taken

       to the police station or jail for TIP proceedings.
Most material is the fact that the witness

       emphatically denied the suggestion of the

       Public Prosecutor that she had gone to the

       Court on 26th December, 2008, and identified

       the assailants.
Identification in Court after delay – Unsafe and
Improbable
51. It is trite that the evidence of an eye-witness

must be of sterling quality and unimpeachable

character. It should not only inspire the confidence

of the Court but must also be of such a nature that

is acceptable at its face value.
41
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
52. We may note that the possibility of identification

of the accused-appellant by Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati

(PW-18) in Court, after a lapse of nearly eight and a

half years from the incident, is extremely unlikely. In

her testimony, the witness candidly admitted that her

distance vision was weak and that she could not see

objects at a distance without spectacles. It is also

borne out from the record that even at the time of the

incident, she was aged about 73 years and was

infirm. She was not wearing spectacles at the time of

her deposition via video conferencing. In this

background, her purported identification of the

assailant after such a long lapse of time, that too over

video conferencing, does not inspire confidence.
53. Furthermore, when a suggestion was put to the

witness      by    the    Public        Prosecutor   in     cross-

examination as to whether she had gone to the

Patiala House         Courts      for     identifying the    four
42
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
assailants, the witness emphatically denied the

same.
54. In her cross-examination, the witness Smt.

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) stated that the accused-

appellant Raj Kumar @ Bheema was wearing a black-

coloured shirt, which is an improvement introduced

for the first time after nearly eight and a half years.

This appears to be one of the probable reasons for her

identification of the accused-appellant. No identifying

feature of the assailants was disclosed in her

previous statement22 recorded under
Section 161
CrPC, wherein no physical description of the accused

persons or clothes worn by them at the time of the

incident was mentioned. Such an embellishment

casts a serious doubt on the reliability of her dock

identification and is suggestive of a clear attempt to

fill critical lacunae in the prosecution case.


22 Exh. PW-17/A.
43
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
55. In assessing the credibility of a witness, the

testimony must inspire confidence in the judicial

mind,       and       omissions,          improvements,   or

contradictions touching the core of the prosecution

version inevitably undermine such assurance. This

Court has consistently held that minor discrepancies

are not fatal, but material improvements that go to

the root of the matter essentially erode the credibility

of the witness.
56. In view of the aforesaid glaring facts emerging

from the testimony of Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-
18), it would be unsafe to place reliance on her

evidence regarding the identification of the accused.

Once her identification of the accused-appellant in

Court is discarded, no substantive evidence remains

on record to connect the accused with the crime.
44
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
B.  Glaring Infirmities in the Test Identification
Proceedings
57. The trial Court, as well as the High Court, drew

an adverse inference against the accused-appellant

on the ground that he declined to participate in the

TIP. However, the fact remains that the very sanctity

of the TIP stands under a serious cloud of doubt when

it is manifest that Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18)

did not go for participating in any such identification

parade.
58. In this context, it would be essential to advert to

the prosecution case regarding the effort made by the

Investigating Officer to get the appellant subjected to

the TIP.
59. It is the case of the prosecution that the accused

was arrested on 21st November, 2008. On perusal of

the arrest memo23, it is apparent that there is no


23 Exh. PW- 14/B.
45
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
mention in the document that the face of the accused

was kept baparda (muffled) after his arrest. A doubt

on the prosecution case on identification thus arises

from this very stage.
60. The evidence of the first Investigating Officer

Shri S.K. Sharma (PW-15), who effected the arrest of

the accused-appellant on 21st November, 2008, has

been carefully examined. The Investigating Officer

(PW-15), though, stated in his deposition that at the

time of the arrest of the accused-appellant Raj Kumar

@ Bheema, his face was kept muffled. However, this

assertion stands contradicted by the arrest memo,

which contains no such recital.
61. The Investigating Officer further stated that the

accused-appellant          was      interrogated   and,   in

furtherance thereof, recoveries were affected vide

memoranda Exh. PW-14/D, Exh. PW-14/O, Exh.

PW-14/P, and Exh. PW-15/H. A careful scrutiny of
46
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
these memoranda would show that there is no

reference therein that the face of the accused was

muffled at the time of the recovery proceedings. This

significant omission lends support to the plea taken

by the accused-appellant during the TIP and in his

statement under
Section 313
CrPC that he had

already been shown to the witness, and his

photographs had been taken by the Investigating

Officer, which were later used for dock identification.
62. It is trite that where the witnesses have had an

opportunity to see the accused prior to the holding of

the TIP, the evidentiary worth of such proceedings

stands considerably diminished. It is the duty of the

prosecution to establish beyond doubt that right from

the time of arrest, the accused was kept baparda to

rule out the possibility of his face being seen before

the identification proceedings are conducted. If the

witnesses have had any opportunity to see the
47
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
accused before the TIP – whether physically or

through photographs – the credibility and sanctity of

the identification proceedings would stand seriously

compromised.
63. Another material infirmity in the prosecution

case relates to the procedural aspects of the TIP.

From the evidence of Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-
18), it is evident that she categorically stated that she

was     discharged       from     Moolchand   Hospital   on

24th/25th December, 2008. She did not utter even a

single word to suggest that she had been taken to

prison or any Court for participating in any such

proceedings. Further, the witness was emphatic in

stating that neither did she meet the police nor did

she visit the Patiala House Courts after being

discharged from the hospital. It is also pertinent to

note that no document pertaining to the treatment or

discharge of Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) was
48
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
proved on record by the prosecution. Consequently,

a grave doubt arises regarding the very possibility of

any TIP proceedings having been conducted in the

presence of the witness Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati

(PW-18) on 24th December, 2008.
64. This conclusion gets support from the evidence

of the ACMM, Smt. Surya Malik Grover (PW-12), who,

in her deposition, only stated that the Investigating

Officer informed her that the identifying witness was

standing outside. Significantly, there is no signature

of the identifying witness Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati

(PW-18) on any of the documents prepared in

connection with the TIP.
65. In this view of the matter, the prosecution

version that efforts made to subject the accused to

TIP failed on account of their refusal, stands refuted.

While the refusal of the appellant to participate in the

TIP may, prima facie, invite an adverse inference,
49
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
mere such inference cannot support the theory of

identification when the very authenticity of the TIP is

under a serious cloud of doubt. When it stands

established from the record that the TIP attempted by

the prosecution was fundamentally flawed, and a

doubt is created that the identifying witness herself

may not even have been present to participate

therein, the very foundation of the identification

proceedings falls flat to the ground.
66. Furthermore,           in   such      circumstances   and

considering the significant improvements made by

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) from her previous police

statement on the aspect of identifying features (black

shirt), the dock identification of the accused-

appellant made by the injured witness, Smt. Indra

Prabha Gulati (PW-18), during the course of her

evidence through video-link, recorded nearly eight
50
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
and a half years after the incident would be unsafe to

rely upon.
C.    Recoveries and Non-identification of Articles
67. In addition to the above, the prosecution placed

reliance on the alleged recoveries of looted articles at

the instance of the accused. However, it is pertinent

to note that Smt. Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) was

not made to identify the said articles during her

testimony. Furthermore, Vivek Gulati, son of Smt.

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18), who is stated to have

identified the articles in the TIP, was not examined

during the trial. Consequently, the alleged recoveries

lose their evidentiary worth and cannot be relied

upon, as there is no credible proof that they are the

looted articles.
68. The prosecution has tried to claim that the

accused-appellant could not offer any explanation for
51
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
the presence of human blood on the pant recovered

at his instance,24 which he had allegedly worn at the

time    of   the     incident,     which   circumstance   is

incriminating. However, indisputably, the blood

stains on the pant could not be matched with the

blood sample lifted from the scene of occurrence or

with the blood group of the deceased or the injured

victim, as the Serology report25 recorded “no reaction”

in respect of blood grouping for Exh. 20 (Pant). On

this count alone, guilt cannot be fastened upon the

appellant, as the recovery by itself is not sufficient to

prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The mere

availability of human blood on an article is not

sufficient unless it is further corroborated by a

matching blood group with that of the deceased.




24 Exh. PW-14/D.
25 Exh. 24/B.
52
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
69. Once the identification of the accused by Smt.

Indra Prabha Gulati (PW-18) is discarded, and the

recovery of articles cannot be connected either with

the crime or with the accused, no substantive or

credible evidence remains on record to link the

accused with the offence.
CONCLUSION
70. In view of the discussion made hereinabove, the

impugned judgments do not stand to scrutiny. The

appeal is, thus, allowed.
71. The judgment dated 29th September, 2022,

passed by the High Court, as well as the judgment of

conviction dated 12th February, 2021, and the order

of sentence dated 20th February, 2021, passed by the

trial Court, are hereby set aside.
72. The accused-appellant is acquitted of the

charges. He has remained in custody for almost 15
53
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024
and a half years and shall be released from prison

forthwith, if not wanted in any other case.
73. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand

disposed of.
….……………………J.
                                           (VIKRAM NATH)


                                          ...…………………….J.
                                           (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 17, 2025.
54
Crl. Appeal@ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 697/2024