[Cites
34
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sri Lakshmi Hotel Pvt. Limited vs Sriram City Union Finance Ltd on 18 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1327                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13785 OF 2025
                                             (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 12300 of 2020)

                            SRI LAKSHMI HOTEL PVT. LIMITED & ANR.                        ….Appellant(s)


                                                              VERSUS


                            SRIRAM CITY UNION FINANCE LTD. & ANR.                      ….Respondent(s)




                                                          JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the Division

                                 Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Madras dated 07.01.2020 by

                                 which the original side appeal under
Section 37
of the Arbitration and

                                 Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, “the Act, 1996”) filed by the appellants

                                 herein being O.S.A. No. 202 of 2019 came to be dismissed thereby
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.11.18
affirming the order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing O.P.
   16:37:55 IST
   Reason:
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 1 of 28
No. 137 of 2015 preferred by the appellants under
Section 34
of the Act,

     1996, seeking to challenge the arbitral award.
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   Appellant no.1, viz., M/s Sri Lakshmi Hotels Pvt. Limited, is a Private

     Limited company registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
. Appellant

     no.2 viz., V.S. Palanivel is the Managing Director of appellant no.1.

     Respondent no.1 viz., Sriram City Union Finance Ltd. is a Non-Banking

     Financial Company (for short, “the NBFC”). Respondent no.2 viz., Mr.

     K. Balasubramanian is a retired District Judge who was appointed as the

     arbitrator and who had passed the arbitral award.
4.   Appellant no.1 through appellant no.2 had availed a loan facility

     amounting to INR 1,50,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore and Fifty Lakh)

     from respondent no.1 vide a loan agreement dated 03.04.2006 (“First

     Agreement”). Additionally, appellant No.2 had also obtained one

     another loan facility from respondent no.1 amounting to INR 7,25,000/-

     (Rupees Seven Lakhs Twenty-Five Thousand) vide a loan agreement

     dated 03.07.2006 (“Second Agreement”). Thus, in total an amount of

     INR 1,57,25,000 (Rupees One Crore Fifty-Seven Lakhs and Twenty-

     Five Thousand) was borrowed by the appellants from respondent no.1
5.   The salient features of the loan agreements relevant for the adjudication

     of the subject in issue are as follows: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 2 of 28
i.   Under the First Agreement, the appellants were to repay the loan

           amount within a period of 12 months along with an interest rate of

           24% p.a. on monthly rest on the 4th of every month commencing from

           04.05.2006.
ii.   Under the Second Agreement, the appellants were to repay the loan

           amount within a period of 6 months along with an interest rate of

           24% p.a. on monthly rest on the 4th of every month, commencing

           from 04.08.2006.
6.     The appellants paid an amount of INR 44,66,250/- (Rupees Forty-Four

       Lakh Sixty-Six Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty only) till 04.04.2007

       and thereafter, stopped making any further payment.
7.     In view of the continuing default by the appellants, the respondent no.1

       issued several demand notices upon the appellants to regularize their

       default. However, no further payments were made. Pertinently, in all

       their replies to the demand notices, the appellants never disputed the

       principal amount borrowed. Notably in a reply dated 06.09.2007, the

       appellants, inter alia, had assured the respondent no.1 that they were on

       war footing to repay the outstanding amount. However, even after such

       assurance no payment was made. In fact, for the first time, the appellants

       vide the letter dated 25.01.2008, objected to the interest rate of 24% p.a.

       and contended that only 12% p.a. was payable on the loan amount.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                          Page 3 of 28
8.   Pertinently, appellant no.2 had issued a cheque in 2008 amounting to INR

     1,89,92,538/- (Rupees One Crore Eighty Nine Lakh Ninety-Two

     Thousand Five Hundred and Thirty Eight only) towards the full and final

     settlement of the loan amount. However, the said cheque was dishonored

     due to insufficiency of funds. Consequently, respondent no.1 initiated

     proceedings under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act,1881.
9.   Since the appellants failed to repay the complete loan amount, the

     respondent no.1 invoked the arbitration clause under the First and Second

     loan agreements respectively and accordingly, the respondent no.2 was

     appointed as the sole arbitrator in Arbitration Case No. 01 of 2009. The

     respondent no.1 filed its Statement of Claim on 26.03.2009 inter alia

     claiming an amount of INR 2,21,08,244 (Rupees Two Crore Twenty-One

     Lakh Eight Thousand Two Hundred and Forty-Four) along with interest

     at the rate of 24% p.a. The appellants filed their respective statement of

     defense on 22.08.2009 inter alia disputing the rate of interest as usurious.

     However, there was no challenge as to the factum of the loan.
10. During the pendency of the arbitration proceedings, the appellants

     challenged the validity of the loan agreements before the respondent no.2

     by way of filing an application being I.A. No. 1 of 2012 inter alia,

     seeking a direction from respondent no.2 for expert verification of the

     handwritings and signatures on the loan agreements. However, the said

     application was rejected by respondent no.2, and the appellants never
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                         Page 4 of 28
challenged the said rejection order. Accordingly, the said decision of

     rejection attained finality.
11. After cogitating the pleadings and submissions of both the parties, the

     respondent no.2 passed an Award dated 27.12.2014, wherein, while

     partly allowing the claim of the respondent no.1, the appellants were

     directed to pay a sum of INR.2,21,08,244/- (Rupees Two Crore Twenty

     One Lakh Eight Thousand Two Hundred and Forty Four) with interest at

     the rate of 24% p.a. from the date of filing of the statement of the claim

     till the date of its realization (“Award”).
12. Being aggrieved by the said Award, the appellants herein challenged the

   same by filing a petition under
Section 34
of the Act, 1996 before the Ld.

   Single Judge of the High Court. However, the same came to be dismissed

   by the Ld. Single Judge vide judgment dated 16.11.2017, whereby it was

   held that the respondent no.2 had passed the Award after a thorough

   appreciation of facts of the matter and the terms of the agreement. Further,

   the Ld. Single Judge observed that the ambit of interference under
section

   34
the Act, 1996 being limited to the conditions mentioned therein, no

   interference was warranted. The court further noted that an arbitrator is

   the final judge of facts and the findings in the award should not be

   interfered merely on the ground that the terms of contract were not

   correctly interpreted. Since, the view of the Ld. Single was that none of
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 5 of 28
the conditions under Section 34 were made out, the Award passed by the

   respondent no.2 was upheld and the petition, was accordingly dismissed.
13. As the appellants failed to pay the decretal amount in terms of the

   judgement passed by the Ld. Single Judge, the respondent no.1 filed a

   petition under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016

   (“IBC”) being CP/1140/(IB)/CB/2018 before the National Company Law

   Tribunal, Special Bench, Chennai, (“NCLT”). The said petition was

   admitted by the NCLT vide its order dated 28.02.2019 and an Interim

   Resolution Professional (“IRP”) was appointed.
14. Since no resolution applicant submitted a resolution plan, the IRP filed an

   application under section 33(2) of the IBC, seeking initiation of

   liquidation proceedings against the appellant no.1. By an Order dated

   17.07.2019 the NCLT allowed the aforesaid application to liquidate the

   assets of appellant no.1
15. Being aggrieved by the judgment dated 16.11.2017 passed by the Ld.

   Single Judge dismissing the Section 34 petition, the appellants herein

   preferred an appeal under
Section 37
of the Act, 1996 being O.S.A. No.

   202 of 2019. However, the same came to be dismissed by a Division

   Bench of the High Court, inter alia affirming the order passed by the Ld.

   Single Judge and the respondent no.2 respectively.
16. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants are here before this

   Court with the present appeal.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                         Page 6 of 28
B.    SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
17. Ms. Nina Nariman, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant no. 2

     vehemently submitted that the interest component of 24% in the loan

     agreement could be termed as unconscionable and usurious. She would

     submit that the Reserve Bank of India guidelines have repeatedly stressed

     the need for banks and financial institutions to keep the customers’ welfare

     in mind and not charge excessively high or usurious interest rates. The

     interest rate of 24% in fact violates these binding guidelines.
18. She relied upon the guidelines on fair practices “for lenders” dated

     05.05.2023 to make good her submission as regards unconscionable rates

     of interest. The learned counsel further submitted that this Court in two of

     its decisions (
i) Central Bank of India v. Ravindra and Others
reported

     in (
2002) 1 SCC 367 and (ii) Sardar Associates v. Punjab and Sindh

     Bank
reported in (2009) 8 SCC 257 respectively, has said in so many

     words that the RBI guidelines are binding in nature.
19. She further submitted that
Section 3
of the Usurious Loans Act, 1918

     allows the court to determine what constitutes excessive interest and

     relieve the debtor of its liability in case the interest component is beyond

     what is reasonable and deemed to be accessible. She brought to our notice
Section 3(b)(i)
and
Section 3(b)(ii)
of the Usurious Loans Act, 1918

     respectively.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                            Page 7 of 28
20. According to her, the
Usurious Loans Act, 1918
applies to all statutes,

     which, given the beneficial intent of the legislation, should be read as

     including claims in arbitration.
21. The learned counsel further argued that the alleged rate of interest of 24%

     was never agreed between the parties, since the appellant no. 2 was made

     to sign on blank documents, and doing so the respondent later

     manipulated/interpolated the said rate. This according to her amounts to

     fraud and fraud vitiates all.
22. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed that

     there being merit in her appeal, the same may be allowed accordingly.
C.     SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
23. On the other hand, Mr. Krishnan Venugopal, the learned Senior Counsel

     appearing for the respondent, vehemently submitted that no error not to

     speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by the

     High Court in passing the impugned judgment and order.
24. He would submit that it is within the discretion of the arbitrator under
Section 31(7)(b)
of the Act, 1996 to rely on the rate of interest stipulated

     in the loan agreements. He would submit that assuming for the moment,

     without admitting, that the arbitrator has failed to exercise his discretion

     judiciously, and the interest at the rate of 24% deserves to be reduced

     appropriately in view of the expressed provision for post-award interest at
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                          Page 8 of 28
the default rate of 18% as provided in
Section 31(7)(b)
of the Act, 1996

   (prior to the 2015 Amendment to the Act, 1996), the respondent in fact

   could recover much less than it could have even at the mandatory rate of

   18% interest.
25. The learned counsel submitted that the respondent initiated arbitration

   proceedings under the loan agreements and in accordance with the

   provision of the Act, 1996 owing to the appellant no. 1 company’s

   persistent and deliberate refusal to repay the loans it availed from the

   respondent cumulatively amounting to INR 1,57,25,000. The loan

   agreements categorically provided for interest at the rate of 24% p.a. The

   learned counsel invited the attention of this Court to clause 15 of the loan

   agreement which expressly provided that the “purpose of the loan” was

   “to clear bank loan (bridge loan)”.
26. He also drew our attention to the letters addressed by the appellant no. 1

   company to the respondent dated 28.03.2006 and 03.07.2006 respectively.

   He would submit that the two letters would clearly indicate that the loans

   were sought to settle a pre-existing debt owed by the appellant company

   to the Indian Bank on which it had defaulted. In such circumstances,

   according to the learned counsel, the loans sanctioned by the respondent

   could be said to be a high-risk transaction entered into with a defaulting

   borrower necessitating a higher security and a higher rate of interest.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 9 of 28
27. The learned counsel further submitted that the contention raised on behalf

     of the appellants that the interest rate of 24% awarded by the learned

     arbitrator was usurious under the applicable State Usurious Statute,

     namely, the
Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Charging Exorbitant Interest Act,

     2003
, has no merit worth the name.
In this regard, the learned counsel

     relied upon the decision of this Court in
Nedumpilli Finance Company

     Limited v. State of Kerala
reported in (2022) 7 SCC 394 wherein this

     court is said to have held that the State’s statute governing interest rates

     will have no application to the NBFCs such as the respondent herein. The

     respondent is a NBFC registered under and solely governed by Chapter III

     B of the Reserve bank of
India Act, 1934
.
28.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed that

     there being no merit in the appeal the same may be dismissed.
D.    ANALYSIS
29. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

     gone through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our

     consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in

     dismissing the Section 37 appeal filed by the appellants herein, thereby

     affirming the order passed by the High Court in Section 34 proceedings?
30. It is relevant for us to take into consideration the fact that despite the

     award, the respondent has not been in a position to recover the full amount
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 10 of 28
irrespective of the fact whether the interest should be calculated at the rate

   of 24% or the statutory rate of 18%.
31. In the aforesaid context, we should look into the table set out below as

   provided by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent:
Principal Awarded                        INR 2,21,08,244/-
                                               24% per annum from
      Pre-Award Interest                       26.03.2009        to
                                               27.12.2014
Sum (Principal + Pre-Award Interest) INR 5,27,37,550/-
      Awarded
      Post-Award interest at 24% on the Sum INR 12,44,49,060/-
Awarded (on 27.12.2014) until
      realisation       (calculated      until
      29.08.2020)
Post-Award interest at 18% (i.e. the INR 10,65,21,183/-
      statutory interest rate provided under
Section 31(7)(b)
of the Arbitration Act)
      on the Sum Awarded (on 27.12.2014)
      until realisation (calculated until
      29.08.2020)
      Total dues actually recovered thus far INR 8,27,99,917/-
      by Respondent NBFC from the
      Petitioner Company
      Balance monies Awarded but not INR 4,16,49,143/-
recovered on the Awarded interest rate
      of 24%
      Balance monies Awarded but not INR 2,37,21,266/-
recovered assuming an interest rate of
      18% provided under
Section 31(7)(b)
of
      the Arbitration Act.
32. The arbitral award in this case was passed on 27.12.2014.
33.
Section 31
of the Act, 1996 deals with the form and contents of the arbitral

   award. Section 31 has 8 Sub-sections. Sub-section (7) is relevant for the
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 11 of 28
purpose of deciding the present appeal. Sub-section (7) as it stood at the

   relevant point of time read as under:
“31. Form and contents of arbitral award –
                                 *****
          (7)(a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in
          so far as an arbitral award is for the payment of money, the
          arbitral tribunal may include in the sum for which the award
          is made interest, at such rate as it deems reasonable, on the
          whole or any part of the money, for the whole or any part of
          the period between the date on which the cause of action
          arose and the date on which the award is made.
(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall,
          unless the award otherwise directs, carry interest at the rate
          of eighteen per cent per annum from the date of award to the
          date of payment.”
34. The plain reading of sub-section (7) would make it clear that it is in two

   parts, the first part i.e., clause (a) deals with passing of an award which

   would include interest upto the date on which the award is made, while

   the second part, i.e., clause (b) deals with the grant of interest on the sum

   awarded by the arbitral tribunal.
35. In the present litigation, we are more concerned with the interpretation of

   clause (b), which deals with the post-award interest. What clause (b)

   provides for is that the arbitral tribunal may award interest on the sum

   adjudged under clause (a). But if no such interest is awarded, then there

   shall be interest at the rate of 18% on the sum awarded by the arbitral

   tribunal from the date of the award to the date of payment. The intent

   behind granting the pre-award interest is to compensate the claimant for
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 12 of 28
the loss suffered from the time the cause of action arose till the passing of

   the arbitral award. This is also with a view to ensure that the arbitral

   proceedings are concluded expeditiously. Similarly, the intent behind

   grant of post-award interest is to discourage the award-debtor from

   delaying the payment of the arbitral amount to the award-holder.
36. The law with regard to the power of an Arbitrator to award interest for pre-

   reference period, pendent lite period and post-award period is well settled.

   Section 31(7)(a) provides that the arbitrator has the power to award

   interest at such rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or on any part of

   the money, for the whole or any part of the period between the date on

   which the cause of action arose and the date on which the award is made.

   The grant of such interest during the pre-award period is subject to the

   agreement as regard the rate of interest or unpaid sum between the parties.
37. Clause (b) of
Section 31(7)
of the Act, 1996 confers discretion upon the

   Arbitral Tribunal to award interest for the post-award period but that

   discretion is not subject to any contract. If such discretion is not exercised

   by the Arbitral Tribunal, then the statute steps in and mandates the

   payment of interest at the rate specified for the post-award period. While

   clause (a) gives parties an option to contract out of interest, no such option

   is available in regard to the post-award period.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 13 of 28
38.
In
R.P. Garg v. The General Manager, Telecom Department & Ors.
,

   reported in 2024 INSC 743, this Court had the occasion to deal with the

   question as to whether the appellant was entitled to post-award interest on

   the sum awarded by the Arbitrator. In that case, the Arbitrator had denied

   payment of interest under a misplaced impression that the contract

   between the parties prohibited it. The executing court affirmed the finding

   of the arbitrator and rejected the prayer. However, allowing the appeal, the

   District Judge held that the appellant will be entitled to post-award

   interest. The High Court allowed the revision against the said order and

   set aside the District Court’s order while holding that the contract between

   the parties did not permit the grant of post-award interest. While allowing

   the appeal, this Court held that the sum directed to be paid under the

   arbitral award must carry interest.
While taking note of the decision of this

   Court in
Morgan Securities & Credits Pvt Ltd. v. Videocon Industries

   Ltd.
reported in 2022 INSC 898, this Court held as under:
“11. So far as the entitlement of the post-award Interest is
          concerned, sub-Section (b) of Section 31(7) provides that the
          sum directed to be paid by the Arbitral Tribunal shall carry
          interest. The rate of interest can be provided by the Arbitrator
          and in default the statutory prescription will apply. Clause (b)
          of Section 31(7} is therefore in contrast with clause (a) and is
          not subject to party autonomy. In other words, clause (b) does
          not give the parties the right to "contract out" interest for the
          post-award period. The expression 'unless the award otherwise
          directs' in Section 31(7)(b) relates to rate of interest and not
          entitlement of interest. The only distinction made by Section
          31(7)(b) is that the rate of interest granted under the Award is
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 14 of 28
to be given precedence over the statutorily prescribed rate. The
          assumption of the High Court that payment of the interest for
          the post award period is subject to the contract is a clear error.
12. The clear position of law that granting post-award interest
          is not subject to the contract between the parties was recently
          affirmed in the decision of this Court in
Morgan Securities &
          Credits (P) Ltd. v. Videocon Industries Ltd.
,® wherein the
          court observed as follows:
"24. The issue before us is whether the phrase "unless the
            award otherwise directs" in
Section 31(7)(b)
of the Act only
            provides the arbitrator the discretion to determine the rate
            of interest or both the rate of interest and the "sum" it must
            be paid against At this juncture, it is crucial to note that both
            clauses (a) and (b) are qualified. While, clause (a) is
            qualified by the arbitration agreement, clause (b) is
            qualified by the arbitration award. However, the placement
            of the phrases is crucial to their interpretation. The words,
            "unless otherwise agreed by the parties" occur at the
            beginning of clause (a) qualifying the entire provision.
            However, in clause (b), the words, "unless the award
            otherwise directs" occur after the words "a sum directed to
            be paid by an arbitral award shall" and before the words
            "carry interest at the rate of eighteen per cent". Thereby,
            those words only qualify the rate of post-award interest.
25. Section 31(7)(a) confers a wide discretion upon the
            arbitrator in regard to the grant of pre-award interest The
            arbitrator has the discretion to determine the rate of
            reasonable interest, the sum on which the interest is to be
            paid, that is whether on the whole or any part of the
            principal amount, and the period for which payment of
            interest is to be made — whether it should be for the whole
            or any part of the period between the date on which the
            cause of action arose and the date of the award. When a
            discretion has been conferred on the arbitrator in regard to
            the grant of pre-award interest it would be against the grain
            of statutory interpretation to presuppose that the legislative
            intent was to reduce the discretionary power of the
            arbitrator for the grant of post-award interest under clause
(b). Clause (b) only contemplates a situation where the
            arbitration award is silent on post-award interest, in which
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                         Page 15 of 28
event the award holder is entitled to a post-award interest
            of eighteen per cent."”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
39. In view of the aforesaid, the interpretation of clause (b) of
Section 31(7)
of the Act, 1996 is no more res integra. The grant of post-award interest

   under Section 31(7)(b) is mandatory. The only discretion which the

   arbitral tribunal has is to decide the rate of interest to be awarded. Where

   the arbitrator does not fix any rate of interest, then the statutory rate, as

   provided in Section 31(7)(b), shall apply.
In the present case the two

   agreements itself provided the rate of interest to be 24% p.a. (See:
Union

   of India and Anr. v. Sudhir Tyagi
: 2025 DHC 2621)
40.
In the case of
North Delhi Municipal Corpn. v. S.A. Builders Ltd.
,

   reported in (2025) 7 SCC 132, this Court has held as thus:-
“39. Generally, going by the provisions contained in Section 31(7)
       of the 1996 Act, it is evident that an Arbitral Tribunal has the
       power to grant: (i) pre-award, (ii) pendente lite, and (iii) post-
       award interest. Intention behind awarding pre-award interest is
       primarily to compensate the claimant for the pecuniary loss
       suffered from the time the cause of action arose till passing of the
       arbitral award. Further, this is also to ensure that the arbitral
       proceeding is concluded within a reasonable period to minimise
       the impact of the pre-award interest as well as interest pendente
       lite; thereby promoting efficiency in the arbitration process.
       Similarly, grant of post-award interest also serves a salutary
       purpose. It primarily acts as a disincentive to the award debtor not
       to delay payment of the arbitral amount to the award-holder.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
41.
In the case of
Morgan Securities & Credits (P) Ltd. v. Videocon

   Industries Ltd.
, reported in (2023) 1 SCC 602, this Court has held as thus:
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 16 of 28
“21. The purpose of granting post-award interest is to ensure
          that the award-debtor does not delay the payment of the
          award. With the proliferation of arbitration, issues involving
          both high and low financial implications are referred to
          arbitration. The arbitrator takes note of various factors such
          as the financial standing of the award-debtor and the
          circumstances of the parties in dispute before awarding
          interest. The discretion of the arbitrator can only be restricted
          by an express provision to that effect. Clause (a) subjects the
          exercise of discretion by the arbitrator on the grant of pre-
          award interest to the arbitral award. However, there is no
          provision in the Act which restricts the exercise of discretion
          to grant post-award interest by the arbitrator. The arbitrator
          must exercise the discretion in good faith, must take into
          account relevant and not irrelevant considerations, and must
          act reasonably and rationally taking cognizance of the
          surrounding circumstances.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
42. Thus, it is now well established that unless there is an express bar

   contained in the agreement, the arbitrator possesses the discretion and has

   jurisdiction to award interest including the post-award interest.
In the case

   of
State of Rajasthan and Another v. Ferro Concrete Construction

   Private Limited
, reported in (2009) 12 SCC 1, this Court held as follows:
“60. The appellants contend that there was no provision in the
          contract for payment of interest on any of the amounts payable
          to the contractor and therefore no interest ought to be
          awarded. But this Court has held that in the absence of an
          express bar, the arbitrator has the jurisdiction and authority to
          award interest for all the three periods—pre-reference,
          pendente lite and future (vide decisions of the Constitution
          Bench in
Irrigation Deptt., Govt. of Orissa v. G.C.
          Roy
[(
1992) 1 SCC 508] , Dhenkanal Minor Irrigation
          Division v. N.C. Budharaj
[(2001) 2 SCC 721] and the
          subsequent decision in
Bhagawati Oxygen Ltd. v. Hindustan
          Copper Ltd.
[(2005) 6 SCC 462] ). In the present case as there
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 17 of 28
was no express bar in the contract in regard to interest, the
           arbitrator could award interest.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
43. However, on the point of awarding interest,
Section 31(7)(a)
of the Act,

   1996 stipulates that the arbitrator’s discretion while awarding pre-award

   interest is subject to the agreement between the parties. In the case of HLV

   Limited (Formerly Known as Hotel Leelaventure Pvt. Ltd.) v. PBSAMP

   Projects Pvt. Ltd reported in 2025 INSC 1148, this Court inter alia held

   that:
“25.3. From the above, the view of the court is clearly
           discernible in that the discretion to grant interest would be
           available to the arbitral tribunal under clause (a) of sub-
           section (7) of Section 31 only when there is no agreement to
           the contrary between the parties. When the parties agree with
           regard to any of the aspects covered under clause (a) of sub-
           section (7) of Section 31, the arbitral tribunal would cease to
           have any discretion with regard to the aspects mentioned in
           the said provision. Only in the absence of such an agreement,
           the arbitral tribunal would have the discretion to exercise its
           powers under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of
           the 1996 Act.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
44. Contrarily, the pre-amended
Section 31(7)(b)
of the Act, 1996 statutorily

   grants post-award interest at 18% p.a., save and except in cases where the

   arbitral award itself specifies a different rate of interest. This goes on to

   show that discretion vested on the Arbitral Tribunal at the time of

   awarding post-award interest in unfettered. It, however, goes without

   saying that such discretion ought to be exercised judiciously and after a
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 18 of 28
thorough consideration of all the relevant factors.
In the case of
Morgan

   Securities & Credits
(supra) it was held as under:
“The arbitrator has the discretion to grant post-award interest.
          Clause (b) does not fetter the discretion of the arbitrator to
          grant post-award interest. It only contemplates a situation in
          which the discretion is not exercised by the arbitrator.
          Therefore, the observations in
Hyder Consulting [Hyder
          Consulting (UK) Ltd. v. State of Orissa
, (2015) 2 SCC 189 :
(2015) 2 SCC (Civ) 38] on the meaning of “sum” will not
          restrict the discretion of the arbitrator to grant post-award
          interest. There is nothing in the provision which restricts the
          discretion of the arbitrator for the grant of post-award interest
          which the arbitrator otherwise holds inherent to their
          authority.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
45. The nature of transaction between the parties is purely commercial. It is

   undisputed that the appellants (borrowers) had by way of executing two

   separate loan agreements borrowed monies from the respondent no.1

   (lender), for the purpose of repaying a previously availed loan facility

   from an Indian Bank wherein the appellants had already defaulted. This

   by itself evinces the high degree of risk associated with these loan

   transactions. Accordingly, a high rate of interest was charged to secure the

   debt. Although the appellants have challenged the rate of interest stated in

   the loan agreement by inter alia questioning the genuineness of the loan

   agreements, yet both the courts below have concurrently held after a

   detailed analysis of the evidence as regards the genuineness of the loan

   agreement, thereby affirming the rate of interest at 24% p.a. To take a view

   contrary would amount to re-appreciation of evidence, which is prohibited
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 19 of 28
under the scheme of the Act, 1996. The proviso to
Section 34(2A)
of the

   Act, 1996 explicitly prohibits re-appreciation of evidence. The said

   provision is reproduced herein below:
“Section 34 Application for setting aside arbitral awards.-
xxx               xxx                 xxx
          (2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than
          international commercial arbitrations, may also be set aside
          by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitiated by
          patent illegality appearing on the face of the award:
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the
          ground of an erroneous application of the law or by
          reappreciation of evidence.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
46. The aforesaid statutory bar has been consistently upheld by this Court in
Swan Gold Mining Ltd. v. Hindustan Copper Ltd.
, reported in (
2015) 5

   SCC 739, P.R. Shah, Shares & Stock Brokers (P) Ltd. v. B.H.H.

   Securities (P) Ltd.
reported in (
2012) 1 SCC 594, Ssangyong Engg. &

   Construction Co. Ltd. v. NHAI
reported in (
2019) 15 SCC 131 and PSA

   Sical Terminals (P) Ltd. v. V.O. Chidambranar Port Trust

   Tuticorin and others
reported in (2023) 15 SCC 781. Accordingly, we

   refrain from entering into the merits of the issue, particularly when the

   findings of the learned Arbitrator have been concurrently upheld.
47. The conduct of the appellants has consistently been non-committal

   towards the payment of the loans. The appellants, by way of a letter dated

   06.09.2007 addressed to respondent no.1, had assured that they were on a
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                      Page 20 of 28
war footing to repay the loans. However, the same was merely a hollow

   assurance as the loans remained unpaid. Thereafter, in the year 2008 by

   way of cheque amounting to Rs.1,89,92,538/- the appellants attempted to

   settle the loan, but the said cheque bounced on account of insufficient

   funds. In such circumstances, it is evident that the appellants were in a

   constant breach of the terms of the loan agreements and did not take

   adequate steps to repay the loan. Such constant and continuing defaults

   adversely affected the financial health of the respondent no.1 and deprived

   the respondent no.1 from its right to use and enjoy monies for several

   years.
48. Additionally, even after the arbitral award was passed, the respondent no.1

   was unable to execute the same, as the appellants failed to comply with

   the arbitral award and continued to default in their payments. Having been

   left with no other option, the respondent no.1 initiated the CIRP

   proceedings against appellant no.1, which also failed. It was only upon

   the commencement of liquidation proceedings against the appellant no.

   1 that the respondent No. 1 was able to recover a portion of its dues.

   Particularly, the amount recovered from the liquidation process was much

   less than the amount actually due and payable to the respondent no.1, in

   terms of the award. Having undergone numerous hardships and going

   through several round of litigations it will be manifestly unjust to deprive
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                      Page 21 of 28
the respondent no.1 from its rightful entitlements of post award interest at

     this stage.
I.    Whether interest at the rate of 24% as provided in the agreements

      between the parties could be said to be against public policy?
49. There is no gainsaying that the question as to whether the charging of a

     high rate of interest in the case of a purely commercial transaction is

     morally wrong entails a complex web of issues that would be contingent

     upon a variety of factors and perspectives. Although at first glance, the

     charging of interest at the rate of 24% could be considered as exploitative,

     unfair and morally blameworthy, high interest rates reflect the lenders risk

     of default due to highly competitive and uncertain market conditions,

     besides the fact that high interest rates might discourage borrowers from

     taking unnecessary risks. In the commercial world, justifiability or

     reasonability of high interest rates would depend on the transparency of

     the terms and conditions of the contract entered into between the lender

     and the borrower, as well as the informed consent of the borrower.

     Ultimately, morality is inherently dependent on context, shaped by a

     complex interplay of cultural norms, as well as individual values. The

     moral implications of high interest rates are not absolute, rather they must

     be assessed through a nuanced lens that considers the inter-relationship

     between economic, social, and regulatory factors.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 22 of 28
50. The expression “public policy in the context of challenge to an arbitral

   award has come to be discussed in plethora of cases. This Court in
OPG

   Power Generation Private Limited v. Enexio Power Cooling Solutions

   India Private Limited
, reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2600, had the

   occasion to consider the concept of ‘public policy’, in the background of

   a challenge to an arbitral award.
Referred was a decision of three-Judge

   Bench of this Court in the case of
Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya
reported in AIR 1959 SC 781, wherein the doctrine of public policy was

   discussed in the context of
Section 23
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872,

   and the position of law was summarized as under:
“Public policy or the policy of law is an elusive concept; it
          has been described as untrustworthy guide, variable quality,
          uncertain one, unruly horse, etc; the primary duty of a court
          of law is to enforce a promise which the parties have made
          and to uphold the sanctity of contracts which formed the
          basis of society, but in certain cases, the court may relieve
          them of their duty on a rule founded on what is called the
          public policy; for want of better words Lord Atkin describes
          that something done contrary to public policy is a harmful
          thing, but the doctrine is extended not only to harmful cases
          but also to harmful tendencies; this doctrine of public policy
          is only a branch of common law, and, just like any other
          branch of common law, it is governed by precedents; the
          principles have been crystallized under different heads and
          though it is permissible for courts to expound and apply them
          to different situations, it should only be invoked in clear and
          incontestable cases of harm to the public; Though the heads
          are not closed and though theoretically it may be permissible
          to evolve a new head under exceptional circumstances of a
          changing world, it is advisable in the interest of stability of
          society not to make any attempt to discover new heads in
          these days.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                       Page 23 of 28
51. Another decision to which reference was made is
Central Inland Water

   Transport Corporation v. Brojo Nath Ganguly
reported in (1986) 3 SCC

   156 wherein this Court observed that the expressions ‘public policy’,

   ‘opposed to public policy’, or ‘contrary to public policy’ are incapable of

   a precise definition. It was observed that public policy is not the policy of

   a particular government, rather it connotes some matter which concerns

   the public good and the public interest. It was observed as under:
“92…. What is for the public good or in the public interest or
          what would be injurious or harmful to the public good or the
          public interest has varied from time to time. As new concepts
          take the place of old, transactions which were once
          considered against public policy are now being upheld by the
          courts and, similarly, where there has been a well- recognized
          head of public policy, the courts have not shirked from
          extending it to new transactions and changed circumstances
          and have at times not even flinched from inventing a new
          head of public policy.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
52. This Court in
OPG Power Generation Private Limited
(supra) further

   held as under:
“34.
In
Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric Co.15
,
          a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court observed that the
          doctrine of public policy is somewhat open-textured and
          flexible. By citing earlier decisions, it was observed that there
          are two conflicting positions, which are referred to as the
          “narrow view” and the “broad view”. According to the
          narrow view, courts cannot create new heads of public policy
          whereas the broad view countenances judicial law making in
          these areas. In the field of private international law, it was
          pointed out, courts refuse to apply a rule of foreign law or
          recognize a foreign judgment or a foreign arbitral award if it
          is found that the same is contrary to the public policy of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                         Page 24 of 28
country in which it is sought to be invoked or enforced.
However, it was clarified, a distinction is to be drawn while
          applying the rule of public policy between a matter governed
          by domestic law and a matter involving conflict of laws. It
          was observed that the application of the doctrine of public
          policy in the field of conflict of laws is more limited than that
          in the domestic law, and the courts are slower to invoke
          public policy in cases involving a foreign element than when
          a purely municipal legal issue is involved. It was held that
          contravention of law alone will not attract the bar of public
          policy, and something more than contravention of law is
          required.
35.
In fact, in
Renusagar
(supra), this Court was dealing with
          the enforceability of a foreign award. For that end, it had to
          interpret the expression “contrary to public policy” in the
          context of
Section 7(1)(b)(ii)
of Foreign Awards (Recognition
          and Enforcement) Act, 1961. While doing so, it was held that
(a) contravention of law alone will not attract the bar of
          public policy, and something more than contravention of law
          is required; and (b) The expression ‘public policy’ must be
          construed in the sense the doctrine of public policy is applied
          in the field of private international law. Applying the said
          criteria, it was held that enforcement of a foreign award
          could be refused on the ground of being contrary to public
          policy if such enforcement would be contrary to (a)
          fundamental policy of Indian law or (b) the interests of India
          or (c) justice or morality. The Court thereafter proceeded to
          hold that a contravention of the provisions of the
Foreign
          Exchange Regulation Act
would be contrary to the public
          policy of India as that statute is enacted for the national
          economic interest to ensure that the nation does not lose
          foreign exchange which is essential for the economic survival
          of the nation.
36.What is clear from the above discussion is that for an
          award to be against public policy of India, a mere infraction
          of the municipal laws of India is not enough. There must be,
          inter alia, infraction of a fundamental policy of Indian law,
          including a law meant to serve public interest or public good.
xxx                    xxx                  xxx
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                         Page 25 of 28
52.The legal position which emerges from the aforesaid
           discussion is that after the ‘2015 amendments’ in Section 34
           (2)(b)(ii) and Section 48(2)(b) of the 1996 Act, the phrase “in
           conflict with the public policy of India” must be accorded a
           restricted meaning in terms of Explanation 1. The expression
           “in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law”
           by use of the word ‘fundamental’ before the phrase ‘policy of
           Indian law’ makes the expression narrower in its application
           than the phrase “in contravention with the policy of India
           law”, which means mere contravention of law is not enough
           to make an award vulnerable. To bring the contravention
           within the fold of fundamental policy of Indian law, the award
           must contravene all or any of such fundamental principles
           that provide a basis for administration of justice and
           enforcement of law in this country. Without intending to
           exhaustively enumerate instances of such contravention, by
           way of illustration, it could be said that (a) violation of the
           principles of natural justice; (b) disregarding orders of
           superior courts in India or the binding effect of the judgment
           of a superior court; and (c) violating law of India linked to
           public good or public interest, are considered contravention
           of the fundamental policy of Indian law. However, while
           assessing whether there has been a contravention of the
           fundamental policy of Indian law, the extent of judicial
           scrutiny must not exceed the limit as set out in Explanation 2
           to Section 34(2)(b)(ii).”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
53.   In the light of the aforesaid discussion, reverting back to the instant

      matter, on a plain and grammatical construction of clauses (ii) and (iii)

      of Explanation 1 to
Section 34(2)(b)
of the Act, 1996 it cannot be said

      that the imposition of an exorbitant interest in the background of

      contemporary commercial practices, would be against the fundamental

      policy of Indian Law, or against the basic notions of morality or justice.
It is well-settled that fundamental policy of Indian law does not refer to

      violation of any Statue but fundamental principles on which Indian law
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                        Page 26 of 28
is founded. Any difference or controversy as to rate of interest clearly

      falls outside the scope of challenge on the ground of conflict with the

      public policy of India unless it is evident that the rate of interest awarded

      is so perverse and so unreasonable so as to shock the conscience of the

      Court sans which no interference is warranted in the award, whereby

      interest is awarded by the Arbitrator.
II.
Usurious Loans Act
, 1918
54. We have no hesitation in saying that there is no merit worth the name in

      the plea advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the appellants

      that the transaction in question falls foul of the
Usurious Loans Act,

      1918
.
The Usurious Loans Act, 1918
was followed by the Punjab Relief

      of Indebtedness, 1934 (hereinafter called, the “1934 Act”). The said 1934

      Act is applicable to the Union Territory of Delhi.
Section 2(3)
of the 1934

      Act defines “loan” to mean “loan whether of money or kind”.
55.
The Usurious Loans Act, 1918
as followed by the 1934 Act were

      promulgated in a different era and the power of the Court to adjudicate

      if the interest on a loan amount is excessive has to give way in view of

      the plenary powers of the Courts provided under the later enactment, i.e.,

      the Act, 1996.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                          Page 27 of 28
E.   CONCLUSION
56. In the overall view of the matter, we have reached the conclusion that we

     should not interfere with the impugned order passed by the High Court.
57. In the result, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
……………………………J.
                                                      (J.B. Pardiwala)




                                                 ……………………………J.
                                                    (K.V. Viswanathan)
New Delhi.
18th November, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (C) No.12300 of 2020                     Page 28 of 28