[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Central Bureau Of Investigation vs M/S Sarvodaya Highways Ltd on 11 November, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1359




                                                        NON-REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).              OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 11108 of 2022)

                            CENTRAL BUREAU
                            OF INVESTIGATION                                  ….APPELLANT(S)

                                                            VERSUS

                            M/S. SARVODAYA
                            HIGHWAYS LTD. AND ORS.                           ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.     Heard.
2.     Leave granted.
3.     The instant appeal at the instance of Central

                            Bureau of Investigation1 takes exception to the

                            judgment and final order dated 18th July, 2022

                            passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2025.11.26
17:02:39 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter, referred to as “appellant-CBI”.
1
Chandigarh in CRMM No. 31272 of 2018 (O&M)2. By

the impugned judgment, the High Court allowed the

petition under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973,3 [Section 528 of the Bharatiya

Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS)] filed by

respondent No. 1-M/s. Sarvodaya Highways Ltd.4

and its Directors i.e., respondent No. 2-Gurinder

Kumar         Garg,        respondent          No.3-Aruna         Garg,

respondent No.4-Aashutosh Garg and respondent

No.5-Aayush Garg, and thereby quashed the entire

proceedings          arising      out     of   the   FIR     RC       No.

BD1/2015/E/0002/CBI/BS&FS/DLI registered by

the appellant-CBI for the offences punishable under

Section 120B read with
Sections 406
,
420
,
467
,
468
and
471
of the Indian Penal Code, 18605 and
Sections



2
Hereinafter, referred to as “High Court”.
3 Hereinafter, referred to as “
CrPC
”.
4 Hereinafter, referred to as “respondent No.1-Company or defaulter

company”.
5 Hereinafter, referred to as “
IPC
”.
2
13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of

Corruption         of     Act,     19886.   Consequently,   the

proceedings arising out of the chargesheet No.

RC.BD/2015/E/2002 dated 30th November, 2016

filed pursuant to investigation in the aforesaid FIR

also came to be quashed.
BRIEF FACTS
4.     The FIR mentioned supra came to be lodged on

3rd February, 2015 at the instance of the Branch

Manager of the erstwhile State Bank of Bikaner and

Jaipur (now merged with State Bank of India)7,

alleging, inter alia, that the Bank had sanctioned

credit facility of Rs.50 crores under fund based-limits

and Rs.10 crores under non-fund based limits to

respondent No.1-Company through its Managing

Director. While applying for the loan, it was projected



6 Hereinafter, referred to as “
PC Act
”.
7 Hereinafter, referred to as “Bank”.
3
on behalf of respondent No.1-Company that it was

engaged              in          the       construction     of

residential/commercial                 complexes,   townships,

highways, bridges and flyovers across India and had

been awarded 10 work orders to the tune of

Rs.348.24 crores. Acting on the aforesaid information

and financial standing provided by respondent No.1-

Company, the Bank sanctioned the credit facilities in

the above terms.
5.     However, when the amounts were not repaid as

per the schedule and the accounts became irregular,

an internal inquiry was initiated and it was found

that lien of the Bank had not been marked in the

revenue records by the Patwari Halqa, Dhakoli,

Zirakpur and that the records had been manipulated.

The account of respondent No.1-Company was

declared to be a Non-Performing Asset8 on 28th July,


8 Hereinafter, referred to as “NPA”.
4
2013 by the Bank. The internal inquiry concluded

that a fraud of Rs.52.50 crores had been committed.

Consequent to these findings, a complaint was lodged

by the Branch Manager of the Bank on 9th January,

2015, on the basis of which the aforesaid FIR dated

3rd February, 2015 came to be registered with the

appellant-CBI, and investigation was commenced.
6.   During   the   course   of   investigation,   the

investigating agency (i.e., the appellant herein)

collected detailed evidence, oral and documentary,

and came to the conclusion that the officers of

respondent No.1-Company and the then Branch

Manager of the Bank, Mr. Nishan Lal, had connived

together to defraud the Bank by furnishing false

information and provided fabricated work orders for

procuring the cash credit limit, which was thereafter

utilized and remained unpaid.
5
7.   The investigation further revealed that the

accused persons had submitted false and fabricated

stock statements and receivable statements, thereby

cheating the Bank, despite no actual work having

been executed by them. The investigating officer also

found that 3 out of the 10 work orders were entirely

fabricated, as the companies to whom these work

orders were allegedly issued expressly stated that

they had not issued any such orders to respondent

No.1-Company. The remaining 7 work orders were,

as a matter of fact, issued to the associate companies

of the defaulter, one of whose Directors was a

common Director in all these 7 companies. Based on

the evidence collected, the investigating agency drew

the following conclusions in the chargesheet:-
“It was therefore, further revealed in the
      investigation by the Petitioner Department that
      the said Respondents knowingly and dishonestly
      submitted false and forged work orders
      purportedly issued by the aforesaid companies
      to induce the Respondent Bank to sanction
6
credit facilities to the Respondent No.1/A-1. In
         addition to the aforesaid, the investigation
         further confirmed that marking of hens on 3
         properties, which were offered by the
         Respondent No. 1/Accused Company, as
         collateral securities to the Respondent Bank
         were also forged.
The aforesaid facts constitute the commission of
         offences against M/s Sarvodaya Highways Ltd.
         (A-1) through its Directors (A-2) to (A-5), Sh.
         Gurinder Kumar Garg (A-2), Smt. Aruna Garg (A-
3), Sh. Aashutosh Garg (A-4), Sh. Aayush Garg
         (A-5) and Sh. Nishan Lal, the then Branch
         Manager, SBBJ, Panchkula, all committed
         offences punishable u/s 120 B r/w 420, 467,
         468, 471
IPC
and
Section 13(2)
r/w
Section
         13(1)(d)
of PC Act, 1988 and substantive offences
         thereof.”
8.     Sanction         was      granted       by   the   Competent

Authority to prosecute the Bank Manager, Mr.

Nishan Lal, and pursuant to conclusion of the

investigation, chargesheet came to be filed in the

Court of the Special Judge for CBI9, Panchkula,

Haryana against respondent No. 1-Company, its

Directors and the Bank Manager for offences

punishable under Sections 120B read with
Sections

9
Hereinafter, referred to as “trial Court”.
7
420, 467, 468, and 471 of the
IPC
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the PC Act.
9.   While the case was pending before the trial

Court, respondent No.1-Company claims to have

entered into a one-time settlement dated 5th March

2018 with the Bank. The cash credit liability was

settled on payment of Rs. 41 crores to the Bank. It is

on the basis of this one-time settlement that

respondent Nos. 1 to 5, being the defaulting company

M/s. Sarvodaya Highways Ltd., and its Directors,

approached the High Court by way of a petition under
Section 482
of the CrPC seeking quashing of the

aforesaid FIR and the chargesheet dated 30th

November, 2016.
10. The learned Single Judge of the High Court was

persuaded to invoke the inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the CrPC and quashed the proceedings

arising from the chargesheet based on the aforesaid
8
one-time settlement, vide judgment and order dated

18th July, 2022, which is subject matter of challenge

in this appeal by special leave.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF APPELLANT
11. Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional

Solicitor General, representing the appellant-CBI

vehemently and fervently contended that the High

Court committed gross error in law in quashing the

proceedings arising out of the chargesheet based on

the one-time settlement entered into between the

defaulting company, i.e., respondent No.1 and the

Bank. He submitted that the investigation conducted

by the appellant-CBI resulted into an unimpeachable

finding regarding fabricated documents having been

used to procure the cash credit facility. The one-time

settlement has been entered by the Bank under

compulsion because the account of the defaulter

company    had   been declared     to   be   NPA   and
9
proceedings         under   the
Securitisation   and

Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement

of Security Interest Act, 2002
were also initiated.

Ultimately, realizing that it would not be possible to

recover the entire outstanding amount along with

interest, the Bank opted for a safer course of settling

the account by accepting a substantially lesser

amount than what would have been recovered had

the terms of the cash credit account been adhered to

by respondent No. 1-Company. Thus, significant loss

was suffered by the Bank which has a direct and

adverse bearing on the public exchequer.
12. The learned Additional Solicitor General placed

reliance on the following observations made by this

Court in the case of
Gian Singh v. State of

Punjab10
, to urge that merely because a settlement

has been arrived at in respect of the loan account, the


10 (2012) 10 SCC 303.
10
same cannot, by itself, furnish a valid ground for

quashing the criminal proceedings:
“57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings
      on the ground of settlement between an offender
      and victim is not the same thing as compounding
      of offence. They are different and not
      interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of
      compounding of offences given to a court under
      Section 320 is materially different from the
      quashing of criminal proceedings by the High
      Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. In
      compounding of offences, power of a criminal
      court is circumscribed by the provisions
      contained in Section 320 and the court is guided
      solely and squarely thereby while, on the other
      hand, the formation of opinion by the High
      Court for quashing a criminal offence or
      criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is
      guided by the material on record as to
      whether the ends of justice would justify such
      exercise of power although the ultimate
      consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of
      indictment.
…
61. The position that emerges from the above
      discussion can be summarised thus : the power
      of the High Court in quashing a criminal
      proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of
      its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and
      different from the power given to a criminal
      court for compounding the offences under
      Section 320 of the Code. Inherent power is of
      wide plenitude with no statutory limitation
      but it has to be exercised in accord with the
      guideline engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to
      secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent
      abuse of the process of any court. In what
      cases power to quash the criminal proceeding
      or complaint or FIR may be exercised where
11
the offender and the victim have settled their
dispute would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no category
can be prescribed. However, before exercise of
such power, the High Court must have due
regard to the nature and gravity of the crime.
Heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape,
dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even
though the victim or victim's family and the
offender have settled the dispute. Such
offences are not private in nature and have a
serious impact on society. Similarly, any
compromise between the victim and the
offender in relation to the offences under
special statutes like the
Prevention of
Corruption Act
or the offences committed by
public servants while working in that
capacity, etc.; cannot provide for any basis
for quashing criminal proceedings involving
such offences. But the criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil
flavour stand on a different footing for the
purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
offences arising out of matrimony relating to
dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the
wrong is basically private or personal in nature
and the parties have resolved their entire
dispute. In this category of cases, the High Court
may quash the criminal proceedings if in its
view, because of the compromise between the
offender and the victim, the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation
of the criminal case would put the accused to
great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not
quashing the criminal case despite full and
complete settlement and compromise with the
victim. In other words, the High Court must
12
consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
       to the interest of justice to continue with the
       criminal proceeding or continuation of the
       criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse
       of process of law despite settlement and
       compromise between the victim and the
       wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of
       justice, it is appropriate that the criminal case is
       put to an end and if the answer to the above
       question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court
       shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the
       criminal proceeding.”
                                     [Emphasis supplied]
13. It    was     submitted       that    the    investigation

establishes the submission of forged documents, and

misrepresentation by the respondent No. 1-Company

and its Directors for procuring the cash credit facility.

The    material    collected    reveals     grave    economic

offences committed by the accused. The connivance

between the defaulter company, its Directors and the

Bank     Manager      to   defraud       the    Bank     stands

conclusively proved. Sanction for prosecution of the

Bank Manager has been duly granted by the

competent authority. It was argued that quashing of
13
the chargesheet by the High Court would, in effect,

result in the indirect exoneration of the Bank

Manager as well, and therefore, the impugned order

cannot be sustained in law.
14. Reliance was also placed by Mr. Banerjee on the

judgments of this Court in
Central Bureau of

Investigation           v.   Jagjit   Singh11
,   State     of

Maharashtra through
CBI v. Vikram Anantrai

Doshi & Ors.12
, and
Anil Bhavarlal Jain v. State

of Maharashtra13
.
15.
In
Jagjit Singh
(supra), this Court stated that

offences involving bank fraud affect society at large,

observing as follows: -
“15. The debt which was due to the Bank was
       recovered by the Bank pursuant to an order passed
       by the Debts Recovery Tribunal. Therefore, it
       cannot be said that there is a compromise between
       the offender and the victim. The offences when
       committed in relation with banking activities
       including offences under
Sections 420
/
471
IPC
       have harmful effect on the public and threaten

11 (2013) 10 SCC 686.
12 2014 SCC OnLine SC 745.
13   2024 SCC OnLine SC 3823.
14
the well-being of the society. These offences fall
    under the category of offences involving moral
    turpitude committed by public servants while
    working in that capacity. Prima facie, one may
    state that the bank is the victim in such cases
    but, in fact, the society in general, including
    customers of the bank is the sufferer. In the
    present case, there was neither an allegation
    regarding any abuse of process of any court nor
    anything on record to suggest that the offenders
    were entitled to secure the order in the ends of
    justice.”
                                  [Emphasis supplied]
16. Further this court in
Vikram Anantrai Doshi
(supra) stated that economic offences against banks

are social wrongs, and repayment or settlement

cannot justify quashing criminal proceedings. This

Court in Paragraph 26 observed as follows:-
“26. We are in respectful agreement with the
    aforesaid view. Be it stated, that availing of money
    from a nationalised bank in the manner, as alleged
    by the investigating agency, vividly exposits fiscal
    impurity and, in a way, financial fraud. The modus
    operandi as narrated in the charge-sheet cannot be
    put in the compartment of an individual or
    personal wrong. It is a social wrong and it has
    immense societal impact. It is an accepted principle
    of handling of finance that whenever there is
    manipulation and cleverly conceived contrivance to
    avail of these kinds of benefits it cannot be
    regarded as a case having overwhelmingly and
    predominatingly civil character. The ultimate
    victim is the collective. It creates a hazard in the
    financial interest of the society. The gravity of the
15
offence creates a dent in the economic spine of the
nation. The cleverness which has been skillfully
contrived, if the allegations are true, has a serious
consequence. A crime of this nature, in our view,
would definitely fall in the category of offences
which travel far ahead of personal or private wrong.
It has the potentiality to usher in economic crisis.
Its implications have its own seriousness, for it
creates a concavity in the solemnity that is
expected in financial transactions. It is not such a
case where one can pay the amount and obtain a
“no dues certificate” and enjoy the benefit of
quashing of the criminal proceeding on the
hypostasis that nothing more remains to be done.
The collective interest of which the Court is the
guardian cannot be a silent or a mute spectator
to allow the proceedings to be withdrawn, or for
that matter yield to the ingenuous dexterity of
the accused persons to invoke the jurisdiction
under
Article 226
of the Constitution or under
Section 482 of the Code and quash the
proceeding. It is not legally permissible. The
Court is expected to be on guard to these kinds
of adroit moves. The High Court, we humbly
remind, should have dealt with the matter
keeping in mind that in these kinds of
litigations the accused when perceives a tiny
gleam of success, readily invokes the inherent
jurisdiction for quashing of the criminal
proceeding. The Court’s principal duty, at that
juncture, should be to scan the entire facts to
find out the thrust of allegations and the crux
of the settlement. It is the experience of the
Judge that comes to his aid and the said
experience should be used with care, caution,
circumspection and courageous prudence. As we
find in the case at hand the learned Single Judge
has not taken pains to scrutinise the entire
conspectus of facts in proper perspective and
quashed the criminal proceeding. The said
quashment neither helps to secure the ends of
16
justice nor does it prevent the abuse of the process
    of the court nor can it be also said that as there is
    a settlement no evidence will come on record and
    there will be remote chance of conviction. Such a
    finding in our view would be difficult to record. Be
    that as it may, the fact remains that the social
    interest would be on peril and the prosecuting
    agency, in these circumstances, cannot be treated
    as an alien to the whole case. Ergo, we have no
    other option but to hold that the order [Vikram
    Anantrai Doshi v. State of Maharashtra, Criminal
    Application No. 2239 of 2009, order dated 22-4-
    2010 (Bom)] of the High Court is wholly
    indefensible.
[Emphasis supplied]
17. It was submitted that this Court, in
Anil

Bhavarlal Jain
(supra), declined to quash criminal

proceedings on the ground that a settlement had

been arrived at between the parties, observing that,

as the case involved a special statute i.e.,
PC Act
, and

that quashing the proceedings would have grave and

far-reaching consequences on the society at large.

This Court in paragraphs 17 and 18 observed as

follows: -
“17. A profitable reference in this regard can be
    made to the judgment in
State v. R Vasanthi
    Stanley9
wherein this Court declined to quash the
17
proceedings in a case involving alleged abuse of the
   financial system. It was observed as under:
“15. …….. A grave criminal offence or
         serious economic offence or for that
         matter the offence that has the
         potentiality to create a dent in the
         financial health of the institutions is not
         to be quashed on the ground that there
         is delay in trial or the principle that
         when the matter has been settled it
         should be quashed to avoid the head on
         the system. That can never be an
         acceptable principle or parameter, for
         that would amount to destroying stem
         cells of law and order in many a realm
         and further strengthen the marrow of
         unscrupulous litigations. Such a
         situation should never be conceived of.”
18. In the instant case, it is on record that consent
   terms were submitted by the parties before the
   DRT. It is admitted that the bank had suffered
   losses to the tune of Rs. 6.13 Crores approximately.
   Hence, a substantial injury was caused to the
   public exchequer and consequently it can be said
   that public interest has been hampered. Keeping in
   view the fact that in the present case a special
   statute i.e.
PC Act
has been invoked, we are of the
   view that quashing of offences under the said Act
   would have a grave and substantial impact not just
   on the parties involved, but also on the society at
   large. As such the High Court committed no error
   in declining to exercise its inherent powers in the
   present case, thereby refusing to quash the
   criminal proceedings.”
18. It was thus urged that the impugned judgment

does not stand to scrutiny and should be set aside
18
and the proceedings of the chargesheet should be

revived.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
19. Per contra, Mr. Siddarth Dave, learned senior

counsel representing the respondents, vehemently

and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by

the learned ASG appearing for the appellant-CBI. It

was urged that not only has the Bank agreed to one-

time settlement but thereafter all the pledged assets

have also been released. The proceedings before the

Debt   Recovery Tribunal     have been      closed   on

instructions of the Bank. In these circumstances, it

was    urged   that   continuation   of   the   criminal

prosecution against the respondent No. 1-Company

and its Directors would serve no useful purpose and

would amount to an exercise in futility.
20.
In support of his contentions, Mr. Dave placed

reliance on the judgments of this Court in
Jaswant
19
Singh v. State of Punjab & Another14
,
CBI New

Delhi v. B.B. Aggarwal & Others15
, and
CBI, ACB,

Mumbai v. Narendra Lal Jain & Others16
.           He

urged that the monetary disputes inter se between

the Bank and the defaulter company have been

settled and no dues settlement certificate has been

issued by the Bank and so also that the proceedings

before the Debt Recovery Tribunal stand closed with

the settling of the accounts.     Hence, no useful

purpose would be served by continuing with the

criminal prosecution of the defaulter company and its

Directors. He urged that it is a lame prosecution,

which the appellant CBI wants to pursue in this

matter.
14 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1007.
15 2019 (5) RCR (Crl.) 573.
16 2014 (5) SCC 364.
20
ANALYSIS
21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to

the submissions advanced at bar and have gone

through the impugned order and also the material

placed on record.
22. The       High      Court,      while     quashing         the

proceedings, assigned the following reasons: -
“After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find
    merit in the present writ petition, for the following
    reasons:-
(a) It is admitted case that cash credit facility was
    availed in the year 2012 and on account of account
    being declared NPA, some proceedings were
    initiated before DRT, where the petitioners had
    paid back the amount as per settlement arrived at
    between the petitioners and the bank.
(b) It is also admitted case of the bank that at no point
    of time, the petitioners tried to sell off or siphon off
    of the loan amount to any third party and it is a
    simple case where the loan was not repaid in time,
    for which it was declared NPA and once the
    recovery proceedings were initiated before DRT, the
    petitioners repaid the entire amount along with
    interest to the respondent Bank in installments
    and similarly, in the same manner, the respondent-
Bank was releasing the mortgaged properties by
    issuing the letters, as noticed above.
(c) The respondent-Bank as well as CBI have filed
    affidavits that the entire amount stands paid and
    at no point of time, any action of the petitioner was
21
of any criminal intent except that the loan amount
    was not paid in time.
In view of the observations made above and also in
    view of judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
    B.B. Aggarwal’s case (supra), present petition is
    allowed        and       FIR      bearing       RC
    No.BD1/2015/E/0002/CBI/BS&FS/DLI              dated
    03.02.2015 and final report dated 30.11.2016 as
    well as the consequential proceedings arising out of
    the FIR are ordered to be quashed.”
23. Having gone through the reasons assigned by

the High Court, it is apparent that while quashing the

proceedings on the basis of one-time settlement, the

High Court failed to advert to the following vital facts

of the case which were duly established during

investigation.
(i)   That there was a specific finding in the

        chargesheet that the defaulter company

        through      its   directors     had     submitted

        fabricated documents and misrepresented to

        the Bank for the purpose of procuring the

        cash credit facility.
22
(ii)    That the appellant-CBI, on the basis of

          evidence     collected    during    investigation,

          found   that     the     offences   of   criminal
conspiracy, fabrication of documents, and

          offences under the
PC Act
, were clearly made

          out.
(iii)   That sanction for prosecution had been duly

          issued against the then Bank Manager, Mr.

          Nishan Lal.
(iv)    That the amount of settlement under the one-
time settlement did not cover the actual

          amount due to the Bank and that there was

          a deficit of more than 5 crores plus interest

          which was a direct loss to the public

          exchequer.
24. The High Court, while exercising jurisdiction

under
Section 482
CrPC, did not consider these vital

facts and quashed the proceedings merely on the
23
basis of the alleged one-time settlement. The blanket

order quashing the chargesheet in its entirety would

have the effect of terminating the prosecution against

the Bank Manager as well, against whom prosecution

sanction has been granted.
25. There are plethora of judgments of this Court,

some of which we have
referred to above
, which

categorically hold that in cases involving economic

offences, it is not merely the Bank that stands

defrauded, but the society at large is also impacted.
26. It can be said without a shadow of doubt that

the one-time settlement would not fetch the entire

amount to which the Bank was otherwise entitled,

had the cash credit account been maintained

regularly. The settlement was made at around Rs.41

crores whereas, admittedly, the liability was of Rs. 52

crores approximately. One-time settlements are, as a

rule, effected under circumstances where the Bank
24
under duress is compelled to accept lesser amount in

order to secure the maximum possible recovery

against the defaulting account.
27. In this background, we feel that the High Court

committed error apparent in the eyes of law by

quashing the proceedings.
28.
In the case of
Jaswant Singh
(supra), the

dispute involved was inter se between private parties

and the prosecution had been initiated only for the

offences punishable under
Sections 406
and
420
of

the IPC.   This Court thought it fit to quash the

proceedings considering the fact that the accused

and the complainant had settled all their disputes

amicably and no useful purpose would be served by

allowing the prosecution to continue.
29.
In the case of
B.B. Aggarwal
(supra), this

Court upheld the order of the High Court quashing

the proceedings against the accused on the ground
25
that the civil suits filed by the Bank against the

defaulter companies and their directors for recoveries

of the outstanding dues, which were subsequently

transferred to Debt Recovery Tribunal stood settled

by entering into a one-time settlement.
30. On going through the aforesaid judgments, we

find that this Court did not consider the judgment in

the case of
Gian Singh
(supra) which expressly

prohibits quashing of proceedings of a criminal case

on strength of a compromise where loss to public

exchequer is evident and the offences under the
PC

Act, 1988
are applied.
31.
In the
Case of Narendra Lal Jain
(supra), the

offences were under
Sections 420
and
120B
of the

IPC.   This Court held that
Section 420
IPC was

compoundable whereas
Section 120B
IPC was not.

In this background, the Court was persuaded to

quash the proceedings holding that allowing the
26
criminal prosecution to continue would be nothing

short of an exercise in futility.
Additionally, in
Narendra Lal Jain
(supra), there was no indication

about use of forged documents to procure the

loan/advance facilities from the Bank.
32. Furthermore, in none of these three cases did

the Court observe that the amount of the one-time

settlement did not cover the actual outstanding dues

of the Bank.
33. In this background, we are of the clear opinion

that the facts involved in the three precedents relied

upon by learned counsel for the respondents are

clearly distinguishable and the same have no

application to the case at hand.
34. Thus, we are of the opinion that the impugned

judgment and order do not stand to scrutiny and

deserves to be set aside. We, therefore, allow the

appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and order
27
and restore the proceedings arising out of the

chargesheet dated 30th November, 2016 before the

trial Court.
35. We further make it clear that this order should

not be construed as making any observations on the

merits of the case which may prejudice the defence of

the accused persons before the trial Court which

shall proceed with the trial of the case uninfluenced

by any of the observations made hereinabove.
36. The appeal is allowed in these terms.
37. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand

disposed of.
….……………………J.
                               (VIKRAM NATH)



                               ...…………………….J.
                               (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 11, 2025.
28