[Cites
49
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Robert Lalchungnunga Chongthu @ R L ... vs State Of Bihar on 20 November, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 1339




                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                     OF 2025
                                       (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 10130 OF 2025)


                            ROBERT LALCHUNGNUNGA
                            CHONGTHU @ R L CHONGTHU
                                                                                         … APPELLANT(S)

                                                                     VERSUS


                            STATE OF BIHAR                                                …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                              JUDGMENT
For convenience the judgment is divided into the following parts:
INDEX
                            The Appeal.................................................................................. 2
                            Factual Aspects ........................................................................... 2
                            The Impugned Judgment ...........................................................11
                            The Case Of The Parties ........................................................... 12
                            Analysis .................................................................................... 14
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NAVEEN D
Date: 2025.11.20
Conclusion and Directions ....................................................... 43
   19:37:43 IST
   Reason:
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                            Page 1 of 46
SANJAY KAROL J.,
           Leave granted.
THE APPEAL
2.         The Appellant is aggrieved by the High Court of Judicature
at Patna’s refusal in exercising its inherent powers under
Section
482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 in terms of
judgment and order dated 9th May 20252 passed in Criminal
Miscellaneous No. 62048 of 2023, wherein the prayer was to
quash and order taking cognizance dated 1st June 2022 passed by
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sahasra in connection with
Sahasra Sadar P.S Case No. 112 of 2005 dated 24th April 2005.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
3.         As can be seen, the genesis of this case is over twenty years
old. It is necessary to recapitulate past events in order to
appreciate the context in which the impugned judgement is under
challenge before us.
I.       The Appellant is an officer of the Indian
         Administrative Services, Bihar Cadre. He was posted as
         District Magistrate-cum-Licensing Authority, Sahasra,
1
Hereinafter referred to as ‘
CrPC
2
Impugned judgement
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                         Page 2 of 46
Bihar, on 24 December 2002 and remained in the possession
      till his transfer to Banka on 11th April 2005.
      II.      The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India
      passed an order vide letter No. 11026/76/2004, directed
      further streamlining of the procedure of issuance of arms
      licences. The said letter is extracted hereinunder:
“29th October, 2004
                Sub : Streamlining the procedure of issuing Arms
                license.
Sir,
                I am directed to state that large scale issue of licenses
                has been reported in certain States. In many cases the
                licences have been issued to non-resident without
                proper verification and in some cases the licenses
                have not been issued by the licensing authority. I order
                to plug the loopholes in the existing procedure of
                issuing Arms Licence that have come to light, it has
                been decided to take the stesp indicated in the
                succeeding paragraphs.
All arms licences issued between 1994-98 from J&K
                and between September 1998 to February 2001 from
                Ferojpur district (Punjab) and submitted at the office
                of District Collector all over the country for re-
                registration, reissuance or for any other purpose
                should be verified to ascertain the bonafide of the
                licenses and genuineness of the license documents.
                Under the provisions of
Section 13(2A)
the licensing
                authority can make such other enquiry as it considers
                necessary. Necessary instruction may be issued to the
                District Magistrate to conduct police verification at
                the place of his stay during the last 3 years, preceding
                the date of application.
Arms license for the categories of weapons specified
                in Schedule-II of the Arms Rules 1962, for which
                D.M. is the licensing authority and not the officers
                subordinate to him. It may be stated that there is no
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                             Page 3 of 46
provision in the
Arms Act, 1959
, for delegation of
                 such authority to others for granting arms license.
                 The licensing authority in the states should be advised
                 to furnish return on the licenses issued on a quarterly
                 basis to the State Home Department for scrutiny on
                 quarterly basis to the State Home Department for
                 scrutiny/Secretary of the Home Department.
                 A very strict departmental action should be taken
                 wherever any instances of lapse in issuance of arms
                 license comes to the notice of the State Government.
                 The records of all the licenses issued by the licensing
                 authority in the States should be computerized and a
                 mechanism should be put in the place for early
                 warning wherever there is an unprecedent spur in
                 issue of arms license in a particular district.
                 Action taken in the matters may kindly be intimated
                 to the Ministry.
Yours Faithfully
                                                     Director, Security.”

      III.      For compliance of the directions issued in the above
       quoted extract, one Bal Krishna Jha, ASI was deputed to
       collect information and during such gathering of
       information, it was found that 7 persons to whom arms
       licences had been issued were unverified. The details of
       these persons as given in the FIR, lodged upon the
       statement of the Station House Officer, PS Saharsa, are as
       under:
1.    Omprakash Tiwari S/o Jagtanand Tiwari, R/o
                 patna, presently R/o Chitragupt Nagar, Kayasth Tola,
                 Saharsa.
2.    Smt. Rani Durgawati, W/o OmprakashTiwari,
                 R/o Patna, presently R/o Chitragupt Nagar, Kayasth
                 Tola, Saharsa.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 4 of 46
3.    Hariom Kumar S/o Jago Singh, Ward No. 15,
                Bokaro Shankarwar Tola, P.S. Mokama, District-
                Patna, presently at Shankar Chowk, Saharsa.
4.    Abhishek Tripathi, S/o Vishwajeevan Tripathi,
                Village- Rajendra Tola, Balwa Tal, Motihari, at
                present Kayasth Tola.
5.    Uday Shankar Tiwari S/o Jagtanand Tiwari, R/o
                Patna, at present Chitragupt Nagar, Kayasth Tola,
                Saharsa.
6.    Rajesh Kumar, S/o Keshav Prasad, Village-
Chitragupt Nagar, Parmaveer Albert kka Institute &
                Cultural Arts Center, Saharsa.
7.    Madhup Kumar Singh, S/o Shambhu Nath
                Singh, R/o Rajapatti, Dumra Road, Sitamarhi, at
                present Gangjala, Saharsa.”


      The statement in the FIR was that some of these licences
      had been issued to persons who were not physically capable;
      the same had been issued in violation of
Section 13(2)
, Arms
      Act, 1959, with intent to give undue benefit to the
      applicants, by the appellant, who, at the relevant point in
      time was District Magistrate-cum-licensing Authority,
      Sahasra, Bihar. As such, ‘the then licensing authority’ was
      also named as an accused therein.         It was stated that the
      same had been done in furtherance of a criminal conspiracy
      and abetment at a large scale.
IV.       After investigation, chargesheet dated 9th July 2005
      was entered wherein one of the accused persons, namely
      Omprakash Tiwari was sent up for trial whereas
      investigation against other persons was continued. A
      supplementary chargesheet dated 13th April 2006 was then
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                        Page 5 of 46
filed, wherein, qua the appellant it was observed that no
      offence was made out under the
Arms Act
against him, and
      the allegations levelled           were termed         ‘false’. The
      complainant recorded his ‘no objection’ to such closure
      report. The relevant extract of the charge sheet is as under :-
“…Resultantly, he could not have been verified and no
              Offence under
Arms Act
is made out against FIR
              accused Sh. R. L. Chongthu, the then District
              Magistrate, Saharsa. Therefore, the allegation against
              him have been found to be false. Rest of all the
              abovenamed Accused persons are on bail from the
              court. Therefore, the investigation is completing on all
              points in this case. Therefore, in the present case, I
              submit Supplementary Chargesheet No. 118/06 dated
              13th April, 2006…..”
      V.       The Sub-Divisional Officer of Police, Sadar,
      Saharsa by letter dated 26th November 2007 addressed to the
      Chief Judicial Magistrate, Saharsa submitted as follows:
“1.     The then District Magistrate, Saharsa- Sh.
               R.L. Chongthu issued Arms License without getting
               done verification of name and address of named
               Accused Sh.Abhishek Tripathi, S/o Vishwajeevan
               Tripathi, Permanent Address - Shailendra Gupta-
               Balua Taal, Motihari, District - Champaran. The
               enquiry of name and permanent address of Abhishek
               Tripathi was conducted through Superintendent of
               Police, Motihari. After enquiry, it was found no
               person in the name of Abhishek Tripathi resides on
               this address, in whose favour Arms License was
               issued by the then District Magistrate Sh. Chongthu.
               Meaning thereby is that the matter of issuing Arms
               License in favour of a fake person in deliberate
               manner and by hatching criminal conspiracy without
               getting done the verification of temporary/ permanent
               address, has come into the light, in which, the
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                             Page 6 of 46
criminal involvement of the then District Magistrate,
               Saharsa Sh. Chongthu clearly appears.
2.       The then Superintendent of Police, Saharsa in
               his Report No. 3 issued vide his Office Memorandum
               No. 920/ C.R. dated 11.04.2005, has found the
               allegation against the then District Magistrate Sh.
Chongthu to be false, whereas, in the same Report, it
               is mentioned to not to verify the alleged Licensee
               Abhishek Tripathi.
3.       Also in Report-3, the Investigating Officer
               has been ordered to submit chargesheet also against
               those named accused prsons, whose’ permanent/
               temporary addresses have been found to be correct,
               which are not as per Rules.
In the light of aforesaid order, the then SDPO, Saharsa
               Sh.Ashok Kumar Sinha vide Memo No.2558/07
               dated 19.09.2007 of this Office, had requested to pass
               orders for conducting re-investigation on the
               aforesaid points in the present case, but, the order
               could not have been received yet. Again, vide Memo
               No.3547/C.R. dated 24.11.2007 of the Superintendent
               of Police, Saharsa, it has been directed to conduct
               investigation on aforesaid points after obtaining order
               from the Court.
Therefore, it is requested that in the light of aforesaid
               order, kindly issue order to conduct re-investigation
               of case on the aforesaid points.
For your kind information.”

      On the aforesaid aspects, a request for the re-investigation
      was resubmitted by letter dated 5th October 2008.
     VI.       The Chief Judicial Magistrate, Saharsa in an order
      dated 19th June 2009 observed that an order for re-
      investigation could not be granted but further investigation
      was permitted in law, and as such, permitted further
      investigation under
Section 173(8)
, CrPC.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 7 of 46
VII.         The     General       Administration          Department,
          Government of Bihar3 by letter dated 10th December 2015
          asked the Appellant to show cause regarding the issuance
          of arms licences to a total of 16 accused persons. The
          Response is as under:
“Letter No. 242
Office of the Divisional Commission
                           Bhagalpur Division, Bhagalpur (Bihar)
               From:
ROBERT L. CHONGTHU
                  Divisional Commissioner,
                  Bhagalpur Division Bhagalpur
               To          Ashwlal Dattatraya Thakare
                           Additional Secretary
                           Central Administration Department,
                           Govt, of Bihar, Patna
                                               Bhagalpur dated 23.12.2015

               Sub: Allegation against the then District Magistrate, Sarsa
               relating to irregularly in issuance of Arms License.
               Ref: General Administration Department's Letter No.
               17049 dt. 10.12.2015.
Sir,
               I, with reference to the subject mentioned above I have to
               say that vide letter No. 17049 dated 10.12.2015, I am
               asked to submit explanation regarding all 16 persons. It is
               requested to kindly provide the documents related to
               sanctioning of arms licences of all 16 persons on the
               ground that the matter has become old one and I am not
               able no recollect all the facts and circumstances related to
               the sanctioning of arms licenses to these 16 persons. It
               would be really helpful if the above said documents are
               supplied to me so that I can explain things in proper
               manner otherwise in absence of these required documents,
               my explanation would not be proper and complete.
3
The Department
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                Page 8 of 46
2. That as regards to the earlier papers supplied to me and
            after perusing the same, it seems to me that various office
            orders issued from the Ministry of Home Affairs,
            Government of India are meant for streamlining the
            procedure of issuing arms licenses which inter alia, state
            that a decision has been taken to take steps, such as, all
            arms licenses issued for a period in Jammu Kashmir and
            Punjab be verified, the District Magistrate should delegate
            his powers of issuance of license to another officer, the
            licensing authority be advised to furnish Return on the
            licenses issues on quarterly basis, the records of licenses
            should be computerized, licensing authority is required to
            obtain report from the officer in charge of the nearest
            police station and if lapses took place then strict
            departmental proceeding should be taken.
3. That another office order talks about scam occurred in
            the State of Jammu & Kashmir highlighting the
            connivance of the District Magistrate, Jammu with some
            gun dealers.
4. That support to the circular/office order issued by the
            Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, also
            categorically serving that while issuance of licenses during
            my tenure, I have called for the police verification report
            from the nearest police station in all the cases. Not only
            this, even reminder was sent to the Sahrsa police station
            for sending the verification report vide letter no. 667-
            2/General dated 8.7.2004.
5. That it is further to state that during my tenure,
            parliamentary election said bye-elections were held in the
            district which also necessitated the requirement of police
            verification for all the license no such verification report
            was ever served or submitted to my office.
6. That from period of proviso of
section 13
of Arms Act,
            1959, it is apparent that where the officer of the nearest
            police station does not send his report on the application
            within the prescribed time, the licensing authority may, if
            deems, fit, make such order, after the expiry of the
            prescribed time, without further waiting for that report.
7. That when the officer in charge of the concerned police
            station failed to submit the required report then I have
            issued the licenses to these persons and my action is
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                             Page 9 of 46
protected under the provisions of the
Arms Act, 1959
as
            stated hereinabove.
8. That it is pertinent to mention here that my action of
            issuing was not irreversible and the licenses issued by me
            have been revoked. Further, the entire circular/office order
            insists upon the streamlining of the procedure for
            prevention of misuse of such licenses. There is nothing on
            the record nor there is any material on record to show that
            any person having been granted the license, had misused
            the same during the period of subsistence of licence.
9.
That the Arms Act, 1959
provides the safeguard against
            irregular issuance of license if it is learnt that the license
            has been obtained by suppressing material information or
            by providing wrong information. The moment I came to
            know that there was suppression of material information
            then immediately. I proceeded to cancel the licenses and
            the licenses were accordingly cancelled by me hence, there
            is no residue effect to such licenses.
10. That in terms of
sections 13
&
14
of the Arms Act,
            1959 and Rules 51,51-A, 52 and 53 of the Arms Rules,
            1962 which deal with grant of arms licenses and police
            verification is not since qua non for issuance of license.
11. That it is pertinent to mention here that owing to many
            a reasons, it necessitated the Ministry of Home Affairs to
            issue circular/office order for streamlining the procedure
            of issuing arms Licenses vide letter dated 29.10.2004. It is
            mentioned therein that in order to plug the loopholes in the
            existing procedure of issuing arms licenses, it has been
            decided to take steps indicated in the succeeding
            paragraphs and thereafter, few steps and guidelines have
            been provided. The humble submission is that the
            guidelines contained in the said circular would be
            prospectively used and there cannot be any retrospective
            effect of the said guidelines. Therefore, the very seeking
            of explanation on the basis of the guidelines which call for
            taking strict departmental proceeding would not be
            applicable in the present case as the licenses have been
            issued before the issuance of the guidelines.
12. That it is humbly requested to kindly provide the
            documents related to all 15 persons so that I may be able
            to give proper reply/explanation as required by your
            goodself. It is further prayed to your goodself not to treat
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 10 of 46
this explanation as final explanation and I reserve the right
             to file proper explanation expeditiously within a week
             from the date of receipt of the entire documents related to
             grant of arms licenses of all these 16 persons.
Yours Faithfully
                                              Sd/- (Robert L. Chonghtu)
                                               Divisional Commissioner,
                                        Bhagalpur Division, Bhagalpur”

      VIII.      The explanation was accepted and the Department
           discharged the Appellant on 25th February 2016 putting
           an end to the disciplinary proceedings. Hence, the
           chargesheet No.834/2020, after completion of further
           investigation, was submitted on 31st August 2020.
     IX.         The State granted sanction under
Section 197
CrPC
      on 27th April 2022. Cognizance of the chargesheet was taken
      on 1st June 2022. It is against this order that the appellant
      had approached the High Court, and which resulted in the
      impugned judgment.
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
4.     The High Court rejected the application under
Section 482
,
CrPC observing that various illegalities and irregularities
pervaded the issuance of licenses by the appellant, in as much as
certain persons who were physically unfit, were issued licenses;
in some of the applications approved, the bodyguard of the
appellant was listed in the “column of care”; in yet others licenses
were issued a mere 2 days after calling for the police report, in
which time the said report was obviously not furnished.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                               Page 11 of 46
Regarding the departmental proceedings, it was observed that
while discharging the appellant, the department had asked him to
remain careful in the future which, cannot be equated to
exoneration in departmental proceedings. Further, on the aspect
of power vested in the authority as per
section 13(2A)
of the
Arms Act, it was held that the power cannot be used and arbitrary
and unjust manner. The Court did observe that the Trial Court,
keeping in view the many years that had passed since the
inception of the case, ought to conclude the trial expeditiously by
conducting the same on day-to-day basis.
THE CASE OF THE PARTIES
5.     We have heard learned counsel for the parties. The
mainstay of the argument on behalf of the appellant is that
Section 13(2A)
of the Arms Act vested within him the discretion
to grant an arms license even without police verification and all
that he did was exercise such discretion in a bona fide manner.
Secondly, it is submitted that none of the chargesheets even as
much as remotely suggest, conspiracy between the appellant and
the licensees or any act of corruption on part of the former. This
reinforces the bona fide exercise of power. Since the alleged
misuse of this power under the
Arms Act
is the standalone charge
against the appellant, the fact that he has been discharged in the
departmental proceedings acquires importance, as the same is
fatal to criminal prosecution on the same facts, is the third limb
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                    Page 12 of 46
of the submissions. Fourthly, it is submitted that the chargesheet
in which the appellant has eventually been named has been
submitted after an inordinate delay of 15 years that too in the
absence of any fresh material/evidence. Fifthly, some of the
accused licensees have been acquitted by the High Court by
orders dated 5th February 2020 and 23rd February 2024 passed in
Criminal Misc No.5536 of 2016, Criminal Misc No. 29456 of
2016 and Criminal Misc No. 63786 of 2021. Next it is urged that
the order granting sanction against the appellant is a non-
speaking order and defeats the object of
Section 197
CrPC which
is to protect an officer against vexatious prosecution.
In the end,
it is submitted that all the points above make out a case,
affirmatively in the appellant’s favour as per the grounds
mentioned in
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal4
.
6.         On the other hand, the case of the State is that the exercise
of power by the appellant was abuse of power vested in him since
he did not wait for the police verification report and issued
licenses to persons of questionable integrity as also those who are
physically unfit and even fictitious. About the acquittal of other
persons connected to the sequence of events, it is submitted that
the case of the appellant is distinct and no benefit on ground of
parity can be accorded to him. Regarding the discharge in the
departmental proceedings, it is urged that the same is the
4
1992 Supp. (1) 335
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                         Page 13 of 46
demonstration of influence of the appellant on two grounds, one,
that it is inconceivable that an SHO would ignore the orders of
the higher officer and thereby not submit such verification report
and two, that the SHO concerned denied having received any
request from the office of the appellant for conducting
verification.
ANALYSIS
7.     The first argument for us to consider is the scope of
Section
13(2A)
of the Arms Act. It reads as under:
13. Grant of licences.―(1) An application for the grant of a
      licence under Chapter II shall be made to the licensing authority
      and shall be in such form, contain such particulars and be
      accompanied by such fee, if any, as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority shall call
      for the report of the officer in charge of the nearest police station
      on that application, and such officer shall send his report within
      the prescribed time.
(2A) The licensing authority, after such inquiry, if any, as it may
      consider necessary, and after considering the report received
      under sub-section (2), shall, subject to the other provisions of
      this Chapter, by order in writing either grant the licence or refuse
      to grant the same:
Provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest police
      station does not send his report on the application within the
      prescribed time, the licensing authority may, if it deems fit, make
      such order, after the expiry of the prescribed time, without
      further waiting for that report.
(emphasis supplied)

It flows from the above that calling for a police verification
report is mandatory and the same is to be sent to the licensing
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                               Page 14 of 46
authority within a prescribed time. What is meant by prescribed
has been clarified by
Section 2 (g)
which defines prescribed to
be that which has been described in the rules made under the
Arms Act
. The rules in vogue at the relevant point in time i.e.,
2002-2004 were the Arms Rules 1962. A perusal thereof reveals
that the rules did not prescribe a timeline within which the police
was to submit a report or the licensing authority is to either grant
or deny a license.
8.        It is a generally understood position in law that when a
legislation or a rule does not provide for limitation/time limit for
a particular aspect, the same is to be governed by the standard
of reasonable time. [See:
Collector v. D. Narsing Rao5
.]
We may
also refer to an earlier decision given by this Court in
Collector
v. P. Mangamma6
, as follows:
5. A reasonable period would depend upon the factual
            circumstances of the case concerned. There cannot be any
            empirical formula to determine that question. The
            court/authority considering the question whether the period is
            reasonable or not has to take into account the surrounding
            circumstances and relevant factors to decide that question.
6.
In
State of Gujarat v. Patel Raghav Natha
[(1969) 2 SCC
            187 : AIR 1969 SC 1297] it was observed that when even no
            period of limitation was prescribed, the power is to be
            exercised within a reasonable time and the limit of the
            reasonable time must be determined by the facts of the case
            and the nature of the order which was sought to be varied.
…It would be hard to give an exact definition of the word
5
(2015) 3 SCC 695
6
(2003) 4 SCC 488
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                               Page 15 of 46
“reasonable”. Reason varies in its conclusions according to
            the idiosyncrasy of the individual and the times and
            circumstances in which he thinks. The reasoning which built
            up the old scholastic logic stands now like the jingling of a
            child's toy. But mankind must be satisfied with the
            reasonableness within reach; and in cases not covered by
            authority, the decision of the Judge usually determines what
            is “reasonable” in each particular case; but frequently
            reasonableness “belongs to the knowledge of the law, and
            therefore to be decided by the courts”. It was illuminatingly
            stated by a learned author that an attempt to give a specific
            meaning to the word “reasonable” is trying to count what is
            not a number and measure what is not space. It means prima
            facie in law reasonable in regard to those circumstances of
            which the actor, called upon to act reasonably, knows or ought
            to know. [See
Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Jagan Nath Ashok
            Kumar
[(1987) 4 SCC 497 :
AIR 1987 SC 2316] and Gujarat
            Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. Unique Erectors
            (Gujarat) (P) Ltd.
[(1989) 1 SCC 532 : AIR 1989 SC 973] ]
            As observed by Lord Romilly, M.R. in Labouchere v. Dawson
            [(1872) LR 13 Eq Ca 322, 325 : 41 LJ Ch 472 : 25 LT 894] it
            is impossible a priori to state what is reasonable as such in all
            cases. You must have the particular facts of each case
            established before you can ascertain what is reasonable under
            the circumstances.
Reasonable, being a relative term is
            essentially what is rational according to the dictates of reason
            and not excessive or immoderate on the facts and
            circumstances of the particular case.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
[See:
Telangana Housing Board v. Azamunnisa Begum7
,]
9.        Given that at the relevant point in time, no time limit stood
prescribed, an alternate interpretation to ‘prescribed time’ can be
the time specified by the authority seeking the police report in
7
(2018) 7 SCC 346
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 16 of 46
such letter itself. This too, is absent from the record before us.
The State and the learned Single Judge have chosen to focus on
only one instance. Be whatsoever the contours of the application
of doctrine of reasonable time, it only stands to reason that when
no time stands clarified it is expected that the Authority may act
appropriately within a logically sound period of time. In
question are the appellant’s actions in so far as 16 licenses are
concerned. However, the record only speaks, to perhaps one
instance, where a mere two days after the request for the report
of police was made, that the license was issued, and the papers
in that regard and do not specify the time granted by the
appellant/the appellant’s office to furnish the report. It cannot be
doubted that the particular instance of application by Kanhaiya
Kumar Singh and Chandan Kumar Singh would not be
justified as a proper exercise of discretion when licenses have
been granted after only two days, but given that the State has
remained silent as to the timeline in other cases, we close
consideration of this issue having recorded as above.
10.    Next, let us turn our attention to the sanction issued
against the appellant. As already recorded, it is his case that the
sanction is vitiated because it is a non-speaking order. The
sanction is reproduced below:
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                     Page 17 of 46
“GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR
                           LAW DEPARTMENT
             (Under Rule 53(1)(c) and 32(a) XIX of Executive
                                   Rules)
                                  ORDER
     Order No. S.P.02/2016-164/J.
     Patna, dated
     27.04.2022
     Whereas, on perusal of the documents and evidences mentioned
     in Case Diary available in the File No. 06/Aarop-03/2016 of
     General Administration Department, Bihar, Patna addressed to
     the Secretary, Law Department, the State Government is satisfied
     that prima facie offence of issuance of Arms License in favour of
     a fake person deliberately under a criminal conspiracy without
     conducting verification of his permanent/ temporary address,
     appears to be made out against the Accused of P.S. Saharsa
     (Sadar) Crime No. 112/2005 dated 26.04.20055 namely Sh.
R.L.Chongthu, IAS (1997), the then District Magistrate-cum-
     Licensing Authority, Saharsa, due to which, the prima facie case
     for prosecuting him under
Section 109
,
419
,
420
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
120(B)
IPC and
Section 30
of Arms Act, is made out against him.
     And whereas, according to
Section 197
of the Cr.P.C., 1973(Act
     No.2 of 1973), when any person who is a public servant not
     removable from his officer save by or with the sanction of the
     Government, is accused of any offence alleged to have been
     committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
     discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of
     such offence except with the previous sanction.
     And Whereas, Sh. R. L. Chongthu, IAS (1997), the then District
     Magistrate-cum-Licensing Authority, Saharsa is such a public
     servant and it is alleged that he has committed such an offence
     while acting or purporting to act in discharge of his official duty.
     And now therefore, the State Government do hereby grant
     Prosecution Sanction against him under the provisions of
Section
     197
of Cr.P.C. for prosecuting him
u/s 109
,
419
,
420
,
467
,
468
,
420
,
471
,
120(B)
IPC and
Section 30
of Arms Act.
By the orders of Governor of Bihar
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 18 of 46
Sd/-
(Jyoti Swaroop Shrivastava)
                              Incharge Secretary to the Government,
                                            Law Department, Bihar.
Memo No. SP -02/2016/164/J. Patna,
        Dt.27.04.2022”
11.       Section 197 which mandates the grant of sanction before
commencement of prosecution for public servants, reads:
“197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.—(1) When any
        person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant
        not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the
        Government is accused of any offence alleged to have been
        committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
        discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of
        such offence except with the previous sanction 6 [save as
        otherwise provided in the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
(1
        of 2014)]—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may
        be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence
        employed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the
        Central Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may
        be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence
        employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State
        Government:…”
The ambit of this Section has been discussed in various
judgments of this Court. It will be necessary to refer to them as
under:
11.1      In
Gurmeet Kaur v. Devender Gupta8
through B.V.
        Nagarathna, J., this Court observed:
8
(2025) 5 SCC 481
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 19 of 46
“25. As already noted, the object and purpose of the
                  said provision is to protect officers and officials of the
                  State from unjustified criminal prosecution while they
                  discharge their duties within the scope and ambit of
                  their powers entrusted to them. A reading of Section
                  197CrPC would indicate that there is a bar for a court
                  to take cognizance of such offences which are
                  mentioned in the said provision except with the
                  previous sanction of the appropriate Government when
                  the allegations are made against, inter alia, a public
                  servant.
26. There is no doubt that in the instant case the
                  appellant herein was a public servant but the question
                  is, whether, while discharging her duty as a public
                  servant on the relevant date, there was any excess in the
                  discharge of the said duty which did not require the first
                  respondent herein to take a prior sanction for
                  prosecuting the appellant herein…”


        11.2      The factors to be borne in mind when dealing with
        a case involving sanction under this section has been, after
        consideration of number of previous pronouncements
        crystallised as follows in
Devinder Singh v. State of
        Punjab9
:
39. The principles emerging from the aforesaid
                   decisions are summarised hereunder:
39.1. Protection of sanction is an assurance to an
                   honest and sincere officer to perform his duty honestly
                   and to the best of his ability to further public duty.
However, authority cannot be camouflaged to commit
                   crime.
39.2. Once act or omission has been found to have
                   been committed by public servant in discharging his
9
(2016) 12 SCC 87
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                Page 20 of 46
duty it must be given liberal and wide construction so
                far its official nature is concerned. Public servant is
                not entitled to indulge in criminal activities. To that
                extent
Section 197
CrPC has to be construed narrowly
                and in a restricted manner.
39.3. Even in facts of a case when public servant has
                exceeded in his duty, if there is reasonable connection
                it will not deprive him of protection under
Section 197
CrPC. There cannot be a universal rule to determine
                whether there is reasonable nexus between the act
                done and official duty nor is it possible to lay down
                such rule.
39.4. In case the assault made is intrinsically
                connected with or related to performance of official
                duties, sanction would be necessary under
Section 197
CrPC, but such relation to duty should not be
                pretended or fanciful claim. The offence must be
                directly and reasonably connected with official duty
                to require sanction. It is no part of official duty to
                commit offence. In case offence was incomplete
                without proving, the official act, ordinarily the
                provisions of
Section 197
CrPC would apply.
                39.5. In case sanction is necessary, it has to be decided
                by competent authority and sanction has to be issued
                on the basis of sound objective assessment. The court
                is not to be a sanctioning authority.
39.6. Ordinarily, question of sanction should be dealt
                with at the stage of taking cognizance, but if the
                cognizance is taken erroneously and the same comes
                to the notice of court at a later stage, finding to that
                effect is permissible and such a plea can be taken first
                time before the appellate court. It may arise at
                inception itself. There is no requirement that the
                accused must wait till charges are framed.
                39.7. Question of sanction can be raised at the time of
                framing of charge and it can be decided prima facie on
                the basis of accusation. It is open to decide it afresh in
                light of evidence adduced after conclusion of trial or
                at other appropriate stage.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 21 of 46
39.8. Question of sanction may arise at any stage of
                    proceedings. On a police or judicial inquiry or in
                    course of evidence during trial. Whether sanction is
                    necessary or not may have to be determined from
                    stage to stage and material brought on record
                    depending upon facts of each case. Question of
                    sanction can be considered at any stage of the
                    proceedings. Necessity for sanction may reveal itself
                    in the course of the progress of the case and it would
                    be open to the accused to place material during the
                    course of trial for showing what his duty was. The
                    accused has the right to lead evidence in support of his
                    case on merits.
39.9. In some cases it may not be possible to decide
                    the question effectively and finally without giving
                    opportunity to the defence to adduce evidence.
                    Question of good faith or bad faith may be decided on
                    conclusion of trial.”


         11.3     A Bench of three Learned Judges in
P.K. Pradhan
         v. State of Sikkim10
held thus:
“5. The legislative mandate engrafted in sub-section (1)
                  of Section 197 debarring a court from taking
                  cognizance of an offence except with the previous
                  sanction of the Government concerned in a case where
                  the acts complained of are alleged to have been
                  committed by a public servant in discharge of his
                  official duty or purporting to be in the discharge of his
                  official duty and such public servant is not removable
                  from office save by or with the sanction of the
                  Government, touches the jurisdiction of the court itself.
                  It is a prohibition imposed by the statute from taking
                  cognizance. Different tests have been
laid down in
decided cases to ascertain the scope and meaning of the
                  relevant words occurring in Section 197 of the Code:
“any offence alleged to have been committed by him
                  while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his
10
(2001) 6 SCC 704
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 22 of 46
official duty”. The offence alleged to have been
                  committed must have something to do, or must be
                  related in some manner, with the discharge of official
                  duty. No question of sanction can arise under Section
                  197, unless the act complained of is an offence; the only
                  point for determination is whether it was committed in
                  the discharge of official duty.”
12.       The avowed object of sanctions being granted before
cognizance is to ensure that the threat of criminal prosecution
does not hang over the heads of the officials in discharge of their
public duty. At the same time, it is not intended to protect
officers who have transgressed the boundaries of their duty for
some act/benefit which otherwise would not be termed
acceptable. An aspect connected with this object, is that the
authority granting sanction does not do so mechanically. This is
a layer of protection envisioned by this Section. In other words,
when allegations are made, it is not for the authorities to grant
sanction simply on the basis of the allegations but it is also that
they should examine the materials placed by the investigating
agency and come to a prima facie satisfaction thereon, about the
officer having some or the other involvement in the alleged
offence/crime.
In
Mansukhlal Vitthaldas Chauhan v. State of
Gujarat11
, this Court held that the order of granting or refusing
sanction must show application of mind. The relevant
paragraphs thereof are extracted hereunder:
11
(1997) 7 SCC 622
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                Page 23 of 46
“17. Sanction lifts the bar for prosecution. The grant of
         sanction is not an idle formality or an acrimonious exercise
         but a solemn and sacrosanct act which affords protection to
         government servants against frivolous prosecutions.
(See
Mohd. Iqbal Ahmed v. State of A.P.
[(1979) 4 SCC 172 :
1979 SCC (Cri) 926 : AIR 1979 SC 677] ) Sanction is a
         weapon to ensure discouragement of frivolous and vexatious
         prosecution and is a safeguard for the innocent but not a
         shield for the guilty.
18. The validity of the sanction would, therefore, depend
         upon the material placed before the sanctioning authority and
         the fact that all the relevant facts, material and evidence have
         been considered by the sanctioning authority. Consideration
         implies application of mind. The order of sanction must ex
         facie disclose that the sanctioning authority had considered
         the evidence and other material placed before it…”
19. Since the validity of “sanction” depends on the
         applicability of mind by the sanctioning authority to the facts
         of the case as also the material and evidence collected during
         investigation, it necessarily follows that the sanctioning
         authority has to apply its own independent mind for the
         generation of genuine satisfaction whether prosecution has to
         be sanctioned or not. The mind of the sanctioning authority
         should not be under pressure from any quarter nor should any
         external force be acting upon it to take a decision one way or
         the other. Since the discretion to grant or not to grant sanction
         vests absolutely in the sanctioning authority, its discretion
         should be shown to have not been affected by any extraneous
         consideration. If it is shown that the sanctioning authority was
         unable to apply its independent mind for any reason
         whatsoever or was under an obligation or compulsion or
         constraint to grant the sanction, the order will be bad for the
         reason that the discretion of the authority “not to sanction”
         was taken away and it was compelled to act mechanically to
         sanction the prosecution.”

Not much more needs to be said. The sanction awarded against
the appellant which we have extracted in toto (supra) can in our
considered view, in no way be said to be reflecting application
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 24 of 46
of mind by the authorities. If sanction is based on what can at
best be described as vague statements such as “on perusal of the
documents and evidences mentioned in Case Diary available”,
this protection would be obliterated. The remainder of the
sanction order touches upon the essence of
Section 197
CrPC
and the fact that the appellant is a public servant who would be
covered thereby. The substance of why a sanction is required
was however entirely missed by the sanctioning authority. The
same is bad in law and must be, set aside. All consequential
actions including the order taking cognizance, therefore would
be quashed.
13.    There      is   another     ground   which   needs     detailed
consideration. The permission for further investigation was
given in 2009 and the chargesheet that was submitted as a result
thereof was dated 31st August 2020 that is after a period of 11
years. This is after the fact that in the second chargesheet, the
investigating authorities have concluded the charges against the
appellant to be false. In 2024, the impugned judgment records
that even after the cognizance was taken nearly two years ago in
2022, the trial had not moved forward. As we approach the end
of 2025, the question to be considered is as to how long this can
continue.
14.    Various judgments of this Court have emphasised the
right to speedy trial as being an important facet of
Article 21
of
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                        Page 25 of 46
the Constitution. Timely completion of investigation is inherent
thereto.
14.1 A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Abdul
            Rehman Antulay v. R.S. Nayak12
, observed:
“81.
Article 21
declares that no person shall be
                  deprived of his life or liberty except in accordance with
                  the procedure prescribed by law. The main procedural
                  law in this country is the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
                  1973. Several other enactments too contain many a
                  procedural provision.
After Maneka Gandhi [Maneka
                  Gandhi v. Union of India
, (1978) 1 SCC 248 : AIR
                  1978 SC 597] , it can hardly be disputed that the ‘law’
                  [which has to be understood in the sense the expression
                  has been defined in clause (3)(a) of
Article 13
of the
                  Constitution] in
Article 21
has to answer the test of
                  reasonableness and fairness inherent in
Articles 19
and
14. In other words, such law should provide a procedure
                  which is fair, reasonable and just. Then alone, would it
                  be in consonance with the command of
Article 21.
Indeed, wherever necessary, such fairness must be read
                  into such law. Now, can it be said that a law which does
                  not provide for a reasonably prompt investigation, trial
                  and conclusion of a criminal case is fair, just and
                  reasonable? It is both in the interest of the accused as
                  well as the society that a criminal case is concluded
                  soon. If the accused is guilty, he ought to be declared
                  so. Social interest lies in punishing the guilty and
                  exoneration of the innocent but this determination (of
                  guilt or innocence) must be arrived at with reasonable
                  despatch — reasonable in all the circumstances of the
                  case. Since it is the accused who is charged with the
                  offence and is also the person whose life and/or liberty
                  is at peril, it is but fair to say that he has a right to be
                  tried speedily. Correspondingly, it is the obligation of
                  the State to respect and ensure this right. It needs no
                  emphasis to say, the very fact of being accused of a
12
(1992) 1 SCC 225
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                  Page 26 of 46
crime is cause for concern. It affects the reputation and
               the standing of the person among his colleagues and in
               the society. It is a cause for worry and expense. It is
               more so, if he is arrested. If it is a serious offence, the
               man may stand to lose his life, liberty, career and all that
               he cherishes.
82. The provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
are consistent with and indeed illustrate this principle.
               They provide for an early investigation and for a speedy
               and fair trial. The learned Attorney General is right in
               saying that if only the provisions of the Code are
               followed in their letter and spirit, there would be little
               room for any grievance. The fact however, remains
               unpleasant as it is, that in many cases, these provisions
               are honoured more in breach. Be that as it may, it is
               sufficient to say that the constitutional guarantee of
               speedy trial emanating from
Article 21
is properly
               reflected in the provisions of the Code.”
The Court laid down guidelines regarding fair trial. Regarding
investigation, which is the relevant facet here, the direction
issued is as under:
“…
               (2) Right to speedy trial flowing from
Article 21
encompasses all the stages, namely the stage of
               investigation, inquiry, trial, appeal, revision and re-trial.
That is how, this Court has understood this right and
               there is no reason to take a restricted view.
               (3) The concerns underlying the right to speedy trial
               from the point of view of the accused are:
(a) the period of remand and pre-conviction detention
               should be as short as possible. In other words, the
               accused should not be subjected to unnecessary or
               unduly long incarceration prior to his conviction;
(b) the worry, anxiety, expense and disturbance to his
               vocation and peace, resulting from an unduly prolonged
               investigation, inquiry or trial should be minimal; and
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                Page 27 of 46
(c) undue delay may well result in impairment of the
                  ability of the accused to defend himself, whether on
                  account of death, disappearance or non-availability of
                  witnesses or otherwise.
…”

            14.2 A Bench of seven judges in
P. Ramachandra Rao
            v. State of Karnataka13
, while disapproving of setting up
            of strict timelines by this Court for completion of
            investigation etc observed:
“…The mental agony, expense and strain which a
                  person proceeded against in criminal law has to
                  undergo and which, coupled with delay, may result in
                  impairing the capability or ability of the accused to
                  defend himself have persuaded the constitutional courts
                  of the country in holding the right to speedy trial a
                  manifestation of fair, just and reasonable procedure
                  enshrined in
Article 21.
Speedy trial, again, would
                  encompass within its sweep all its stages including
                  investigation, inquiry, trial, appeal, revision and retrial
                  — in short everything commencing with an accusation
                  and expiring with the final verdict — the two being
                  respectively the terminus a quo and terminus ad
                  quem — of the journey which an accused must
                  necessarily undertake once faced with an implication.
                  The constitutional philosophy propounded as right to
                  speedy trial has though grown in age by almost two and
                  a half decades, the goal sought to be achieved is yet a
                  far-off peak. Myriad fact situations bearing testimony
                  to denial of such fundamental right to the accused
                  persons, on account of failure on the part of prosecuting
                  agencies and the executive to act, and their turning an
                  almost blind eye at securing expeditious and speedy
                  trial so as to satisfy the mandate of
Article 21
of the
                  Constitution….”
13
(2002) 4 SCC 578
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 28 of 46
14.3    Just recently, a bench of three Judges of this Court
            in
Sovaran Singh Prajapati v. State of U.P.14
, (including
            one of us, Sanjay Karol J.) after considering number of
            pronouncements, culled out the features of fair trial. The
            third point mentioned therein is important here. It reads,
            “Process of investigation and trial must be completed with
            promptitude.”.
14.4    Another recent instance was in the case CBI v. Mir
            Usman15 wherein this Court held:
“31. The right to speedy trial is implicit in
Article 21
of
               the Constitution of India. The first written articulation of
               the right to speedy trial appeared in 1215 in the Magna
               Carta: “We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer
               to any man either justice or right.”
Article 21
of the Indian
               constitution declares that “no person shall be deprived of
               his life or personal liberty except according to the
               procedure laid by law.” Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer in
Babu
               Singh v. State of U.P.
, (1978) 1 SCC 579 : AIR 1978 SC
               527 remarked, “Our justice system even in grave cases,
               suffers from slow motion syndrome which is lethal to “fair
               trial” whatever the ultimate decision.
Speedy justice is a
               component of social justice since the community, as a
               whole, is concerned in the criminal being condignly and
               finally punished within a reasonable time and the innocent
               being absolved from the inordinate ordeal of criminal
               proceedings.” In the case of
Sheela Barse v. Union of
               India
, (1986) 3 SCC 632 : (1986) 3 SCR 562, this Court
               has held that the right to speedy trial is a fundamental right.
Further it was stated by this Court that the consequence of
               violation of the fundamental right to speedy trial would be
14
2025 SCC OnLine SC 351
15
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2066
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                  Page 29 of 46
that the prosecution itself would be liable to be quashed on
            the ground that it is in breach of fundamental right.”
15.    Moving further, it is to be noted that this aspect of prompt
investigation has received statutory recognition as well in the
CrPC
, which of course, is the comprehensive code laying down
detailed procedure is for stages of investigation, trial and appeal
among other things. It must be stated that statutory recognition
of prompt investigation is a pre-constitutional stipulation.
During the colonial period, the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
1861, and its immediate successor, the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
,      1872,     conceived      the    process     of    criminal
investigation as a domain of exclusive police competence,
characterized by minimal judicial supervision. These early
procedural frameworks vested extensive autonomy in the police
establishment, leaving investigations largely beyond the reach
of magisterial control, and notably omitted any statutory
timelines for their completion. The institutional foundation for
this arrangement lay in the
Police Act, 1861
, which served as the
principal legal instrument governing investigative powers and
responsibilities. Although the police operated nominally under
the “general control and direction” of the District Magistrate, in
practice, the investigation of offences was conducted
independently within the police hierarchy, reflecting the colonial
state’s preference for an executive, rather than judicially
mediated, model of law enforcement.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                             Page 30 of 46
This design is made explicit in the text of the
Police Act
itself. Reference may made to
Section 5
which granted the police
authorities a power of the magistrate and 23 which delineated
the core duties of police officers in notably broad terms. Sections
25. 26 and 27 establish that the rule of the Magistrate was limited
to certain spheres only, for instance dealing with property.
Read together, these provisions reveal a conception of
policing that was investigative, preventive, and executive in
nature, with the judiciary occupying a passive and peripheral
role. The Magistrate’s function under the Codes of 1861 and
1872 was confined largely to receiving police reports or taking
cognizance of completed investigations, rather than directing or
monitoring their course. It was only with the advent of later
reforms – first, through the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1898,
and subsequently under the Code of 1973 - that the architecture
of criminal procedure began to incorporate judicial control and
procedural accountability, through provisions such as Sections
61, 167 and 173(1) of the 1898 Code and 156(3), 167, and
173(1), 173(2) of the 1973 Code, which introduced oversight
mechanisms (in Section 156(3) and 167) and prescribed
reasonable limits (in Section 173(1), 173(2)) for the duration of
investigations. In its latest avatar, the legislation codifying
criminal procedure i.e. BNSS 2023, also provides similar
timelines under Sections 187, 193, 230, 250, 251,262, 263 etc.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                     Page 31 of 46
16.        At this juncture, we would not be out of place to refer as
to how other jurisdictions provide for and deal with speedy trial,
in same and similar terms as has been held by this Court.
16.1      In the United States of America, the Sixth
             Amendment to the Constitution16, introduced by the Bill
             of Rights, 1791 provides:
“In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
                       the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial
                       jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall
                       have been committed, which district shall have been
                       previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of
                       the nature and cause of the accusation; to be
                       confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
                       compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his
                       favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his
                       defence.”
             The following cases demonstrate the application of this
             constitutional enshrinement-
16.1.1       Earl Warren, CJ wrote for a unanimous
                     Court in Klopfer v United States17 as under:
“We hold here that the right to a speedy trial
                                  is as fundamental as any of the rights
                                  secured by the Sixth Amendment. That
                                  right has its roots at the very foundation of
                                  our English law heritage. Its first
                                  articulation in modern jurisprudence
                                  appears to have been made in Magna Carta
                                  (1215), wherein it was written, "We will
                                  sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to
16
https://constitution.congress.gov/constitution/amendment-6/
17
386 U.S. 213 (1967)
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                    Page 32 of 46
any man either justice or right"; ' but
                             evidence of recognition of the right to
                             speedy justice in even earlier times is found
                             in the Assize of Clarendon (1166).' By the
                             late thirteenth century, justices, armed with
                             commissions of gaol delivery and/or oyer
                             and terminer " were visiting the countryside
                             three times a year." These justices, Sir
                             Edward Coke wrote in Part II of his
                             Institutes, "have not suffered the prisoner to
                             be long detained, but at their next coming
                             have given the prisoner full and speedy
                             justice, . . . without detaining him long in
                             prison." 12 To Coke, prolonged detention
                             without trial would have been contrary to
                             the law and custom of England; " but he
                             also believed that the delay in trial, by itself,
                             would be an improper denial of justice. In
                             his explication of Chapter 29 of the Magna
                             Carta, he wrote that the words "We will sell
                             to no man, we will not deny or defer to any
                             man either justice or right" had the
                             following effect:
"And therefore, every subject of this
                             realme, for injury done to him in bonis,
                             terris, vel persona, by any other subject, be
                             he ecclesiasticall, or temporall, free, or
                             bond, man, or woman, old, or young, or be
                             he outlawed, excommunicated, or any
                             other without exception, may take his
                             remedy by the course of the law, and have
                             justice, and right for the injury done to him,
                             freely without sale, fully without any
                             deniall, and speedily without delay."
16.1.2   In    Baker      v    Wingo18,        the    Court,
                    consolidating the tests that were already in
                    application by the lower courts, laid down a four-
18
407 US 514 (1972)
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                  Page 33 of 46
pronged test, commonly known as the Baker Test.
The Court is to consider-the length of the delay,
                   the reason for the delay, when the defendant
                   asserted his right to speedy trial, and the prejudice
                   suffered by the defendant as a result of the delay.
16.1.3       In Doggett v. United States19, the Court
                   was concerned with the case in which an alleged
                   drug peddler was indicted for conspiracy to
                   distribute cocaine. The accused had apparently
                   fled the jurisdiction of the United States. Even
                   though the information of the outstanding arrest
                   warrant had been sent to all posts of the United
                   States Customs, he could only be arrested 6 years
                   after his return to the country, and in total, 8 ½
                   years after his indictment. Souter J., for the
                   majority held:
“…We have observed in prior cases that
                                unreasonable delay between formal
                                accusation and trial threatens to produce
                                more than one sort of harm, including
                                “oppressive       pretrial    incarceration,”
                                “anxiety and concern of the accused,” and
                                “the possibility that the [accused's] defense
                                will be impaired” by dimming memories
                                and loss of exculpatory evidence. Barker,
                                407 U. S., at 532; see also Smith v. Hooey,
                                393 U. S. 374, 377–379 (1969); United
19
1992 SCC OnLine US SC 94
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                  Page 34 of 46
States v. Ewell, 383 U. S. 116, 120 (1966).
Of these forms of prejudice, “the most
                           serious is the last, because the inability of a
                           defendant adequately to prepare his case
                           skews the fairness of the entire system.”
                           407 U. S., at 532. Doggett claims this kind
                           of prejudice, and there is probably no other
                           kind that he can claim, since he was
                           subjected neither to pretrial detention nor,
                           he has successfully contended, to
                           awareness of unresolved charges against
                           him.”
                           …Our speedy trial standards recognize that
                           pretrial delay is often both inevitable and
                           wholly justifiable. The government may
                           need time to collect witnesses against the
                           accused, oppose his pretrial motions, or, if
                           he goes into hiding, track him down. We
                           attach great weight to such considerations
                           when balancing them against the costs of
                           going forward with a trial whose probative
                           accuracy the passage of time has begun by
                           degrees to throw into question. See Loud
                           Hawk, supra, at 315–317. Thus, in this
                           case, if the Government had pursued
                           Doggett with reasonable diligence from his
                           indictment to his arrest, his speedy trial
                           claim would fail. Indeed, that conclusion
                           would generally follow as a matter of
                           course however great the delay, so long as
                           Doggett could not show specific prejudice
                           to his defense.”

         16.2 Next, we turn our attention to Canada.
Section 11
under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
         houses a total of nine rights. For the instant purposes, (a)
         and (b) are relevant-
“11.            Any person charged with an offence has
                              the right-
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                              Page 35 of 46
(a) to    be    informed    without
                               unreasonable delay of the specific
                               offence;
                               (b) to be tried within a reasonable
                               time”
16.2.1 The case of R. v. Askov 20saw the Supreme
                 Court of Canada holding that:
“ The court should consider a number of factors
                         in determining whether the delay in bringing
                         the accused to trial has been unreasonable: (1)
                         the length of the delay; (2) the explanation for
                         the delay; (3) waiver; and (4) prejudice to the
                         accused. The longer the delay, the more
                         difficult it should be for a court to excuse it, and
                         very lengthy delays may be such that they
                         cannot be justified for any reason. Delays
                         attributable to the Crown will weigh in favour
                         of the accused. Complex cases, however, will
                         justify delays longer than those acceptable in
                         simple cases. Systemic or institutional delays
                         will also weigh against the Crown. When
                         considering delays occasioned by inadequate
                         institutional resources, the question of how long
                         a delay is too long may be resolved by
                         comparing the questioned jurisdiction to others
                         in the country. The comparison of similar and
                         thus comparable districts must always be made
                         with the better districts, not the worst. The
                         comparison need not be too precise or
                         exact; rather, it should look to the appropriate
                         ranges of delay in determining what is a
                         reasonable limit. In all cases it will be
                         incumbent upon the Crown to show that the
                         institutional     delay       in     question      is
                         justifiable. Certain actions of the accused, on
                         the other hand, will justify delays. A waiver by
                         the accused of his rights will justify delay, but
20
[1990] 2 SCR 1199
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 36 of 46
the waiver must be informed, unequivocal and
                            freely given to be valid.
16.2.2       Just two years later, the Court in R v.
Morin21 in an attempt to refine the holding in Askov,
                 (supra) held that institutional delays would not on
                 their own, constitute a violation of
section 11 (b)
of
                 the Charter. The factors to be considered were
                 expanded as hereinbelow, and then came to be
                 known as the Morin Framework:
“The general approach to a determination of
                           whether the
s. 11(b)
right has been denied is not
                           by the application of a mathematical or
                           administrative formula but rather by a judicial
                           determination balancing the interests which the
                           section is designed to protect against factors
                           which inevitably lead to delay. The factors to be
                           considered are: (1) the length of the delay; (2)
                           waiver of time periods; (3) the reasons for the
                           delay, including (a) inherent time requirements
                           of the case, (b) actions of the accused, (c)
                           actions of the Crown, (d) limits on institutional
                           resources and (e) other reasons for delay; and
                           (4) prejudice to the accused.”
                 16.2.3 In R v. Jordan22 which is a case almost a
                 quarter-century after the Morin Framework, the
                 Court        recognised        various       issues       with
                 implementation thereof in the following terms

                          “The Morin framework for applying
s. 11(b)
has
                          given rise to both doctrinal and practical
21
[1992] 1 SCR 771
22
[2016] 1 SCR 631
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 37 of 46
problems, contributing to a culture of delay and
                     complacency       towards      it.   Doctrinally,
                     the Morin framework is too unpredictable, too
                     confusing, and too complex. It has itself become
                     a burden on already over-burdened trial courts.
From          a      practical       perspective,
                     the Morin framework’s               after-the-fact
rationalization of delay does not encourage
                     participants in the justice system to take
                     preventative measures to address inefficient
                     practices and resourcing problems.”
             Keeping these issues in view, the Court then
             directed:
“At the heart of this new framework is a
                     presumptive ceiling beyond which delay — from
                     the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial
                     — is presumed to be unreasonable, unless
                     exceptional circumstances justify it. The
                     presumptive ceiling is 18 months for cases tried
                     in the provincial court, and 30 months for cases
                     in the superior court (or cases tried in the
                     provincial court after a preliminary inquiry).
                     Delay attributable to or waived by the defence
                     does not count towards the presumptive ceiling.
                     Once the presumptive ceiling is exceeded, the
                     burden is on the Crown to rebut
                     the presumption of unreasonableness on the basis
                     of exceptional circumstances. If the Crown
                     cannot do so, a stay will follow. Exceptional
                     circumstances lie outside the Crown’s control in
                     that (1) they are reasonably unforeseen or
                     reasonably unavoidable, and (2) they cannot
                     reasonably be remedied.
It is obviously impossible to identify in advance
                     all circumstances that may qualify as exceptional
                     for the purposes of adjudicating a
s. 11(b)
application. Ultimately, the determination of
                     whether circumstances are exceptional will
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                             Page 38 of 46
depend on the trial judge’s good sense and
                       experience. The list is not closed. However, in
                       general, exceptional circumstances fall under two
                       categories: discrete events and particularly
                       complex cases.
If the exceptional circumstance relates to a
                       discrete event (such as an illness or unexpected
                       event at trial), the delay reasonably attributable to
                       that event is subtracted from the total delay. If the
                       exceptional circumstance arises from the case’s
                       complexity, the delay is reasonable and no further
                       analysis is required.
An exceptional circumstance is the only basis
                       upon which the Crown can discharge its burden
                       to justify a delay that exceeds the ceiling. The
                       seriousness or gravity of the offence cannot be
                       relied on, nor can chronic institutional delay.
                       Most significantly, the absence of prejudice can
                       in no circumstances be used to justify delays after
                       the presumptive ceiling is breached. Once so
                       much time has elapsed, only circumstances that
                       are genuinely outside the Crown’s control and
                       ability to remedy may furnish a sufficient excuse
                       for the prolonged delay.”
s




         16.3 The next example we take is from the Republic of
         South Africa23.
Article 35
of its Constitution is titled
         “Arrested, detained and accused persons”.
Article 35(1)
enshrines, among other things, what are famously known
         as the Miranda Rights after the decision of the US
         Supreme Court in Miranda v. Arizona24. Thereafter,
Article 35(2)
provides for prisoners’ rights and relevant
23
The Constitution OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996-
https://www.justice.gov.za/constitution/SAConstitution-web-eng.pdf
24
384 U.S. 436 (1966)
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                                 Page 39 of 46
for the present discussion,
Article 35(3)
provides for ‘fair
           trial’. Therein, it is stipulated as hereunder:
“(d) to have their trial begin and conclude without
              unreasonable delay”
              16.3.1 In Ptrue Bothma v. Petrus Arnoldus Els25 the
              constitutional court held as under:
“ [32] Major pre-trial abuses by the state are
                       now firmly prohibited by the Constitution.
                       It is no accident that
section 35
of the
                       Constitution, which deals with arrested,
                       detained and accused persons, is by far the
                       longest section in the Bill of Rights. It sets out
                       precise protections against treating people in
                       arbitrary ways after they have been placed
                       under arrest. One that becomes operative as
                       soon as someone becomes an accused person
                       is the right to have the trial begin and conclude
                       without unreasonable delay.
[33] Although
section 35(3)
does not deal
                       expressly with pre-trial delay, it must be
                       construed and understood in the light of the
                       value accorded to human dignity and freedom
                       in our Constitution.22 Freedom is protected by
section 12
of the Constitution.”
17.       The inescapable conclusion arrived at from the above
discussion in the Indian context, is that there has been an
evolution in legislative wisdom over the years and the criminal
procedure have moved from a period of no timelines and
minimal judicial interventions/oversight to progressively more
oversight and recognition of the need to conclude investigations
25
[2009] ZACC 27
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                               Page 40 of 46
in time. It may be true that no strict timelines are provided in the
CrPC
, but it is equally so that investigations are to be completed
in reasonable time.
18.    The discussion regarding other countries also leads us to
a similar conclusion. The Supreme Court of Canada has
although given timelines, it has also recognised that the
possibility of extension of the said timeline is open. The four-
prong test as in Baker, the Askov - Morin framework that we
have discussed above, has a subjective element, which keeping
in view the realities of the Indian judicial system, is the only
option that can be practically applied. Strict timelines, if laid
down would be in ignorance of ground realities.
19.    Coming back to the present case, why the investigation in
this case took more than a decade to be completed is lost on us.
Apparently, it was found that the licenses issued by the appellant
were also issued to a fictitious person even at the time when the
order for further investigation was taken. Out of the 16 accused
persons one person stood charge-sheeted in terms of the first
chargesheet and the remaining, excluding the appellant and one
Abhishek, were charge-sheeted by way of the second
chargesheet. When only the actions of the appellant were subject
matter of investigation by the time permission was taken as
above - 11 years is quite obviously a timeline afflicted by delay.
No reason is forthcoming for this extended period either in the
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                     Page 41 of 46
chargesheet or at the instance of the Court having taken
cognizance of such chargesheet. In other words, the appellant
has had the cloud of a criminal investigation hanging over him
for all these years.
The judgments above referred to supra hold
unequivocally that investigation is covered under the right to
speedy trial and it is also held therein, that violation of this right
can strike at the root of the investigation itself, leading it to be
quashed. At the same time, it must be said that timelines cannot
be set in stone for an investigation to be completed nor can outer
limit be prescribed within which necessarily, an investigation
must be drawn to a close. This is evidenced by the fact that
further investigation or rather permission therefor, can be
granted even after commencement of trial. [See:
Rampal
Gautam v The State26] Where
though,
Article 21
would be
impacted would be a situation where, like in the present matter,
no reason justifiable in nature, can be understood from record
for the investigation having taken a large amount of time. The
accused cannot be made to suffer endlessly with this threat of
continuing investigation and eventual trial proceedings bearing
over their everyday existence.
26
Criminal Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) 7968 of 2016
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                       Page 42 of 46
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
20.        On this count, prosecution against the appellant is liable
to be quashed. The conclusion is that even though, in the one
case that has been consistently highlighted by the State, it cannot
be said that the appellant acted within the scope of authority as
given by
Section 13(2A)
of the Arms Act, but given that the
administrative authorities have already discharged him, that
issue need not be taken further. On the issue of sanction being
improper and large delay in filing of chargesheet as also
consequent action, we have decided in favour of the appellant.
The appeal is accordingly allowed.
21.        Before parting with this matter, we deem it fit to issue the
following directions:
(i)     In view of
Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali27
, it can be
           seen that the ‘leave of the court’ to file a supplementary
           chargesheet, is a part of
Section 173(8)
CrPC. That being
           the position, in our considered view, the Court is not
           rendered functus officio having granted such permission.
Since the further investigation is being made with the
           leave of the Court, judicial stewardship/control thereof,
           is a function which the court must perform.
27
(2013) 5 SCC 762- See para 49
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                         Page 43 of 46
(ii)    Reasons       are       indispensable   to   the   proper
       functioning of the machinery of criminal law. They form
       the bedrock of fairness, transparency, and accountability
       in the justice system. If the Court finds or the accused
       alleges (obviously with proof and reason to substantiate
       the allegation) that there is a large gap between the first
       information report and the culminating chargesheet, it
       is bound to seek an explanation from the investigating
       agency and satisfy itself to the propriety of the
       explanation so furnished.
The direction above does not come based on this case
       alone. This Court has noticed on many unfortunate
       occasions that there is massive delay in filing
       chargesheet/taking cognizance etc. This Court has time
       and again, in its pronouncements underscored the
       necessity of speedy investigation and trial as being
       important for the accused, victim and the society.
       However, for a variety of reasons there is still a lag in the
       translation of this recognition into a reality.
(iii) While it is well acknowledged and recognised that
       the process of investigation has many moving parts and is
       therefore impractical to have strict timelines in place, at
       the same time, the discussion made in the earlier part of
       this judgement, clearly establishes that investigations
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                          Page 44 of 46
cannot continue endlessly. The accused is not out of place
       to expect, after a certain point in time, certainty- about the
       charges against him, giving him ample time to preparing
       plead his defence.         If investigation into a particular
       offence has continued for a period that appears to be
       unduly long, that too without adequate justification,
       such as in this case, the accused or the complainant
       both, shall be at liberty to approach the High Court
       under Section 528 BNSS/482
CrPC
, seeking an update
       on the investigation or, if the doors of the High Court
       have been knocked by the accused, quashing. It is
       clarified that delay in completion of investigation will
       only function as one of the grounds, and the Court, if in
       its wisdom, decides to entertain this application, other
       grounds will also have to be considered.
(iv)      Reasons are not only important in the judicial
       sphere, but they are equally essential in administrative
       matters particularly in matters such as sanction for they
       open the gateway to greater consequences. Application of
       mind by the authorities granting or denying sanction must
       be easily visible including consideration of the evidence
       placed before it in arriving at the conclusion.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                      Page 45 of 46
Pending application(s) if any, shall stand(s) disposed of.
………………………………………….…J.
                                 (SANJAY KAROL)



                     ………..…………………………………….J.
                     (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)



New Delhi;
November 20, 2025.
Crl.Appeal @SLP(Crl)No.10130 of 2025                    Page 46 of 46