[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Talli Gram Panchayat vs Union Of India on 19 November, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1331                                                             REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 731 OF 2023


             TALLI GRAM PANCHAYAT                                     ...APPELLANT(S)


                                                          VERSUS


             UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                  …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                         JUDGMENT
1.             The date on which environment clearance (EC) granted to the

             project proponent is “communicated” to “any person aggrieved” is relevant

             for calculating the period of limitation for filing an appeal under
Section

             16(h)
of the Green Tribunal Act, 2010. 1 Considering the fact that such

             communication is the obligation of plurality of duty bearers and to “any

             person”, we have interpreted
Section 16(h)
of the Act to hold that limitation

             will commence from the earliest of the date on which the communication

             is carried out by any of the duty bearers. Having considered the legal and

             factual submissions of the appellant, we have come to the conclusion that
Signature Not Verified
the appeal filed by the appellant is beyond the mandatory period of
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.11.19
16:25:30 IST
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’.
1
limitation. We have thus affirmed the judgment of the Tribunal and

dismissed the appeal.
Facts:
2.   The respondent being the project proponent, applied and obtained

an EC for limestone mining covering an extent of 193.3269 hectares at

Talli and Bambor villages in Gujarat from the Ministry of Environment,

Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) on 05.01.2017. The appellant,

the Gram Panchayat of village Talli, sought to challenge this EC before

the National Green Tribunal by filing an appeal under
Section 16(h)
of the

Act. However, as there was delay, the appeal was accompanied by a

Miscellaneous Application (M.A.) for condonation of delay in filing the

appeal. It was contended therein that the grant of EC was known to them

only through the reply dated 14.02.2017 received under the
Right to

Information Act
. It was therefore contended that limitation must

commence either from 14.02.2017 or from the last of the communications

received from the authorities who had the duty to intimate the appellant.
3.   By its order dated 29.01.2018, the Tribunal dismissed the appeal for

default and even the subsequent application for restoration was also

dismissed on 16.07.2021. Challenging these orders, the appellant filed a

civil appeal before this Court, primarily contending that such orders could

not have been passed by a single member of the Tribunal. Accepting the
2
submission, this Court by its order dated 11.07.2022 allowed the appeals

and remanded the matter back to the Tribunal for consideration and

disposal on merits. While remanding, this Court directed the Tribunal to

consider all questions, including the issue relating to limitation. After

restoration of the appeal, the Tribunal heard the appeal and the

accompanying application for condonation of delay and proceeded to

dismiss the application on the ground that the appeal was filed after the

maximum condonable period of 90 days as such barred by limitation.

Thus, the present Civil Appeal under
Section 22
of the Act.
4.   We heard Mr. Sanjay Parikh, senior counsel, assisted by Mr.

Abhimanue Shrestha, advocate for the appellant and Mr. Pinaki Mishra,

senior counsel, for the respondents.
Analysis:
5.
Section 16
of the Act, to the extent that it is relevant for our purpose

is extracted herein below for ready reference;
“Sec. 16. Tribunal to have appellate jurisdiction - Any person
      aggrieved by,-
(a)…
(b)….
(h) an order made, on or after the commencement of the
National
      Green Tribunal Act, 2010
, granting environmental clearance in the
      area in which any industries, operations or processes or class of
      industries, operations and processes shall not be carried out or shall
      be carried out subject to certain safeguards under the
Environment
      (Protection) Act, 1986
(29 of 1986).
…
3
may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the order or
            decision or direction or determination is communicated to him, prefer
            an appeal to the Tribunal:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
            prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said
            period, allow it to be filed under this section within a further period not
            exceeding sixty days.”
6.
Section 16(h)
provides that “any person aggrieved… may’ within a

period of 30 days from the date of the ‘communication’ of the order

granting EC prefer an appeal to the Tribunal. The proviso enables the

Tribunal to allow a further period, not exceeding 60 days, if in the opinion

of the Tribunal, the appellant is prevented by sufficient cause. In the

normal course, a communication is completed when the order impugned

is served on an applicant/suitor personally, through mail or publication, as

the case may be. However, in the context of
Section 16(h)
, two distinct

features must be borne in mind for a proper understanding of the

expression            ‘communicated’             to    him.      Firstly,     the    communication

contemplated under
Section 16(h)
is to sub-serve a public purpose of

enforcing any legal right relating to environment 2’. Environmental issues

are not always adversarial, rather they operate as public law concerns.

The expression “any person aggrieved” in
Section 16(h)
, read with
Sections 2(c)
, (g), (j) and (m) of the Act must therefore receive a liberal

construction as ‘communication’ contemplated herein
Section 16(h)
is

intended to be in rem and not in personam. There is therefore an
2
This is evident from the preamble and other substantive provisions of the Act.
4
obligation on a duty bearer to ensure that appealable decisions are

properly declared and easily accessible. Secondly, the said obligation to

“communicate” the order vests in plurality of duty holders being the, (i)

MoEF&CC, (ii) project proponent, and (iii) the Pollution Control Board(s).

Keeping in mind the features, we will now interpret
Section 16(h)
to

determine the date by which multiple authorities or persons, the duty

bearers, will communicate the orders to any person aggrieved.
7.   When we say multiple authorities or plurality of duty bearers have

the obligation to communicate, it is because of the legal regime under the
Environment Protection Act, 1986
, read with enforceable subordinate

legislation made thereunder. In exercise of powers under
Section 3(2)
of

the Environment Protection Act, read with Rule 5 of the Environment

Protection Rules, the MoEF&CC issued the Environment Impact

Assessment Notification 2006, (EIA Notification, 2006). Paragraph 10 of

the said notification places certain obligations on MoEF&CC or the SEIAA

and the project proponent, the same is reproduced below for ready

reference;
"10. Post Environmental Clearance Monitoring-
(i) (a) In respect of Category 'A' projects, it shall be mandatory for the
      Project Proponent to make public the environmental clearance
      granted for their project along with the environmental conditions and
      safeguards at their cost by prominently advertising it at least in two
      local newspapers of the district or State where the project is located
      and in addition, this shall also be displayed in the Project Proponent's
      website permanently.
5
(b) In respect of Category 'B' projects, irrespective of its clearance by
       MoEF/SEIAA, the Project Proponent shall prominently advertise in
       the newspapers indicating that the project has been accorded
       Environment Clearance and the details of MoEF website where it is
       displayed.
(c) The Ministry of Environment and Forest and the State/Union
       Territory level Environmental Impact Assessment Authorities
       (SEIAAs), as the case may be shall also place the environmental
       clearance in the public domain on Government portal.
(d) The copies of the environmental clearance shall be submitted by
       the Project Proponents to the Heads of local bodies, Panchayats, and
       Municipal Bodies in addition to the relevant offices of the Government
       who in turn has to display the same for 30 days from the date of
       receipt.”
8.   The EC granted by MoEF&CC or, as the case may be, the SEIAA

invariably requires the Centre or the State Pollution Control Boards, being

the statutory regulators, to ensure compliance of the conditions imposed

on the project proponent as a pre-condition for grant of EC. Thus, the

cumulative mandate flowing out of the
Environment Protection Act
and the

Rules and Regulations made thereunder, including the EIA Notification

2006, require the MoEF&CC, the project proponent and the Pollution

Control Boards to communicate, to make public, advertise, place in public

domain either through the Governmental Portal or to display in their office

the information about the grant of EC.
9.   In view of the concurrent obligations of MoEF&CC the project

proponent and the Pollution Control Boards to communicate grant of the

EC, the question that arises for consideration, is to identify the day when

the ‘communication’ of the EC is complete on the ‘person aggrieved’ for

commencement of period of limitation for filing appeal under
Section 16(h)
6
of the Act. When the duty to communicate is the obligation of more than

one authority or individual, it is natural or inevitable that the dates by which

they comply with their respective obligations do not synchronise. The

dates by which MoEF&CC could upload its decision on its website, project

proponent advertise the EC in the two local newspapers and the dates by

which Pollution Control Board would display the EC on its notice board

may not be the same.
10.    When obligation to communicate the decision vests in multiple

authorities, it is appropriate to infer that the communication is complete

when the ‘person aggrieved’ receives information from the earliest of the

communication. Following the principle of first accrual, which postulates

that when a suit is based on multiple causes of action, the period of

limitation will begin to run from the date when the right to suit first accrues.
In
Khatri Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
3, this Court held; “…if a suit is

based on multiple causes of action, the period of limitation will begin to

run from the date when the right to sue first accrues.
To put it differently,

successive violation of the right will not give rise to fresh cause and the

suit will be liable to be dismissed if it is beyond the period of limitation

counted from the day when the right to sue first accrued.”




3 (2011) 9 SCC126 also followed in
Rajeev Gupta v. Prashant Garg
(2025 SCC OnLine SC 889).
7
11.     It is of course a condition precedent that the communication must

be clear and complete and if this condition is satisfied, it is logical to

conclude that the person aggrieved cannot pick and choose later

communications from other duty bearers for reckoning the period of

limitation. It is the first accrual that would trigger the period of limitation

prescribed under
Section 16(h)
of the Act.
12.
In
Save Mon Region Federation & Anr. vs. Union of India4
, decided

way back in 2013, the Tribunal recounted the concurrent obligations of

MoEF&CC, the project proponent and others to communicate the grant of

EC to any person aggrieved and hold that where different stake holders

are to communicate the order, the earliest date on which the

communication is carried out, shall be the date for reckoning limitation;
“10. The date on which the order of Environmental Clearance is
            communicated to the public at large, shall be the date from which
            the period of limitation shall reckon, as contemplated under
Section
            16
of the Act. Communicating the order, in other words, shall mean
            putting the order in the public domain in its complete form and as
            per the mode required under the provision of the
NGT Act
of the
            Regulation 2006. The limitation shall start running and shall be
            computed as referred to in Para 19 of the judgment. Where different
            acts by different stakeholders are complied with at different dates,
            the earliest date on which complete communication is carried out,
            shall be the date for reckoning of limitation.”




4 2013(1) All India NGT Reporter 1.
8
13.    This decision is again reiterated in the subsequent decision of
Medha Patkar & Ors. v. Ministry of Environment & Forests, UOI and Ors.5
“12. From the above dictum, it is clear that a communication would
           mean putting it in public domain and completing the acts as are
           contemplated in the EIA Notification of 2006, read with conditions
           of the EC and the provisions of the Act. In terms of the scheme of
           the notification and law, there are three stakeholders in the process
           of grant of environmental clearance:
(a) Project Proponent
(b) Ministry of Environment and Forests and
(c) Other agencies which are required to fulfil their obligations to
           make the communication complete in terms of the provisions of the
           Act and the notification concerned.
…
15. …Complete performance of its obligations imposed on it by the
           order of environmental clearance would constitute a communication
           to an aggrieved person under the Act. In other words, if one set of
           the above events is completed by any of the stakeholders, the
           limitation period shall trigger. If they happen on different times and
           after interval, the one earliest in point of time shall reckon the period
           of limitation. Communication shall be complete in law upon
           fulfilment of complete set of obligations by any of the stakeholders.
           Once the period of limitation is prescribed under the provisions of
           the Act, then it has to be enforced with all its rigour. Commencement
           of limitation and its reckoning cannot be frustrated by
           communication to any one of the stakeholders. Such an approach
           would be opposed to the basic principle of limitation.
16. The Tribunal must adopt a pragmatic and practical approach
           that would also be in consonance with the provisions of the Act
           providing limitation. Firstly, the limitation would never begin to run
           and no act would determine when such limitation would stop
           running as any one of the stakeholders may not satisfy or comply
           with all its obligations prescribed under the Act. To conclude that it
           is only when all the stakeholders had completed in entirety their
           respective obligations under the respective provisions, read with the
           notification of 2006, then alone the period of limitation shall begin to
           run, would be an interpretation which will frustrate the very object of
           the Act and would also cause serious prejudice to all concerned.
           Firstly, this completely frustrates the purpose of prescription of
           limitation. Secondly, a project proponent who has obtained
           environmental clearance and thereafter spent crores of rupees on
           establishment and operation of the project, would be exposed to
           uncertainty, danger of unnecessary litigation and even the
           possibility of jeopardizing the interest of his project after years have

5 2013 SCC Online NGT 63.
9
lapsed. This cannot be the intent of law. The framers of law have
         enacted the provisions of limitation with a clear intention of
         specifying the period within which an aggrieved person can invoke
         the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. It is a settled rule of law that once
         the law provides for limitation, then it must operate meaningfully and
         with its rigour. Equally true is that once the period of limitation starts
         running, then it does not stop...”
14.   In view of the interpretation that we have given in
Section 16(h)
,

coupled with the consistent rulings of the Tribunal, we are of the opinion

that the period of limitation will commence from the earliest of the date on

which the communication is carried out by any of the duty bearers.

Application of the law to the facts of the present case:
15.   We will now examine the law as declared hereinabove to the facts

of the present case to ascertain the compliance of these statutory

requirements by the MoEF&CC (Respondent No.1), the Project

Proponent (Respondent No.4), and the State Pollution Control Board

(SPCB). This examination is necessary to determine the specific date

from which the period of limitation commenced. The status of compliance

with respect to the communication of the EC is summarized in the table

below, as also reproduced in the order impugned before us.

  SN Entity         Responsibility              Compliance                  Remarks
  A. MOEFCC
     As per EIA     Place              the      EC letter signed on 5       Fully
     Notification   environmental               Jan 2017, scanned on 5      Complied
     2006           clearance in the public     Jan 2017 at 6:56:21         on    5-1-
Clause 10      domain              on      pm, and NIC confirmed       2017
                    Government portal           that the same was
                                                uploaded on 5 Jan
                                                2017 at xxx
10
As    per      MoEF shall put the          EC letter is available till   Fully
     NGT Order      complete order of           date                   at     Complied
     in   Save      Environmental               http://environmentcle         on    5-1-
Mon
Case       Clearance      on     its   arance.nic.in/onlinese        2017
                    website and the same        archnewrk.aspx?autoi
                    can be downloaded           d=5017&proposal_no=I
                    without any hindrance       A/GJ/MIN/34113/20
                    or impediments within       15&typep=EC
                    seven days of such
                    order, which would
                    remain uploaded for at
                    least 90 days.
                    MoEF shall put it on its    No proof submitted that Not
                    notice board of the         EC was put on notice Complied.
                    Principal as well as the    board.
                    Regional Office for a
                    period of at least 30
                    days. It should be
                    accessible     to    the
                    public at large without
                    impediments
B.   Project
     Proponent
     As per EIATo make public the               Advertisement            Not
     Notification
               environmental                    intimating receipt of EC Complied.
     2006      clearance granted for            letter published but the
     Clause 10 their project along with         advertisements does
               the       environmental          not              include
               conditions           and         environmental
               safeguards at their              conditions           and
               cost by prominently              safeguards.
               advertising it at least in
               two local newspapers
               of the district
               Display in the project           No proof submitted that       Not
               proponent’s website              EC was put on                 Complied.
               permanently                      website.
               Submit to the Heads              Complied and proof            Fully
               of local bodies,                 submitted of receipt of       complied
               Panchayats and                   the same on 9 Jan             on
               Municipal Bodies in              2017.                         11.1.2017
               addition to the
               relevant offices of the
               Government
     As    per Project       Proponent          No proof submitted that Not
     NGT Order uploads               the        EC was put on website. Complied.
in
Save Environmental
     Mon
Case Clearance order with
               its       environmental
               conditions upon its
11
website as well as
               publishes the same in
               the newspapers
               Project        Proponent       Advertisement              Not
               publishes                      intimating receipt of EC   Complied.
               Environmental                  letter published but the
               Clearance order with           advertisements does
               its       environmental        not              include
               conditions           and       environmental
               safeguards        in   2       conditions           and
               newspapers.                    safeguards.
               The project proponent          Complied and proof         Fully
               also has to submit a           submitted                  complied
               copy of the EC to the                                     on
               heads of the local                                        11.1.2017
               authorities,
               panchayats and local
               bodies of the district
     As per EC A copy of clearance            Complied and proof         Fully
     Letter    letter will be marked to       submitted of receipt of    complied
               concerned Panchayat            the same on 9 Jan          on
                                              2017.                      11.1.2017
                 The project authorities      Advertised      in     2   Fully
                 should advertise at          newspapers on 11 Jan       Complied
                 least in two local           2017 that the project      on
                 newspapers        widely     has been accorded          9.1.2017
                 circulated,    one      of   environmental
                 which shall be in the        clearance and a copy of
                 vernacular language of       the clearance letter is
                 the locality concerned,      available with the State
                 within 7 days of the         Pollution Control Board
                 issue of the clearance       and also at web site of
                 letter informing that the    the      Ministry     of
                 project     has    been      Environment,      Forest
                 accorded                     and Climate Change at
                 environmental                www.environmentclear
                 clearance and a copy         ance.nic.in.
                 of the clearance letter
                 is available with the
                 State Pollution Control
                 Board and also at web
                 site of the Ministry of
                 Environment, Forest
                 and Climate Change at
                 www.environmentclear
                 ance.nic.in and a copy
                 of the same should be
                 forwarded      to     the
                 Regional Office.
C.   SPCB
12
As per EIA     Nil
        Notification
2006
Clause 10
        As       per Government agencies         No proof submitted by Not
        NGT Order    are      expected      to   SPCB.
Complied
        in     Save  display the order of
Mon
Case     environmental
                     clearance for a period
                     of 30 days on its
                     website or publish on
                     notice board, as the
                     case may be.
        As per EC State Pollution Control        No proof submitted by Not
        Letter       Board should display a      SPCB.                 Complied
                     copy of the clearance
                     letter at the Regional
                     office, District Industry
                     Centre and Collector's
                     office/       Tehsildar's
                     Office for 30 days
  D.    Village
        Panchayat
        As per EIA Display the EC for 30         No proof submitted by Not
        Notification days from the date of       SPCB.                 Complied
        2006         receipt.
        Clause 10
        As       per Local     bodies     are    No proof submitted by Not
        NGT Order expected to display the        SPCB.
Complied
        in     Save order of environmental
Mon
Case clearance for a period
                     of 30 days on its
                     website or publish on
                     notice board, as the
                     case may be.
16.    It is evident from the table extracted hereinabove that the EC

granted on 05.01.2017 was uploaded on the website of the MoEF&CC on

the very same day. It is also clear that the Project Proponent has taken

steps for compliance, such as submitting the EC to the concerned

Panchayats, which was acknowledged on 09.01.2017. Further, by also
13
advertising the grant of the EC in two local newspapers on 11.01.2017 the

duty to communicate is completed.
17.   NGT returned a definitive factual finding that the EC dated

05.01.2017 was uploaded on the MoEF&CC website on 05.01.2017 and

found that there is "enough proof thereof on record". This finding implies

that the EC was placed in public domain and was accessible and

downloadable. The NGT specifically rejected the appellant's contention

that they came to know about the EC only through an RTI application on

14.02.2017, terming it a "pretext to bring the said appeal within the period

of limitation".
18.   Given the NGT's finding that the EC was uploaded and made

publicly accessible on 05.01.2017, 30 days limitation period will

commence from that date. If so, the maximum period of 90 days expired

by the time the appellant filed its appeal on 19.04.2017. There is no error

in the conclusion drawn by the Tribunal, it has rightly dismissed the appeal

on the ground of limitation.
19.   It is also argued by the appellant that the project proponent has

failed to publish the entirety of the EC in the two newspapers as mandated

by Clause 10 of the EIA Notification. This argument is based on the

premise that if there is a failure to publish the entirety of the EC in the

newspapers, the project proponent would have failed in its duty 'to
14
communicate'. In our opinion, interpreting Clause 10 of the EIA

Notification in this manner would be pedantic, rather than subserving the

purpose and object of the statutory requirement of communicating and

publishing the grant of EC.
20.       It will be sufficient compliance, if the project proponent publishes the

grant of the EC, and indicates therein the substance of the conditions and

safeguards. While it is the project proponent’s responsibility to publish

grant of EC in its favour, it is no part of the legal requirement that the

entirety of the environmental clearance is published in the newspaper.
In
Save Mon
(Supra), the Tribunal held that the project proponent must

publish the “factum” of EC along with the conditions at its own expense.
A detailed discussion of this issue is also found in a subsequent decision

in V. Sundar Proprietor Chemicals, India v. Union of India & Ors. 6, which

is relevant for this context. We are in agreement with the principle that;
“34. … In the instant case, the respondents have placed 2 publications
          made one in English and another in Tamil as early as in 5/2015 which
          clearly indicate that it was publicly notified through the said publications
          that the project in question has been granted the EC. It was also further
          stated in the publications that the EC is available with the TNPCB and
          can also be seen in the website of SEIAA, Tamil Nadu in the link at
          http://www.seiaa.tn.gov.in. Thus there were clear notices to the public
          at large to the effect that the EC was granted to the project in question
          and complete and comprehensive information was available on the
          website of the TNPCB. The comments made by the counsel that the
          advertisement made in both the newspapers did not even contain the
          particulars and conditions attached to the EC in question cannot be
          countenanced. The size of the advertisement is immaterial but what it
          conveys is material. The judgment of the Principal Bench of NGT made
          in
Save Mon Region Federation and Lobsang Choedar v. Union
of
6
2015 SCC Online NGT 145.
15
India, Manu/GT/0029/2013 lends full support to the case of respondents
      that if done as above then it has to be taken as a complete
      communication. The period of limitation has to be reckoned from
      05.09.2014, i.e., date of publications made as contended by the learned
      counsel for the 10th and 11th respondents.”
21.   In the order impugned before us, the Tribunal has considered all

the arguments in detail and has come to the correct conclusion that there

is complete and effective communication of the order granting

environmental clearance.
22.   For the reasons stated above, Civil Appeal No. 731 of 2023 against

the judgment and order dated 03.01.2023 passed by the National Green

Tribunal, Western Zone Bench, Pune in MA No. 262 of 2017 (WZ) in

Appeal No. 36 of 2017(WZ) is hereby dismissed.
23.   Parties shall bear their own costs.
………………………………....J.
                                    [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]



                                              ………………………………....J.
                                                [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]


NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 19, 2025
16