[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ravi Prakash Srivastava vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 November, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1291




                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             EXTRA ORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017



                            RAVI PRAKASH
                            SRIVASTAVA & ORS.                ….PETITIONER(S)


                                                 VERSUS

                            STATE OF UTTAR
                            PRADESH & ORS.                 ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   WITH



                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 15548 OF 2017




                                                   ORDER
Mehta, J.
1.   Heard.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.11.07
16:19:39 IST
Reason:
1
2.     The present special leave petitions1 have been

preferred against the impugned judgment and final

order dated 17th May, 2016 passed by the High Court

of Judicature at Allahabad2 in Writ-C No. 22576 of

2016. Vide the said order, the High Court disposed of

the writ petition without granting any substantive

relief as sought for by the petitioners. However, the

petitioners were given liberty to approach the

Housing Commissioner in respect of the affairs of the

Housing Society and to file a civil suit in respect of

the loan availed by the petitioners to finance the

purchase of the flats.
3.     Succinctly stated, facts of the case are that the

petitioners claim to be the allottees in a Group

Housing Project undertaken by Golf Course Sahkari



1 Petitioners in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 9792 of 2017 were also

the petitioners in Writ-C No. 22576 of 2016 filed before the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad whereas Petitioners in Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 15548 of 2017 were not party to the above-stated writ petition.
2 Hereinafter, being referred to as the “High Court”.
2
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
Awas Samiti3 (previously, JP Greens Employees

Sahkari Awas Samiti), which was formed in 2004 and

registered as a housing co-operative society under
Section 7
of Uttar Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act,

1965. The Samiti filed an application with Greater

Noida Industrial Development Authority4 seeking

allotment of land. GNIDA vide letter dated 9th

September, 2004 allotted Plot No. 7, Sector PI-2,

Greater       Noida,       Gautam         Buddha         Nagar,   Uttar

Pradesh, 201308 admeasuring 10,000 sq. meters @

Rs. 2975/- per sq. meter in favour of the Samiti, for

flat-based development, stipulating payment of 30%

of the lease amount within 60 days and the balance

70% in eight half-yearly instalments.
4.     Pursuant thereto, GNIDA executed a lease deed

dated 29th March, 2005 in favour of the Samiti which



3 Hereinafter, being referred to as the “Samiti” or “Society”.
4 For short “GNIDA”.
3
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
in turn, submitted a layout plan which was approved

by GNIDA in 2005 itself. The approved plan of the

Housing Society envisaged four towers (Ground+10

floors) with two towers (1st and 4th) having 4 flats on

each floor and other two towers (2nd and 3rd) having 3

flats on each floor. In total, the Housing Society was

to comprise approximately 140 (±5%) flats along with

2 shops.
5.     Thereafter, the construction of the project was

purportedly entrusted to M/s Shiv Kala Developers

Pvt. Ltd., of which Mr. Mahim Mittal (respondent No.
20) is the Director. Advertisements were issued in the

newspapers           and       brochures          were       circulated,

projecting the development of a luxury residential

complex under the name of “Shiv Kala Charms”5 on

the aforesaid plot. The petitioners herein applied for

the allotment of flats in the said project. It is stated


5 Hereinafter, being referred to as the “Housing Project”.
4
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
that     although         cheques          were        collected    from

prospective allottees in the name of the Samiti, the

corresponding receipts were issued in the name of

either M/s Shiv Kala Developers Pvt. Ltd. or M/s

Advantage Engineers and Developers Pvt. Ltd6.
6.     The Housing Project was pre-approved for

housing loan by various banks. Influenced thereby,

the    petitioners        availed      housing         loan   facilities,

pursuant to which, tri-partite agreements were

executed           between           the         petitioners,        the

Samiti/developer, and the respective banks. Under

the said agreements, the sanctioned loan amount

was directly disbursed to the Samiti.
7.     It is stated that after 14th October, 2007, no

payment in respect of lease amount was received by

GNIDA. Consequently, GNIDA issued a letter in July,

2010,      calling      upon        the     Samiti       to   pay    Rs.


6 Hereinafter, being referred to as the “Developer”.
5
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
3,14,42,238/- (Rupees Three Crore Fourteen Lakh

Forty Two Thousand Two Hundred and Thirty Eight

only) by 31st July, 2010. Since the Samiti failed to

comply, GNIDA issued a final show cause notice

dated 21st February, 2011, requiring the Samiti to

explain why the lease deed should not be cancelled.

Ultimately, vide order dated 9th September, 2011,

GNIDA cancelled the lease deed executed in favour of

the Samiti.
8.     Several      complaints         were     lodged      by   the

homebuyers with the authorities alleging large-scale

siphoning and diversion of funds by the office bearers

of the Samiti in collusion with the developer. Taking

cognizance        of    the     said      complaints,       District

Magistrate, Gautam Buddha Nagar vide order dated

2nd    December,         2011       constituted        an   inquiry

committee to examine the affairs of the Samiti. The

committee submitted its report on 5th March, 2012
6
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
highlighting grave irregularities in the affairs of the

Samiti and recording, inter alia, the following

findings: -
• The construction of the Housing Society is not

     complete and at present, the entire work has

     been stopped due to cancellation of lease deed.
• The lease deed was cancelled owing to the failure

     of Mr. SU Jafar7 and Mr. Mahim Mittal8 to make

     the requisite payment to GNIDA.
• It is clear that the funds received by the Samiti

     from         the        homebuyers                have       been

     misappropriated.
• The office bearers of the Samiti have failed to

     furnish the information sought by the Committee

     regarding the list of allottees and the amounts

     deposited       by    each      of   them      towards       their
7 Respondent No. 22- Secretary of the Samiti
8 Respondent No. 20- Director of M/s Shiv Kala Developers Pvt. Ltd.
7
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     respective flats, thereby deliberately withholding

     material information.
• The Samiti was being run in an arbitrary manner

     and in contravention of the provisions of the
UP

     Cooperative        Societies       Act,    1965
;   the   UP

     Cooperative Societies Rules, 1968; and bye-laws

     framed thereunder.
• It was found that the same flat has been allotted

     multiple times to more than one allottee/s and in

     many cases, multiple loans have been availed in

     respect of the same flat.
• It has also been found that Mr. SU Jafar and Mr.

     Mahim Mittal have allotted fictitious flats which

     have never existed to certain allottees, and loans

     have also been sanctioned in respect of the said

     flats.
8
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
9.     Based on the aforesaid conclusions/findings,

the          committee           made           the     following

recommendations:-
1. That a letter shall be forwarded to Governor,

      Reserve Bank of India for initiating an inquiry

      into    the      involvement         of     banks/financial

      institutions in the fraud committed by the office

      bearers of the Samiti.
2. That an enquiry be conducted by the Housing

      Commissioner, UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad in

      respect of the Housing Project.
3. That legal action/proceedings shall be initiated

      against all those persons who were involved in

      the fraudulent housing scheme.
10. The homebuyers filed a criminal complaint

against the office bearers of the Shiv Kala Group and

the Samiti before the Economic Offences Wing, Delhi.

The said complaint led to the registration of FIR No.
9
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
62 of 2012 against SU Jafar, Mahim Mittal and 8

other     co-accused          persons.     After       investigation,

chargesheet came to be filed by the Economic

Offences Wing, Delhi for offences punishable under
Sections 409
,
420
,
467
,
468
,
472
and
120B
of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860.
11. On 27th December 2013, UP Awas Evam Vikas

Parishad appointed an administrator to look into the

affairs     of     the        society.    Additional        Housing

Commissioner, UP Awas Evam Vikas Parishad vide

letters dated 7th April, 2014 and 27th May, 2015,

directed the Cooperative Officers (Housing) to lodge

an FIR against Mahim Mittal and other concerned

persons.
12. Petitioners claiming to be the allottees of the

Housing Project filed writ petition9 before the High

Court seeking several reliefs/directions against the
9 Writ-C No. 22576 of 2016.
10
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
Samiti,       the      developer         and       the   financial

institutions/banks. For sake of ready reference, the

reliefs sought in the writ petition are reproduced

hereinbelow:
“It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this
     Hon’ble Court may graciously be pleased to allow
     this petition and issue;
a) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Certiorari to quash the
           order dated 09.09.201l (Annexure 9 to
           the writ petition) issued by the Greater
           Noida Industrial Development Authority
           whereby the lease deed of Plot No.7,
           Sector PI-2, Greater Noida, Gautam Budh
           Nagar, U.P.- 201308 was terminated;
b) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Mandamus to the
           Authorities to take appropriate action in
           terms of letter dated 04.02.2014 and
           27.05.2015 (Annexure 16 to the writ
           petition) issued by UP Awas Evam Vikas
           Parishad against GCSAS Society office
           bearer;
c) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Mandamus to the Housing
           Commissioner of UP Awas Evam Vikas
           Parishad, Lucknow to form a committee till
           the conduction of fresh society elections;
d) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Mandamus to the Housing
           Commissioner of UP Awas Evam Vikas
           Parishad, Lucknow, to identify the genuine
           members in the GCSAS society and direct
           UP Sahkari Samiti Nirvachan Ayog to
           conduct fresh society election;
11
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
e) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Mandamus to the
           Respondent Authorities to recover the
           amount misappropriated/diverted by Mr.
           Mahim Mittal, Mr. Asit Mittal, Mr. SU
           Zaffar, Mr. Pankaj Jindal and Mr. Umesh
           Garg from the coffers of the Golf Course
           Sahkari Awas Samiti and to return the
           same to the samiti;
f) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction in
           the nature of Mandamus to the Greater
           Noida Industrial Development Authority
           to restore the lease deed dated
           29.03.2005 with respect to Plot No. 7,
           Sector PI-2, Greater Noida, Gautam Budh
           Nagar, U.P.- 201308;
g) An appropriate Writ, Order to restore the
           lease deed dated 29.03.2.005 with
           respect to Plot No. 7, Sector PI-2, Greater
           Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, U.P.- 201308;
h) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction to
           the National Housing Bank and Reserve
           Bank of India to conduct an enquiry against
           the bank/financial institution involved in
           the project GCSAS;
i) An appropriate Writ, Order or direction to
           the Respondents LICHFL, HDFC Bank,
           AXIS Bank, India Bulls HFL, DHFL,
           PNBHFL, Indian Bank, Oriental Bank of
           Commerce,       and     Syndicate      Bank
           prohibiting them to recover the loan from
           the petitioners till the possession of the
           respective flats in question is not handed
           over to the petitioners;
j) Any other writ, order or direction in the
           circumstances of the case that this Hon’ble
           Court may deem fit and proper; and
k) award the costs of the writ petition.”


                                         (Emphasis supplied)
12
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
13. The High Court, vide final order dated 17th May,

2016, disposed of the writ petition without granting

any substantive relief as sought for by the petitioners.

The High Court took note of the fact that the lease

deed has already been cancelled due to the non-

payment of lease rent and criminal proceedings have

also been initiated and chargesheet has been filed

against the office bearers of the Samiti and the

developer whereas the role played by the officers of

the bank is still under investigation. In this view of

the     matter,      the     High        Court     expressed    its

disinclination to issue any writ or pass any

substantive        directions       in     the     writ   petition.

Nevertheless, it was observed that if any adverse

report is submitted to the concerned authority, i.e.,

the Reserve Bank of India and National Housing

Bank by the Economic Offences Wing, Delhi,

appropriate action, as permissible in law, shall be
13
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
taken against the concerned individuals. The High

Court further granted liberty to the petitioners to

approach the Housing Commissioner for redressal of

the grievances concerning the affairs of the Housing

Society and to file civil suits seeking appropriate relief

in relation to repayment of the loans availed by the

petitioners for financing the purchase of the flats. For

ease of reference. operative portion of the order

passed by the High Court is reproduced hereinbelow:
“The records reflect that the petitioners have taken
     loan from the respondent banks for the purposes of
     purchase of flats offered by a Housing Cooperative
     Society.
From the records we find that the land, subject
     matter of controversy, was provided to the Housing
     Society by Greater Noida Industrial Development
     Authority (respondent no. 4) and because of non-
     payment of lease rent and other dues, the allotment
     was cancelled as early as on 09.09.2011. We further
     find that a first information report has already been
     registered against the Directors of the Housing
     Society and further that the role played by financial
     institutions is under examination of the Economic
     Offences Wing, final report whereof is still to be
     submitted. It has been stated that the Economic
     Offences Wing has submitted a charge-sheet against
     the Directors of the Housing Society while the role of
     the officers of the bank is still under consideration.
     We, in the facts of the present case, do not find any
14
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     good ground to interfere with the order dated
     09.09.2011 cancelling the lease of the land settled
     with the Housing Society specifically when there is
     hardly any deposit of lease rent and other dues by
     the Housing Society. Since a first information report
     has already been lodged against the Housing
     Society, no further direction against the office
     bearers of the Housing Society is called for at this
     stage nor is this Court required to issue any other
     mandamus in the matter of running of the said
     Housing Society. The petitioners are at liberty to
     approach the Housing Commissioner for the said
     purpose.
So far as the enquiry against the officers of the bank
     and other officers is concerned, the matter is already
     under examination of the Economic Offences Wing.
     If any adverse report is submitted to the concerned
     authority namely the Reserve Bank of India and
     National Housing Bank by the Economic Offences
     Wing, all action as permissible under law, shall be
     taken against them. We do not find any good reason
     to interfere with the repayment of the loan which has
     been availed of by the petitioners from the bank.
     However, it is always open to the petitioners to file a
     civil suit for avoiding the agreement. We hope and
     trust that the proceedings in respect of involvement
     of the officers of the banks shall be concluded at the
     earliest by the agency concerned.
With the aforesaid observations the present writ
     petition is disposed of.”
14. The aforesaid order passed by the High Court is

the subject matter of challenge in the instant batch

of special leave petitions filed at the instance of the

members of the society claiming to be the original

allottees of the flats-in-question.
15
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
15. This Court vide order dated 14th July, 2021

observed that the primary issue to be dealt with in

the present proceedings is in reference to prayer

Clause (f) of the writ petition. The said clause is

reproduced hereinbelow:
“(f) An appropriate writ, order or direction in the
     nature of mandamus to the Greater Noida
     Industrial Development Authority to restore the
     lease deed dated 29.03.2005 with respect to plot
     No. 7, Sector PI-2, Greater Noida, Gautam Budh
     Nagar, U.P.- 201308.”


                                          (Emphasis supplied)
16. During the pendency of the special leave

petitions before this Court, several intervention

applications came to be filed by individuals claiming

to be the allottees in the Housing Project. Considering

the same, this Court vide order dated 29th July, 2021

directed Registrar, Cooperative Societies to disclose

by way of an affidavit, the details of the genuine

members of the Society along with their known postal
16
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
addresses/contact numbers/email addresses and

whether the proceedings for winding up of the Society

had been taken to its logical end and stage thereof.
17. In compliance of the aforesaid order, an affidavit

dated 11th August, 2021 came to be filed by Housing

Commissioner-cum-Registrar, Cooperative Societies,

Uttar Pradesh (respondent No. 5)10. The petitioners

were granted an opportunity to file their response to

the said affidavit.11
18. On 1st September, 2021, when the case came up

for consideration, this Court, upon perusing the said

affidavit and the response filed by the petitioners,

placing on record details about the membership and

allotment of the concerned flat(s) to them, was of the

opinion that the claims of petitioners as well as the

applicants have to be verified by respondent No. 5-



10 Hereinafter, being referred to as the “respondent No. 5-Commissioner”.
11 Order dated 17th August, 2021.
17
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
Commissioner.            Hence,        respondent        No.   5-

Commissioner was directed to conduct a limited

enquiry regarding the genuineness of the documents

and     the     claims      set     up     by     the   concerned

petitioners/applicants and to place on record list of

such members whose claims were found to be

genuine. The relevant extract of the said order is

reproduced hereinbelow:
“We have perused the affidavit dated 11.08.2021
      filed by respondent No.5-Housing Commissioner-
      cum-Registrar, Cooperative Housing Society, Uttar
      Pradesh.
In     response      to    that    affidavit,     the
      petitioners/applicants      have    filed     further
affidavit placing on record details about the
      membership and allotment of the concerned
      flat(s) to the respective petitioners/applicants.
      That claim will have to be verified by the Housing
      Commissioner-cum-Registrar, in the first place
      within four weeks from today.
We permit the Housing Commissioner-cum-
      Registrar to conduct that limited enquiry about
      the genuineness of the documents and the claim
      set up by the concerned petitioners/applicants
      and if satisfied, that they were bonafide members
      of the society, list of such members can be
      produced along with affidavit before the next
      date of hearing.
The petitioners/applicants who have not furnished
      the documents are free to do so within one week
      from today. They shall submit their claim
18
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
       documents to respondent No. 5 directly within one
       week.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
19. Respondent            No.     5-Commissioner        filed    an

affidavit dated 3rd October, 2021 stating that in total

53     applications       had     been      received    from     the

concerned allottees. A chart was annexed to the said

affidavit detailing: (i) the amounts deposited by each

applicant in the account of the Samiti; (ii) the flat

number against which such deposits were made; and
(iii) the particulars of the bank/financial institutions

from which loan had been taken by the respective

applicants.         However,          respondent        No.       5-
Commissioner sought further time to place on record

a comprehensive affidavit after due verification of the

claims of the aforesaid 53 applicants, in view of the

fact     that     additional        information        had      been

requisitioned from the concerned banks/financial

institutions, which was essential for ascertaining the
19
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
genuineness of the documents/claims furnished by

the applicants.
20. This Court, vide order dated 19th May, 2022

recorded that respondent No. 5-Commissioner had

identified 42 allottees having credible documentary

evidence to indicate that they were original members

of the Housing Project and further noted that the

claim of two additional persons had also been

verified. In view of the same, respondent No. 5-

Commissioner was directed to file a revised report.

The Court further recorded that Tower-1, in respect

of which the petitioners had set up their claim, is

occupying around 3243.92 sq. meters approximately

whereas the total area of the plot was about 9731.76

sq. meters. Counsel for GNIDA submitted that a sum

of Rs. 12 Crores remained outstanding in respect of

price of the plot. This Court observed that in the

event, GNIDA were to restore the lease in respect of
20
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
the portion of land on which the said tower stands,

the outstanding dues would stand proportionately

reduced with reference to the area occupied by the

subject tower. Counsel for the petitioners submitted

that the petitioners are willing to abide by all the

conditions to be specified by GNIDA, especially

regarding payment of outstanding dues. Accordingly,

GNIDA was directed to submit a plan concerning the

restoration of the lease upon payment of the

outstanding dues. Liberty was also granted to all

persons claiming to be the original allottees to submit

their claims before respondent No. 5-Commissioner

for due verification. The relevant extract of the said

order is reproduced hereinbelow:
“Pursuant to the directions issued by this Court, the
     Registrar has verified the claim of the petitioners and
     other persons who had submitted to such
     verification. The Registrar has identified 42
     applicants having sufficient documentary evidence
     to indicate that they were original members in
     respect of the subject project.
The tower has been constructed on plot No. 7
admeasuring 9731.76 square meters; lease
21
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     whereof has been cancelled by the authority. The
     structure standing on the said plot, in respect of
     which the petitioners have set up their claim, is
     occupying around 3243.92 square meters
     approximately. In all, 44 flats have been
     constructed, whereas only 35 petitioners are before
     this Court. The Registrar has identified 42 persons
     as original members while making it clear that 10
     applications could not be verified due to non-
     cooperation by the bank and other agencies.
     Today, during the course of hearing, learned
     counsel appearing for respondent No. 13 (India
     Bulls Housing Finance Ltd.) has confirmed
     payment made by Ravi Prakash Shrivastava.
     Similarly, in the case of Jamila Ansari, the
     Housing     Commissioner      (respondent     No.5)
     submits that confirmation has been received
     from the concerned Agency.
The Registrar may submit a revised report giving
     further break-up of eligible persons before the
     next date of hearing.
Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the respondent No.4 (Greater
     NOIDA) submits that as per his instructions
     around Rs.12 crore amount had remained
     outstanding in respect of plot No. 7.
In the event, the said authority has to restore the
     lease in respect of land on which subject tower is
     standing being plot No. 7, the outstanding
     amount would stand proportionately reduced in
     the context of area underneath the subject
     tower. The authority shall produce a plan in
     respect of which lease can be restored on
     payment of such outstanding dues. That be
     placed on record along with affidavit of
     authorized official.
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the petitioner(s), on instructions,
     submits that the petitioners are willing to abide
     by all the conditions to be specified by the
22
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     Greater NOIDA, especially regarding payment of
     outstanding dues.
For the time being, we do not wish to dilate on the
     manner in which the 44 flats can be allotted — as
     the number of claimants seem to be more than 44.
     That issue can be deliberated on the next date.
     It will be open to the concerned applicants and
     interested    persons       to   furnish    further
     documents/evidence before the Registrar for
     confirmation of their original membership.”


                                         (Emphasis supplied)
21. On 22nd July, 2022, when the matter was placed

before the Court, it was noted that respondent No. 5-

Commissioner filed a compliance report stating that

he had verified the claims of 52 applicants and also

found that 50 applicants (including the petitioners

herein) were able to substantiate their claims of

having made the payment to developer/society for

flats in the Housing Project. It was further submitted

by learned counsel for India Bulls Housing Finance

Ltd. (respondent No. 13) as well as by counsel for the

intervenors that there exist more individuals who

have     not    yet     approached         respondent   No.    5-
23
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
Commissioner for the verification of their claims.

Accordingly, respondent No. 5-Commissioner was

directed to verify the claims of all such persons and

submit a fresh status report as to their eligibility or

otherwise. It was also clarified that until the

outstanding dues pertaining to the plot are fully

discharged, GNIDA cannot be compelled either to

revive the lease or to grant any further permissions,

including permissions for construction in deviation of

the prevailing regulations and building bye-laws.
22. Respondent No. 5-Commissioner submitted

compliance report dated 8th August, 2022 wherein it

was stated that that in terms of order dated 22nd July,

2022, claims of 15 more applicants were scrutinized

and it was found that 7 of the said applicants were

able to substantiate their claims. It was further

stated that out of 67 applicants/allottees, claims of

57    applicants        could     be     verified      by   way   of
24
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
documentary evidence. However, it was stated that

out of the said 67 applicants, names of only 19

applicants had been found included in the detailed

list of members prepared in the year 2010 by the

Secretary/President,           Sahkari      Awas       Samiti   and

furnished to respondent No. 5-Commissioner for the

purpose of election to the office of the management

committee. Hence, only 19 applicants were entitled to

be considered as the actual members of the

Samiti/Society. The petitioners were afforded an

opportunity to submit their objections to the said

affidavit.12
23. This Court vide order dated 9th January, 2024,

noted the submissions advanced by the counsel

appearing for GNIDA and UP Awas Evam Vikas

Parishad regarding the need for a structural audit, to

be conducted by an expert agency and granted eight


12 Order dated 17th August, 2022.
25
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
weeks’ time for the conduct of audit of the structure

constructed thus far. The relevant extract of the said

order is reproduced hereinbelow:
“Pursuant to our order 18.10.2023 and the
     subsequent order dated 21.11.2023, extending the
     time, Mr. Ravindra Kumar and Mr. Vishwajit Singh,
     learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the
     Greater NOIDA and Uttar Pradesh Awas Vikas
     Parishad, respectively, have stated that the said
     respondents have already inspected the site, and
     technically, they feel it appropriate that there should
     be a structural audit to be conducted by an expert
     agency, like Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi or
     any other institute of equal competence for that
     matter, and for the said purpose, they would require
     eight weeks’ time.
Although, there is opposition by Ms. Meenakshi
     Arora, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
     behalf of the petitioner(s) with respect to the
     time sought before us, but considering the nature
     of expert report, which is sought to be obtained,
     we deem it appropriate to grant eight weeks’
     time to the respondents.
It is ensured by the learned counsel for the aforesaid
     respondents that the respondents will immediately
     start the exercise of getting the structural audit, and
     they further assured the Court that they would
     submit the report by the next date of hearing.
     We would also request the agency engaged by the
     respondents for the purpose of structural audit to
     make endevour to submit the report within time as
     fixed by this Court.”

                                         (Emphasis supplied)
26
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
24. Thereafter, on the request of counsel for the

petitioners, this Court granted 2 weeks’ time to the

petitioners to place on record the list of 40 allottees,

who were willing to join together for the development

and completion of one tower comprising of 40

apartments, specifying the details regarding the floor

and the apartment number proposed to be allotted to

each of such 40 allottees.13
25. In compliance of the aforesaid order, the

petitioners,        along      with     other      allottees   filed

Interlocutory Application Nos. 103839 and 103703 of

2024 annexing therewith the list of 40 allottees, who

were willing to join together for the development and

completion of Tower-1 comprising of 40 apartments.
The said interlocutory applications came up for

hearing before this Court on 30th April, 2024 and on

the said date, counsel for the applicants submitted


13 Order dated 16th April, 2024.
27
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
that the 33 applicants who were originally the

petitioners, had been duly verified by respondent No.

5-Commissioner whereas only three of the remaining

seven applicants could be verified. This Court

directed that the details of the four unverified

applicants and any other individual whose claim was

yet to be verified, be provided to the counsel for

respondent No. 5-Commissioner along with the

supporting documents for due verification. This

Court further noted that number of impleadment

applications had been filed by the allottees, some of

whom were keen to join the afore-mentioned group of

40 applicants but declined to permit such claims at

that stage. However, it was observed that it will

always be open for such applicants/allottee to join

together and if all the remaining 100 allottees joined

together in groups of 40 and 60, their claims could

be considered for the remaining two towers, one of 40
28
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
apartments and other of 60 apartments. The parties

were also granted liberty to conduct a joint inspection

in respect of the existing construction. The Court also

recorded the submission of the counsel for GNIDA

that if all the three towers are taken up together for

occupation, then there shall be no issue of division of

land and other complicated issues of separating and

dividing common areas, including parking in the

basement. The relevant extract of the said order is

reproduced hereinbelow:
“Pursuant to order dated 16th April, 2023 I.A. No.
     103839 of 2024 has been filed by the petitioners
     giving a list of 39 allottees.
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the petitioners submits that 40th
     gentleman has also been identified as Mr. Sanjeev
     Kumar Singh. Impleadment Application No.
     103703/2024 has been independently filed by
     Mr. Singh. Thus, the chart given as Annexure A-
     1 to the aforesaid IA takes care of the 40
     applicants who are joining together.
Ms. Arora requested for an inspection of the site by
     a technical team. She further submits that all 33
     applicants who were originally the petitioners are
     duly    verified    by     the   Registrar-Housing
     Commissioner. However, out of the seven who are
     newly added, three were only verified and four
     remain to be verified. The details of these four
29
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     allottees along with supporting documents may
     be provided to learned counsel for the Registrar-
     Housing Commissioner within a week whereupon
     the Housing Commissioner may get the same
     verified and submit a report within the next four
     weeks.
Further any other claims now made before the
     Housing Commissioner which claims may either
     be pending before this Court by way of
     impleadment application(s) or even otherwise, to
     be provided to learned counsel for the Registrar-
     Housing Commissioner, such claims may also be
     verified.
…     …       …      …
     There are number of impleadment applications filed
     by the allottees, some of whom are very keen to join
     the team of 40 applicants represented by Ms. Arora,
     learned senior counsel. However, we are not
     permitting such claims to be considered at this
     stage. It will always be open for the remaining
     parties to join together and if all the remaining
     100 allottees join together in groups of 40 and
     60 their claims would be considered for the
     remaining two towers one of 40 apartments and
     other of 60 apartments.
Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned senior counsel has
     also pointed out that it will be in the interest of all
     the parties that a joint inspection be made with
     regard to the existing construction issues like
     common areas, basements and other common
     amenities will stand sorted, to which Ms. Arora,
     learned senior counsel has no objection. As such,
     they may decide amongst themselves to make this
     inspection. General Manager, Greater NOIDA,
     Planning and Architecture may take care of this.
     Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned senior counsel
     further submitted that if all the three towers are
     taken up together for occupation, then there
     shall be no issue of division of land and other
     complicated issues of separating and dividing
30
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     common areas,           including       parking   in   the
     basement.”

                                          (Emphasis supplied)
26. When the matter came up for hearing on 22nd

October, 2024, this Court recorded that structural

audit report of Tower-1, conducted by M/s. Architect

Harish Tripathi & Associates, had been placed on

record and that the said report opined that Tower-1

could      be    rendered        fit   for     habitation    upon

strengthening and making certain modifications. On

the strength of this report, counsel for the petitioners

submitted that the 40 applicants/allottees who have

come together for developing and completing Tower-

1, may be permitted to do so. It was further submitted

that the said 40 applicants/allottees are willing to

discharge all their liabilities towards GNIDA as well

as any other taxes, dues, fees or charges, as may be

applicable under law. It was finally submitted that

out of these 40 applicants/allottees, any of the
31
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
allottee who was originally allotted three-bedroom flat

would also duly compensate to an allotee who was

allotted four-bedroom flat, who is deprived of getting

a four-bedroom apartment, though it was pointed out

that Tower-4 also consists of 40 four-bedroom

apartments. Accordingly, the Court directed GNIDA

to provide the details of the proportional charges due

to it from these allottees with respect to Tower-1.

However, counsel for GNIDA contended that the main

hurdle in allowing the said applicants/allottees to

start with the construction work is that the lease,

being for a single plot, had been cancelled in 2011,

and as such, partial restoration of the lease with

respect to Tower-1 alone is not in the domain of

GNIDA, as the lease could either be cancelled in

entirety or restored in toto.
32
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
27. Taking note of the aforesaid submissions, the

Court directed GNIDA to examine, as a special case,

the feasibility of restoring the lease partially in

respect of Tower-1 and the adjoining areas necessary

for its use and utility. It was made clear that upon

such restoration, the allottees must first pay all

outstanding dues, and only thereafter could the

construction work commence. No construction would

be permitted without full clearance of such dues. This

Court also recorded that certain other allottees had

filed interlocutory applications seeking similar reliefs

as sought for by aforesaid 40 applicants/allottees. In

respect of the same, it was observed that such

allottees could also be permitted to proceed with

construction, provided that they make a unified effort

to complete the Tower as is existing, i.e., either

Tower-2 or 3, which have 30 apartments each of

three-bedroom or Tower-4, which has 40 apartments
33
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
of four-bedroom. In case, the required number of

allottees joined together, the Court would consider

the grant of permission to                   such allottees   to

commence with the construction. The relevant

extract of the said order is reproduced hereinbelow:
“1. Pursuant to order dated 30.07.2024, learned
     counsel for the petitioners has filed a very detailed
     report, by M/s. Architect Harish Tripathi and
     Associates (Arhta) (running into 636 pages) related
     to structural safety audit and strengthening for
     residential Tower-1 of Shivkala Charm Society,
     Greater Noida.
2. According to the said report, after
     strengthening and making required other
     changes in the existing form, Tower-1 can be
     made fit to be used as habitable.
3. In view of the findings given in the said report,
     Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel,
     appearing for the petitioners, submits that the
     allottees who have joined together and are now
     40 in number, may be allowed to continue with
     the construction work of Tower-1 as they are
     interested in getting the said Tower to be
     completed.
4. Learned senior counsel further submits that
     these 40 allottees will discharge all their
     liabilities towards the Greater NOIDA (for short,
     the Authority) as may be communicated to them
     by the Authority and any other taxes, dues, fees
     or charges, as may be admissible under law, to be
     collected from them, would also be paid.
5. It is also submitted by learned senior counsel,
     that out of these present 40 allottees, any of the
     allottee who was originally allotted three-
bedroom apartment would also duly compensate
34
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     to a four-bedroom allotee, who is deprived of
     getting a four-bedroom apartment, although,
     according to learned senior counsel, Tower-4 also
     consist of 40 apartments of four-bedroom.
6. In view of the above, we require the Authority to
     provide the details of the proportional charges due
     to it from these allottees with respect to Tower-1
     within a month.
7. Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the Authority, however, submits
     that there is one hurdle before these allottees
     start with the work after making due payment.
     The hurdle is that the entire lease which was for
     a single plot was cancelled in the year 2011, as
     such partial restoration of the lease with respect
     to Tower-1 alone is, apparently, not in the
     domain of the Authority as it will either cancel
     the entire lease or restore the lease in toto.
8. Considering the facts and circumstances of
     the case, we require the Authority to examine
     this aspect, as a special case that it may restore
     partial lease with respect to Tower-1 and the
     required adjoining areas which may be necessary
     for its use and utility.
9. After the dues are communicated and the partial
     lease is restored, these allottees would make the
     required payment to the Authority and only
     thereafter they will start with the construction work.
     They would also file appropriate undertaking with
     respect to the compensation, which they have
     promised to make, with respect to the allotees
     having three-bedroom apartment allotments. The
     said undertaking may be filed on or before the next
     date.
10. After payment is raised by the Authority, four
     weeks’ time is granted to these 40 allottees to make
     the deposits.
11. We make it clear that no construction work
     will start without being dues fully paid.
12. The applications, details of which given
     below, have been pressed by the respective
35
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     counsel, claiming that these applicants are also
     the allottees and their allotment and payment
     have been verified by U.P. Avas Evam Vikas
     Parishad. As such, these applicants may also be
     allowed to be considered for carrying out the
     construction work with respect to Tower No.4 or
     the other two Towers being Tower Nos. 2 and 3,
     as the case may be.
IA NO.53283/2024
IA NO.103703/2024
IA NO.98909/2022
IA NO.103089/2022
IA NO.112130/2022
IA No.101087/2021
IA NO.124741/2021
IA NO.183601/2023
IA NO.74439/2024
IA NO.134469/2022
IA NO.14612/2022
IA NO.92267/2023
IA NO.266400/2023
IA NO.142809/2021
13. This Court has no difficulty in permitting
     these allottees to proceed with the construction,
     however, they have to make a unified effort to
     take one complete Tower as is existing, either
     Tower 2 or 3, which have 30 apartments each of
     three-bedroom or Tower 4, which has 40
     apartments of four-bedroom. In case, the
     required number of allottees join together, the
     Court would be more than happy to permit them
     to continue with construction. In such case, one
     of the applicants to take the lead till required
     number of allottees join together.”

                                          (Emphasis supplied)
36
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
28. It may be noted herein that despite repeated

opportunities14 having been granted to GNIDA to

place on record a response or propose a plan

indicating the manner in which the Housing Project

is to be dealt with, or to suggest a viable mechanism

keeping in view the peculiar dynamics of the case,

GNIDA has utterly failed to do so.
29. The dissatisfaction of this Court qua the

conduct of GNIDA was recorded in the order dated

18th March, 2025 and another opportunity was

granted to GNIDA to file an affidavit providing the

details of demand which it would have raised in case

the original builders had completed the project so

that the proportional charges of each of the allottee

could be determined. By the self-same order, the

Court directed that the details of 10 applicants in I.A.



14 Orders dated 19th May, 2022; 5th April, 2023; 18th October, 2023; 21st

November, 2023; and 22nd October, 2024.
37
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
No. 56220 of 2025, who claimed to be the allottees of

flats in the Housing Project, be provided to the

counsel representing respondent No.5-Commissioner

for verification. The relevant extract of the said order

is reproduced hereinbelow:
“We are not happy with the fact that the Greater
     Noida     Industrial    Development       Authority
     (hereafter referred to as ‘Authority’) is not
     cooperating in the entire exercise of reviving a
     dead project where the home buyers have been
     cheated by the builder who has vanished decades
     ago and some of the home buyers have joined
     together to revive the entire project in part and
     also other home buyers are coming in for revival
     of the remaining part of the Project. The 40 home
     buyers who have joined together to complete one
     Tower containing 40 apartments of four-bedroom
     each have been continuously in touch with the
     Authority requesting them to provide the details and
     also to find out solutions as to how they can go
     ahead with their aspirations of owning their
     apartments. Further they are more than willing to
     pay their proportionate share of the charges due
     to the Authority but despite the same the
     Authority is not coming up with the details of the
     demand/solutions nor is it cooperating in and
     allowing them to continue with their joint
     venture of completing one Tower of 40
     apartments.
Today Mr. Ravindra Kumar, learned senior
     counsel appearing for the Authority has prayed
     for a week’s time to provide the details of the
     demand which the Authority would have raised
     in case the original builders had completed the
     project so that the proportional charges of each
38
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
     of the home buyers can be decided depending
     upon the size of the apartments they are taking.
     Let an affidavit be filed by the competent officer of
     the Authority within a week.
List the matter again on 25th March, 2025.
     In the meantime, I.A. No. 56220 of 2025 has been
     filed by 10 applicants. Copy of the same be provided
     to Mr. Abhishek Kumar Singh, AOR representing
     Respondent no. 5-Housing Commissioner, UP Awas
     Vikas Parishad who will verify as to whether these
     10 applicants in the said application are genuine or
     not and also about the payments made by them as
     claimed in the application by supporting documents.
For the said verification four weeks’ time is granted.”


                                         (Emphasis supplied)
30. At this stage, it is pertinent to note that

Interlocutory Application No. 55798 of 2025 has been

filed by another group of 30 allottees who have joined

together for the development and completion of

Tower-2       of   the     Housing       Project,      with   reliefs

analogous to those claimed by the earlier group of 40

allottees referred to supra.
31. Finally, the matter came up before this Court on

13th May, 2025, on which date, extensive arguments

were urged on behalf of the parties, and the matters
39
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
were closed for orders. Liberty was granted to

allottees to approach the counsel for respondent No.

5-Commissioner with the details of their claims, so

that the same could be verified. The relevant extract

of the said order is reproduced hereinbelow:
“1. Arguments concluded.
2. Order reserved.
3. In the meantime, all the request received by
     Mr. Abhishek Kumar Singh, Advocate-on-Record
     for the Awas Vikas Parishad/Housing Board, the
     same would be verified and report be submitted
     within next eight weeks. No specific orders are
     required. The allottees are free to approach Mr.
     Abhishek Kumar Singh, Advocate-on-Record
     through their respective counsel.”


                                          (Emphasis supplied)
32. We have heard and considered the submissions

advanced by learned counsel for the parties at bar

and have gone through the material available on

record.
33. The preceding facts and circumstances would

clearly indicate that the original allotees who dreamt

of a roof over their heads have been struggling in a
40
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
losing cause for the last nearly 20 years. It is

apparent that the petitioners/applicants/allottees

have endured immense hardship for all this time

apart from losing their hard-earned money and have

been     embroiled       in    administrative          log-jam   and

prolonged litigation. Despite pursuing remedies

before     various       fora,    their     grievances      remain

unredressed. Even after nearly two decades of

booking their flats and making payments, some by

taking loans from financial institutions, the allottees

have been unable to take possession, as construction

has remained stalled since 9th September, 2011, i.e.,

from the date of cancelling of lease deed by GNIDA,

owing to the fraudulent acts and irregularities

committed by the office bearers of the Samiti/Society

and the developer.
34. Adding to the complexity of the situation is the

fact that during the pendency of the special leave
41
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
petitions before this Court, numerous intervention

applications have been filed by persons claiming to

be original allottees of the Housing Project. It is

pertinent       to    note      that     respondent    No.   5-

Commissioner has verified most of these claims,

though several such claims are yet to be verified.

Furthermore, it is evident from the record that all the

original allottees are not before this Court, thereby

impeding the formulation of a comprehensive plan of

action in respect of the development and completion

of the Housing Project comprising of four towers on

the entire chunk of land.
35. We are of the considered view that this

unsavoury state of affairs cannot be allowed to

continue indefinitely, and the issue has to be taken

to its logical conclusion. While it is imperative to

ensure some measure of relief to the genuine

allottees, it is equally important to guard against any
42
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
fraudster or imposter staking a false claim on the

legitimate entitlement of the genuine allottees,

thereby, taking undue advantage of the prevailing

uncertainty.
36. Having regard to the protracted pendency of

these proceedings spanning over several years,

during       which        numerous          interlocutory   and

impleadment applications have been filed by persons

asserting claims as original allottees of the Housing

Project, coupled with the complexities arising from

verification of such claims and the need to coordinate

between multiple statutory authorities and agencies,

this Court is of the opinion that the matter has

assumed considerable administrative magnitude and

intricacy. The overlapping issues of restoration of

lease, identification of genuine allottees, proportional

determination of land dues, and feasibility of

completing the stalled construction necessitate a
43
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
comprehensive,             structured,          and    impartial

examination          under       the     supervision    of   an

independent fact-finding authority. Resolution of all

these issues seems unlikely if not impossible in the

proceedings under
Article 136
of the Constitution of

India.
37. In view of the aforesaid circumstances and to

ensure an expeditious and efficacious resolution,

constitution of an independent Committee under the

aegis of a former Judge has become indispensable.

Hence, we are inclined to form a one-Judge

Committee, headed by Hon’ble Retd. Judge of High

Court of Judicature at Allahabad, to undertake a

detailed enquiry into the entire factual matrix and

give suggestions for a suitable resolution.
38. On our request, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Pankaj

Naqvi, Judge (Retd.), High Court of Judicature at
44
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
Allahabad, has graciously agreed to conduct the

requisite enquiry.
39. The broad parameters of the Enquiry would be

as below:
I.   Committee          shall     scrutinize          all   records,

      agreements, correspondences, approvals, and

      other materials pertinent to the issue including

      the affidavits filed by concerned authorities

      before this Court and identify the genuine

      allottees of the Housing Project.
II.   Identify and prepare a list of such allottees who

      are willing to join together for the development

      and completion of the Housing Project.
III. Consult with GNIDA and if required, cull out a

      solution in respect of partial restoration of the

      lease deed for Plot No. 7, Sector PI-2, Greater

      Noida, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh,

      201308 which was terminated vide order dated
45
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
       9th September, 2011 issued by GNIDA, in case

       the entire Housing Project is not being developed

       and constructed by the allottees identified in

       terms of Clause (II).
IV.    In case partial lease of the plot can be duly

       restored upon payment of outstanding dues of

       GNIDA, the Committee shall devise a fair

       mechanism/formula for determining the liability

       of each allottee identified in terms of Clause (II).
V.    Prepare a comprehensive plan in consultation

       with all the stakeholders, for the development

       and completion of the Housing Project in a time-
bound manner.
VI.    Any other matter which the Committee may

       deem relevant for a complete and just resolution

       of the controversy.
VII.   In the eventuality that the original allottees of

       the flats in Towers 3 and 4 are found to be
46
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
      unidentifiable or unverifiable, the Committee

      may also examine the feasibility and viability of

      auctioning Towers 3 and 4 of the Housing Project

      by way of an open lottery or such other

      transparent mechanism as may be deemed

      appropriate, so as to ensure recovery of the

      entire      expenditure         towards          construction;
discharge of all land dues payable to GNIDA and

      any other financial obligations in respect of the

      land appurtenant thereto. The said exercise

      shall be undertaken keeping in view the

      objective of enabling completion of the remaining

      towers and protecting the interests of genuine

      allottees who have joined together to undertake

      the construction and development of Towers 1

      and 2.
40. Upon completion of the enquiry, the Committee

shall submit a detailed report setting out its findings,
47
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
conclusions,         and       recommendations,            thereby

facilitating the final resolution of the matter. The

Committee would endeavor to submit its report to

this Court in a sealed cover within a period of four

months from the date of the commencement of its

effective functioning. The State of Uttar Pradesh;

GNIDA; Housing Commissioner, UP Awas Evam

Vikas Parishad; District Magistrate, Gautam Buddha

Nagar,       Uttar       Pradesh;         all     banks/financial

institutions, i.e., respondent Nos. 10 to 19 and all the

petitioners as well as other allottees who have filed

intervention       applications       before      this   Court    or

otherwise,       shall     extend       full    assistance       and

cooperation to the Committee for facilitating the

enquiry and to ensure timely submission of the

report. The expenses for travel and incidental

expenses for the sittings of the Committee shall be
48
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
borne equally by the allottees on the one hand and

State of Uttar Pradesh on the other.
41. The Committee shall be provided secretarial

assistance comprising of: one Personal Assistant

(PA), one Lower Division Clerk (LDC), and one Law

Clerk, who may be assigned at the discretion of the

Hon’ble Chairperson. The Committee may hold its

proceedings in New Delhi or Noida, Uttar Pradesh, as

deemed appropriate, with the concerned State(s)

and/or        Union         Territory        making    suitable

arrangements for its sittings.
42. The Committee shall be entitled to formulate its

own modalities and procedure for conducting the

enquiry.
43. The Chairperson of the Committee shall be

entitled to a fixed honorarium to the tune of Rs. 15

lakhs (Rupees Fifteen Lakhs only) which shall be paid
49
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
in three equal tranches spread over a period of four

months.
44. The        expenses        for    the    aforesaid   enquiry

proceedings shall be equally borne by the allottees on

the one hand and State of Uttar Pradesh on the other.

The parties shall ensure that appropriate facilities are

provided for the conduct of the enquiry.
45. The logistic arrangements for the Committee

shall be completed on or before 21st November, 2025.
46. The parties shall be entitled to appropriate

representation in the proceedings to be conducted by

the Committee.
47. The State of Uttar Pradesh and GNIDA shall

publish a public notice regarding the constitution

and functioning of the Committee in two national

dailies, one in English and one in Hindi so as to

apprise all allottees, particularly those who have not

yet approached this Court. The notice shall specify
50
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter
that such allottees may submit their claims before

the Committee, which shall examine and verify the

claims through respondent No. 5-Commissioner.
48. List on 24th March, 2026 for receiving the

Enquiry Committee’s report.
….……………………J.
                                           (VIKRAM NATH)



                                          ...…………………….J.
                                          (SANDEEP MEHTA)

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 07, 2025.
51
SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 9792 OF 2017 and connected matter