[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Government Of Tamil Nadu vs P.R. Jaganathan on 19 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1332




                                                                                    REPORTABLE


                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. ………….OF 2025
                                           (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020)


                            THE GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU,
                            REP. BY ITS SECRETARY,
                            TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT & ORS.                         …APPELLANT(S)


                                                                    VERSUS


                            P.R. JAGANATHAN & ORS ETC.                             … RESPONDENT(S)


                                                              JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. We have heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, the learned Senior Counsel

                            appearing for the appellants and Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned

                            Additional Solicitor General (ASG), Mr. S Nagamuthu, the learned Senior

                            Counsel and other learned counsel appearing for the respondents. We have
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
perused the written arguments and the documents filed by the parties.
   Date: 2025.11.19
   17:54:12 IST
   Reason:
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                    Page 1 of 20
3. The issue for consideration in these appeals is: Whether a party to a

   concluded contract, voluntarily and statutorily entered into, can seek

   further relief by taking refuge under the statutory provisions?
4. Sections 7 and 12 of The Tamil Nadu Acquisition of Land for Industrial

   Purposes Act, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as the “1997 Act”), read as

   under:
Section 7 of the 1997 Act

         “7. Determination of amount
         (1) Where any land is acquired by the Government under this Act, the
         Government shall pay an amount for such acquisition which shall be
         determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.
         (2) Where the amount has been determined by agreement between the
         Government and the person to whom the amount has to be paid, it shall
         be paid in accordance with such agreement.
(3) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Government shall
         refer the case to the Collector for determination of the amount to be
         paid for such acquisition as also the person or persons to whom such
         amount shall be paid:
Provided that no amount exceeding such amount as the Government may,
         by general order, specify to be paid for such acquisition shall be determined
         by the Collector without the previous approval of the Government officer
         as the Government may appoint in this behalf.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), after the
         case is referred to the Collector under that sub-section, but before he
         has finally determined the amount, if the amount is determined by
         agreement between the Government and the person to whom the
         amount has to be paid, such amount shall be paid by the Collector in
         accordance with such agreement.
(5) Before finally determining the amount, the Collector shall give an
         opportunity to every person to whom the amount has to be paid to state his
         case as to the amount.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                  Page 2 of 20
(6) In determining the amount, the Collector shall be guided by the
      provisions contained in sections 23 and 24 and other relevant provisions of
      the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, (Central Act I of 1894) subject to
      modifications that-
(a) in the said
section 23
, the references to the date of publication of
            the notification under
section 4
, sub-section (1) and the time of
            publication of the declaration under
section 6
of the said Act shall be
            construed as references to the date of publication of notice under sub-
            sections (2) and (1), respectively, of
section 3
of this Act; and
(b) in the said
section 24
, the references to the date of publication of
            notification under
section 4
, sub-section (1) and the date of publication
            of the declaration under
section 6
of the said Act shall be construed as
            references to the date of publication of notice under sub-sections (2)
            and (1), respectively, of
section 3
of this Act.
(7) For the purpose of determining the amount-
(a) the Collector shall have power to require any person to deliver to
            him such returns and assessments as he considers necessary;
(b) the Collector shall also have power to require any person known
            or believed to be interested in the land to deliver to him a statement
            containing as far as may be practicable, the name of every other person
            interested in the land as co-owner, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and
            the nature of such interest, and of the rents and profits, if any, received
            or receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding the
            date of the statement.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
Section 12
of the 1997 Act

      “12. Payment of interest.
When the amount is not paid or deposited on or before taking
      possession of the land, the Government shall pay the amount
      determined with interest thereon at the rate of [nine per cent]
      [Substituted for the expression, ‘four per cent.’ by the Tamil Nadu
      Acquisition of land for Industrial Purposes (Amendment) Act, 1999 (Tamil
      Nadu Act 2 of 2000).] per annum from the time of so taking possession
      until it shall have been so paid or deposited.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                     Page 3 of 20
5.
Section 7
of the 1997 Act is an exhaustive provision dealing with the

   determination of amount of compensation to be paid to the landowner or

   person interested over an acquired land. Sub-section (2) of
Section 7
of the

   1997 Act encourages and facilitates the determination of the amount

   payable to the owner or person interested through an agreement with the

   Government. It further stipulates that upon such an agreement, the resultant

   amount will have to be paid only as per the terms agreed, thereunder.

   Under sub-section (3) of
Section 7
of the 1997 Act, a reference would be

   warranted to the Collector, only on the failure to reach such an agreement.
6. Sub-section (4) of
Section 7
of the 1997 Act gives one more opportunity

   towards an amicable settlement between the parties. Thus, even after the

   issue pertaining to the determination of compensation is referred to the

   Collector under sub-section (3), an agreement can be entered into between

   the Government and the concerned individual. Upon such an agreement,

   the Collector shall make due compliance.
7. Therefore, after an agreement is entered into, the terms and conditions

   mentioned thereunder, along with the amount duly arrived at, alone would

   govern the parties. In other words, the agreement becomes sacrosanct,

   leading to the termination of the umbilical cord which connects the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                      Page 4 of 20
agreement to the other provisions pertaining to the passing of the award

   under the 1997 Act. The object of these provisions is to arrive at a

   settlement by negotiation, while ensuring timely payment, by avoiding the

   circuitous route involving the procedure for passing of the award, reference

   and appeal.
8.
Section 12
of the 1997 Act speaks of payment of interest at the rate of nine

   per cent per annum, from the time of taking possession until the

   compensation is either paid or deposited. Therefore, this provision gets

   triggered only after possession is taken and, thereafter, continues to be in

   force till the amount is paid or deposited. To make the aforesaid position

   clear,
Section 12
of the 1997 Act has no application to a case where an

   agreement has been entered into between the parties. This is for the reason

   that a concluded contract under
Section 7
of the 1997 Act, voluntarily

   entered into between the parties, would exclude itself from purview of the

   1997 Act, thereafter.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
9. Lease agreements for the lands situated in villages Singanallur and

   Kalapatti of Coimbatore District were entered into between the land

   owners and the Department of Defence way back in the year 1942, pursuant
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                      Page 5 of 20
to which possession of the respective lands were handed over to the

   Department of Defence. These lands were used as an aerodome and later

   on transferred to the Department of Civil Aviation in the year 1947.

   Subsequently, they were transferred to the Airport Authority of India

   (AAI), who was paying the rent to the lessors/landowners. A tripartite

   agreement was arrived at between the AAI, the Government of Tamil Nadu

   and the land owners on 22.08.2006, whereby, a lease rent of 5% of the land

   value was finalized by consent, subject to re-valuation at regular intervals.
10.In the year 2011, as the lands were required for the purpose of expansion

   of the Coimbatore Airport runway, proceedings for the acquisition of the

   lands were initiated under the 1997 Act by issuing a show cause notice and

   public notice under
Section 3(2)
of the 1997 Act on 22.04.2011 and

   30.04.2011 respectively, followed by the Gazette notifications of the

   acquisition under
Section 3(1)
the 1997 Act, which were published on

   10.01.2013, 18.08.2015 and 13.10.2015. At this stage, litigation

   commenced between the parties as the land owners made claims, both for

   compensation and arrears of lease rent. Writ petitions were filed

   challenging the acquisition proceedings, while simultaneously seeking

   orders of injunction and stay of the proceedings. Incidentally, the backlog
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                       Page 6 of 20
of rent was also sought for. Orders of injunctions were granted in some

  cases, while in some other cases, the land owners obtained status quo from

  the year 2017. It was contended that the rental arrears were not paid.
11.An attempt was made to resolve the issue of compensation by duly

  invoking
Section 7(2)
of the 1997 Act. Accordingly, a meeting was

  convened between the Special District Revenue Officer, concerned

  officials of the AAI and the landowners on 06.03.2018, and an agreement

  was arrived at, wherein, compensation was fixed at the rate of Rs. 1500/-

  per sq.ft. for residential lands and Rs. 900/- per sq.ft. for agricultural lands.

  Consequently, some of the land owners withdrew their challenge to the

  acquisition proceedings.
12.Vide judgment dated 03.07.2019, the Division Bench of the Madras High

  Court, held the 1997 Act to be ultra vires. Status quo was ordered by this

  Court in the Special Leave Petitions filed challenging the above judgment.

  However, during the pendency of these petitions, the Government of Tamil

  Nadu revived the 1997 Act by enacting the
Tamil Nadu Land Acquisition

  Laws (Revival of Operation, Amendment and Validation) Act, 2019
.
13.By the Government Order passed in G.O. (Ms) No.173 dated 20.11.2019,

  the Report of the State Level Private Negotiation Committee fixing the
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                          Page 7 of 20
rates of compensation as decided in the meeting dated 06.03.2018 was,

   accordingly approved, and a sum of Rs. 189,29,71,894/- was ordered to be

   sanctioned towards payment of compensation to the landowners. We may

   also note that the valuation was so fixed by giving substantial enhancement

   to the then prevailing guideline value. In any case, it was fixed by consent.
14.During the pendency of the proceedings before the High Court, a direction

   was issued to the appellants to deposit the amount of compensation which

   was required to be disbursed in respect of the private respondents therein,

   and the same was duly complied with. Similarly, interim orders passed

   directing the AAI to pay the arrears of rent were also duly complied with.

   The Special Leave Petitions filed by the appellants were disposed of by

   taking note of the earlier judgment of this Court in
G. Mohan Rao & Ors.

   versus State of Tamil Nadu & Ors
, (2022) 12 SCC 696 upholding the

   validity of the
Tamil Nadu Land Acquisition Laws (Revival of Operation,

   Amendment and Validation) Act, 2019
. By the impugned judgment dated

   18.08.2020, the High Court was pleased to hold as under:
“59. When consent is given and an agreement to receive payment on certain
         terms and conditions is arrived at, then the same is a complete package and
         therefore, claiming of an additional amount as solatium or otherwise does
         not arise. The entire transaction cannot in any manner be treated less than
         a concluded agreement binding the consenting parties and the State
         Government as observed above. We, therefore, hold that the consent given
         and the negotiations finalized with regard to the rates was inclusive of all
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                 Page 8 of 20
claims in respect to compensation subject to the terms thereof. We may,
         however, clarify that after the agreement had been entered into and consent
         given, then any delay in payment would attract the payment of interest as
         indicated hereinafter.”
15.The High Court held that once the consent was given and an agreement to

   receive payment on certain terms and conditions was arrived at, then the

   same was a complete package and therefore, claiming of an additional

   amount as solatium or otherwise does not arise. However, on the contrary,

   the High Court proceeded to state that from the date of taking possession

   under the 1997 Act, which it reckoned from the date of issuance of the

   notice under
Section 3(2)
of the 1997 Act, till the date of the impugned

   judgment i.e. 18.08.2020, the landowners are entitled to interest. It invoked
Section 12
of the 1997 Act, in support of its decision. Incidentally, it was

   held that for the period between the order of grant of stay up to the stage

   of surrender of challenge to the acquisition proceedings, the landowners

   shall not be entitled to any interest. The said part of the judgment has

   become final. We may profitably quote the relevant passage of the

   judgment under challenge:
“61. A perusal of the said Section, in our opinion, leaves no room for doubt
         that in the instant case the possession was already with the Government,
         though on lease. However, for the purpose of the present case, it would be
         appropriate to presume that the date of taking over possession under the
         1997 Act would be the date on which notification under
Section 3(2)
came
         to be issued. The petitioners would, therefore, be entitled to payment of
         interest after the notification under
Section 3(2)
at the rates prescribed
         therein till date. The deduction will however be made in respect of any
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                 Page 9 of 20
amount of lease rent paid beyond the date of the notification under
Section
         3(2)
of the 1997 Act. Apart from this, the petitioners themselves obtained
         an interim order of status quo and other orders restraining the respondents
         from raising constructions in the present batch of writ petitions. The
         petitioners had given up their challenge to the acquisition notification as is
         recorded in the order dated 25.3.2019 and acknowledged by the Court in
         the order dated 12.9.2019. In the said circumstances, this period between
         the grant of the stay order up to the stage of surrender made to the challenge
         of the notification i.e., 25.3.2019 has to be excluded for the purpose of
         award of interest. The petitioners would however be entitled for interest
         after deductions as aforesaid. This would be only in respect of those
         petitioners who had given their consent and on whose behalf the surrender
         to the challenge had been made on 25.3.2019 before this Court.”
16.Respondents – K. Arasappan and K. Sathappan before us, though placed

   differently, seek to be placed on the same footing as that of the other private

   respondents. This was taken note of by this Court at the time of passing the

   interim order dated 12.01.2022 facilitating them to receive compensation

   at the rate of Rs. 900/- per sq. ft. We have been informed that the said

   respondents have received compensation at the rate of Rs. 1500/- per sq.

   ft., in pursuance of the order passed by the High Court. We do not wish to

   go into the said issue any more, as the appellants have chosen not to press

   the same.
17.Aggrieved by the direction of the High Court to pay the interest from the

   date of issuance of the notice under
Section 3(2)
of the 1997 Act, till the

   date of the impugned judgment, which according to the appellants would
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                 Page 10 of 20
amount to a sum of Rs. 1800/- crores, the instant appeals have been

   preferred.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS
18.The prevailing guideline value of 2011, was hiked by 250% while fixing

   the compensation by negotiation between the parties. Having agreed to the

   said compensation, it is not open for the landowners to resile from the

   same. The respondents are estopped from raising a contrary plea. They

   shall not be allowed to approbate and reprobate. An agreement under
Section 7(2)
of the 1997 Act being final, the High Court ought not to have

   invoked
Section 12
of the 1997 Act for the payment of interest. All the

   relevant factors have been taken into consideration while fixing the amount

   agreed upon. This would only mean that it brought to an end every other

   possible dispute, which is inclusive of the compensation, rent and interest.

   The High Court has committed a fundamental error in having taken

   recourse to
Section 12
of the 1997 Act, after giving a clear finding that the

   agreement is a complete package. Thus, the contract once concluded,

   cannot be reopened and that too, by way of a writ petition under
Article

   226
of the Constitution of India.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                      Page 11 of 20
SUBMISSIONS OF THE AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA
19.The learned ASG appearing for the respondent-AAI would submit that the

   AAI has nothing to do with the present dispute. It is submitted that the

   interim order for the payment of arrears of rent passed by the High Court

   has already been complied with. In any case, there is no privity of contract

   between the AAI and the private respondents.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PRIVATE RESPONDENTS
20.The learned Senior counsel appearing for the private respondents

   submitted that, what the respondents are entitled to in law cannot be denied

   to them. There is no finality to the agreement entered into, and what is to

   be determined is just and fair compensation that they are entitled to receive.

   There is no express exclusion of
Section 12
of the 1997 Act. As the High

   Court has rightly considered the relevant materials in coming to its

   conclusion and the respondents, being the original land owners, having lost

   the possession of their lands for a considerable number of years, the

   impugned order does not require to be interfered with.

   DISCUSSION
21.
Sections 7(2)
and
7(4)
of the 1997 Act exhibit a laudable objective. They

   facilitate land owners or interested persons to negotiate and arrive at an
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                       Page 12 of 20
agreement on the amount of compensation to be paid. Once such an

   agreement is arrived at, it becomes a concluded contract under
Section 3
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. The rights and liabilities of the parties

   would only be governed by the terms of the contract. Hence, a contract

   voluntarily entered into between the parties, shall not be disturbed by

   taking recourse to the statutory provisions, which are sought to be excluded

   by such contract. A party to a contract cannot be permitted to have recourse

   to two different modes, especially after having accepted the compensation

   under the contract without any demur or protest. It is not open to either of

   the parties to resile from the terms of the agreement arrived at. We may

   note that the issues of rent and compensation were raised even

   earlier. These issues were put to an end through the agreement. Therefore,

   the private respondents are totally estopped from seeking any relief beyond

   the terms of the contract.
22.In our considered view, the High Court, after having correctly considered

   the contract along with the rights and liabilities of the parties arising under

   it, has wrongly pressed into service
Section 12
of the 1997 Act, which is a

   provision for the payment of interest from the date of taking possession till

   the date of payment or deposit of the amount. Under the contract, no room
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                        Page 13 of 20
is given to any of the parties to seek any remedy available under the Act.

   Once there is a final agreement, all disputes with respect to determination

   of rent and interest would get subsumed within the contract itself. Any

   interpretation to the contrary, would be violative of
Section 7(2)
and
Section 7(4)
of the 1997 Act.
23.It is not as if the agreement has been entered into by force or deceit. There

   is no suppression of fact or any element of fraud. Therefore, it can be seen

   that the private respondents were initially inclined to accept the amount

   determined by way of a final agreement. It is only thereafter, wisdom

   dawned upon them to seek interest. Thus, it is a clear case of approbation

   and reprobation. The said doctrine of approbate and reprobate has been

   enunciated by this Court in the case of
Union of India and Others v. N.

   Murugesan and Others
, (2022) 2 SCC 25:
“Approbate and reprobate:
26.These phrases are borrowed from the Scots law. They would only
         mean that no party can be allowed to accept and reject the same thing,
         and thus one cannot blow hot and cold. The principle behind the
         doctrine of election is inbuilt in the concept of approbate and
         reprobate. Once again, it is a principle of equity coming under the
         contours of common law. Therefore, he who knows that if he objects to
         an instrument, he will not get the benefit he wants cannot be allowed
         to do so while enjoying the fruits. One cannot take advantage of one
         part while rejecting the rest. A person cannot be allowed to have the
         benefit of an instrument while questioning the same. Such a party
         either has to affirm or disaffirm the transaction. This principle has to
         be applied with more vigour as a common law principle, if such a party
         actually enjoys the one part fully and on near completion of the said
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                            Page 14 of 20
enjoyment, thereafter questions the other part. An element of fair play
        is inbuilt in this principle. It is also a species of estoppel dealing with
        the conduct of a party. We have already dealt with the provisions of the
Contract Act
concerning the conduct of a party, and his presumption of
        knowledge while confirming an offer through his acceptance
        unconditionally.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)
24.This Court has repeatedly held that a settlement arrived at under the

  concerned statute cannot be allowed to be reopened or modified.
Ranveer Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2016) 14 SCC 191

        “14. This sub-section (2) of
Section 11
begins with a non obstante clause
        which makes it free of the requirements of sub-section (1) if all the persons
        interested in the land agree in writing as to what matters should be included
        in the award of the Collector. Thereupon the Collector is competent to make
        an award as per agreement without making further enquiry. In view of such
        clear provision that permits agreement to determine all the matters to be
        included in the award, all the inclusions and omissions in the consent
        award must be treated as based upon agreement of the parties and the
        final amount determined by way of agreement must be taken as a
        completely just compensation inclusive of the statutory interest
        payable to the claimant for the land concerned at least on the date of
        agreement. Since the agreed compensation amount is accepted without
        protest with a clear stipulation not to claim any additional amount, it
        has to be deemed that the compensation reflected in the consent award
        has taken into account all relevant factors including interest till the
        date of agreement. Moreover, the right to seek reference for
        enhancement itself gets lost by accepting the compensation without
        protest especially when there is an agreement that the landowner shall
        not claim any amount in addition to the amount agreed upon as
        compensation and shall accept the compensation without any protest.
        In such circumstances agreed amount has to be treated as a just
        compensation permitting no addition or substitution whatsoever.
In
        other words, not only the remedy under the Act of seeking
        enhancement is lost but the substantive cause of action also vanishes
        when the landowner agrees for a consent award and the amount of
        compensation is accepted without any protest.”

                                                               (emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                Page 15 of 20
Indore Development Authority v. Manoharlal and Others, (2020) 8
SCC 129
      “290. …Approaching this case in that way, I cannot help feeling that the
      legislature had not specifically in mind a contingent burden such as we
      have here. If it had, would it not have put it on the same footing as an actual
      burden? I think it would. It would have permitted an increase of rent when
      the terms were so changed as to put a positive legal burden on the landlord.
      If the parties expressly agreed between themselves the amount of the
      increase on that account the court would give effect to their agreement.
      But if, as here, they did not direct their minds to the point, the court has
      itself to assess the amount of the increase. It has to say how much the
      tenant should pay “in respect of” the transfer of this burden to the
      landlord. It should do this by asking what a willing tenant would agree to
      pay and a willing landlord would agree to accept in respect of it. Just as
      in the earlier cases the courts were able to assess the value of the “fair
      wear and tear” clause, and of a “cooker”, so they can assess the value of
      the hot water clause and translate it fairly in terms of rent; and what
      applies to hot water applies also to the removal of refuse and so forth.
I
      agree that the appeal should be allowed, and with the order proposed by
Asquith, L.J.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)

State of Karnataka and Others v. Sangappa Dyavappa Biradar and
Others
, (2005) 4 SCC 264

      “13. An award under the Act is passed either on consent of the parties or
      on adjudication of rival claims. For the purpose of passing a consent award,
      it was not necessary to comply with the provisions of
Article 299
of the
      Constitution. An agreement between the parties need not furthermore be
      strictly in terms of a prescribed format.
14. The respondents having accepted the award without any demur
      were estopped and precluded from maintaining an application for
      reference in terms of
Section 18
of the Act. It is also trite that by reason
      of such agreement, the right to receive amount by way of solatium or
      interest, etc. can be waived.”
                                                               (
emphasis supplied)

NOIDA Industrial Development Authority v. Ravindra Kumar
,
(2022) 13 SCC 468
      “18. The third question is whether the relief of the grant of market value in
      terms of the 2013 Act could have been denied to the landowners who had
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                  Page 16 of 20
accepted the compensation by agreement in terms of the Karar Niyamawali.
The High Court has given reasons for adopting the said approach. The main
      reason is that without any grievance, the landowners voluntarily accepted
      the compensation by an agreement in terms of the Karar Niyamawali. After
      lapse of considerable time thereafter, the landowners chose to file writ
      petitions in the High Court. After having acquiesced to the action of the
      Government by accepting the compensation under an agreement, the
      landowners were not justified in making a grievance at a belated stage.
      Therefore, we find no error with the view taken by the High Court in
      relation to those landowners who had accepted compensation under
      Karar Niyamawali.”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)

State of Gujarat and Others v. Daya Shamji Bhai and Others (1995) 5
SCC 746

      “3. Notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (for
      short “the Act”) was published on 18-12-1980 acquiring large extent of
      lands for the purpose of irrigation Dam No. 2 Project. The landowners had
      given their consent in writing on 11-3-1983 agreeing to accept the
      compensation determined by the Land Acquisition Officer and 25 per
      cent more thereof and also agreed not to seek any reference under
Section 18
. The market value was determined by the Collector on 25-3-
      1983 and 25 per cent in addition thereto was awarded. Respondents were
      paid in terms of the consent agreements signed by the respondents and
      sanctioned by the Superintending Engineer, Rajkot. Subsequent thereto, the
      respondents sought for reference under
Section 18
on 26-4-1986. The
      Assistant Judge, Rajkot by his award and decree dated 29-6-1991 enhanced
      compensation to the rate of Rs 200 per acre for Bagayat land and Rs 140
      per acre for Jirayat land. Feeling aggrieved, when the appellants filed
      appeals, the Gujarat High Court confirmed the same by the impugned
      judgment and decree dated 3-7-1992. Thus these appeals by special leave.
4. The only question is whether the claimants of the land are entitled to seek
      reference under
Section 18
and the civil court can determine higher
      compensation.
Section 11(2)
of the Act empowers the parties to enter
      into an agreement and an award in terms thereof is permissible. In the
      agreement they had specifically accepted that owners would receive
      compensation and 25 per cent of the compensation in addition and had
      agreed to forgo their right to seek reference under
Section 18
of the
      Act. The owners and the Special Land Acquisition Officer had agreed
      under
Section 11(2)
of the Act that the Land Acquisition Officer would
      make the award in terms of the contract. Clause 14 of the agreement
      reads thus:
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                 Page 17 of 20
“The landowners will not go to any court under
Section 18
of the Act.”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)

Nathani Steels Ltd. v. Associated Constructions, 1995 Supp (3) SCC
324
“3. The appellant has invited our attention to two decisions of this Court.
The first dated 1-10-1993 in
P.K. Ramaiah and Co. v. Chairman &
      Managing Director, National Thermal Power Corpn.
[1994 Supp (3) SCC
      126] and second, dated 4-2-1994 in State of Maharashtra v. Nav Bharat
      Builders [1994 Supp (3) SCC 83]. In the first mentioned case the parties
      had resolved their disputes and differences by a settlement pursuant
      whereto the payment was agreed and accepted in full and final settlement
      of the contract. Thereafter, brushing aside that settlement the Arbitration
      clause was sought to be invoked and this Court held that under the said
      clause certain matters mentioned therein could be settled through
      Arbitration but once those were settled amicably by and between the parties
      and there was full and final payment as per the settlement, there existed no
      arbitrable dispute whatsoever and, therefore, it was not open to invoke the
      Arbitration clause. In the second mentioned case the respondent-Contractor
      acknowledged the receipt of the amount paid to him and stated that there
      was unconditional withdrawal of his claim in the suit in respect of the labour
      escalation. There was, thus, full and final settlement of the claim and it was
      contended that no arbitrable dispute survived in relation thereto. Other
      claims, if any, and which were not settled by and between the parties could
      be raised and it would be open to consider whether the arbitrable dispute
      arose under the contract necessitating reference to arbitration.
Dealing with
      this question also this Court after referring to the decision in
P.K. Ramaiah
case [1994 Supp (3) SCC 126] concluded that in relation to the claim under
      the head ‘labour escalation’ there did not remain any arbitrable dispute
      which could be referred to arbitration. It would thus be seen that once
      there is a full and final settlement in respect of any particular dispute
      or difference in relation to a matter covered under the Arbitration
      clause in the contract and that dispute or difference is finally settled by
      and between the parties, such a dispute or difference does not remain
      to be an arbitrable dispute and the Arbitration clause cannot be
      invoked even though for certain other matters, the contract may be in
      subsistence.
Learned counsel for the respondent, however, placed great
      emphasis on an earlier decision of this Court in
Damodar Valley Corpn. v.
      K.K. Kar
[(1974) 1 SCC 141] and in particular to the observations made in
      paras 11 to 13 of the judgment.
It may, at the outset, be pointed out that a
      similar argument was advanced based on the observations made in this
      decision, in
Ramaiah
case [1994 Supp (3) SCC 126] also (vide para 7) but
      the same was rejected holding that on the facts since the respondent did not
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                                 Page 18 of 20
give any receipt accepting the settlement of the claim, the payment made
      by the other side was only unilateral and hence the dispute subsisted and
      the Arbitration clause in the contract could be invoked. Therefore, that
      decision can be distinguished on facts. Even otherwise we feel that once
      the parties have arrived at a settlement in respect of any dispute or
      difference arising under a contract and that dispute or the difference
      is amicably settled by way of a final settlement by and between the
      parties, unless that settlement is set aside in proper proceedings, it
      cannot lie in the mouth of one of the parties to the settlement to spurn
      it on the ground that it was a mistake and proceed to invoke the
      Arbitration clause. If this is permitted the sanctity of contract, the
      settlement also being a contract, would be wholly lost and it would be
      open to one party to take the benefit under the settlement and then to
      question the same on the ground of mistake without having the
      settlement set aside. In the circumstances, we think that in the instant
      case since the dispute or difference was finally settled and payments
      were made as per the settlement, it was not open to the respondent
      unilaterally to treat the settlement as non est and proceed to invoke the
      Arbitration clause. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High Court
      was wrong in the view that it took.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
The power under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India is both

discretionary and extraordinary. Unless circumstances so warrant, there

shall not be any interference in a concluded contract. By the impugned

judgment, the High Court has rewritten the agreement arrived at between

the parties. In any case, there cannot be any payment of interest from the

date of notice under
Section 3(2)
of the 1997 Act till the date of the

impugned judgment. We may also note that for the subsequent period, the

High Court has declined to grant any interest. Suffice it is to state that the

impugned judgment cannot be sustained in the eyes of law to the extent of

payment of interest, as it sought to apply
Section 12
of the 1997 Act to a
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                             Page 19 of 20
voluntary agreement entered into between the parties under
Section 7
of

   the 1997 Act.
25.For the foregoing reasons, we have no hesitation in setting aside the

   impugned judgment to the aforesaid extent. Accordingly, the same stands

   set aside. Consequently, the appeals are allowed.
26.Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No order as to costs.
...………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)




                                     ………………….…………………………. J.
(NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)


   NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 19, 2025
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) Nos. 12770-83 of 2020                       Page 20 of 20