[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Akula Narayana vs The Oriental Insurance Company Limited on 10 November, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 1301

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 013509 OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 8434/2023)

                            AKULA NARAYANA                       …APPELLANT (S)

                                                  VERSUS

                            THE ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY
                            LIMITED & ANR.
                                                       …RESPONDENT (S)

                                              JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.        Leave granted.
2.        This is Claimant’s appeal against the judgment and

                             order of the High Court for the State of Telangana at

                             Hyderabad1 dated 08.06.2022 whereby the High Court

                             allowed the appeal of the first-respondent (i.e., the

                             Insurer) and set aside the award passed by the Motor

                             Accidents Tribunal2 to the extent it made the insurer

                             liable along with the owner of the vehicle to pay

                             compensation to the appellant.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN ARORA
Date: 2025.11.10
16:59:53 IST
Reason:
1
The High Court
2
The Tribunal
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                                    Page 1 of 6
3.      There is no dispute inter se parties regarding liability of

             the second respondent (i.e., owner of the vehicle with

             which accident was caused). There is also no dispute

             that the vehicle was insured with the first respondent.

             The only dispute is whether the insurer should have

             been absolved totally from its liability to pay the

             compensation or that the insurer should have been

             directed to pay and recover the same from the vehicle

             owner.
4.      The Tribunal vide its award dated 29.04.2021 held first

             and second respondent (i.e., insurer and owner,

             respectively)     jointly   and   severally   liable   for    the

             compensation payable to the claimant. Tribunal’s

             conclusion in that behalf rests on the statement of

             administrative manager of the insurer, made during

             cross-examination, that insurer had collected additional

             premium for carrying conductor and cleaner. Based on

             that, the Tribunal concluded that since the owner had

             paid additional premium, the deceased, a passenger in

             the vehicle, would be a third party in terms of the policy.
5.      The High Court on an appeal by the insurer held that

             though the insurer might have collected additional
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                                Page 2 of 6
premium for driver, conductor and cleaner, the policy

             would not cover the risk of any other person or

             passenger. Besides that, the vehicle being a five-seater

             was carrying nine persons, therefore, there was a clear

             breach of the terms and conditions of the policy and as

             such the insurer cannot be held liable.
6.      Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the claimant

             is before us because it finds it difficult to recover the

             compensation from the vehicle owner.
7.      We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.      The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that it

             is a clear case where additional premium was collected

             by the insurer for covering the risk of driver, conductor

             and cleaner. The claim was in respect of death of one

             person and therefore, even though the policy may not

             cover the risk of passengers, it covered the risk of at least

             three persons which may or may not be passengers.
In

             support of its submission, the learned counsel for the

             appellant has placed reliance on a decision of this Court

             in
Mata Ram versus National Insurance Company
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                            Page 3 of 6
Limited & Another3
.
In the alternative, the learned

                 counsel for the appellant submitted that since the

                 insurer had taken additional premium to cover risk of

                 three persons who travel in the vehicle, even if there has

                 been a violation of the policy conditions, the insurer

                 cannot be relieved of its liability to make good the

                 compensation though it may recover the same from the

                 owner in light of the pay and recover principle recognized

                 by this Court in
National Insurance Company Limited

                 versus Swaran Singh4
and
Shamanna & Anr. versus

                 Divisional Manager, Oriental Insurance Company

                 Limited & Others5
.
9.       Per contra, learned counsel for the insurer submitted

                 that the policy in question was a statutory policy; a

                 gratuitous passenger, other than driver, conductor and

                 cleaner, is not a third party and, therefore, the insurer

                 would not be liable. In addition, the vehicle was a five-

                 seater vehicle, admittedly carrying nine passengers,

                 there was thus breach of condition of insurance. As

                 such the insurer cannot be held liable. Hence, no
3
(2018) 18 SCC 289
4
(2004) 3 SCC 297
5
(2018) 9 SCC 650
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                              Page 4 of 6
interference with the judgment of the High Court is

                    called for.
10.        We have considered the rival submissions and have

                    perused the materials on record including the decisions

                    cited before us.
11.        At the outset, we may observe that there is no appeal by

                    the insured against High Court’s order holding him not

                    entitled         to        the   benefit    of   insurance.   In   such

                    circumstances, we have only to consider whether the

                    High Court should have completely absolved the insurer

                    of its liability or ought to have directed the insurer to pay

                    with liberty to recover the same from the vehicle owner.
12.        Where the contract of insurance is not disputed, even on

                    breach of insurance conditions, this Court had allowed

                    recovery of compensation from the insurer by giving

                    right to the insurer to recover the same from the vehicle

                    owner6. The pay and recover principle has been

                    consistently followed even though it was doubted in a

                    reference          which         remained    unanswered.      Taking    a

                    conspectus of various pronouncements, this Court
6
See decisions cited in Footnote 4 and 5.
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                                               Page 5 of 6
recently in
Rama Bai v. Amit Minerals7
again applied

                 the said principle and while allowing the appeal of the

                 claimant directed that the insurance company shall

                 satisfy the award and may recover from the insured.

                 Following    the   aforesaid      decisions,        we      deem       it

                 appropriate to allow the appeal by directing that the first

                 respondent (i.e., the insurer) shall satisfy the award,

                 though, however, it can recover the amount so paid from

                 the insured (i.e., owner of the vehicle).
13.      The appeal stands allowed to the aforesaid extent.
14.      Pending application(s) if any, shall stand disposed of.
….............................................J.
                                                                  (Sanjay Karol)



                                         ................................................J.
                                                                      (Manoj Misra)


              New Delhi;
November 10, 2025
7
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2067
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 8434/2023                                          Page 6 of 6